DÉPARTEMENT DE SCIENCE ÉCONOMIQUE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS
CAHIERS DE RECHERCHE & WORKING PAPERS
Why U.S. Money does not Cause U.S. Output,
but does Cause Hong Kong Output
Gabriel Rodriguez and Nicholas Rowe
ISSN: 0225-3860
CP 450 SUCC. A
P.O. BOX 450 STN. A
OTTAWA (ONTARIO)
OTTAWA, ONTARIO
CANADA K1N 6N5
CANADA K1N 6N5
Why U.S. Money does not Cause U.S. Output,
but does Cause Hong Kong Output¤
Gabriel Rodríguezy
University of Ottawa
Nicholas Rowe
Carleton University
Previous Version: October 11, 2002
This Version: April 5, 2005
Standard econometric tests for whether money causes output will be
meaningless if monetary policy is chosen optimally to smooth ‡uctuations in output. If U.S. monetary policy were chosen to smooth U.S.
output, we show that U.S. money will not Granger cause U.S. output.
Indeed, as shown by Rowe and Yetman , if there is a (say) 6
quarter lag in the e¤ect of money on output, then U.S. output will be
unforecastable from any information set available to the Fed lagged 6
quarters. But if other countries, for example Hong Kong, have currencies that are …xed to the U.S. dollar, Hong Kong monetary policy
will then be chosen in Washington D.C., with no concern for smoothing Hong Kong output. Econometric causality tests of U.S. money on
Hong Kong output will then show evidence of causality. We test this
empirically. Our empirical analysis also provides a measure of the degree to which macroeconomic stabilisation is sacri…ced by adopting a
…xed exchange rate rather than an independent monetary policy.
Monetary Policy, Causality, VECM, U.S. Money, U.S.
Federal Funds Rate.
JEL Classication: C3, C5, E4, E5.
¤We thank James Yetman, Steve Ferris, Huntley Schaller, Ehsan Choudhri, and Francisco Ruge-Murcia for their comments and suggestions. We also thank constructive comments from the Editor James R. Lothian and an anonymous referee. Comments from the
participants at the seminar at University of Carleton are also acknowledged. Remaining
errors are the authors’ responsibility.
yAddress for correspondence: Gabriel Rodríguez, Department of Economics, University
of Ottawa, P. O. Box 450 Station A, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5, Canada. Telephone:
+613-562-5800 (1750), Fax: +613-562-5999, E-Mail address: .
Introduction
Does money cause real output? If the Federal Reserve were suddenly, capriciously, without warning, to cut the money supply by 20%, what e¤ect
would this have? Nearly all macro-economists would agree that the cut in
the money supply would cause a fall in aggregate demand, and that the fall
in aggregate demand would cause, at least temporarily, real output to fall.
As Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans argue, even when the literature has not yet converged to a particular set of assumptions for identifying
the e¤ects of an exogenous shock to monetary policy, “there is considerable agreement about the qualitative e¤ects of a monetary policy shock in
the sense that inference is robust across a large subset of the identi…cation
schemes that have been considered in the literature.”
The only disagreement would come from the two extreme ends of the
macroeconomic spectrum. Some Post-Keynesian macroeconomists would
argue that the money supply has no e¤ect on aggregate demand, and so will
not a¤ect real output. And some Classical macro-economists would argue
that the money supply might a¤ect aggregate demand, but perfectly ‡exible
prices and wages, and the resulting vertical aggregate supply curve, would
mean that only the price level would fall, and real output would not.
Despite this very general agreement that money causes output, the supporting econometric evidence is weak or inconclusive. The basic reason for
the weak econometric evidence is simple. The sort of experiment described
above is very unlikely ever to happen. The Federal Reserve, believing that a
capricious 20% cut in the money supply would have disastrous consequences
for real output, would not willingly conduct such an experiment. It would
not capriciously cut the money supply by 20% merely to see how big a recession this would cause. So the sort of experiment which could properly test
whether money causes output is never in fact conducted. To say the same
thing another way, an OLS regression of output on money will only give
unbiased estimates if the money supply has a positive variance and if money
is exogenous with respect to output. But exogeneity of money with respect
to output would mean that the Federal Reserve chooses monetary policy
without considering the e¤ect its policy will have on output. No responsible
Federal Reserve would ever choose monetary policy that way.
If money were found to cause output in an OLS regression, this would
mean that the Fed had caused or permitted the money supply to vary in
such a way that the variance of output was higher than it would have been
if the Fed had acted di¤erently.
Such a …nding would be evidence not
just that money causes output, but that the Federal Reserve had behaved
irresponsibly or foolishly. A responsible and sensible Fed would never carry
out the sort of experiment which would let us directly test whether money
causes output.
This problem with testing whether money causes output is at its starkest
when the Fed adopts as its overriding objective the goal of smoothing output ‡uctuations. Many economists think that a signi…cant fraction of the
variation in central bank policy actions re‡ects policy makers’ systematic
responses to variations in the state of the economy ). This systematic component is typically formalized
with the concept of a feedback rule or reaction function1.
Suppose there is some underlying structural equation, known to the Fed,
linking level of real output yt+j with the level of money supply mt, and some
other variables, with a j-period lag in the e¤ect of money on output:
yt+j = F(mt;::::):
The Fed ideally wants real output to grow at some constant sustainable rate
1 Other strategies to identify monetary policy shocks do not involve modelling the monetary reaction function. For example, one approach consists in looking at data to identify
exogenous monetary policy actions. It is the way adopted by Romer and Romer .
The other way of identifying monetary policy shocks is by using the assumption that they
do not a¤ect economic activity in the long run. At this respect, see Faust and Leeper
 and Pagan and Robertson .
t+j = gt+j:
Assuming the Fed has a symmetric quadratic loss function, and that the
structure of the economy is linear, the Fed will set the money supply in each
period so that the rational expectation of real output in t + j, conditional
on all information available at time t (It) equals the ideal level:
E(yi+jjIt) = E[F(mt; :::::)jIt] = Y ¤
Because any variable can be decomposed into its rational expectation and a
forecast error, where that forecast error must be uncorrelated with anything
in the information set at time t; we have that
yt+j = E(yt+jjIt) + et+j:
Substituting from (2) and (3) into (4) we get
yt+j = gt+j + et+j:
What equation (5) says is that output will be equal to a time trend plus a
random error which is totally uncorrelated with any information available
at time t. Presumably the money supply is part of that information set.
This means that if the Federal Reserve is using monetary policy to smooth
real output, output will necessarily be uncorrelated with the lagged money
supply; see also Rowe and Yetman . Even though by assumption
money causes output, with a j-period lag, any econometric causality test
will …nd no evidence for causality.
To understand this result better, let us ask under what circumstances
the Federal Reserve would choose to cut the money supply by 20%.
would do this only if it learned some information (about one of the other
variables in the structural equation F (:), like a major tax cut for example)
which would lead it to expect a big increase in output if it held the money
supply constant. If the Fed forecasts correctly, the money supply will fall
by 20%, but output will continue to grow at trend. The only ‡uctuations
in output will be the result of the Fed’s forecast errors, and these should be
uncorrelated with anything the Fed knows at the time when its monetary
policy can in‡uence output.
In order to test whether money causes output we have to …nd a data
set where the monetary authority varies the money supply with no concern
for its e¤ect on output. Hong Kong provides just such a data set2. For
many years, Hong Kong has maintained approximately …xed exchange rates
with the U.S. dollar. Since Hong Kong is small relative to the U.S., and
since the Federal Reserve undertakes no responsibility to help Hong Kong
maintain the …xed exchange rate, Hong Kong monetary policy is e¤ectively
set in Washington D.C. If the shocks to the U.S. and Hong Kong economies
are imperfectly correlated, and if the Federal Reserve conducts monetary
policy to smooth U.S. output, but does not care about Hong Kong output,
this means that monetary policy is at least partly exogenous with respect
to Hong Kong output.
Suppose the Fed sees a positive shock about to hit the U.S. economy. It
lowers the money supply in order to lean against the wind and o¤set this
shock. If its forecast is successful, U.S. output continues to grow at trend.
But if no similar shock hits the Hong Kong economy, Hong Kong will be
hit by the full impact of the cut in U.S. money supply, with no o¤setting
shock, and will su¤er a recession. Similarly, if the Fed anticipates a negative
shock to the U.S. economy, it will raise the money supply. No change in
U.S. output is subsequently observed, but Hong Kong enjoys a boom3.
2 Other countries such as Thailand and Argentina were also considered. Unfortunately,
availability of data represented the principal limitation to extend our empirical analysis
to these and other countries.
3 Our story here assumes the shock to the U.S. economy is an IS shock. A positive IS
shock to the U.S. economy means the Fed will reduce the money supply and raise interest
rates to hold U.S. aggregate demand constant. But the higher U.S. interest rates will mean
higher Hong Kong interest rates also, provided there is at least some capital mobility. And
the higher Hong Kong interest rates will reduce aggregate demand in Hong Kong . According to him, “the shocks
were transmitted around the world primarily through the workings of the
gold standard”; see also Chodhri and Kochin , Eichengreen ,
Hamilton , among others. In fact, the new gold standard research
allow the economists to assert with considerable con…dence that monetary
factors played an important causal role, both in the world decline in prices
and output, and their eventual recovery. The evidence suggests that countries that left the gold standard recovered from the Depression more quickly
that countries that remained on gold. No country exhibited signi…cant recovery while remaining on the gold standard. The strong dependence of the
rate of recovery on the choice of exchange-rate regime is further, powerful
evidence of the importance of monetary factors.
Empirical Application
In this section we present the empirical evidence from the causality tests.
Our data consist of the vector zt of dimension n £ 1 which contains the
three time series used in the subsequent analysis. That is, zt = (y1t;y2t;y3t)0,
where y1t denotes the logarithm of the output of Hong Kong (yhk
denotes the logarithm of the output of US (yus
); and y3t denotes either the
Hong Kong happens to face a similar positive IS shock). If the shock to the U.S. economy
were an LM shock, such as a fall in U.S. money demand, the Fed would reduce the money
supply proportionately, leaving interest rates unchanged, and there would be no e¤ect in
either country.
logarithm of the US money supply (mus
t ) or the level of the US Federal Fund
t ). The data is quarterly and it spans from 1986:1 until 1999:4.
The empirical application that follows consists of three steps. In the
…rst step, we test for the order of integration of each time series, using
the univariate augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) unit root test . In second step, we test for the existence of cointegration relations using the Johansen procedure . In the third and last step, we estimate the vector error correction
model (V ECM) and test for Granger causality using the recommendations
of Phillips and Toda .
In fact, the appropriate way to test for causality depends on whether or
not there exist cointegrating relations. When there are cointegration relations, we can test for short run causality using an F- test of the signi…cance
of the lagged …rst di¤erences of the relevant variables (in our case, ¢mus
t¡k for k = 1;2; :::k¤). And we can test for long run causality by, in addition, using an F- test of the signi…cance of the error correction term. Some
empirical references are Hayo , Khalid and Guan , Wernerheim
In the application of the ADF test, the lag length was chosen using
the sequential procedure suggested by Campbell and Perron which
consists of initially assuming some maximal lag (say kmax) in the estimation
of the ADF autoregression and testing for the signi…cance (at 90%) of the
last lag. If no signi…cance is found, the statistic is again estimated using
kmax-1 lags. The procedure is repeated until a signi…cant lag is found. If no
signi…cant lag is found, k = 0 is selected.
Results4 show evidence of nonstationarity for all series. In other words,
all series can be considered as I(1) processes. Given this fact, our second
step is to verify the existence of cointegration relations between the set of
variables.
4 In order to save space, results are not presented but they are available upon request.
The vector zt containing the n variables, can be represented by the following V AR(k):
¦izt¡i + ©Dt + ²t
where it is assumed that ²t is a sequence of i:i:d: zero mean with covariance
matrix -. In most cases it is also assumed that the errors are Gaussian
which is denoted by ²t » N(0;-). The variable Dt contains the possible
deterministic components of the process, such as a constant, a time trend,
seasonal dummies and intervention dummies. This is the model proposed
by Johansen and is widely used in empirical applications5.
The system (6) is reparameterized as a vector error correction model
¢zt = ¦zt¡1 +
¡i¢zt¡i + ©Dt + ²t
with ¦ = ¡I + Pk
i=1 ¦i; ¡i = Pk
j=i+1 ¦j: Notice that the matrix ¡ =
I(1) cointegration occurs when the matrix ¦ is of reduced rank, r < n
where ¦ may be factorized into ¦ = ®¯0, ® and ¯ are both full rank matrices
of dimension n £ r; the matrix ® contains the adjustment coe¢cients and ¯
the cointegration vectors. These vectors have the property that ¯0zt is stationary, even though zt itself is non-stationary. Notice that there also exist
full rank matrices ®? and ¯? of dimension n£ (n¡r) which are orthogonal
to ® and ¯, such that ®0
?® = 0 and ¯0
?¯ = 0, and the rank(¯?;¯) = n.
To test the rank of matrix ¦; Johansen developed maximum
likelihood cointegration testing methods using the reduced rank regression
technique based on canonical correlations. The procedure consists of obtaining an n £ 1 vector of residuals r0t and r1t from auxiliary regressions
5 There are large number of empirical applications using this statistical framework. Two
very detailed and in‡uencial applications are Johansen and Juselius .
(regressions of ¢zt and zt¡1 on a constant and the lagged ¢zt¡1 ... ¢zt¡k+1).
These residuals are used to obtain the (n £ n) residual product matrices:
Sij = (1=T)
for i;j = 0;1: The next step is to solve the following eigenvalue problem
j¸S11 ¡ S10S¡1
00 S01j = 0
which gives the eigenvalues b¸1 > ::: > b¸n and the corresponding eigenvectors
b¯1 through b¯n, which are also the cointegrating vectors. A test for the rank
of matrix ¦ can now be performed by testing how many eigenvalues ¸ equals
to unity. One test statistic for the resulting number of cointegration relations
is the Trace statistic which is a likelihood ratio test de…ned by
Trace = ¡T
log(1 ¡ b¸i):
Another useful statistic is given by testing the signi…cance of the estimated eigenvalues themselves
¸max = ¡Tlog(1 ¡ b¸i):
In the trace test, the null hypothesis is r = 0 (no cointegration) against
the alternative hypothesis that r > 0 (cointegration). The ¸max statistic
tests the null hypothesis that r = r0 versus the alternative hypothesis that
r = r0 + 1, where r0 = 0; 1; :::;n ¡ 1. For further details regarding the
construction of these statistics, see Johansen .
Critical values for these tests have been tabulated by Osterwald-Lenum
 . However, limiting distributions depend on the set of deterministic
components considered in equation (6) and depend also on the set of deterministic components allowed in the cointegrating relations. Given the
nature of our series, we always consider an intercept in the estimation of
the equation (6)6. For the cointegration relations, we consider two cases.
The …rst case includes only an intercept in the long run relationship. In the
second case, we include an intercept and also a time trend in the long run
equation. In the tables, we refer to the former as the “…rst speci…cation”
and the latter as the “second speci…cation”.
Another important issue, in the application of the Johansen test, is the
speci…cation of the lag length. Many suggestions appear in the literature.
One suggestion is to use informational criteria such as AIC or SIC.7 Given
that our goal is to identify causality, we are particularly interested in some
longer lag speci…cation. Hence, the SIC procedure is not considered, because it is known that this criteria will choose a more parsimonious model.
Using AIC, we have selected k = 8 for the speci…cation in levels, which
implies using k = 7 in the V ECM speci…cation.
The results from the application of the Johansen test are shown in Tables
1a and 1b. There is clear evidence of cointegration in all systems. Using the
U.S. Federal Funds rate as the monetary instrument reveals one cointegration relationship using the …rst speci…cation, and two cointegration relations
in the second speci…cation. Using the U.S. money supply as the monetary
instrument reveals two cointegration relations in the second speci…cation.
Notice however, that in the …rst speci…cation we found r = 3; which implies
that all variables are stationary. This result might be a consequence of the
small sample size used in the application. In fact, there is evidence for a survey) that small samples can cause spurious rejection of the null hypothesis of no cointegration. One recommended
solution for this problem to adjust the values of the statistics to take into
account for small sample size. We do this only in the case where r = 3.
Following Reimers , we adjusted the ¸max test by (T ¡ kn)=T, where
6 It is equivalent to assume that there is a linear trend in the time series.
7 Another suggestion is to use the likelihood ratio test, based either on the log value of
the likelihood or based on the determinant of the covariance matrix. We obtain essentially
the same results as the AIC:
T is the total number of observations, k is the lag number and n is the
number of variables used in the system. With this adjustment, the values
for the ¸max test are 21.70, 11.13 and 6.21. Only the …rst of these vectors is
signi…cant at 95.0%. Hence, we will work with r = 1.
Our third and …nal step is to estimate the equation (6) in order to test
for causality from the monetary instruments to output. The equations to
be estimated are:
t¡1 + ® + °1D1t + °2D2t + °3D3t + et
t¡1 + ® + °1D1t + °2D2t + °3D3t + et
where i =Hong Kong and j =US; ectt¡1 corresponds to the error correction
term; Di is a seasonal dummy variable de…ned as Di = 1 for i = 1; 2; 3
quarters. Equations (12) and (13) consider the US Federal Funds Rate (Rus
and US money supply (mus
t ) as the monetary instruments, respectively.
Results using the Federal Funds Rate as the instrument monetary are
shown in Table 2a, and the results using the money supply as the monetary
instrument are shown in Table 2b. We present the value of the F -statistic
(and its associated p-value in parenthesis), under both the …rst and second
speci…cations used in the cointegration analysis. Overall, our principal conclusion is clear, and is also robust to whether the Federal Funds Rate or the
money supply is treated as the monetary instrument. There is clear evidence
in favor of our hypothesis that U.S. monetary policy causes Hong Kong output, but does not cause U.S. output. When the F -test includes testing for
the error correction terms, the results give even stronger evidence in favor
of long run causality from U.S. monetary policy to Hong Kong output.
Notice, however, that our results from Granger causality tests need to
be considered with caution because of the small sample size used in the
applications. Phillips and Toda show, based in Monte Carlo simulations, that it is di¢cult to support validity of the F-statistic when sample
sizes are small and when three or more variables are used in the system. In
order to take into account for this possibility, Tables 3a and 3b present the
results obtained from a bivariate system8. It means that when estimating
equations (12) and (13) for Hong Kong, the variables ¢yUS
t¡h (h = 1; 2; :::;k)
are excluded. In similar way, when estimating equations (12) and (13) for
US, the variables ¢yhk
t¡h (h = 1;2;:::; k) are excluded.
Overall, the results suggest similar conclusions as obtained from previous results. Using the …rst speci…cation, non Granger causality is rejected
for Hong Kong real output (see Table 3a). When the error correction terms
are taken into account in the F-statistic, the evidence is stronger and therefore, long-run causality is observed. When using second speci…cation, the
evidence is weak. Observing results for the US output (Table 3a, bottom
panel), evidence suggest some weak rejection of the null hypothesis of non-
Granger causality.
Results presented in Table 3b, using monetary supply as monetary instrument, con…rm the results that US monetary instrument causes Hong
Kong output. It is needed to say that this result is obtained when the error
correction term is included in the F-statistic and the results are independent of the number of deterministic components include in the cointegrating
relationship (…rst or second speci…cation).
In summary, results obtained from the bivariate system con…rm that US
monetary instrument causes Hong Kong output but does not cause US output. In particular, the results are clearly observed when the error correction
8 Notice, however, that we continue to use the same cointegrating vectors identi…ed
using the trivariate system. The issue discussed in the Introduction is supported by the
fact that the 3 variables are related in the long term (cointegration exists) even if the
short-run dynamics excludes some of these variables.
terms are included in the F non-causality statistic.
If all values of the Johansen statistics are adjusted using the rule suggested for Reimers , we have evidence in favor of r = 1 only for the
case where U.S. money is used as monetary instrument and using the …rst
speci…cation. In all other cases, cointegration is no longer found.
Decomposition of variance can be used to measure the importance of one
shock in the explanation of the variance error. We present these results only
for the case where U.S. money is used as monetary instrument using our
…rst speci…cation. Remember that in this case r = 1 was found. Results are
presented in Table 4 and they are not sensitive to the order of the variables
used to estimate the equation (6)9. Table 4 shows that the variance error of
the Hong Kong output is explained at the end of the third year (an horizon
equal to 12 quarters) around 35.5% for U.S. output and 26.4% for U.S.
money. Using a horizon of 24 quarters these values are 43.6 and 17.6%,
respectively. When the variance error of U.S. output or U.S. money are
analyzed, we see a di¤erent picture: Hong Kong output has no short or long
run e¤ects on U.S. output. But more importantly, U.S. money is not able to
explain the variance error of the U.S. output. This is in concordance with
our causality analysis.
Conclusion
This paper analyzes two issues concerning the use of Granger-causality statistics in examining in‡uence of money on economic activity. First, if monetary policy reacts to the state of the economy, money may not be found
to Granger cause output. This issue is obviously not very new. It is well
recognized by now that monetary authority reacts to the economy using
a reaction function; see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans . Sec-
9 Orthogonalisation of the disturbances is performed using Choleski decomposition. We
veri…ed all possible orders of variables in the V ECM estimation and no substantial changes
were observed. Results are available upon request.
ond, for: an economy maintaining …xed exchange rate with the US, Granger
causality statistics from US money to small output economy reveal real effects of money. This second issue may be observed as closely related to the
role played by monetary factors during the Great Depression. In fact, as
Bernanke argues, the way as countries maintained the exchange rate
to the gold standard determined the way and speed of recovery from the
Great Depression. The point that an economy has exchange rate regime
…xed to another country implies a strong support of the monetary factors
role in the economic activity of the …xed exchange rate economy.
This paper shows that U.S. monetary policy does not cause U.S. output,
but does cause Hong Kong output. To show this, we used the Granger
causality test in the context of cointegration, as was suggested by Phillips
and Toda . Because the sample size used is very small, our results
have to be interpreted with caution. However, all results con…rm the …nding
that the U.S. monetary instrument (U.S. Federal Funds Rate or U.S. money
supply) a¤ects real output in Hong Kong but has no e¤ect on U.S. output.
How is it that U.S. monetary policy could appear to have no real e¤ects
at home, but to have big real e¤ects on the opposite side of the world? Our
answer to this apparent paradox is simple. U.S. monetary policy is chosen
to smooth U.S. output, and so ‡uctuations of U.S. output from trend represent the Fed’s forecast errors, which must under rational expectations be
orthogonal to the Fed’s information set at the control lag, and this information set includes the monetary instrument. No Granger test could ever show
that an exogenous change in U.S. monetary policy would cause a change in
U.S. output, because U.S. monetary policy is chosen speci…cally to avoid
making exogenous changes which would cause U.S. output to ‡uctuate. But
this does not mean that U.S. monetary policy is irrelevant for real variables.
The fact that Hong Kong output is strongly in‡uenced by an exogenous (to
Hong Kong) U.S. monetary policy surely implies that U.S. output would
also be strongly in‡uenced if U.S. monetary policy were, counterfactually,
exogenous to the U.S.
Our answer is simple and, we believe, plausible. No other resolution
appears reasonable. It would not be reasonable to argue, for example, that
the U.S. has perfectly ‡exible prices and therefore money is neutral in the
U.S., while Hong Kong has sticky prices and therefore money is not neutral in
Hong Kong. If our answer is accepted, this means that all previous empirical
tests for the real e¤ects of monetary policy are deeply ‡awed, and massively
underestimated the importance of monetary policy for real variables. The
fact that it is so hard to show empirically that U.S. monetary policy has
real e¤ects in the U.S. does not indicate the irrelevance of monetary policy.
Instead it shows that the Federal Reserve has not managed monetary policy
to make the money supply ‡uctuate like the weather.
Indeed, a strong
…nding that money did Granger cause output would be good grounds for
demanding the resignation of the Chairman of the Federal Reserve.