Archive ouverte UNIGE
 
Article scientifique
Published version
Open Access
This is the published version of the publication, made available in accordance with the publisher’s policy.
The quantum-state diffusion model applied to open systems
Gisin, Nicolas; Percival, Ian C.
How to cite
GISIN, Nicolas, PERCIVAL, Ian C. The quantum-state diffusion model applied to open systems. In:
Journal of Physics. A, Mathematical and General, 1992, vol. 25, n° 21, p. 5677–5691. doi:
10.1088/0305-4470/25/21/023
This publication URL:
 
Publication DOI:
10.1088/0305-4470/25/21/023
© This document is protected by copyright. Please refer to copyright holder(s) for terms of use.
J. Phya A: Math. Gen. 25 567-5691, Printed in the UK
The quantum-state diffusion model applied to open systems
Nicolas Gisint and Ian C Percivalt
t Group of Applied Physics, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
t Blackett laboratory, Imperial College, Prince Cansort Road, London S W 7 ZBZ, UK,
and School of Mathematical Sfiences, Queen Maly and Wstfield College, University of
Lnndon, Mile End Road, London El 4NS, UK
Received 8 May 1992
AbstrafL A model of a quantum system interacting with its environment is proposed in
which the system is represented by a State vector that satisfies a mchastic differential
equation, derived from a density operator equation ruch as the Bloch equation, and
consistent with it. The advantages of the numerical solution of these equations over the
direct numerical solution of the density operator equations are d-bed.
The method
is applied to the nonlinear absorber, caseades of quantum transitions, second-harmonic
generation and a measurement reduction process. The model provides graphic illustra-
tions of these processes, with statistical fluctuations that mimic those of arperiments. The
stochastic differential equations originated from studies of the measurement problem in
the foundations of quantum mechanics. The model is "pared
with the quantum-jump
model of Dalibard, Carmichael and others, which orginated among experimenters looking
for intuitive pictures and mles of mmputation.
1. Introduction
In his paper on the A- and B-coefficients [l], Einstein assumed that an individual
quantum system like an atom was capable of a transition or jump from one state
LV aiiv~iici wuii the absorption oi eniissioii of iadiani enaim-. Aiihough Einsiein's
paper stimulated the development of modern quantum mechanics, such jumps have
no formal place in that theory, for which the state vector represents the properties of
an ensemble of systems and not an individual system.
Despite the success of the modern theory, many physicists, particularly experi-
menters, have insisted on treating quantum jumps of individual systems as real, and
L l l r DLQLC " C C L Y L a0 ' C p C J c L 1 L 1 L , &
LLLC "CLIQ*L""I
a,, " I U L " I Y U Q . I
~ p L C ' L 1 , a.3 G,G,,,p,,r,r;u
by a single run of a laboratory experiment (quantum optics provides many examples,
see for instance (21). The experimenters' picture has given them valuable physi-
cal insights , which have sometimes escaped the theoreticians with their relatively
elaborate mathematical tools based on density operator evolution. For example Itano
and co-workers based their analysis of their 'Zeno paradox' experiment on quantum
based on density operator equations, as shown for example in .
Independently of these developments, and stimulated hy the fundamental objec-
tions of Schrodinger and particularly Einstein to the usual formulations of
quantum mechanics, Bohm [SI, Bell [9-111 and others have insisted on the impor-
tance of alternative formulations. In particular Bohm and Bub, Pearle, Gisin, Dibsi,
0305-4470N2/215h77+lS$07.50
@ 1992 IOP Publishing Ltd
._._%^_ ..._
n o -z.--_r~-t:-n
+hn hnLn..:n..r
:-A:..:.l..nl
~ . , o t n -
n- n-..--l:G..A
There n,nnntlxm.inmn methnrlr O ~ V P thp n m e veciiltr
the m~.l than-,
y"Y..." ..., "...r ...-...
""" &..- ...
1 ""..._ ..,I".." ".- -"". ..._".
and Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber [12-201 have proposed alternative quantum theories
in which the state vector represents an individual sysem and follows a stochastic dy-
namics, such as a diffusion equation. But none of them has been used to advantage
in solving specific quantum problems. In it was suggested that they could.
In this paper it is shown that diffusion equations for the state vector can be used
effectively for the analysis of a quantum system in interaction with its environment,
and demonstrate that they have advantages over the usual numerical solution of
the Bloch density operator equations for a wide range of problems, including the
nonlinear absorber and second harmonic generation. The continuous diffusion leads
naturally to sudden transitions between discrete quantum states, resembling quantum
jumps, with a finite but short jumping time, determined by the equations themselves.
The measurement of a quantum system becomes a simple example of the interaction
of the measured system with its environment, and when treated like any other such
interaction, leads to an irreversible diffusion towards one of the eigenspaces, or
eigenstates, in the case of a non-degenerate spectrum.
Gisin and Di6si have shown how to obtain diffusion or Fbkker-Planck
equations for the state vector from a density operator evolution equation. Percival 
(see also Di6si and Gisin and Cibils ) provided a natural symmetry condition
under which this diffusion equation is unique, apart from a non-physical phase factor.
This diffusion equation is presented here as an It6 stochastic equation for a Wiener
process, as described in detail in section 2.
N Gisin and I C F’ercival
Given a Bloch equation for the density operator p
P = - f L [ ~ I ~ l
+ C(ZL,PL!,,
- L!,,L,P-
the differential form of the stochastic equation of motion for the state vector I$) is
where (Lm)+ = ($IL,I$)
is the expectation of L,
for state I$).
The first sum
represents the ‘drift’ of the state vector and the second sum the random fluctuations,
due to the interaction of the system with its environment. The dt, are independent
complex differential random variables representing a mmplex normalized Wiener
process, and they satisfy
M(Re(dF,) W d t , ) ) = M(Im(dt,)Im(dt,))
M(Red[,Imdt,)
where M represents the mean over the probability distribution.
Normally the elegant It6 and Stratonovich notations are used for such processes,
in which the mean is implied without being written. Our analysis is equivalent to the
It6 form, in which differentials up to the second power must be evaluated, but we
write the means explicity to assist those who are unfamiliar with this notation.
Numerical solutions of such equations can be effective and efficient. The method
used in the applications is described in section 3, several of these applications are
Diffusion model applied to open systems
in section 4, and section 5 contains an account of the measurement of a dynamical
variable as an example of the diffusion of quantum states through interaction with
the measuring apparatus.
Dalibard et a1 , and also Carmichael and Rich and Mahler [U]
independently derived an efficient method of computing the development of an open
system based on stochastic evolution of the state vector, in which instantaneous
quantum jumps are treated as if they were real, as mentioned at the beginning Of
the introduction. There are many similarities and differences between their method
and ours, which are discussed in section 6, which also mntains comparisons with the
usual methods of numerical solution of the Bloch density operator equations and
recommendations for use.
2. Evolution of density operators and quantum states
This section shows bow the quantum state diffusion equation of (1.2), of the type
introduced in [16-18,201, is derived from a density operator equation (1.1).
A density operator p for a system with an Ndimensional state space can be
expressed in many ways as a mean M over a distribution of normalized pure-state
projection operators
P = Ml+)(+l.
We seek differential equations for I+) so that
p = d p / d t
is determined by a given diffential equation, such as the Bloch equation.
If an open system with density operator p starts at time t = 0 in a pure state and
evolves into a mixed state as a result of the interaction, there can be no general deter-
ministic equation for the pure states /+). But there are stochastic equations, as might
be expected from the probabilistic nature of the interaction with the environment. In
time dt the variation Id+) in I+) is then given by the It6 form
where Iu)dt is the drift term and the differential stochastic fluctuations are repre-
sented by a sum Over independent Wiener process dEj, which are mmplex, because
this is quantum mechanics, with equal and independent fluctuations in their real and
imaginary parts,
This complex form has simple invariance properties under unitaly transformations
 . As usual the mean and variance of each fluctuation are zero and d t l / * ,
so squares of differential stochastic fluctuations are significant, and from (1.3)
Md{;d<, = 0
Mdc;dc, = 26;,dt
where M is used to represent a mean over both the distribution and the fluctuations
due to the stochastic process.
N Gisin and IC Percival
'TO preselve the normalization of the state vector the fluctuations in the state must
be orthogonal to that state, so
Mid$) = 1v)dt
Mld$)(d$l = 2 x l u j ) ( u j l d t .
'hking means over Id$) and Id$)(d+l,
The values of the drift and stochastic terms can be obtained from b when the
initial density operator projects onto a pure state:
P+ = IM1LI.
The general form for arbitrary initial p then follow from the linearity of the density
operator equations, such as the Bloch equation. Note that the stochastic equations
for the states are nonlinear. Using (2.6), the change in the p js given by
dp = M(I1L)(d.ll+ld$)($l+ld~)(d$l)
b = ( I ~ ) ( v l + l u ) ( ~ 1 + 2 ~ l u j ) ( ~ j I )
The stochastic terms are determined by the component of b in the space orthog-
onal to $:
Note that although the Iuj) are not uniquely determined by (2.9), the operator
given by the sum over their projectors is uniquely determined, and this is enough to
determine the diffusion process uniquely, since the first and second moments of Id$)
given by (2.3) are the same for any Iuj) satisfying (2.9), and all other moments can
be neglected for an It8 process.
The drift is given by
where ic is a non-physical imaginary phase change constant, which is determined,
not by the density operator equations, but by convention, to agree with the usual
Schrtidinger equation in the absence of interaction with the environment.
The above theory and the results (2.9) and (2.12) apply to any linear differential
equations for the density operator that are of first order in time. Now consider the
Bloch equations in the Lindblad form
P = - - [ H , p I + C ( z L , p L ! , - L ! , L , p - p L ! , L , ) .
Diffusion model applied to open systems
The stochastic terms are given by
2 c l " j ) ( " j l = p u -
l+)(+l)~ml+)(+la(~-
which is satisfied by the vectors
l"m) = (Lm - (L)$)I+) '
From (2.12) and (2.13), the drift term is
where the constant c is chosen to give the simplest form. (1.2) follows on substituting
(2.15) and (216) into (2.3).
3. Method of numerical solution
For the numerical solutions, we used an unnormalized state vector I+(t)),
satisfies the simpler equations
Id+) = -;Hl4)dt + c ( W ! , , ) + L , - L?,L,,,) I4W +
L m I 4 ) d L
obtained by omitting terms in the direction of the state vector I+) from the right-
hand side of (1.2). This is justified for complex fluctuations that satisfy Mdtjd€, = 0
The expectation value of an operator (A) is then
( 4 4 = (+lAl4)/(4l4) '
The norm of 14) was adjusted occasionally to keep its magnitude within the range
of the computer.
The practical method is based on a finite sample of s,
pure states, in which the
density operator is approximated by a mite sum over projection operators onto these
J U I I C O .
For each state of the sample the state-differential diffusion equation (3.1) was
the Hamiltonian and drift terms were integrated using a Runge-Kutta method with
overall step length dl. At chosen intervals, the mean values of any 'output' operators
required for the output were computed.
General-purpose programs have been written in Pascal and FOK"
for the so-
lution of any density operator equations of the form (1.1) in which the Hamiltonian,
a fi&e-d_ifferencp equation. ??le stochastic term w-s a_d_d_ed_ &e.r!y;
Lindblad and ouput operators are expressed as finite sums over finite products of cre-
ation and annihilation operators with one or two degrees of freedom. The examples
presented here were executed on a notebook computer.
As in the recent quantum-jump method of Dalibard, Carmichael and others [23-
251, one advantage of the stochastic differential equation method lies in the fact that
for a state space of dimension N , a state vector needs N complex numbers to define
it, whereas the density operator requires the equivalent of N 2 / 2 .
A disadvantage is that, as in a laboratory experiment, the results are given by
statistical distributions, with errors that depend on the size of the sample.
this similarity between stochastic theory and stochastic experiment is obviously an
advantage too; it provides a graphic illustration of the processes that take place, and
thus insight into them.
For speed of computation the advantages of the method outweigh the disadvan-
tage when the sample size is smaller than approximately twice the complex dimension
of the state vector. We have found in practice that quite good results are often ob-
tained with small sample sizes, as shown in the next section. The computer memory
required by the stochastic method is less, by a factor CON, than with direct integration
of the Bloch equations, where CO
is a constant, and this allows the stochastic-diffusion
method to be used where the direct-integration method cannot.
Since the theory uses the well developed It8 stochastic calculus, and the solutions
are continuous in time, any of the existing tools for numerical integration of such
stochastic equations could be used to improve the method of integration.
N Girin and I C Percival
4. Examples
Figure 1 illustrates the simplest example of the forced and damped linear oscillator
in interaction representation, for which the Hamiltonian and Lindblad operators of
f f = 2 i ( a t - a )
and the initial state is
= IS). The solutions of the Bloch equations are well
known, but the method provides a graphic illustration for each run of the reduction
towards a coherent state, which evolves like the classical motion and has no stochastic
fluctuations. This is an example in the quantum domain of localization in phase space,
which is characteristic of our everyday experience in the classical domain.
The next example is the nonlinear absorber, with
H = O.li(at - a )
The system starts in the ground state, and is weakly excited on resonance, as shown
by the interaction representation hamiltonian. This is chosen because it is a tractable
example, which is a good test of the method because the stochastic fluctuation ir
large in comparison with the hamiltonian and nonlinear dissipation. It has also been
analysed with the same parameters using the positive P-representation, which is an
extension of the Wigner function representation, and for which there are runaway
problems .
For a single run, figure 2 shows the strong oscillations in the expectation value Of
the mean photon number with time, figure 3 shows the distribution over photon num-
ber in time and figure 4 over the sample at a given time, indicating the equivalence Of
Diffusion model applied to open Tstems
foxed damped linear os-
ciliator, showing rrdunion towards a m-
herent Mate which has no gtoehastic AU-
Figure 2. Oscillations in the expectation
value of the mean pholon number (a'a)
for a single mn of the nonlinear absorber.
r m z m m m m e c a s m w s m m
Plgure 3. Distribution of mean photon
number for 31030 time t uniformly dis-
tribuled in t for a single Nn of the non-
linear absorber. Note the nearly uniform
spread over the range f"
the WO for sufficiently long times. Figure 5 shows the mean Over 100 samples, com-
pared with a numerical solution using the direct integration of the density operator
equations.
The next example is a quantum cascade with emission only, also in interaction
N Gisin and I C Percival
< P h " " P
Flgure 4 Distribution of photon number
for lD00 different mns at time t = 2w.
Note the similarity U, the previous distri-
representation. The operator L , represents the interaction required to measure the
system in a given state, whereas L, represents the damping due to photon emission:
L , = O.la.
Figure 6 shows that the continuous-state diffusion automatically produces sudden
transitions between states in a single run. Clearly these are not instantaneous jumps,
hut their sharpness depends on the nature of the interaction of the system with its
environment, through L,. Their frequency is determined by L,.
Figure 7 illustrates a similar example in which there are only two states, but there
is also absorption and stimulated emission, so the operators are given by
H = O.l(at +a)
L, = O.la.
The final example of this section is the representation of a system for second-
harmonic generation, a realistic problem of two degrees of freedom with a very simple
nonlinear interaction. In the following equations the first term in the Hamiltonian is
the forcing term on one oscillator, and the second term is the nonlinear interaction.
The operators L, and L, provide linear damping for each of the oscillators:
H = zoi(ai - a,) + 0.2i(af2a, - atai)
Diffusion model applied to open qstems
Figure 6. A quantum caseade with emis-
sion oniy.
Ihe mntinuous-state diffu-
sion automatically produces sudden Iran-
sitions between quantum states in a sin-
gle a n , but these are mt instantaneous
Transitions between a p i r
of states with absorption and stimulated
In practice the quantum numbers are much higher than in the previous examples.
For our case the amplitudes only became insignificant for nl = 140 and n2 = 80, so
that if the density operator equation (1.1) had been directly integrated, then about
1402 x 80'
% 1.25 x 10a real numbers would have been needed for storage and
computation at each time t.
It would appear that for the state-diffusion method the state vector would need
2 x 140 x 80 real numbers to represent it, but in fact the state vector at a given
time on an individual run does not span the full space, and it was possible to follow
the mean photon number with a moving photon number representation that never
included more than 55 states for the first millator and 40 for the second, giving 4400
real numbers to represent a state, as against about 5 million for the density operator.
Figure 8 shows the results of a single run, with the mean photon number of each
oscillator, and the variance
O(Q+Q) = (((atay) - (a'a)2)1/2
of the expectation value, as a function of time. The fluctuations in this example
were relatively small, so U) runs already provided a good approximation, as shown in
This can be compared with the positive P-representation calculations of Dijrfle
and Schenzle and of Schack and Schenzle [B].
N Gisin and I C Percival
Flpm b A single run of the second-
harmonic generation syslem represented
ty the operators of (4.5). The mean pho:
ton number is plotted against time for
B o t 08011ator, repmenled by Ihe upper
and the smond oscillator, rrp-
resented by the upper broken a w e . The
lower CUN.ZS reprcscnt the Yanance m
each L'dsc,
A mean mer 20 ~ n s
second-harmonic generation, with the
same meaning for each N N C . The mri-
ance shown is a mean mer the variances
for each run, so that it can be wmpared
F,T"T'-",-rr,
directly with figure 8.
5. Reduction to un eigenstate by a measurement
In the usual picture, quantum measurement is represented by the projection of the
state I$) onto an eigenstate of the measured dynamical variable with Hermitian
operator A. This satisfies neither the exact Schrodinger dynamics of isolated quantum
systems nor the approximate Schrijdinger dynamics used for systems in interaction
with their environment.
In stochastic reduction theories measurement is just a simple example of the
interaction of a system with its environment, and is treated like any other such
interaction. The standard-state vector equation (1.2) is used, with zero Hamiltonian
and a single Lindblad operator A to represent the interaction.
The following analysis shows that the change in mean square deviation is a nega-
tive continuous function of I$),
except at the eigenstates, where it is zero, as shown
in [lq. The state vectors of the ensemble thus diffuse towards the eigenstates, a
process similar to Pearle's model of 'gambler's ruin' .
The mean value is
Q = ($/AI$)
and the mean square deviation is
M ( ( A ~ ) - Q')
Dffiwn model applied to open Jystems
Figure 10. M a n pholon number 88 a
funaion of time for ihe measurement
process. ?he stochastic mnwrgence to
the eigenslalca can be clearly aecn.
where all expectations (.) in this section are for the initial state 14).
From (1.2), because A is Hermitian,
so the change in the expectation of A in time dt is
da = (d$lAl+) + ($lAld+) + (d$lAld+)
= - ~ ( + ~ ( A - Q ) ~ A I . ~ ) ~ ~ + ~ ( + I ( A - ~ ) A ~ $ ) ~ W ~ + ~ ( + I ( A - ~
= 2((A2) - a')dwR
and consequently
Mda' = M(2ada + dada) = 4((A2) - a')'dt
Since measurement does not affect the mean of the expectation of any commuting
operator, we have
Md(A") = O
- a') = -4((A2) - a')' < 0
which is negative.
trated in figure 10. The Hamiltonian and ldndblad operators are
The example of the measurement of the photon number of an oscillator is illus-
L = 0 . 4 ~ ' ~
and the intial state had the same amplitude for every odd level between 1 and 9
inclusive for each of nine samples. The stochastic attraction towards the eigenstates
can be clearly seen. In the laboratory this attraction occurs at an early stage in the
interaction of the system with the measuring apparatus.
N Gisin and I C Percival
6. Discussion and prospects
We have demonstrated a new numerical model for the motion of a quantum system
in interaction with its environment, in which the state vector represents an individ-
ual system and diffuses continuously in the space of quantum states. The diffusion
equation is derived directly from the density operator equation, such as the Blcch
equation, and is consistent with it. Programs have been written in Pascal and FOR-
TRAN for any system of one or two degrees of freedom in which all the operators
can be represented as finite Sums over finite products of creation and annihilation
operators.
As in the usual representation by a density operator, the statediffusion model
depends on the Cut that is made between the system and its environment, although
beyond a certain point, the precise position of the cut makes no significant difference
to the final result that is compared with experiment. The model shows that the cut
can be very close to the microworld of quantum systems.
The model possesses the following advantages over the usual direct numerical
solution of the Bloch equation.
(1) The model provides insight into the behaviour of individual systems and
processes, which are represented in a form that can be compared directly with exper-
imental and observational systems and processes.
(2) The computer store required is of order C, N, where N is the dimension of
the space of quantum states. This compares with the CzN2 required for the density
operator equation, which can rule out this method altogether. The Ci are constants.
(3) Fbr speed of computation the advantages of the method outweigh the dis-
advantages when the sample size is smaller than approximately twice the complex
dimension of the state vector.
(4) The process of measurement is represented just like any other interaction of
a quantum system and its environment, and needs no special treatment. This is the
original reason for introducing stochastic equations for state vectors.
There are also disadvantages of the diffision model:
(i) Where high precision is required, the sample required may be too large for
advantage (3), so the method may be slower than direct integration of the density-
matrix equations, sometimes much slower. These situations are likely to arise in
practice where the dimension of the state space is small and the corresponding ex-
perimental or observational statistical errors are vely small.
(ii) Analytic solutions of the stochastic equations are rarely available (though
some do exist ).
(iii) The model is unfamiliar.
The disadvantages (ii) and (iii) are likely to become less severe with time and
greater familiarity with application of the diffusion model.
The first three advantages are shared with the stochastic quantum-jump model
of Dalibard, Carmichael and others mentioned in the introduction, although for
advantage (l), their model provides a dinerent insight, and it remains to be seen which,
if any, is preferable. The continuous stochastic-diffusion model has the following
further advantages over the quantum-jump model.
(5) Given a density operator equation, equation (1.2) for diffusion of quantum
states is derived explicitly and uniquely. The uniqueness of the diffusion equation
provides a one-to-one relation between a probability distribution wer pure states at
an initial time, and the distribution at later times.
Diffusion model applied to open systeins
(6) Since its solutions are continuous in time, and it uses the well developed
It8 stochastic calculus, all the existing tools for numerical integration of such
stochastic equations can be used.
(7) Although the solutions are continuous in time, fast transitions resembling
quantum jumps appear naturally.
The advantages of the stochastic differential equation method outweigh the dis-
advantages in a very wide variety of situations, which occur in many fields, including
quantum optics, quantum chemistry, and the physics of condensed matter.
Obviously the similarities between the continuous-diffusion and quantum-jump
methods outweigh the differences. Although at the moment the latter have not been
used to represent a measurement process, the work of Di6si suggests that they
might be used in this way (advantage (4)), and that it might also be possible to derive
unique quantum-jump equations from density-operator equations (advantage (5)). It
is not clear at the moment which method is preferable as a practical tool, or whether
each might have its advantages in different situations.
But it is clear that the two models have completely different origins. There h thus
a remarkable convergence of two trends in physics that have previously been quite
distinct: the quantum measurement 'problem' as considered by physicists concerned
about the foundations of quantum physics, and the quantum measurement process
as treated pragmatically by experimenters looking for intuitive pictures and rules of
computation.
The stochastic reduction model of quantum mechanics provides both insight and
practical tools for the solution of a wide variety of physical problems.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to A Barchielli, K Burnett, L Di6si, P Knight, G Lindblad, M Roche
and R Thompson for helpful discussions, to H Carmichael for unpublished notes and
to the UK Science and Engineering Research Council for financial support.
The Lindblad form of the Bloch equations is not unique. If L,
is a set of ml
operators which represent the time evolution of the density operator in (l.l), then
the ~ z m e ev&gicfi g;:~
!-y the j1 nnorstnrr U urhr.re
--I' ..*.---
so that umj is unitary when the dimensions ml and j , are equal. Substitution in
(1.1) gives the same equation with I(, in place of L,.
For the uniqueness of the
state-diffusion equation the two forms of the Bloch equation must produce equivalent
state-diffusion equations. By substitution in (1.2)
N Gisin and I C Percival
d(j = Cumjdtm
Mdtp,dtj = 0
and the products are to be taken in the It6 sense as mean values. ?he two state-
diffusion equations are therefore equivalent, as required.