High-order methods for decaying two-dimensional homogeneous isotropic turbulence
Omer San∗, and Anne E. Staples
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
Numerical schemes used for the integration of complex ﬂow simulations should provide accurate solutions for the long time integrations these ﬂows require. To this end, the performance of various high-order accurate numerical schemes is investigated for
direct numerical simulations (DNS) of homogeneous isotropic two-dimensional decaying turbulent ﬂows. The numerical accuracy
of compact diﬀerence, explicit central diﬀerence, Arakawa, and dispersion-relation-preserving schemes are analyzed and compared
with the Fourier-Galerkin pseudospectral scheme. In addition, several explicit Runge-Kutta schemes for time integration are investigated. We demonstrate that the centered schemes suﬀer from spurious Nyquist signals that are generated almost instantaneously
and propagate into much of the ﬁeld when the numerical resolution is insuﬃcient. We further show that the order of the scheme becomes increasingly important for increasing cell Reynolds number. Surprisingly, the sixth-order schemes are found to be in perfect
agreement with the pseudospectral method. Considerable reduction in computational time compared to the pseudospectral method
is also reported in favor of the ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes. Among the fourth-order schemes, the compact scheme provides better
accuracy than the others for fully resolved computations. The fourth-order Arakawa scheme provides more accurate results for
under-resolved computations, however, due to its conservation properties. Our results show that, contrary to conventional wisdom,
diﬀerence methods demonstrate superior performance in terms of accuracy and eﬃciency for fully resolved DNS computations of
the complex ﬂows considered here. For under-resolved simulations, however, the choice of diﬀerence method should be made with
Keywords: Incompressible ﬂows, high-order accurate schemes, ﬁnite diﬀerence methods, Fourier-Galerkin pseudospectral
method, double shear layer problem, two-dimensional decaying turbulence
1. Introduction
The physics of two-dimensional turbulence have been elucidated substantially during the past decades by theoretical
models, intensive numerical investigations, and dedicated soap
ﬁlm experiments . Two-dimensional turbulence research efforts have applicability in geophysics, astronomy and plasma
physics, in which numerical experiments play a large role. One
of the most important reasons for studying two-dimensional turbulence is to improve our understanding of geophysical ﬂows
in the atmosphere and ocean . We may also ﬁnd twodimensional ﬂows in a wide variety of situations such as ﬂows
in rapidly rotating systems and ﬂows in a ﬂuid ﬁlm on top of
the surface of another ﬂuid or a rigid object .
Two-dimensional turbulence behaves in a profoundly diﬀerent way from three-dimensional turbulence due to diﬀerent energy cascade behavior, and follows the Kraichnan-Batchelor-
Leith (KBL) theory . In three-dimensional turbulence,
energy is transferred forward, from large scales to smaller
scales, via vortex stretching. In two dimensions that mechanism
is absent, and it turns out that under most forcing and dissipation conditions energy will be transferred from smaller scales
∗Corresponding author.
Email address: (Omer San)
to larger scales. This is largely because of another quadratic
invariant, the potential enstrophy, deﬁned as the integral of the
square of the potential vorticity. Despite the apparent simplicity
in dealing with two rather than three spatial dimensions, twodimensional turbulence is possibly richer in its dynamics than
three-dimensional turbulence due to its conservation properties,
such as its inverse energy and forward enstrophy cascading
mechanisms. Danilov and Gurarie and Tabeling reviewed both theoretical and experimental two-dimensional turbulence studies along with extensions into geophysical ﬂow settings. More recent reviews on two-dimensional turbulence are
also provided by Clercx and van Heijst and Boﬀetta and
Ecke . Recent studies in two-dimensional turbulence, both
forced (stationary) turbulence and unforced (decaying)
turbulence provide high resolution computational con-
ﬁrmation of the KBL theory.
Simulation of turbulent and other convection-dominated unsteady ﬂows using direct numerical simulation (DNS) requires
a numerical method that properly resolves all the multiscale
ﬂow structures . Since high accuracy is crucial in numerical simulation of complex ﬂows with multiscale structures,
such as the unsteady evolution of a turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld, most
two-dimensional turbulence studies have been performed using pseudospectral methods based on fast Fourier transform
(FFT) algorithms . Simulations performed by the lattice
 
November 8, 2018
 
Boltzmann method (LBM) have been also presented for twodimensional decaying turbulence . Pseudospectral methods
are highly accurate but mostly limited to ideal geometries such
as rectangular or circular domains. Discretization methods such
as ﬁnite diﬀerence, ﬁnite element, or ﬁnite volume methods are
often preferred in more realistic problems. Finite diﬀerence
methods oﬀer an attractive alternative to spectral methods in
the direct and large eddy simulations (LES) of turbulence providing reasonable accuracy coupled with relative ease of implementation in simple and complex ﬂow geometries .
Computational algorithms developed in the past were mainly
designed for solving large-scale ﬂuid dynamics problems using second-order spatial accuracy . These algorithms
usually have rather signiﬁcant dispersion errors and if they are
not centered schemes they also have large dissipation errors,
making it hard to accurately compute ﬁne structures in the ﬂow
ﬁeld using them . There are two ways to improve the resolution of these methods; one is to reﬁne the grid and the other is
to construct a high-order accurate scheme. Our approach here
is to test and evaluate diﬀerent high-order formulations for instantaneous and statistical properties of two-dimensional turbulence and compare their accuracy and eﬃciency with those
of the pseudospectral and the second-order schemes. Furthermore, it has been shown by Kravchenko and Moin that the
subgrid-scale models in LES are eﬀective only if central discretization of order higher than two is employed. With this in
mind, we will investigate the behavior of four diﬀerent families
of high-order accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence methods in the decay of
two-dimensional isotropic turbulence.
High-order ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes can be formulated to
reduce the truncation errors associated with the diﬀerence approximations. A straightforward Taylor series expansion of a
pointwise discretization under certain assumptions results in
a family of the explicit diﬀerence (ED) schemes. The compact diﬀerence (CD) schemes feature high-order accuracy with
smaller stencils and smaller truncation errors than the ED
schemes, and have been employed as an alternative to spectral methods in simulations of turbulence with great ﬂexibility
 . On the other hand, increasing the stencil size allows us
to optimize the weight coeﬃcients in the diﬀerence equation.
This strategy leads to the dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP)
schemes , which have been used mostly in acoustics. Another strategy to construct a numerical scheme is based on the
conservation properties of the discrete form of the equations.
Arakawa suggested that the conservation of energy, enstrophy, and skew-symmetry is suﬃcient to avoid computational instabilities stemming from nonlinear interactions. The conservation and stability properties of the Arakawa scheme were investigated by Lilly by means of spectral analysis along with
several ﬁrst and second-order time integration methods. In the
present work, we test several Runge-Kutta methods for time integration, although the primary goal here is to analyze the accuracy of these high-order accurate spatial diﬀerencing methods
for the long-term evolution of complex two-dimensional turbulent ﬂows. For ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes, the combination of
diﬀerentiation errors and nonlinear truncation and aliasing errors, which usually manifest themselves in the high wavenumbers of the resolved scales, determines the overall error at the
small scales. Looking at the accuracy of the whole solution procedure we also investigate the resolution requirements for these
ﬁnite diﬀerence families, the eﬀects of the order of the schemes,
and the importance of the global conservation properties.
The paper is organized as follows: the mathematical formulation of the problem is given in Section 2. The numerical methods are presented in Section 3 with descriptions of
high-order accurate spatial discretization schemes, temporal
discretization algorithms, and an eﬃcient fast Poisson solver
algorithm. These schemes are validated in Section 4 by simulating the Taylor-Green decaying vortex benchmark problem
for the unsteady incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. The
eﬀective accuracies of these methods are also provided in this
section, and are conﬁrmed to be the theoretical accuracies of
the schemes. Section 5 presents a careful numerical investigation of their performance for a challenging benchmark problem which consists of strong shear layers. The results for twodimensional isotropic homogeneous decaying turbulence are
provided in Section 6. The behavior of these nine diﬀerent spatial schemes are tested in terms of accuracy and eﬃciency. The
eﬀects of several explicit Runge-Kutta time advancement techniques on the whole solution procedure are also analyzed. In
addition, the Reynolds number (Re) dependency of the turbulence statistics is illustrated in this section. Final conclusions
and some comments on the performance of these schemes are
drawn in section 7.
2. Mathematical model
The governing equations for two-dimensional incompressible ﬂows can be written in a dimensionless form of the
vorticity-stream function formulation as
along with the kinematic relationship between vorticity and
stream function according to a Poisson equation, which is given
From a computational point of view, this formulation has several advantages over the primitive variable formulation. It eliminates pressure from the Navier-Stokes equations and hence
has no corresponding odd-even decoupling between the pressure and velocity components, as well as projection inaccuracies usually observed in fractional step approaches . Therefore, the usage of a collocated grid does not produce any
spurious modes in the vorticity-stream function formulation.
The vorticity-stream function formulation automatically satis-
ﬁes the divergence-free condition and allows one to reduce the
number of equations to be solved.
The main objective of our work is to test and evaluate diﬀerent frameworks for high-order accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes and compare them with a spectrally accurate
pseudospectral method for two-dimensional isotropic turbulent
ﬂows. In fact, to be able to compare the numerical schemes
more precisely we restricted ourselves to periodic boundary
conditions and a uniform Cartesian grid.
Consequently, we
eliminated errors coming from the mesh non-uniformities and
inconsistent boundary schemes. It should also be noted that
using the vorticity-stream function formulation on a collocated
grid provides us with an ideal computational setting in which to
test the characteristics of the numerical schemes by eliminating
any possible errors coming from projection inaccuracies.
3. Numerical methods
The objective of the present work is to test and evaluate
diﬀerent frameworks for high-order accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence
schemes and compare them with a spectrally accurate pseudospectral method for two-dimensional isotropic turbulence
ﬂows. We will also compare them with their classical secondorder accurate formulations in order to analyze the eﬀects of
order of accuracy. In the text that follows, the high-order ﬁnite
diﬀerence approximations for spatial discretization, the pseudospectral method, an eﬃcient procedure for the Poisson equation, and the time integration methods that we utilize for time
advancement are given brieﬂy for completeness.
3.1. Explicit diﬀerence (ED) scheme
For any scalar pointwise value of f the classical centered ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes for the ﬁrst derivative up the the sixth
order accuracy are given by 
2h(−fi−1 + fi+1) + O(h2)
12h( fi−2 −8fi−1 + 8 fi+1 −fi+2) + O(h4)
60h(−fi−3 + 9 fi−2 −45 fi−1
+45 fi+1 −9 fi+2 + fi+3) + O(h6)
Similarly, the second derivative approximations become
h2 ( fi−1 −2 fi + fi+1) + O(h2)
12h2 (−fi−2 + 16 fi−1 −30 fi
+16 fi+1 −fi+2) + O(h4)
180h2 (2 fi−3 −27 fi−2 + 270fi−1 −490fi
+270 fi+1 −27 fi+2 + 2 fi+3) + O(h6)
where h is the step size in the derivative direction.
3.2. Compact diﬀerence (CD) scheme
Apart from the explicit centered schemes, with the cost of
a tridiagonal system solution (i.e., by using the well-known
Thomas algorithm), the ﬁrst derivative can be computed accordingly 
i+1 = a fi+1 −fi−1
+ b fi+2 −fi−2
which gives rise to an α-family of tridiagonal schemes with
3(α + 2), and b =
3(4α −1). Here, α = 0 leads to the
explicit non-compact fourth-order scheme for the ﬁrst derivative. A classical compact fourth-order scheme, which is also
known as the Pad´e scheme, is obtained by setting α = 1/4. The
truncation error in the Eq. (9) is 4
5!(3α −1)h4 f (5). Therefore, a
sixth-order compact scheme is obtained by choosing α = 1/3.
The second derivative compact centered scheme is given by
i−1 + f ′′
i+1 = a fi+1 −2 fi + fi−1
+ b fi+2 −2 fi + fi−2
where a = 4
3(1 −α), and b = 1
3(10α −1). For α = 1/10 the
classical fourth-order Pad´e scheme is obtained. The truncation
error in the Eq. (10) is −4
6!(11α −2)h4 f (6). Therefore, a sixthorder compact scheme is also obtained by choosing α = 2/11.
These compact schemes for the ﬁrst and second derivatives
show better spectral accuracy then their explicit counterparts.
However, they involve solving tridiagonal matrix equations and
are therefore eﬀectively non-local. This requires special care
for designing parallel computations. However, in this study, we
focus on a single domain without domain decomposition, and
so the compact schemes can be adopted easily.
3.3. Dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP) scheme
An optimized dispersion-preserving scheme was proposed in
 . The scheme increases the stencil size, but improves the
resolution in wavespace. The ﬁnite diﬀerence approximation
for the ﬁrst derivative is
Fourth-order accuracy is obtained for N = M = 3 (centered
DRP scheme) and the optimized coeﬃcients are a0 = 0, a1 =
−a−1 = 0.79926643, a2 = −a−2 = −0.18941314, and a3 =
−a−3 = 0.02651995. The viscous terms can be computed by
using the explicit diﬀerence schemes.
3.4. Arakawa scheme
Arakawa suggested that the conservation of energy, enstrophy and skew symmetry is suﬃcient to avoid computational
instabilities arising from nonlinear interactions. The nonlinear
terms in Eq. (1) were deﬁned as the Jacobian
J(ω, ψ) = ∂ψ
The second-order Arakawa scheme for the Jacobian is
JI(ω, ψ) = 1
3(J1(ω, ψ) + J2(ω, ψ) + J3(ω, ψ))
where the discrete parts of the Jacobian
J1(ω, ψ) =
[(ωi+1,j −ωi−1, j)(ψi, j+1 −ψi,j−1)
−(ωi, j+1 −ωi,j−1)(ψi+1, j −ψi−1,j)]
J2(ω, ψ) =
[ωi+1,j(ψi+1,j+1 −ψi+1, j−1)
−ωi−1,j(ψi−1,j+1 −ψi−1, j−1)
−ωi, j+1(ψi+1,j+1 −ψi−1, j+1)
+ ωi, j−1(ψi+1,j−1 −ψi−1, j−1)]
J3(ω, ψ) =
[ωi+1,j+1(ψi,j+1 −ψi+1, j)
−ωi−1,j−1(ψi−1,j −ψi,j−1)
−ωi−1,j+1(ψi,j+1 −ψi−1, j)
+ ωi+1,j−1(ψi+1,j −ψi,j−1)]
The fourth-order accurate Arakawa discretization of the Jacobian becomes
JII(ω, ψ) = 1
3(J4(ω, ψ) + J5(ω, ψ) + J6(ω, ψ))
J4(ω, ψ) =
[(ωi+1, j+1 −ωi−1, j−1)(ψi−1,j+1 −ψi+1,j−1)
−(ωi−1, j+1 −ωi+1, j−1)(ψi+1,j+1 −ψi−1, j−1)]
J5(ω, ψ) =
[ωi+1,j+1(ψi,j+2 −ψi+2, j)
−ωi−1,j−1(ψi−2,j −ψi,j−2)
−ωi−1,j+1(ψi,j+2 −ψi−2, j)
+ ωi+1,j−1(ψi+2,j −ψi,j−2)]
J6(ω, ψ) =
[ωi+2,j(ψi+1,j+1 −ψi+1, j−1)
−ωi−2,j(ψi−1,j+1 −ψi−1, j−1)
−ωi, j+2(ψi+1,j+1 −ψi−1, j+1)
+ ωi, j−2(ψi+1,j−1 −ψi−1, j−1)]
Arakawa showed that JII conserves enstrophy and energy and
the following Jacobian
J(ω, ψ) = 2JI(ω, ψ) −JII(ω, ψ) + O(h4)
has fourth-order accuracy. The viscous terms can be discretized
with the 4th-order explicit diﬀerence scheme given in the previous section. This scheme was used to compute two-dimensional
isotropic turbulence by Orlandi .
3.5. Fourier-Galerkin pseudospectral method
Fourier series expansion based methods are often used for
solving problems with periodic boundary conditions. One of
the most accurate methods for solving the Navier-Stokes equations in periodic domains is the pseudospectral method, which
exploits fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms, resulting in
spectral accuracy .
It should be noted that the discrete
Fourier transform is O(N2
y), which becomes very expensive
for larger resolutions. On the other hand, the discrete Fourier
transform can, in fact, be computed in O(NxNylog(NxNy)) operations with well-known FFT algorithms . Given a set of Nx
and Ny uniformly distributed points on the interval [0, Lx]× [0,
Ly], the forward Fourier transformation of any discrete function
˜um,nei( 2πm
Lx xi+ 2πn
and its inverse transform to ﬁnd the Fourier coeﬃcients is
ui,je−i( 2πm
Lx xi+ 2πn
−1 and i, and j represent indices for physical space,
and m, and n are the Fourier space indices. The discrete grid
coordinates for i = 0, 1, ..Nx and j = 0, 1, ..Ny are given by
Since the domain is periodic, x0 = xNx and y0 = yNy. Deﬁning
the wave numbers
Now, we can easily perform diﬀerentiation in both directions.
The ﬁrst and second order diﬀerentiation of any function u in
discrete domain becomes
˜um,n(ikx)ei(kxxi+kyy j)
x)ei(kxxi+kyy j)
and similarly for the y direction derivatives. By transforming
Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) to Fourier space, the governing equations
y) ˜ψm,n = −˜ωm,n
where ˜N represents the nonlinear terms (Fourier transform of
the Jacobian) and needs to be computed according to the following convolution
˜N = (iky ˜ψm,n) ◦(ikx ˜ωm,n) −(ikx ˜ψm,n) ◦(iky ˜ωm,n)
The convolution sum for these nonlinear terms is actually computed in the physical domain, with the help of the convolution theorem. One of the basic techniques for removing the
aliasing error for the nonlinear terms is the 3/2-rule which is
known as the padding or truncation algorithm. The key to this
dealiasing algorithm is the use of the discrete transform of Mx
and My rather than Nx and Ny points, so that Mx ≥3Nx/2
and My ≥3Ny/2.
For example, let’s denote ˜am,n and ˜bm,n,
the Fourier coeﬃcients of two multiplicand terms, as being in
˜N, and we would like to compute the Fourier coeﬃcients of
the multiplication of these two terms, ˜cm,n = ˜am,n ◦˜bm,n. In
the pseudospectral (PS) method, we can compute this term as
˜cm,n = F−1(F(˜am,n)F(˜bm,n)), where F and F−1 represent the
forward and inverse transforms, respectively. First we need to
use the forward transformation using Mx and My wavenumbers
˜am,nei(kXXi+kYY j)
˜bm,nei(kXXi+kYY j)
where Xi = iLx
My . The Fourier coeﬃcients are padded
with zeros for the additional wavenumbers such as
Multiplication is performed in physical space but with padded
higher wavenumbers in the following way
Ci, j = Ai, jBi,j.
Then, the inverse transform gives the dealiased Fourier coeﬃcients as
Ci,je−i(kXXi+kYY j)
in which we are only interested in ˜Cm,n for |m| ≤Nx, |n| ≤Ny
(i.e., ˜cm,n = ˜Cm,n for |m| ≤Nx, |n| ≤Ny). Although in practice
dealiasing need only be performed with Mx ≥3Nx/2, we have
used Mx = 2Nx here since the FFT solver we are using requires
resolutions that are powers of two. In order to make a fair comparison of CPU times, however, we have chosen to present the
dealisased computational CPU times an appropriately interpolated factor of the actual time between Nx and Mx. In this study,
the semi-discrete vorticity transport equation in Fourier space,
Eq. (28), is solved explicitly by third-order or forth-order accurate Runge-Kutta time marching schemes which will be given
3.6. Poisson solver
In order to obtain the streamfunction from the vorticity ﬁeld,
Eq. (2) needs to be solved. In general, Gauss-Seidel or successive over relaxation (SOR) types of iterative algorithms for
solving the Poisson equation are of O(N2) where N is the total number of grid points (i.e., N = NxNy for two-dimensional
problems). It is not feasible to use these types of iterative Poisson solvers for high resolution (and therefore high Reynolds
Figure 1: Eﬃciency of Poisson solvers for a two-dimensional square domain.
number) computations along with long time integration.
order to accelerate these solvers, very successful multi-grid
(MG) algorithms have been developed that reduce the computational eﬀort to O(CMGN) where CMG is a proportionality constant . On the other hand, for certain ideal problems on
equally-spaced grids, fast Fourier transform (FFT)-based fast
Poisson solvers (FPS) can be used to solve elliptic problems directly with an O(CFPS Nlog(N)) operational cost, and they are
presently the fastest available algorithms (CFPS log(N) < CMG
in relevant resolutions) for solving Poisson equations .
A preliminary study is performed to test the computational
eﬃciencies of diﬀerent Poisson solvers for a square domain
with equidistant grid spacing. The computational time (CPU
time) for solving just one Poisson equation is illustrated in
Fig. 1. This preliminary comparison shows that the FPS is the
most eﬃcient solver for Cartesian grid problems. We take advantage of the simple rectangular shape of our domain and utilize the FPS for all the simulations in this study. The basic
three-step procedure to ﬁnd ψ from known ω values at any time
(also for the inner steps of the Runge-Kutta time stepping algorithms) has the following form.
1. Use forward FFT for ω to ﬁnd Fourier coeﬃcients according to Eq. (22).
2. Compute Fourier coeﬃcients of stream function from
(k2x + k2y).
3. Use inverse FFT for ψ values according to Eq. (23).
3.7. Time integration algorithms
Steady calculations in ﬂuid ﬂows have been mostly handled
using implicit time advancement algorithms and corresponding large time steps. It is tempting to adopt a similar practice
in computations of turbulent ﬂows. Unfortunately, the requirement of time accuracy over a wide range of scales does not
permit very large time steps in such calculations .
use of large time steps implies that the small scales can have
large errors, which can corrupt the solutions. Therefore, the
families of fourth-order and third-order Runge-Kutta
time integration schemes have been extensively used in turbulence simulations with their certain numerical stability requirements . In ﬂuid dynamics, the numerical stability of such
explicit algorithms is usually addressed by using the convective Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) or viscous Neumann stability conditions . Usually the fourth-order Runge-Kutta
schemes have a greater accuracy for a given time step and a
larger allowable stability domain than the third-order Runge-
Kutta schemes. To be practical, an explicit algorithm for turbulence computations must provide long-time temporal accuracy
while requiring modest temporary storage resulting in the development of a low-storage Runge-Kutta family for demanding
computations.
Semi-discrete ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) are obtained after spatial discretization of the partial diﬀerential equations. To implement the Runge-Kutta schemes, we cast the governing vorticity transport equation in the following form
dt = £(ω, ψ)
where £(ω, ψ) is the discrete operator of spatial derivatives including nonlinear convective terms and linear diﬀusive terms,
and ψ is obtained from the Poisson equation. A fourth-order
Runge-Kutta scheme can be written in the following form 
ω(1) = ωn + ∆t
2 £(ωn, ψn)
ω(2) = ωn + ∆t
2 £(ω1, ψ1)
ω(3) = ωn + ∆t£(ω2, ψ2)
3(−ωn + ω(1) + 2ω(2) + ω(3)) + ∆t
6 £(ω(3), ψ(3))(39)
The optimal third-order accurate TVD Runge-Kutta scheme is
given as 
ω(1) = ωn + ∆t£(ωn, ψn)
4∆t£(ω(1), ψ(1))
3∆t£(ω(2), ψ(2)).
Alternatively, memory-eﬀective 2N-storage schemes that require only two sets of variables to be held in memory can be
used. The iterative form of the 2N-storage schemes can be written as
g(i) = αig(i−1) + ∆t£(ω(i−1), ψ(i−1))
ω(i) = ω(i−1) + βig(i).
For a third-order accurate three-step scheme, we have indices
i = 1, 2, 3. In order to advance from ωn at time tn to ωn+1
Table 1: Coeﬃcients for various low-storage third-order Runge-Kutta methods.
predictor/corrector
inhomogeneous
Williamson 
at time tn+1 = tn + ∆t we set in Eq. (41) ω(0) = ωn and, after the last step, ωn+1 = ω(3). In order to be able to calculate the ﬁrst step, i = 1, for which no g(0) exists, we require
α1 = 0. The corresponding coeﬃcients for diﬀerent types of
constructed schemes are listed in Table 1. In practice all of them
are approximately equally good as advocated by Brandenburg
 . Although our main objective is to evaluate the performance of the various high-order spatial discretization schemes,
we will perform a comparative study on these explicit Runge-
Kutta schemes presented above to test their long-term characteristics for two-dimensional turbulence.
4. Validation problem: Taylor-Green vortex
In this section, the schemes under consideration are validated on a square domain by solving the Taylor-Green decaying
vortex problem. The Taylor-Green vortex problem is the twodimensional, unsteady ﬂow of a decaying vortex, which is an
exact closed form solution to the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations in Cartesian coordinates. The exact solution of this
vortex ﬂow in a [0, 2π]×[0, 2π] domain with periodic boundary
conditions is given by
ωe(x, y, t) = 2κcos(κx)cos(κy)e−2κ2t/Re
where κ is an integer which represents the number of vortices
in each direction. In order to quantify the eﬀective order of
accuracy for each scheme, using the diﬀerence between exact
and computed solutions, we compute the discrete L2 norm as
i, j −ωi,j|2.
In order to test the spatial convergence rate, we ﬁrst perform
numerical simulations for Re = 1 and κ = 4 with all the spatial
schemes introduced earlier using the third-order TVD Runge-
Kutta scheme with ∆t = 10−4. We choose this small time step
(wherein the maximum CFL number is around 0.002 for the
1282 resolution case) to eliminate possible temporal discretization errors due to the Runge-Kutta time integration schemes. A
study with ∆t = 2×10−4, 10−4, and 5×10−5 shows that the predicted ﬂow ﬁeld is independent of ∆t. To further verify whether
the simulations are independent of the errors associated with
temporal discretization, we also run the same computations using the fourth-order Runge Kutta scheme, which yields exactly
the same results.
Table 2: Discrete L2 error norms and corresponding convergence rates showing the eﬀective order of the spatial diﬀerence schemes for the Taylor-Green vortex
problem at t = 0.1 for Re = 1 and κ = 4, obtained using the time step ∆t = 10−4. The ﬁnal column shows the CPU times in seconds for the 1282 resolution
computations.
pseudospectral method (PS)
6th-order explicit diﬀerence (ED6)
4th-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4)
2nd-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2)
6th-order compact diﬀerence (CD6)
4th-order compact diﬀerence (CD4)
4th-order Arakawa scheme (A4)
2nd-order Arakawa scheme (A2)
4th-order DRP scheme (DRP4)
Figure 2: Convergence of the discrete L2 error norms at time t = 0.1 for the
Taylor-Green vortex decaying problem at Re = 1.
In evaluating the performance of diﬀerent ﬁnite diﬀerence
formulations, the computed discrete L2 norms at time t = 0.1
(when a 95% decay of the initial ﬁeld has happened) are tabulated in Table 2 and are also plotted in Fig. 2. Results show
that the theoretical order of accuracies for all the schemes are
obtained in practice. A linear reduction rate is obtained with
the slope of all curves being their theoretical values, verifying
the correct spatial convergence rate for each scheme. The most
accurate diﬀerence scheme is found to be the sixth-order compact diﬀerence scheme. We also demonstrate that the errors
associated with all the high-order formulations are several order magnitudes lower than the second-order formulations. It
can be seen from Fig. 2 that the predicted result of the 6thorder compact scheme becomes more accurate than the pseudospectral solution for the case with 1282 resolution. This is
mainly due to the accumulation of round oﬀerrors in the FFTs
of the pseudospectral method. It can also be seen that the associated error increases slightly with increasing resolution for
pseudospectral computations, again, due to the round-oﬀerrors
associated with the FFTs. That is actually why Lele called
these compact schemes “spectral-like schemes.” It can also be
seen that the compact schemes give more accurate results than
the explicit ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes due to their smaller truncation error. Since the viscous diﬀerence formulations are equivalent, it should be noted here that the fourth-order Arakawa,
dispersion-relation-preserving, and explicit diﬀerence schemes
predict almost the same answer because of the inherent dynamics of the Taylor-Green vortex validation problem. This problem does not have a convective ﬂow ﬁeld, hence, the center of
the each vortex stays stationary.
Next, we perform a convergence rate analysis for the temporal schemes. As we can see from the previous analysis, the
pseudospectral scheme provides much more accurate results
than the ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes, especially for lower resolutions. In order to be able to test the convergence rate of the
temporal schemes properly, we choose our spatial discretization
scheme to be the pseudospectral scheme with a resolution of
162, for which the temporal discretization error becomes greater
than the spatial discretization error. The computed error norms
are shown in Table 3 at time t = 20 for Re = 1000. It can be
seen from Fig. 3 that a linear reduction rate is obtained with the
slope of all curves being 3 for all the third-order Runge-Kutta
schemes, and 4 for the fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme. We
report that all the third-order Runge-Kutta schemes utilized in
this study produce the same result within negligible diﬀerences
due to round-oﬀerror.
The Taylor-Green vortex problem is one of the simplest incompressible ﬂow test problems, having a smoothly decaying
ﬁeld. We solve it to be able to perform an exact error convergence rate analysis by comparing our results to the analytical
solution of the problem. In the following sections, the eﬀects
of the order of the schemes and their global conservation properties will be analyzed for more challenging convective dominated ﬂow problems. A truly fair comparison might require
implementation of the same discretization scheme for the viscous terms. Therefore, in order to do a fair comparison among
Table 3: Discrete L2 error norms and corresponding convergence rates showing the eﬀective order of the temporal integration schemes for the Taylor-Green vortex
problem at t = 20 for Re = 1000 and κ = 4, obtained using the pseudospectral scheme with a spatial resolution of 162.
4th-order Runge-Kutta (RK4)
TVD Runge-Kutta (TVDRK3)
Symmetric (SYMRK3)
Predictor/Corrector (P/CRK3)
Inhomogeneous (INHRK3)
Williamson (WILRK3)
Figure 3: Convergence of the discrete L2 error norms for the temporal schemes
at time t = 20 for the Taylor-Green vortex decaying vortex problem at Re =
spatial diﬀerence schemes, the viscous diﬀusion terms are approximated using the six-order accurate compact scheme for all
the ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes being considered for the rest of the
5. Double shear layer problem
The double shear layer problem was introduced by Bell,
Colella and Glaz to test the performance of a projection
method, and was studied later by Minion and Brown using various schemes to determine the eﬀects of the grid resolution on solutions of the unsteady, incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations. It is a benchmark problem for testing the accuracy
and resolution of a time dependent numerical method. The double shear layer problem with periodic boundary conditions in a
square domain [0, 2π]×[0, 2π] is subjected to the following initial conditions
ω(x, y, 0) =
( δ cos(x) −σ cosh−2[σ(y −π
δ cos(x) + σ cosh−2[σ( 3π
if y > π(44)
where the constants σ and δ determine the thickness of the shear
layer and the amplitude of the initial perturbation, respectively.
In our computations, the thickness parameter is σ = 15/π, the
perturbation amplitude is δ = 0.05, the Reynolds number is
Re = 104, and the time step is ∆t = 10−3. We choose this
time step (wherein the corresponding maximum CFL number
is 0.25 for the case with a resolution of 10242) to concentrate
on the diﬀerences among the spatial discretization schemes by
eliminating the temporal integration errors in the simulations.
Since the dominant error is due to the spatial diﬀerence operator rather than the temporal integration method, we employ the
TVD Runge-Kutta scheme for the time advancement. We also
perform, but do not report in detail here, a time step reﬁnement
study revealing that the temporal discretization error is indeed
negligible. Moreover, we use the same discrete approximation,
the 6th-order compact diﬀerence scheme, for the viscous terms
in all the cases. In the following, we investigate the behavior of
the spatial discretization schemes for convective terms by solving the double shear layer problem for various resolutions.
Figure 5: The three-dimensional view of the shear layers at time t = 10 by
plotting the magnitude of the vorticity as the z-axis.
Figure 4: Evolution of the double shear layer problem for Re = 104 with the perturbation and thickness parameters of δ = 0.05 and σ = 15/π in a doubly periodic
Table 4: Discrete L2 error norms and computational eﬃciencies of the spatial schemes for the double shear layer problem at t = 10 for Re = 104. The reference
solution for computing the L2 norm is obtained using the pseudospectral method with a resolution of 10242.
CPU2562(hrs)
CPU5122(hrs)
CPU10242(hrs)
The perturbed shear layers roll up into a single vortex and
the shear layers become thinner and thinner as the ﬂow evolves
over time, as shown in Fig. 4. The three-dimensional view of
the shear layers developed at time t = 10 is also illustrated in
Fig. 5, which shows the magnitude of the vorticity as the zaxis. This shear layer problem is particularly important in that
the presence of thinner and thinner shear layers as the ﬂow ﬁeld
evolves in time is not captured by low grid resolution representations. The Gibbs phenomenon, numerical oscillations occurring near sharp vorticity gradients, occurs for underresolved
simulations in which the grid size is larger than the shear layer
thickness. Since sharp discontinuities are observed in the vor-
ticity ﬁeld, this benchmark ﬂow problem is very appropriate to
test the overall accuracy of the methods presented in this study.
Vorticity contours at t = 10 obtained using all the spatial discretization schemes introduced earlier are shown in Figs. 6-8
for diﬀerent spatial resolutions. To make the distinctions among
the schemes more clear, the centerline vorticity distributions
along the y-axis at t = 10 are also shown in Fig. 9-11 for diﬀerent resolutions. Our comparison in these ﬁgures includes four
families of fourth-order diﬀerence schemes, two second-order
schemes, and two sixth-order diﬀerence schemes, as well as the
pseudospectral scheme. Fig. 6 illustrates a comparison of vorticity ﬁelds obtained by using 2562 resolution for these nine different spatial discretization schemes. The corresponding comparison of centerline vorticity distributions is also provided in
Fig. 9. As we can see from these ﬁgures, both the sixth-order
compact scheme and the pseudospectral scheme yield almost
the same accuracy. It can also be seen that all the high-order formulations provide much better accuracy than the second-order
schemes. A truly fair comparison among all the ﬁnite diﬀerence
formulations presented in this study is to look at the fourthorder discretization schemes.
Results show that there is no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between explicit diﬀerence and Arakawa
schemes. The discrete conservation properties of the Arakawa
scheme do not improve the overall accuracy of the whole solution procedure in this case. On the other hand, the compact
diﬀerence and dispersion-relation-preserving schemes result in
better accuracy than the Arakawa or explicit diﬀerence schemes
by eliminating numerical oscillations. Increasing the resolution to 5122, as illustrated in Fig. 7 and Fig. 10, we show that
it is possible to obtain numerical oscillation-free results only
by using high-order schemes. Second-order schemes, both the
explicit diﬀerence and the Arakawa scheme, still produce numerical oscillations. Finally, we perform computations by using 10242 resolution and results are demonstrated in Fig. 8 and
Fig. 11 for vorticity contour ﬁelds and centerline vorticity distributions, respectively. We can see that all numerical schemes
provide an accurate oscillation-free solution to the double shear
layer problem with this resolution.
As a result of this study, a rule of thumb is that second-order
central diﬀerence schemes, whether standard explicit diﬀerence
or conservative Arakawa scheme, require about twice resolution (in each direction) to achieve the same results obtained by
a high-order ﬁnite diﬀerence or pseudospectral scheme. Therefore, this study demonstrates that the numerical oscillations
that occur in underresolved simulations with strong shear layers can be eliminated eﬃciently by using the high-order formulations with the same resolution. For example, at a relatively
high Reynolds number Re = 104, it can clearly be seen that
a resolution of 5122 is not high enough to capture the correct
physics without numerical oscillations using a low-order ﬁnite
diﬀerence formulation. To be able to obtain all the small-scale
physical layers, at least a 10242 resolution needs to be used
with a spatially second-order accurate scheme for solving underlying equations. On the other hand, we demonstrated that
the properly-resolved physical behavior without a Gibbs phenomenon is obtained using a resolution of 5122 with only a
slight increase in the computational price.
In evaluating the eﬃciency of the diﬀerent formulations, the
CPU times are tabulated in Table 4.
In this table, we also
present the corresponding discrete L2 norms which show the
average root-mean-square deviations of the vorticity ﬁeld from
the data obtained by well-resolved pseudospectral calculation
using 10242 resolution. These results demonstrate that high ﬁdelity numerical simulations can be obtained using the highorder ﬁnite diﬀerence methods with a speed-up factor of 5 if
we compare them with the pseudospectral computation. More
importantly, if we compare them with their second-order counterparts, the additional cost due to high-order formulations becomes quite small. The data presented in Table 4 also demonstrates that the computational speed-up increases with increasing spatial resolution as expected. With this in mind, one of
the interesting results is that the errors associated with both
the second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) and the second-order
Arakawa (A2) schemes with 10242 resolution are greater than
the error associated with the sixth-order compact scheme (CD6)
with a much smaller 2562 resolution. This clearly demonstrates
that the high-order diﬀerence formulations can provide an ef-
ﬁcient way of solving ﬂow problems even with strong shear
components.
Figure 9: The centerline vorticity distributions at x = π for the double shear
layer problem, plotted for a resolution of 2562. Comparison of the diﬀerent
numerical schemes at time t = 10. Inset: close-up of boxed area.
6. Two-dimensional decaying turbulence
Two-dimensional homogenous decaying turbulence is an incompressible ﬂow problem in which the kinetic energy decays
 . The problem of the free decay of two-dimensional turbulence is to determine how abundant populations of vortices
freely evolve with time . In this study, we solve this problem to examine the accuracy and eﬃciency of the presented ﬁnite diﬀerence approximations. The results are compared with
Figure 6: Comparison of the numerical schemes for the double shear layer problem at time t = 10 with a resolution of 2562. (a) pseudospectral (PS) method, (b)
sixth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order
compact diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2)
method, and (i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 27 equidistant
levels in the interval [-4.5, 4.5].
Figure 7: Comparison of the numerical schemes for the double shear layer problem at time t = 10 with a resolution of 5122. (a) pseudospectral (PS) method, (b)
sixth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order
compact diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2)
method, and (i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 27 equidistant
levels in the interval [-4.5, 4.5].
Figure 8: Comparison of the numerical schemes for the double shear layer problem at time t = 10 with a resolution of 10242. (a) pseudospectral (PS) method, (b)
sixth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order
compact diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2)
method, and (i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 27 equidistant
levels in the interval [-4.5, 4.5].
Figure 10: The centerline vorticity distributions at x = π for the double shear
layer problem, plotted for a resolution of 5122. Comparison of the diﬀerent
numerical schemes at time t = 10. Inset: close-up of boxed area.
Figure 11: The centerline vorticity distributions at x = π for the double shear
layer problem, plotted for a resolution of 10242. Comparison of the diﬀerent
numerical schemes at time t = 10. Inset: close-up of boxed area.
those of the pseudospectral method. According to the KBL theory for two-dimensional turbulence this system has an inertial
range in the energy spectrum that is proportional to k−3 in the
inviscid limit.
The computational domain is a square with sides of length
2π. Periodic boundary conditions are applied. The initial en-
Figure 12: Initial energy spectrum for the two-dimensional decaying turbulence
ergy spectrum in Fourier space is given by
where k = |k| =
k2x + k2y. The maximum value of initial energy spectrum occurs at wavenumber kp which is assumed to be
kp = 12 in this study. The coeﬃcient as normalizes the initial
kinetic energy and is given by
as = (2s + 1)s+1
where s is a shape parameter. In this study, we take s = 3. The
corresponding energy spectrum given in Eq. (45) is illustrated
in Fig. 12. The magnitude of vorticity Fourier coeﬃcients related to the assumed initial energy spectrum becomes
| ˜ω(k)| =
The initial vorticity distribution in Fourier space is then obtained by introducing a random phase
πE(k) eiζ(k)
where the phase function is given by ζ(k) = ξ(k) + η(k), where
ξ(k) and η(k) are independent random values chosen in [0, 2π]
at each coordinate point in the ﬁrst quadrant of the kx−ky plane.
The conjugate relations for other quadrants are
ξ(−kx, ky) = −ξ(kx, ky)
ξ(−kx, −ky) = −ξ(kx, ky)
ξ(kx, −ky) = ξ(kx, ky)
η(−kx, ky) = η(kx, ky)
η(−kx, −ky) = −η(kx, ky)
η(kx, −ky) = −η(kx, ky).
After the randomization process described above for the
phases, the initial vorticity distribution in the physical space is
computed by taking the inverse FFT. However, we use a random
phase generator to obtain initial ﬂow ﬁeld, it should be noted
that we will use exactly same initial vorticity ﬁeld when we
compare the numerical schemes for the same resolution. The
corresponding initial vorticity distribution is a vortex population which satisﬁes the divergence free condition and provides
the energy spectrum given in Eq. (45). In the following text, we
ﬁrst investigate how homogeneous two-dimensional decaying
turbulence varies with Re when using the sixth-order compact
diﬀerence scheme. Then we will focus our attention on the behavior of a selection of numerical methods for computations of
two-dimensional turbulence. It should be noted here that the
diﬀusion terms are approximated using the sixth-order compact
scheme for all diﬀerence formulations in order to provide a fair
comparison between them. To make the simulation independent
of the errors associated with temporal discretization, a time step
of ∆t = 2×10−4 is used in all simulations except when the temporal discretization schemes are evaluated by a time reﬁnement
analysis. A study with ∆t = 1 × 10−4, 2 × 10−4, and 4 × 10−4
also show that the predicted ﬂow ﬁeld is independent of ∆t.
6.1. Reynolds number dependence
Starting from a divergence free initial vorticity ﬁeld having
the speciﬁed energy spectrum, we solve Eq. (1) for various
Reynolds numbers. Fig. 13 shows the evolution of the vorticity ﬁeld for Re = 1000. As shown in Fig. 13, initial ﬂow ﬁeld
at time t = 0 consists of many vortices according to the spectrum given by Eq. (45). As we can see, a ﬁlamentation process
occurs, initially randomly distributed vortices start to interact
with each other and become bigger vortices with time by a vortex merging mechanism. As also illustrated in Fig. 13, as time
evolves, the exterior strain ﬁeld from each vortex deforms the
vorticity ﬁeld of the other one so that the vorticity ﬁelds wrap
around each other.
In order to examine the characteristics of two-dimensional
decaying turbulence simulations and their dependencies on Re,
we ﬁrst deﬁne two statistical measures. one is the energy spectrum in wave space, and the other is the structure function in
physical space. The energy spectrum is deﬁned as
ˆE(k, t) = 1
2k2| ˜ψ(k, t)|2
and the angle averaged energy spectrum is
k≤| ´k|≤k+1
ˆE(´k, t).
It is known from the KBL theory that the energy spectrum in the
inertial range approaches the classical k−3 scaling in the limit
of inﬁnite Reynolds number. On the other hand, the statistics of
two-dimensional turbulent ﬂow can be further investigated considering powers of vorticity diﬀerences in the physical space.
A commonly used statistical quantity in two-dimensional turbulence is the second-order vorticity structure function which
is deﬁned as
⟨δω(r)2⟩= ⟨|ω(x + r) −ω(x)|2⟩
with r = |r| being the spatial separation. Statistical properties
of decaying two-dimensional turbulence are investigated here
by numerical simulations for diﬀerent Reynolds numbers.
In this part of our analysis, in order to elucidate the ﬂow ﬁeld
evolution for various Re and how the energy spectra and structure functions depend on Re, we perform a set of numerical
experiments for Re = 100, 300, 600, 1000, 3000, and 6000.
All numerical simulations are performed using a resolution of
10242 and start from the same initial condition. Fig. 14 demonstrates the evolution of the angle averaged energy spectrum for
diﬀerent Reynolds numbers. As we can see, the energy spectrum becomes steeper than k−3 for Re = 100 due to the smaller
ﬁlamentation and less interaction among vortices. However,
increasing Re, the energy spectrum in the inertial range approaches towards the classical k−3 limit, in agreement with KBL
theory of two-dimensional turbulence. Similarly, the evolution
of the second-order structure functions for various Reynolds
numbers is exhibited in Fig. 15 showing r2 scaling for small
separations in all the cases. They ﬂatten for large separations
as predicted by the KBL theory of two-dimensional turbulence
in the inviscid limit. Comparisons of the angle averaged energy spectra and the second-order vorticity structure functions
at time t = 2 are also shown in Fig. 17 and Fig. 18, respectively. As demonstrated by Fig. 17, the angle averaged energy
spectrum deﬁned by Eq. (51) asymptotically reaches the k−3
spectrum in the inertial range as Re increases. We ﬁnd that the
Reynolds number dependency is more stringent if we look at
the turbulence statistics in wave space such the angle averaged
energy spectrum.
The corresponding instantaneous vorticity
ﬁelds at time t = 2 are compared in Fig. 16 for the same set
of Reynolds numbers. As we can see from Fig. 16, the amount
of ﬁlamentation increases for higher Reynolds numbers. Due to
the smaller convection in lower Reynolds numbers, the interaction between two vortices is not as strong as that of the higher
Reynolds number cases, such that less amount of ﬁlamentation
occurs and results in bigger vortices with less magnitude of vorticity during the evolution because of faster decay rate.
Noticeably, our results provide numerical proof of the
KBL theory for decaying two-dimensional turbulence using
the sixth-order compact ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme for spatial
discretization along with the third-order TVD Runge-Kutta
scheme for the time advancement. However, we emphasize that
our primary goal in this study is to investigate the behavior of
diﬀerent numerical schemes for long time integration of turbulence simulations. In the following, we ﬁrst test the temporal
schemes and their numerical stabilities, and then focus on the
evaluation of the behavior of spatial discretization schemes for
computations of decaying turbulence.
6.2. Comparison of temporal schemes
We devote this section to investigating the characteristics of
the temporal integration schemes described in Section 3.7. In
general, the errors associated with temporal discretization are
smaller than the errors associated with the spatial discretization, especially if we use high-order methods. Although time
step limitations in an explicit time integration method can be an
Figure 13: Evolution of the vorticity ﬁeld in decaying turbulence for Re = 1000. Initially randomly distributed vortices start to interact with each other and merge
to form larger vortices with time.
Figure 14: Evolution of energy spectra in decaying turbulence for (a) Re=100, (b) Re=300, (c) Re=600, (d) Re=1000, (e) Re=3000, and (f) Re=6000. The energy
spectrum in the inertial range ﬂattens towards the classical k−3 scaling limit as Re increases, in agreement with the KBL theory of two-dimensional turbulence.
Figure 15: Evolution of the second-order vorticity structure functions in decaying turbulence for (a) Re=100, (b) Re=300, (c) Re=600, (d) Re=1000, (e) Re=3000,
and (f) Re=6000. The line r2 is included in each subﬁgure.
Figure 17: Reynolds number dependence of the energy spectrum in wave space.
In the inertial range, the angle averaged energy spectrum, deﬁned by Eq. (51),
asymptotically reaches k−3 scaling with increasing Reynolds number.
impediment to eﬃcient solutions, for turbulent ﬂow computations small time steps are indeed desirable to resolve the small
turbulent time scales. In fact, a balanced spatio-temporal discretization dictates a CFL number of O(1) and large time steps
can have the same undesirable eﬀect on the solution as a coarse
spatial resolution or a low-order dissipative spatial discretization.
In this section, we evaluate the behavior of diﬀerent explicit
Runge-Kutta schemes introduced earlier for time integration
procedure by performing a time step reﬁnement study. The domain of absolute stability for the explicit Runge-Kutta schemes
for scalar equations can be found in many references including
Canuto et al. and Buthcher . What is true for scalar
equations is not necessarily true for systems as advocated by
Figure 18: Reynolds number dependence of the second-order vorticity structure functions in physical space showing the second-order vorticity structure
function, as deﬁned by Eq. (52).
Pruett et al. . Our method of estimating stability limits is
somewhat heuristic here, but it becomes a useful guideline in
practical applications for a wide variety of numerical methods.
For this purpose, we ﬁrst compare the accuracy and stability
of the temporal schemes by performing a time reﬁnement study
using the the sixth-order compact diﬀerence scheme as a spatial discretization method with 5122 resolution. Table 5 shows
the discrete L2 error norms at t = 10 for Re = 103 obtained
by the explicit Runge-Kutta schemes introduced earlier varying
the time steps. The corresponding maximum CFL numbers for
each computation are also documented in the table. Deviations
of ω are computed from the base solution which is obtained by
the forth-order Runge-Kutta method with a small time step of
∆t = 2 × 10−4. In terms of numerical stability, it is demon-
Figure 16: Vorticity contour plots at time t = 2 for various Reynolds numbers. Stronger ﬁlamentation processes occur with increasing Reynolds number.
strated in the table that the fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme
has a greater stability region than the third-order ones as we
expect. Among the third-order Runge-Kutta schemes for the
explicit time integration, the optimal TVD Runge-Kutta scheme
becomes more accurate than all the low-storage schemes. However, the diﬀerence between the Williamson scheme and the
TVD Runge-Kutta scheme is negligible. On the other hand, we
ﬁnd that the predictor/corrector type Runge-Kutta scheme exhibit substantially lower accuracy than other third-order methods.
Next, we perform a similar analysis by using the secondorder conservative Arakawa schemes for the same parameters.
Results are demonstrated in Table 6 showing the similar trends
as observed in the Table 5 for the compact scheme. The interesting outcome is that the second-order scheme can run using almost triple the eﬀective time step if we compare with
the sixth-order scheme due to a wider stability region.
Although the results are not shown here, we also performed similar studies for the fourth-order Arakawa and the fourth-order
compact schemes. Between the second-order scheme and the
fourth-order ones, the second-order spatial operator runs at
nearly double the eﬀective time step.
These results suggest
that the second-order scheme becomes more competitive with
other high-order accurate spatial schemes by allowing larger
time steps. On the other hand, as we will show in the following section, the second-order scheme usually requires double
the resolution in each direction to be able to obtain a similar
accuracy. Even if using a low order scheme allows us to use
larger time steps, still, the high-order schemes become more
eﬀective in terms of the tradeoﬀbetween the accuracy and ef-
ﬁciency. We also demonstrate that although we use an optimal
fast Poisson solver, the CPU time increases approximately 8
times by doubling the resolution in each direction. In fact, it
would be larger if we use other suboptimal Poisson solver. In
other worlds, that fraction of CPU time is much bigger in other
geometries in which the solution of the elliptic equation dominates the computational time. It should also be noted that the ef-
ﬁciency of the high-order schemes would be more pronounced
for three dimensional computations.
Table 5: Discrete L2 error norms for the decaying turbulence problem at t = 10 for Re = 103 using the sixth-order compact diﬀerence scheme as a spatial
discretization method. The reference solution for computing the L2 norm is obtained using the RK4 method with a time step of ∆t = 2 × 10−4. A dash indicates the
numerical instability.
∥ω∥CFL≈0.1
∥ω∥CFL≈0.2
∥ω∥CFL≈0.4
∥ω∥CFL≈0.8
∥ω∥CFL≈1.0
∥ω∥CFL≈1.25
(∆t = 4 × 10−4)
(∆t = 8 × 10−4)
(∆t = 16 × 10−4)
(∆t = 32 × 10−4)
(∆t = 40 × 10−4)
(∆t = 50 × 10−4)
Table 6: Discrete L2 error norms for the decaying turbulence problem at t = 10 for Re = 103 using the second-order conservative Arakawa scheme as a spatial
discretization method. The reference solution for computing the L2 norm is obtained using the RK4 method with a time step of ∆t = 2 × 10−4. A dash indicates the
numerical instability.
∥ω∥CFL≈0.2
∥ω∥CFL≈0.4
∥ω∥CFL≈1.25
∥ω∥CFL≈2.5
∥ω∥CFL≈3.0
∥ω∥CFL≈3.5
(∆t = 8 × 10−4)
(∆t = 16 × 10−4)
(∆t = 50 × 10−4)
(∆t = 100 × 10−4)
(∆t = 125 × 10−4)
(∆t = 140 × 10−4)
6.3. Comparison of spatial schemes
Our main objective is to investigate and analyze the behaviors
of the spatial numerical schemes presented in Section 3 for twodimensional decaying turbulence simulations. In this section,
four diﬀerent families of high-order accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence
representations are compared with pseudospectral simulations
for various Reynolds numbers. We also compare high-order accurate schemes with the second-order accurate schemes. From
our previous time reﬁnement study, we conclude that the truncation error produced by Runge-Kutta time integration schemes
is much smaller than the discretization schemes when we use a
time step within the stability region. The TVD-RK scheme with
∆t = 2 × 10−4 is used as a time integration algorithm for the
following analysis in which the CFL number becomes O(0.1).
Therefore, we can compare diﬀerent spatial schemes without
contaminating the solution due to time stepping algorithm. We
also highlight that we use the sixth-order compact diﬀerence
formulation for discretization of viscous terms in all schemes
tested here.
First, we present a set of numerical experiments using a resolution of 10242 for Re = 1000. The vorticity ﬁelds obtained by
nine diﬀerent spatial schemes at time t = 5 are presented and
compared in Fig. 19. A comparison of the vorticity distributions
on the vertical centerline is also illustrated in Fig. 23 by showing also a close-up ﬁgure to make the comparison more clear.
Furthermore, a comparison of statistical behavior in terms of
Figure 23: Comparison of the numerical schemes for Re = 1000 with a resolution of 10242 (Rec = 6.13) at time t = 5. The centerline vorticity distributions
at x = π are plotted. Inset: close-up of boxed area.
the second-order vorticity structure functions is also demonstrated in Fig. 24.
As we can see, the high-order schemes
Figure 19: Comparison of the numerical schemes at time t = 5 for Re = 1000 with a resolution of 10242 (Rec = 6.13). (a) pseudospectral(PS) method, (b) sixth-order
explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order compact
diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2) method, and
(i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 27 equidistant levels in the
interval [-13, 13].
Figure 20: Comparison of the numerical schemes at time t = 10 for Re = 1000 with a resolution of 5122 (Rec = 12.27). (a) pseudospectral(PS) method, (b)
sixth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order
compact diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2)
method, and (i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 41 equidistant
levels in the interval [-8, 8].
Figure 21: Comparison of the numerical schemes at time t = 6 for Re = 1000 with a resolution of 2562 (Rec = 24.54). (a) pseudospectral(PS) method, (b) sixth-order
explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order compact
diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2) method, and
(i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 23 equidistant levels in the
interval [-11, 11].
Figure 22: Comparison of the numerical schemes at time t = 10 for Re = 100 with a resolution of 5122 (Rec = 1.23). (a) pseudospectral(PS) method, (b) sixth-order
explicit diﬀerence (ED6) method, (c) fourth-order explicit diﬀerence (ED4) method, (d) second-order explicit diﬀerence (ED2) method, (e) sixth-order compact
diﬀerence (CD6) method, (f) fourth-order compact diﬀerence (CD4) method, (g) fourth-order Arakawa (A4) method, (h) second-order Arakawa (A2) method, and
(i) fourth-order dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) method. The vorticity contour layouts are identical in all nine cases illustrating 19 equidistant levels in the
interval [-0.45, 0.45].
and the pseudospectral schemes yield similar ﬂow ﬁelds. The
second-order accurate schemes, both the explicit diﬀerence and
the Arakawa schemes, predict slightly less accurate results. The
sixth-order compact scheme exhibits the best prediction capability among the diﬀerent formulations tested. In evaluating the
performance of the diﬀerent ﬁnite diﬀerence approximations,
the deviation of vorticity ﬁeld from the spectral solution is calculated by using the deﬁnition of discrete L2 norm given by
Eq. (49). Table 7 shows the L2 norms, CPU times, and corresponding speed-up ratios for the ﬁnite diﬀerence formulations.
The speed-up ratio is deﬁned here as the ratio of CPU times for
the computations performed using the pseudospectral method
and those performed using ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes. First, all
the ﬁnite diﬀerence methods are considerably more eﬃcient
than the pseudospectral method. The data in the table exhibits
that the high-order schemes provide the same accuracy level
as the Fourier-Galerkin pseudospectral method, while signiﬁcantly decreasing its computational cost with a speed-up factor
of 5 over the pseudospectral method. Among the fourth-order
schemes, both the compact and dispersion-relation-preserving
schemes show a better performance than the Arakawa and explicit diﬀerence schemes. This clearly shows that designing a
scheme with reduced truncation error or optimizing the scheme
with respect to the dispersion relation could result in a better
prediction capability than the designing a scheme with its discrete conservation properties.
Figure 24: Comparison of the second-order vorticity structure functions for
Re = 1000 with a resolution of 10242 (Rec = 6.13) at time t = 5.
In order to analyze the eﬀects of the Reynolds number and
required resolution to the performance of schemes, it is useful
to deﬁne a cell Reynolds number in the following form
Rec = Re 2π
Therefore, in our previous experiments having a resolution of
10242 at Re = 1000, the cell Reynolds number is Rec = 6.13.
Table 7: Accuracy and eﬃciency of the ﬁnite diﬀerence approximations for the
decaying turbulence problem at Re = 103 using a resolution of 10242. The
reference solution for the L2 norms is obtained by the pseudo-specral method
which takes a CPU time of 621.32 hrs. The speed-up ratio is deﬁned as the ratio
of CPU times.
CPU (hrs.)
Figure 25: Comparison of the second-order vorticity structure functions for
Re = 1000 with a resolution of 5122 (Rec = 12.27) at time t = 10.
Next, we perform similar experiments for Re = 1000 with
5122 resolutions with an increasing cell Reynolds number of
Rec = 12.27. The vorticity ﬁelds at time t = 10 obtained by
nine diﬀerent spatial schemes are plotted in Fig. 20. The corresponding second-order vorticity structure functions are also
illustrated in Fig. 25. We can easily see that the diﬀerence between high-order and low-order schemes becomes ampliﬁed,
and there is a substantial diﬀerence in the corresponding ﬂow
ﬁelds. If we decrease the resolution to the 2562 resulting in a
higher cell Reynolds number, Rec = 24.54, as shown in Fig. 21
and Fig. 26, low-order accurate numerical schemes produce totally diﬀerent ﬂow ﬁelds. As the result of the series of calculations performed in the second and third sets of experiments,
we can see that the sixth-order accurate schemes always predict the same accuracy results as the pseudospectral methods.
In terms of fourth-order accurate schemes, we can see that the
compact diﬀerence scheme produces a slightly better accuracy
than the dispersion-relation-preserving scheme due to its lower
truncation error properties. Between the compact scheme and
Arakawa scheme, the compact scheme exhibits better accuracy
than the Arakawa scheme. The computational eﬃciencies in
terms of speed-up ratios for these sets of experiments are very
similar to the previous high resolution computations given by
Table 7. Making a comparison between low-order and highorder schemes, we can see that a slight increase in the computational time for a higher-order accurate scheme can result in
signiﬁcantly more accurate results than those obtained by the
conventional second-order accurate schemes, and provide the
same level of accuracy with the pseudospectral method in much
less computational time.
Figure 26: Comparison of the second-order vorticity structure functions for
Re = 1000 with a resolution of 2562 (Rec = 24.54) at time t = 6.
We perform one more set of numerical experiments in order
to demonstrate that the results of the various spatial schemes
converge the same ﬂow ﬁeld under well resolved conditions
using a resolution of 5122 at a reduced Re = 100 for which
Rec = 1.23. The vorticity contour plots obtained by these nine
schemes are demonstrated in Fig. 22 which shows that there is
negligible diﬀerence among them. Both low-order and highorder diﬀerence schemes predict the same ﬂow ﬁeld with the
pseudospectral method.
This can also be seen clearly from
Fig. 27 showing the centerline vorticity distributions. Since the
cell Reynolds number is smaller than 2, both second-order accurate and high-order accurate schemes produce similar results
(i.e., well resolved direct numerical simulations). However, we
can see that for larger cell Reynolds numbers, higher-order accurate schemes are required.
6.4. Pile-up phenomenon for high cell Reynolds number
Finally, we would like to test the performance of the ﬁnite
diﬀerence formulations for extremely high cell Reynolds num-
Figure 27: Comparison of the numerical schemes for Re = 100 with a resolution of 5122 (Rec = 1.23) at time t = 10. The centerline vorticity distributions
at x = π are plotted. Inset: close-up of boxed area.
bers. Two sets of numerical experiments are performed for a
resolution of 2562 at Re = 3000 and Re = 6000. The corresponding cell Reynolds numbers in these sets are Rec = 73.63
and Rec = 147.26, respectively. A comparison of the fourthorder diﬀerence schemes is shown in Fig. 28 illustrating the
evolution of the energy spectra for these Reynolds number. Instead of presenting the angle averaged energy spectra, we prefer
to show the full energy spectra, as deﬁned by Eq. (50), for each
pair k = (kx, ky) in wave space to make the comparison more
visible. This ﬁgure clearly illustrates that a higher degree of
pile-up phenomenon occurs for all the ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes
except the Arakawa scheme. Some sort of aliasing errors produce the growth of unphysical small scales. We demonsrate
that these peaks of energy at small scales can be eliminated using the conservative Arakawa scheme. Although there is no big
diﬀerence between the Arakawa scheme and the explicit diﬀerence scheme for smaller cell Reynolds numbers as shown in the
previous sections, the discrete global conservation properties of
the Arakawa schemes prevent the pile-up phenomena for higher
cell Reynolds numbers.
Another sets of experiments using a higher resolution of
10242 are also performed to demonstrate the limits of the
diﬀerence schemes by considering the pile-up phenomenon.
Evolution of the energy spectra for both sixth-order compact
and Arakawa schemes are shown in Fig. 29.
Based on our
numerical experiments, it is concluded that the pile-up phenomenon occurs with non fully conservative schemes for higher
cell Reynolds numbers (Rec > 30). Therefore, the Arakawa
scheme is a better candidate for underresolved simulations. It is
mandatory to conserve energy to have a realistic simulations for
higher cell Reynolds number. High-order centered schemes often show spurious wiggles for convective dominated problems
(a) ED4 for Re = 3000
(b) ED4 for Re = 6000
(c) CD4 for Re = 3000
(d) CD4 for Re = 6000
(e) A4 for Re = 3000
(f) A4 for Re = 6000
(g) DRP4 for Re = 3000
(h) DRP4 for Re = 6000
Figure 28: Evolution of energy spectra in decaying turbulence for two sets of Reynolds numbers: Re = 3000 (Rec = 73.63) in the left column and Re = 6000
(Rec = 147.26) in the right column. Comparison of the fourth-order ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes using a resolution of 2562: (a-b) explicit diﬀerence (ED4), (c-d)
compact diﬀerence (CD4), (e-f) Arakawa (A4), and (g-h) dispersion-relation-preserving (DRP4) schemes. Energy spectra, deﬁned by Eq. (50), are shown for times
t = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10.
(a) CD6 for Re = 1000
(b) CD6 for Re = 6000
(c) A4 for Re = 1000
(d) A4 for Re = 6000
Figure 29: Evolution of energy spectra in decaying turbulence using a resolution of 10242 obtained by (a) the sixth-order compact diﬀerence (CD6) scheme at
Re = 1000 (Rec = 6.13), (b) the sixth-order compact diﬀerence (CD6) scheme at Re = 6000 (Rec = 36.78), (c) the forth-order Arakawa (A4) scheme at Re = 1000
(Rec = 6.13), and (d) the forth-order Arakawa (A4) scheme at Re = 6000 (Rec = 36.78). Energy spectra, deﬁned by Eq. (50), are shown for times t = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8,
when the numerical resolution is insuﬃcient. The cell Reynolds
number is restricted in some degree for these schemes. As the
cell Reynolds number becomes larger, the nature of the ﬁnite
diﬀerence equation is changed because of the cell size used.
The spurious Nyquist signal would be generated almost instantaneously that propagates into the whole domain resulting an
instability in the solution. In order to prevent these numerical
instabilities for a centered diﬀerence scheme without enough
resolution, the ﬁltering methodology can be also used for underresolved ﬂows.
7. Summary and conclusions
A systematic comparison of a variety of high-order accurate ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes has been performed for twodimensional decaying turbulence simulations by solving the
vorticity-streamfunction formulation of two-dimensional incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. The following schemes
were considered: the 6th-, 4th-, and 2nd-order explicit difference schemes, the 6th- and 4th-order compact diﬀerence
schemes, the 4th- and 2nd-order Arakawa schemes, and the 4thorder dispersion-relation-preserving scheme. The objective of
this study was to determine the accuracy and eﬃciency of these
schemes for long-time integration of decaying turbulence simulations, which serves as an instance of a complex ﬂow. We compared the schemes with the spectrally accurate Fourier-Galerkin
pseudospectral method. A brief description of these algorithms
is given in Section 3. In order to eliminate the errors coming
from boundary conditions, we performed our experiments in a
doubly periodic domain. This setting provides a suitable framework for testing the spatial discretization schemes.
We ﬁrst validated the methods by solving the Taylor-Green
vortex problem which is one of the available exact solutions for
two-dimensional unsteady incompressible ﬂows. We showed
that the theoretical orders of accuracies of the schemes were obtained in practice. Then we solved a more challenging double
shear layer benchmark problem which has been used to test the
grid-independence of many incompressible algorithms, since
the presence of thinner and thinner shear layers evolving with
time is not captured by low grid resolution representations. We
found that the low-order diﬀerence schemes require about twice
the resolution in each direction to achieve the same results as
the high-order diﬀerence schemes. We also demonstrated that
numerical oscillations near the sharp vorticity gradients can be
eliminated using the high-order diﬀerence formulations.
We tested the eﬃciency and accuracy of several variants of
third- and fourth-order Runge-Kutta time stepping algorithms
for decaying two-dimensional turbulence. The numerical stabilities of the spatio-temporal schemes were addressed by performing a time reﬁnement study.
We ﬁrst showed that the
fourth-order Runge-Kutta schemes have greater accuracy for a
given time step and have larger allowable stability regions than
the third-order Runge-Kutta schemes. We found that the spatially second-order accurate schemes can run using almost triple
the eﬀective time step compared with the sixth-order schemes,
and can also run using almost double the eﬀective time step
compared with the fourth-order schemes, thereby making them
more competitive with the high-order ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes.
On the other hand, we showed that the second-order schemes
usually require double the resolution in each direction to be able
to obtain a similar accuracy. Therefore, we found that higher
order schemes become more eﬀective in terms of the tradeoﬀ
between the accuracy and eﬃciency.
We studied the Reynolds number dependence of freely evolving decaying turbulence. We showed that the predicted energy
spectrum asymptotically converged to the theoretical k−3 scaling as the Reynolds number increased, which is predicted by
the KBL theory for forward cascading two-dimensional turbulence in the inviscid limit. We also demonstrated that the
analysis was also relatively free from temporal discretization
errors. We then tested the spatial ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes for
various Reynolds numbers. We deﬁned a cell Reynolds number Rec = Re2π/Nx. We demonstrated that for well resolved
simulations, accurate results are obtained for all the schemes if
Rec < 2. If we increase the Reynolds number, however, the
diﬀerence between the high-order accurate and second-order
accurate schemes increases dramatically. Compact diﬀerence
schemes provide more accurate results if Rec < 30. Spurious
Nyquist signals have been observed for larger cell Reynolds
numbers resulting in a pile-up phenomenon. In this case, the
fully conservative Arakawa schemes gives more accurate results.
Our results demonstrate the importance of high-order accurate representations in convection-dominated complex ﬂow
problems, which, in general, require long time integrations.
Although the order of accuracy is less important for wellresolved direct numerical simulations, it becomes signiﬁcant
for Rec > 2. We show that, for fully resolved simulations,
high-order accurate schemes do not require spectral-like simulation times. In fact, spectral-like accuracy is obtained with
a speed-up factor of 5 over the pseudospectral method using
the 6th-order compact scheme. We also demonstrate that the
fourth-order Arakawa scheme is a better choice for higher cell
Reynolds number computations.