Machine Learning in Medicine
Rahul C. Deo, MD, PhD
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine and Institute for Human Genetics,
University of California, San Francisco, and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, San
Francisco, CA
Spurred by advances in processing power, memory, storage, and an unprecedented wealth of data,
computers are being asked to tackle increasingly complex learning tasks, often with astonishing
success. Computers have now mastered a popular variant of poker, learned the laws of physics
from experimental data, and become experts in video games – tasks which would have been
deemed impossible not too long ago. In parallel, the number of companies centered on applying
complex data analysis to varying industries has exploded, and it is thus unsurprising that some
analytic companies are turning attention to problems in healthcare. The purpose of this review is to
explore what problems in medicine might benefit from such learning approaches and use examples
from the literature to introduce basic concepts in machine learning. It is important to note that
seemingly large enough medical data sets and adequate learning algorithms have been available
for many decades – and yet, although there are thousands of papers applying machine learning
algorithms to medical data, very few have contributed meaningfully to clinical care. This lack of
impact stands in stark contrast to the enormous relevance of machine learning to many other
industries. Thus part of my effort will be to identify what obstacles there may be to changing the
practice of medicine through statistical learning approaches, and discuss how these might be
computers; statistics; risk factor; prognosis; machine learning
Machine learning is the scientific discipline that focuses on how computers learn from
data4,5. It arises at the intersection of statistics, which seeks to learn relationships from data,
and computer science, with its emphasis on efficient computing algorithms. This marriage
between mathematics and computer science is driven by the unique computational
challenges of building statistical models from massive data sets, which can include billions
or trillions of data points. The types of learning used by computers are conveniently
subclassified into categories such as supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
However, I find, in addition, that another division can be useful when considering how
machine learning might inform the practice of medicine: distinguishing learning those tasks
Address for Correspondence: Rahul C. Deo, MD, PhD, Smith Cardiovascular Research Building, 555 Mission Bay Blvd South,
Room 452S, San Francisco, California, 94158, USA, Tel: 415-476-9593, Fax: 415-353-2528, .
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
 
Circulation. 2015 November 17; 132(20): 1920–1930. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.001593.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
that physicians can already do well and learning those where physicians have had only
limited success. With these broad categories in mind, we can visit some areas in medicine
that have benefited or might benefit from machine learning approaches.
Supervised learning
Supervised learning starts with the goal of predicting a known output or target. In machine
learning competitions, where individual participants are judged on their performance on
common data sets, recurrent supervised learning problems include handwriting recognition
(such as recognizing handwritten digits), classifying images of objects (e.g. is this a cat or a
dog?), and document classification (e.g. is this a clinical trial about heart failure or a
financial report?). Notably, these are all tasks that a trained person can do well and so the
computer is often trying to approximate human performance. Supervised learning focuses on
classification, which involves choosing among subgroups to best describe a new data
instance, and prediction, which involves estimating an unknown parameter (such as the
temperature in San Francisco tomorrow afternoon).
What might be some examples of supervised learning in medicine? Perhaps the most
common example seen by a cardiologist is the automated interpretation of the EKG, where
pattern recognition is performed to select from a limited set of diagnoses (i.e. a classification
task). In radiology, automated detection of a lung nodule from a chest X-ray would also
represent supervised learning. In both these cases, the computer is approximating what a
trained physician is already capable of doing with high accuracy.
Supervised learning is often used to estimate risk. The Framingham Risk Score3 for
coronary heart disease (CHD) may in fact be the most commonly used instance of
supervised learning in medicine. Such risk models exist across medicine, and include
guiding antithrombotic therapy in atrial fibrillation4 and implantation of automated
implantable defibrillators in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy5. In modeling risk, the computer
is doing more than merely approximating physician skills but finding novel relationships not
readily apparent to human beings.
Unsupervised learning
In contrast, in unsupervised learning, there are no outputs to predict. Instead, we are trying
to find naturally occurring patterns or groupings within the data. This is inherently a more
challenging task to judge and often the value of such groups learned through unsupervised
learning is evaluated by its performance in subsequent supervised learning tasks (i.e. are
these new patterns useful in some way?).
When might such approaches be used in medicine? Perhaps the most compelling
opportunity represents the “precision medicine” initiative6. Frustrated by the inherent
heterogeneity in most common diseases, there is a growing effort to redefine disease
according to pathophysiologic mechanisms, which could, in turn, provide new paths to
therapy. But identifying such mechanisms for complex multifactorial diseases will not be
easy. Let us think about how one might apply unsupervised learning in cardiac disease
towards that end, taking a heterogeneous condition like myocarditis. One can start with a
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
large group of apparently similar individuals with unexplained acute systolic heart failure.
One can then perform myocardial biopsies on them, and characterize the cellular
composition of each sample with a technique such as immunostaining. For example, one
would have a tally of T lymphocytes, neutrophils, macrophages, eosinophils, etc. One could
then see if there are recurring patterns of cellular composition, which, in turn, might suggest
mechanism and guide therapies to explore. A similar approach, albeit focused on genomics,
led to identifying an eosinophilic subtype of asthma7, which uniquely responds to a novel
therapy targeting the eosinophil-secreted cytokine IL-138. Note the contrast with supervised
learning – there is no predicted outcome – we are only interested in identifying patterns in
the data. In fact, treating this as a supervised learning problem – such as developing a model
of mortality in myocarditis and classifying patients by risk – might miss such subgroups
completely, thereby losing a chance to identify novel disease mechanisms.
The learning problem
Let us now define the learning problem more generally in order to understand why complex
machine learning algorithms have had such a limited presence in actual clinical practice. I
will focus first on supervised learning and address unsupervised learning at a later point.
We will take as our goal the prediction of MI and for simplicity treat this as a classification
problem, with individuals who have had one or more MIs as one class and (age and gender
matched) individuals free of MI as a second class (Figure 1A). Our assignment, then, is to
build an accurate model to discriminate between the two classes. The first task is to come up
with some predictors or features. Some obvious features include hypertension, diabetes and
LDL-cholesterol level. But how did we come up with these, and how can we expand this
pool further? A simple way would be to test candidate predictors for association with heart
attack status and keep only those that are significant. But this will miss a great number of
features that might be useful only within a subset of heart attack patients. Worse yet, there
may be features that are useful in combinations (of two, three, or more) but not on their own.
As a solution, we might be tempted to give up and throw in all possible features, but
instinctively, we have some suspicion that this might not help or may even make things
worse (for reasons that will become apparent later). “Feature selection” is the area of
machine learning that focuses on this problem9.
The next challenge is to come up with a function that relates values of the features to a
prediction of disease (class assignment). This challenge can be broken down into two steps.
First we need to decide on which type of function we want to work with (Figure 1B–D).
Classical statistics would have us consider the logistic regression model for this task. With
logistic regression, a type of generalized linear model, features come into the model
additively and linearly. But this is only one possible class of function and if we relax this
assumption, many more choices exist. For example decision trees could be used to predict
heart attack status, allowing the flexibility of “OR” choices (Figure 1B). A heart attack
patient might have mutually exclusive causes such as familial hypercholesterolemia OR an
arterial thrombotic disorder OR HIV, which would be difficult to model with logistic
regression. Other types of machine learning models such as neural networks allow
transformations of input features to better predict outcomes (Figure 1C). Support vector
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
machines build classification models using a transformed set of features in much higher
dimensions10. Prototype methods, such as k-nearest neighbors do away with the idea of
building a model, and instead make predictions based on the outcome of similar case
examples11 (Figure 1D). The best guess for whether our patient will have a heart attack is to
see if similar patients tend to have heart attacks.
All of these choices of functional classes have free parameters to fit. In logistic regression,
the regression coefficients – that is the weights applied to individual features – need to be
determined. In decision trees, one has to choose the variables at which a split is performed
and in the case of quantitative variables, the values at which the split is made. Neural
networks have free parameters related to the function used for feature transformation, as
well as the function used to predict class based on these derived features. Finding optimal
values for these free parameters is a daunting task. Machine learning algorithms represent
computational methods to efficiently navigate the space of free parameters to arrive at a
good model. Note the distinction between algorithms, which consist of instructions followed
by the computer to complete a particular task, and models, which are derived from the
application of algorithms to data.
How do we fit these free parameters? And, more importantly, how do we tell that we’re
doing a good job? Machine learning tries to separate these tasks, focusing on a training set
of examples to perform such tasks as feature selection and parameter fitting, and a test set to
evaluate model performance. Using the training examples, we can try out different values for
the free parameters and assess how similar our predicted outputs are to the known outputs –
this is sometimes called estimating "training error” and one uses a “loss function” that is
tailored to reflect what sort of errors are more tolerable than others. We want a model that
minimizes training error and our chosen algorithm fits free parameters to achieve this goal.
A high-performing model requires multiple attributes for success. First of all, you need
informative features that actually reflect how the classes are different from another. For tasks
that we already know humans can do well, we know that we have the requisite input data.
For example, if the goal is to approximate the ability of an expert cardiologist to read an
ECG, we can be confident that the ECG itself includes all the features that are needed for a
correct classification. But for more challenging classification problems, such as
discriminating MI cases from controls, our limited understanding of disease pathogenesis
makes it unlikely that we are collecting all of the information needed for accurate
classification.
Even if we are collecting the requisite inputs, we still need some function to combine them
to achieve the desired task. For complex learning tasks, we might need considerable
flexibility in how the features are used, as simple additive models are unlikely to achieve an
effective separation between cases and not controls. One often speaks about how
“expressive” a certain class of functions, which typically involves some transformation or
higher order combination of features to carry out complex learning tasks.
We have described two interdependent attributes – informative features and expressive
functions – to achieve low training error. But minimizing training error is not enough.
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Really, what we would like to be able to do is to make excellent predictions/classifications
for individuals we've never seen before. To assess this generalization ability, we should save
some data that we've never looked at to evaluate our "test error”. Such test data should not
have been used for any aspect of the machine learning process, including feature selection or
data normalization. Ideally, we would like to feel confident that if we have built a model
with low training error, we will have some guarantee that it also has low test error.
Otherwise we might be falsely and perhaps dangerously impressed by our own predictive
A considerable amount of theory exists for machine learning that establishes bounds for
similarity between training error and test error10. Although the mathematics is elaborate, the
message is quite simple: models that are highly complex (including those that have a large
number of features) may do better at minimizing training error, but tend to generalize poorly
for a given number of training samples as they tend to overfit to the data. A corollary to this
is if you need a high amount of model complexity in order to make accurate predictions on
your training set, you will need many, many more training examples to ensure that you
generalize well to previously unseen individuals.
A tradeoff thus exists between complexity of the model and generalizability to new data sets.
One solution is to simply have fewer features and a less expressive model. But in this case,
we may be harming ourselves with a low quality model with poor accuracy on the training
set. As an alternative, machine learning experts continue to use flexible models but penalize
themselves for too much complexity such as having too many free parameters or allowing
too broad a range of values for these parameters – a process known as “regularization”. This
may mean that accuracy on the training set might suffer a little, but the benefit will be better
performance on test data.
Given the diverse menu of machine learning algorithms and data models, can we find some
guidance on which would work best in one situation or another? As a rule of thumb, the best
solution would involve fitting a model that matches the underlying model that generated the
data. Unfortunately, we typically have no idea what that underlying model is. An empiric
solution is to try a number of algorithms, making sure to keep aside test data on which to
evaluate performance. But that can be time consuming, especially if some approaches are
unlikely to work well a priori. Many machine-learning practitioners have a toolkit of feature
extraction and preprocessing approaches as well as a subset of supervised and unsupervised
learning algorithms that they feel very comfortable with and return to. When training data is
limited, these often include simpler models with regularization such as penalized forms of
linear and logistic regression. These might not lead to as low training error as complex
models (the term high bias is used) but they tend to generalize well (low variance). When
training data are abundant and the underlying model is likely to arise from non-additivity
and complex interactions between features, instance approaches like k-nearest neighbors or
decision tree algorithms (such as stochastic gradient tree boosting12,13 or random forest14,
discussed below) can work well. Some algorithms such as non-linear support vector
machines15 can be extremely robust in a variety of situations even where the number of
predictive features is very large compared to the number of training examples, a situation
where over-fitting often occurs. Finally, accepting the limitations of each class of algorithms,
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
some practitioners use a process called blending, merging the outputs of multiple different
algorithms (also discussed below).
Finally, for challenging prediction problems, it means that considerable effort needs to be
made to amass as many training examples as possible, all characterized by the same set of
informative features. If one examines the amount of training data that is used in image
analysis competitions – which can include over 100,000 images – we see that the typical
biomedical data sets fall short by two to three orders of magnitude, despite representing
arguably a fundamentally more challenging learning task. And this deficiency in amount of
training data does not even begin to address the fact that we typically have no idea what
features are needed to capture the complexity of the disease process. It is primarily this
challenge – collecting many thousands if not tens of thousands of training examples all
characterized by a rich set of (sufficiently) informative features, that has limited the
contribution of machine learning to complex tasks of classification and prediction in clinical
Illustrative examples of machine learning
To illustrate some of the points addressed here, I will focus on four examples of machine
learning in medicine, covering a range of supervised and unsupervised approaches. Two of
these focus on cardiovascular disease and two on cancer.
Supervised learning – learning from forests and trees
Although a tremendous number of supervised learning algorithms have been developed,
their goals are shared: to provide sufficient flexibility to minimize training error but at the
same time allow generalization to new data sets, all in a computationally efficient way. I
highlight one of these methods – random forests – as an example of an innovative and highly
effective algorithm.
The random forests algorithm, developed nearly 15 years ago14, is touted as one of the best
“off-the-shelf” algorithms for classification available. As their name would suggest, random
forests are constructed from trees – more specifically decision trees. Let us assume that the
goal is to classify individuals into two groups – such as statin responders or non-responders.
We start with a group of training examples consisting of known statin responders and nonresponders, each characterized by a set of features, such as age, sex, and smoking and
diabetes status. Often hundreds or thousands of features may be available. We build a series
(“ensemble”) of decision trees that each seek to use these predictive features to discriminate
between our two groups. At each node in each tree, one feature is selected that most
effectively achieves this split. Since it is unlikely that a single variable will be sufficient,
subsequent nodes are then needed to achieve a more perfect separation. A notable difference
between each tree is that each only has access to a subset of training examples – a concept
known as “bagging”16. Furthermore, at each node, only a subset of features is considered.
The resulting stochasticity allows each tree to cast an independent vote on a final
classification and serves as a means of regularization. Even though each tree is unlikely to be
accurate on its own, the final majority vote across hundreds of trees is remarkably accurate.
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Random forests have had incredible success across a variety of learning disciplines and have
fared well in machine learning competitions. Ishwaran, Lauer and colleagues adapted
random forests to the analysis of survival data – and aptly termed their approach “random
survival forests (RSF)”17. They used a binary variable for death and applied their method to
a variety of problems, including prediction of survival in systolic heart failure18 and in
postmenopausal women19. In the latter example they looked at 33,144 women in the
Women’s Health Initiative Trials and considered conventional clinical and demographic
variables as well as 477 ECG biomarkers. They used RSF to build a survival model – and
identified 20 variables predictive of long-term mortality, including 14 ECG biomarkers.
Models constructed using this reduced subset of features demonstrated improved
performance, both on training data and on a held out test set. Interestingly, once the subset of
20 variables were selected, a simple additive model (a regularized version of the Cox
proportional hazards model) performed just as well as RSF in patient classification,
suggesting that one of the main merits of RSF was in feature selection. Many of these
variables had in fact never before been implicated in predicting mortality.
Why hasn’t this approach been replicated and incorporated into prevalent risk models? The
primary reason may be that the RSF performance was actually inferior to that typically seen
with the commonly used Framingham Risk Score, despite the fact that the latter involves
fewer variables and a simpler model20. How could that be? Although the large sample size
was enviable compared to most epidemiological studies, it came at a price. Many variables
were by self-report and most blood biomarkers were absent, presumably because the cost of
performing detailed phenotyping on such a large cohort would be prohibitive. Notably
absent were cholesterol measures, including total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol. The
authors were also unable to find an external data set for replication, because few cohorts had
the same quantitative ECG variables measured. Thus despite representing a novel
application of a superb algorithm, the study’s benefits were limited by not having training
and test data sets with a common comprehensive set of informative features, including all
those previously found to be important for this prediction task.
C-Path: an automated pathologist and the importance of feature extraction
As highlighted above, feature selection is central to machine learning. Without adequate
informative predictors, we are unlikely to make progress, despite sophisticated algorithms. A
recent example from the field of breast cancer pathology is particularly illustrative of when
machine learning approaches might succeed and when they are unlikely to add benefit to
current conventional clinical practices.
Koller and colleagues at Stanford University focused on improving identification of high
risk breast cancer cases using pathological specimens – developing a tool called C-Path21
(Figure 2). Many of the unfavorable histologic properties of tumors used today such as
tubules and atypical nuclei had been identified decades ago. However, rather than simply
combine these using new algorithms, C-Path took a further step back and focused on
identifying new features using automated image processing. C-Path first developed a
classifier that could robustly differentiate between the epithelial and stromal portions of the
tumor (Figure 2A–B). It then derived a rich quantitative feature set of 6642 predictors from
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
these regions examined separately and together, highlighting epithelial and stromal “objects”
and their relationships, such as properties of nuclei (size, location, spacing) and relationships
between nuclei and cytoplasm in epithelium and stroma (Figure 2C). These features were
then used to construct a model to predict survival, which demonstrated excellent
performance on two independent test data sets, superior to that achieved by community
pathologists. Furthermore, the C-Path scores were significantly associated with 5-year
survival above and beyond all established clinical and molecular factors (Figure 2D).
The C-Path experience was instructive for several reasons. Perhaps the most important
lesson was that novel learned features were essential to improved performance – one could
not simply dress up established features in a new algorithmic packaging and expect superior
classification. Moreover, many of the predictive features learned by C-Path were entirely
novel despite decades of examination of breast cancer slides by pathologists. Thus one of the
main contributions of machine learning is to take an unbiased approach to identify
unexpected informative variables. The second lesson to be learned is that the final algorithm
used for classification, a regularized form of logistic regression called “lasso”22, was
actually quite simple but still generated excellent results. Simple algorithms can perform just
as well as more complex ones in two circumstances: when the underlying relationship
between features and output is simple (e.g. additive) or when the number of training
examples is low, and thus more complex models are likely to overfit and generalize poorly.
If one truly needs the benefits of more complex models such as those capturing highdimensional interactions, one should focus on amassing sufficient and diverse training data
to have any hope of building an effective classifier. Finally, the C-Path authors found that the
success of their model crucially depended on being able to first differentiate epithelium and
stroma. As it is unlikely that a machine would arrive at the need for this step on its own, this
highlights the need for domain-specific human expertise to guide the learning process.
Although analysis of pathology samples plays a limited role in clinical cardiology, one can
imagine extrapolating this approach of data-driven feature extraction to other information
rich types, such as cardiac MRI images or electrograms.
Attractor metagenes in cancer and bake-offs in machine learning
A second machine learning example in cancer biology is illustrative of the interplay between
unsupervised and supervised learning and introduces the concept of “blending” to improve
predictive models.
Given the abundance of learning algorithms and the fact that some approaches are more
suited to particular problems, the machine learning community has embraced the idea of
competitions. In these algorithm “bake-offs”, multiple individuals or groups are given the
same training data and asked to develop predictive models, which in turn are evaluated on an
independent test set. A particularly high profile version of this was the $1,000,000 Netflix
Grand Prize23,24, where money was awarded to the group that could most improve the
prediction of movie preferences based on past ratings. Such competitions have had a
tremendously beneficial impact on the machine learning field, including ensuring
transparency and reproducibility, encouraging sharing of methods, and avoiding the danger
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
of investigators retrospectively “adjusting” an analysis to arrive at the desired result. Similar
competitions have appeared within the biology community25 – but are rare in medical
research, where data sets and methods are not routinely shared.
The recent Sage Bionetworks-DREAM Breast Cancer Prognosis Challenge (BCC)
exemplifies the promise of this type of approach for clinical medicine26. BCC represented an
open challenge to build predictive models for breast cancer based on genomic, clinical, and
survival outcome data from nearly 2000 patients. Over 350 groups from 35 countries
participated and generated predictive models for survival outcomes, which were evaluated
on a newly generated validation set of 184 patients. Interestingly, the winning model27 was
built in part from genomic features identified through applying unsupervised learning to
completely unrelated cancers. The authors had previously developed an algorithm known as
“attractor metagenes”28, which identified clusters of genes that shared similarity across
multiple tumor samples. Many of these clusters happened to correspond to biological
processes essential for cancer progression such as “chromosomal instability” and
“mesenchymal transition”. The authors incorporated the presence or absence of these
features along with other clinical variables into various predictive models for breast cancer
outcomes. Since different learning algorithms may be more or less effective for predicting
outcomes for specific types of patients, the authors used several different supervised learning
algorithms and performed a blending of each algorithm’s output into a final prediction of
survival outcomes (Figure 3).
Several instructive aspects emerged from this competition. The first is that unsupervised
learning can be seen as a means of feature selection, as it can allow discovery of robust
biological descriptors, which can then be used in a supervised model for disease prediction.
The second lesson is that an ensemble of different learning algorithms was able to produce a
superior prediction than any single one alone. Thirdly, models using both genomic and
clinical variables ended up surpassing either data type alone. Finally, learning benefited from
having nearly 2000 data sets for training and validation as well as a transparent framework
that allowed sharing of code and gave participants constant feedback on their performance.
Unsupervised learning in HFpEF: towards precision medicine?
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a highly heterogeneous condition
with no proven therapies29. One possibility for the lack of successful clinical trials in HFpEF
is that enrolled patients reflect multiple dominant pathophysiologic processes, not all of
which would respond to the same agent. Can such processes be identified? Although some
have suggested using genetics for precise redefinition of diseases, genetic variation is
unlikely to help classify complex conditions like HFpEF, where it is most probable that
hundreds of weak genetic factors interact with each other and the environment in an
unpredictable way to elicit disease phenotypes.
We focused on using unsupervised learning for classifying HFpEF patients. As mentioned
above, unsupervised learning seeks to find internal structure in the data. It starts from a
similar framework as supervised learning, with instances (patients in this case) each
characterized by a feature vector, where values are given for particular attributes such as
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
height, sex and age. These data can be conveniently represented by a matrix (Figure 1A).
But instead of using this matrix to learn a model relating features to outcomes, we instead
use it to find group of patients that are similar to one another. Multiple algorithms can be
used for this purpose. Perhaps the simplest is agglomerative hierarchical clustering, which
first groups together individuals that are most similar to one another, and then merges
together similar pairs, and so on and so on. Another class of unsupervised learning
algorithms, including principal component analysis and non–negative matrix factorization30,
performs a matrix decomposition, converting the patient-feature matrix into a product of two
matrices: one which groups together similar features into super-features (we call this
dimensionality reduction) and a second which describes each patient by a vector of weights
applied to these super-features. Patients would then be grouped based on similarity of their
weight vectors. Another set of unsupervised learning methods such as k-medoids
clustering31 and the attractor metagenes algorithm28 try to find distinct training examples (or
a composite) around which to group other data instances. Examples within a cluster should
be more similar to each other than to those of other clusters.
Sparse coding represents a recent advance to the field of unsupervised learning. It was
originally devised to assist in the field of computer vision32, which involves the automated
acquisition, processing and interpretation of images, and focuses on such tasks as facial
recognition and the interpretation of handwritten text. Sparse coding is believed to reflect the
way in which the visual cortex responds to stimuli. Rather than have a large number of
cortical neurons activated by every image, the principle of sparsity instead has a very small
number of neurons attuned to a much more specific, higher order aspect of the image, such
as the edge of an object oriented in a particular direction. Algorithmic improvements allow
computers to learn a set of such higher order features from training images and then interpret
test images as a composite of these features33. With enough training data, computers can
perform such complex tasks as distinguishing between different food types (https://
www.metamind.io/vision/food). In addition to image recognition, sparse coding has been
applied successfully to natural language processing34. We will later discuss if such
approaches might be of use in patient classification for the purposes of precision medicine.
In our analysis of HFpEF, we were interested in grouping patients on the basis of
quantitative echocardiographic and clinical variables35. Starting with 67 diverse features, we
removed highly correlated features to leave 46 minimally redundant predictors (Figure 4A).
We used a regularized form of model-based clustering, where multivariate Gaussian
distributions were used to define each patient cluster on the basis of the means and standard
deviation assigned to each feature. To achieve parsimony, regularization was used to select
the optimal number of patient clusters as well as the number of free parameters fit in
defining each cluster (Figure 4B). Patients were assigned to clusters based on computing a
joint probability across all features and choosing the cluster with the highest probability of
membership for each patient. Comparison of the resulting groups demonstrated differences
across a wide range of phenotypic variables. Similar to the BCC prize winner, we used our
phenotypic clusters as features in a supervised learning model to predict survival of HFpEF
patients and found that they improved upon the clinical models commonly used for risk
assessment, both within our training set and in an independent test set (Figure 4C).
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Needless to say this is only a start. Utility of any such classification should be validated in
survival models in other cohorts, especially because cluster definitions are all too dependent
on which features are chosen and which learning algorithm is used. More importantly, we
would like to use such classification to revisit failed clinical trials in HFpEF such as
TOPCAT36 to see if any of the groups we defined would identify a subclass of patients who
might benefit from specific therapies.
Discussion
Based on the above examples it is obvious that machine learning – both supervised and
unsupervised – can be applied to clinical data sets for the purpose of developing robust risk
models and redefining patient classes. This is unsurprising, as problems across a broad range
of fields, from finance to astronomy to biology13, can be readily reduced to the task of
predicting outcome from diverse features or finding recurring patterns within
multidimensional data sets. Medicine should not be an exception. However, given the limited
clinical footprint of machine learning, some obstacles must be standing in the way of
translation.
Some of these may relate to pragmatic issues relevant to the medical industry, including
reimbursement and liability. For example, our health system is reluctant to completely
entrust a machine with a task that a human can do at higher accuracy, even if there is
substantial cost savings. For machine learning to be incorporated in areas where it cannot
promise as high accuracy as that of a human expert, there must be ways for physicians to
interact with computer systems to maintain accuracy and yet increase throughput and reduce
cost. For example, one can imagine an automated system that errs on the side of very high
sensitivity and uses human over-reading to increase specificity. A new reimbursement model
for such an integrated man-and-machine approach will be needed. And physicians will need
to become comfortable with the risks of medical error – which may be no greater than in
other clinical circumstances – but nonetheless may feel different because of the “black box”
nature of the automated system. On-site evaluation with local data for a sufficiently long
trial period may alleviate some of those concerns. And if we place increasing reliance on
stand-alone highly accurate expert systems to lower medical costs, will the makers of these
systems assume any liability?
An unrelated challenge is whether an FDA clinical indication will be granted to a drug for a
subgroup of patients that has been defined in a manner unrelated to the mechanism of action
of that drug. While it is straightforward to target a specific kinase inhibitor towards cancer
patients with an activating driver mutation in that same kinase, it is not clear how, for
example, we could justify matching our HFpEF classes with a particular type of drug, no
matter how phenotypically homogeneous the group may be. Empirical evidence of
disproportionate therapeutic benefit in one class over another would be necessary – but is it
sufficient? I suspect this inability to justify matching a patient subgroup to a drug on a
biological basis will represent an inherent challenge to the reclassification of most complex
diseases, as these typically cannot be defined by genetics alone or an obvious biomarker
linked to the drug’s therapeutic mechanism. As a solution, clinical trials could be adequately
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
powered for all predefined subgroups but it remains to be seen what evidence would be
needed for a subgroup-selective drug approval.
Some difficulties in the adoption of machine learning in medicine may also be related to
actual statistical challenges in learning. Towards that point, we can extract a number of
useful lessons from the examples I highlighted as well as the broader experiences of the
machine learning community. First of all, novel informative features will be needed to build
improved models in medicine, particularly in learning situations where the computer is not
simply approximating the physician’s performance. Merely using the same predictors with
more innovative algorithms is unlikely to add much value. In the case of C-Path, features
were derived through automated image analysis, while in the attractor metagenes algorithm,
they arose from genomic analyses of tumors. In both cases, the potential pool of new
features was in the tens of thousands.
For cardiovascular disease, where the tissue of interest is not readily accessible, it will be
challenging to find large unbiased sources of phenotypic data with sufficient informativeness
to characterize the disease process. In our study of the HFpEF patients, we used
echocardiographic data. Likewise other features could come from noninvasive
characterization of myocardial tissue and vascular beds. Some even hope that mobile devices
may offer a lower cost, detailed phenotypic characterization of patients37. It remains to be
seen if the information content of data from imaging or mobile recording modalities will
match that of genomic (or proteomic or metabolomic) data, with the caveat that, in the case
of cardiac patients, such ‘omic data may have to come from peripheral blood and not from
the myocardium or vasculature. In this regard, we are at a disadvantage relative to oncology.
It is difficult to see a path forward for deriving biologically rich features in the absence of
obtaining cardiac or vascular tissue, unless, we can somehow develop safe perturbational
agents to probe specific pathway activities within these inaccessible organs, which can then
be quantified through imaging38.
To be in a position to extract novel features, we must somehow find the appetite to collect
large amounts of unbiased data on many thousands of individuals without knowing that such
an effort will actually be useful. And it won’t be enough to collect such data on the training
cohort alone. As the RSF experience demonstrated, it is essential that the same informative
features in any promising model be collected on multiple independent cohorts for them to
serve as test sets. Unfortunately, such biologically informative features are likely to be costly
to acquire (unlike the tens of thousands of digital snapshots of cats used as training data in
image processing applications39).
The final lesson is a technical one, related to the interplay of unsupervised and supervised
forms of learning. Deep learning, with stacked layers of increasingly higher order
representations of objects, has taken the machine learning world by storm40. Deep learning
uses unsupervised learning to first find robust features, which can then be refined, and
ultimately used as predictors in a final supervised model. Our work35 and that involving
attractor metagenes27 both suggest that such techniques might be useful for patient data. In a
deep learning representation of human disease, lower layers could represent clinical
measurements (such as ECG data or protein biomarkers), intermediate layers could represent
Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
aberrant pathways (which may simultaneously impact many biomarkers), and top layers
could represent disease subclasses (which arise from the variable contributions of one or
more aberrant pathways). Ideally such subclasses would do more than stratify by risk, and
actually reflect the dominant disease mechanism(s). This raises a question about the
underlying pathophysiologic basis of complex disease in any given individual: is it sparsely
encoded in a limited set of aberrant pathways, which could be recovered by an unsupervised
learning process (albeit with the right features collected and a large enough sample size), or
is it a diffuse, multifactorial process with hundreds of small determinants combining in a
highly variable way in different individuals? In the latter case, the concept of “precision
medicine” is unlikely to be of much utility. However, in the former situation, unsupervised
and perhaps deep learning might actually realize the elusive goal of reclassifying patients
according to more homogenous subgroups, with shared pathophysiology, and the potential
of shared response to therapy.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my clinical and scientific colleagues at UCSF and Dr. Sanjiv Shah for helpful discussions.
Funding Sources: Work in my laboratory is funded by NIH/NHLBI grants K08 HL093861, DP2 HL123228, and
U01 HL107440.