ABNORMAL EVENT DETECTION IN VIDEOS USING GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETS
Mahdyar Ravanbakhsh 1, Moin Nabi 2, Enver Sangineto 2, Lucio Marcenaro1, Carlo Regazzoni ∗1,3, Nicu Sebe 2
1 DITEN, University of Genova
2 DISI, University of Trento
3 Carlos III University of Madrid
In this paper we address the abnormality detection problem
in crowded scenes. We propose to use Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs), which are trained using normal frames and
corresponding optical-ﬂow images in order to learn an internal representation of the scene normality. Since our GANs are
trained with only normal data, they are not able to generate
abnormal events. At testing time the real data are compared
with both the appearance and the motion representations reconstructed by our GANs and abnormal areas are detected by
computing local differences. Experimental results on challenging abnormality detection datasets show the superiority
of the proposed method compared to the state of the art in
both frame-level and pixel-level abnormality detection tasks.
Index Terms— Video analysis, abnormal event detection,
crowd behaviour analysis, Generative Adversarial Networks
1. INTRODUCTION
Abnormality detection in crowds is motivated by the increasing interest in video-surveillance systems for public safety.
However, despite a lot of research has been done in this area
in the past years , the problem is still open.
There are two main reasons for which abnormality detection is challenging. First, existing datasets with ground truth
abnormality samples are small.
This limitation is particularly signiﬁcant for deep-learning based methods, which have
shown an impressive accuracy boost in many other recognition tasks but are data-hungry. The second reason is the lack of a clear and objective deﬁnition of abnormality. Moreover, these two problems are related to each
other, because the abnormality deﬁnition subjectivity makes
it harder to collect abnormality ground truth.
In order to deal with these problems, generative methods for abnormality detection focus on modeling only the
normal pattern of the crowd. The advantage of the generative paradigm lies in the fact that only normal samples are
needed at training time, while detection of what is abnormal
is based on measuring the distance from the learned normal
pattern. However, most of the existing generative approaches
rely on hand-crafted features to represent visual information
∗Carlo Regazzoni has contributed to produce this work partially under the program
“UC3M-Santander Chairs of Excellence”.
Generator GANs
input frame
input optical-flow
Fig. 1. Top: a generator network takes as input a frame and produces a corresponding optical-ﬂow image. Bottom: a second generator network is fed with a real optical-ﬂow image and outputs an
appearance reconstruction.
 or use Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
trained on external datasets . Recently, Xu et al. 
proposed to use stacked denoising autoencoders. However,
the networks used in their work are shallow and based on
small image patches. Moreover, additional one-class SVMs
need to be trained on top of the learned representation.
In this paper we propose a generative deep learning
method applied to abnormality detection in crowd analysis. More speciﬁcally, our goal is to use deep networks to
learn a representation of the normal pattern utilizing only
normal training samples, which are much easier to collect.
For this purpose, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
 are used, an emerging approach for training deep networks using only unsupervised data. While GANs are usually
used to generate images, we propose to use GANs to learn the
normality of the crowd behaviour. At testing time the trained
networks are used to generate appearance and motion information. Since our networks have learned to generate only
what is normal, they are not able to reconstruct appearance
and motion information of the possible abnormal regions of
the test frame. Exploiting this intuition, a simple difference
between the real test-frame representations and the generated
descriptions allows us to easily and robustly detect abnormal
areas in the frame.
Extensive experiments on challenging
abnormality detection datasets show the superiority of the
proposed approach compared to the state of the art.
2. BACKGROUND
Abnormality Detection Our method is different from , which also focus on
 
learning generative models on motion and/or appearance features. A key difference compared to these methods is that they
employ hand-crafted features (e.g., Optical-ﬂow, Tracklets,
etc.) to model normal-activity patterns, whereas our method
learns features from raw-pixels using a deep learning based
approach. A deep learning-based approach has been investigated also in . Nevertheless, these works use existing
CNN models trained for other tasks (e.g., object recognition)
which are adapted to the abnormality detection task. For instance, Ravanbakhsh et al. propose a Binary Quantization Layer plugged as a ﬁnal layer on top of a CNN, capturing temporal motion patterns in video frames for the task of
abnormality segmentation. Differently from , we specifically propose to train a deep generative network directly for
the task of abnormality detection.
Most related to our paper is the work of Xu et al. ,
who propose to learn motion/appearance feature representations using stacked denoising autoencoders. The networks
used in their work are relatively shallow, since training deep
autoencoders on small abnormality datasets is prone to over-
ﬁtting. Moreover, their networks are not end-to-end trained
and the learned representation need externally trained classiﬁers (multiple one-class SVMs) which are not optimized
for the learned features. Conversely, we propose to use adversarial training for our representation learning. Intuitively,
the adopted conditional GANs provide data augmentation and
implicit data supervision thank to the discriminator network.
As a result we can train much deeper generative networks on
the same small abnormality datasets and we do not need to
train external classiﬁers.
GANs are based on a two-player game between
two different networks, both trained with unsupervised data.
One network is the generator (G), which aims at generating
realistic data (e.g., images). The second network is the discriminator (D), which aims at discriminating real data from
data generated from G. Speciﬁcally, the conditional GANs
 , that we use in our approach, take as input an image x
and generate a new image p. D tries to distinguish x from p,
while G tries to ”fool” D producing more and more realistic
images which are hard to be distinguished. Very recently Isola
et al. proposed an ”image-to-image translation” framework based on conditional GANs, where both G and D are
conditioned on the real data. They show that a U-net encoderdecoder with skip connections can be used as the generator architecture together with a patch-based discriminator in order
to transform images with respect to different representations.
A similar framework is adopted here, generating optical-ﬂow
images from raw-pixel frames and vice versa. However, we
do not aim at generating images which look realistic, but we
use G to learn the normal pattern of an observed crowd scene.
At testing time, G is used to generate appearance and motion
information of the normal content of the input frame. Comparing this generated content with the real frame allows us to
detect the possible abnormal areas of the frame.
3. LEARNING THE NORMAL CROWD BEHAVIOUR
We use the framework proposed by Isola et al. to learn
the normal behaviour of the observed scene. Speciﬁcally, let
Ft be the t-th frame of a training video and Ot the optical-
ﬂow obtained using Ft and Ft+1. Ot is computed using .
We train two networks: N F →O, which generates optical-
ﬂow from frames and N O→F , which generates frames from
optical-ﬂow. In both cases, inspired by , our networks are
composed of a conditional generator G and a conditional discriminator D (we refer to for the architectural details of
G and D). G takes as input an image x and a noise vector
z (drawn from a noise distribution Z) and outputs an image
p = G(x, z) of the same dimensions of x but represented in
a different channel. For instance, in case of N F →O, x is a
frame (x = Ft) and p is the reconstruction of its corresponding optical-ﬂow image y = Ot. On the other hand, D takes as
input two images (either (x, y) or (x, p)) and outputs a scalar
representing the probability that both its input images came
from the real data.
G and D are trained using both a conditional GAN loss
LcGAN and a reconstruction loss LL1. In case of N F →O, the
training set is composed of pairs of frame-optical ﬂow images
X = {(Ft, Ot)}, where Ot is represented using a standard
three-channels representation of the horizontal, the vertical
and the magnitude components. LL1 is given by:
LL1(x, y) = ||y −G(x, z)||1
while the conditional adversarial loss LcGAN is:
LcGAN(G, D) = E(x,y)∈X [log D(x, y)]+
Ex∈{Ft},z∈Z[log(1 −D(x, G(x, z)))]
Conversely, in case of N O→F , we use X = {(Ot, Ft)}. We
refer to for more details about the training procedure.
What is important to highlight here is that both {Ft} and {Ot}
are collected using the frames of the only normal videos of the
training dataset. The fact that we do not need videos showing
abnormal events at training time makes it possible to train our
networks with potentially very large datasets without the need
of ground truth samples describing abnormality.
At testing time we use only the generators (GF →O and
GO→F ) corresponding to the trained networks. Since GF →O
and GO→F have observed only normal scenes during training, they are not able to reconstruct an abnormal event. For instance, in Fig. 1 (top) a frame F, containing a vehicle unusually moving on a University campus, is input to GF →O and
in the generated optical ﬂow image (pO) the abnormal area
corresponding to that vehicle is not correctly reconstructed.
Similarly, when the real optical ﬂow (O) associated with F
is input to GO→F , the network tries to reconstruct the area
corresponding to the vehicle but the output is a set of unstructured blobs (Fig. 1, bottom). We exploit this inability of our
networks to reliably reconstruct abnormality to detect possible anomalies as explained in the next section.
4. ABNORMALITY DETECTION
At testing time we input GF →O and GO→F using each frame
F of the test video and its corresponding optical-ﬂow image
O, respectively. Note that the random noise vector z is internally produced by the two networks using dropout ,
and in the following we drop z to simplify our notation. Using F, an optical-ﬂow reconstruction can be obtained: pO =
GF →O(F), which is compared with O using a simple pixelby-pixel difference, obtaining ∆O = O −pO (see Fig. 1).
∆O highlights the (local) differences between the real optical
ﬂow and its reconstruction and these differences are higher in
correspondence of those areas in which GF →O was not able
to generate the abnormal behaviour.
Similarly, we obtain the appearance reconstruction pF =
GO→F (O). As shown in Fig. 1 (bottom), the network generates ”blobs” in the abnormal areas of pF . Even if these blobs
have an appearance completely different from the corresponding area in the real image F, we empirically observed that
a simple pixel-by-pixel difference between F and pF is less
informative than the difference computed in the optical-ﬂow
channel. For this reason, a ”semantic” difference is computed
using another network, pre-trained on ImageNet . Specifically, we use AlexNet . Note that AlexNet is trained using
supervised data which are pairs of images and object-labels
contained in ImageNet. However, no supervision about crowd
abnormal behaviour is contained in ImageNet and the network is trained to recognize generic objects. Let h(F) be the
conv5 representation of F in this network and h(pF ) the corresponding representation of the appearance reconstruction.
The ﬁfth convolutional layer of AlexNet (before pooling) is
chosen because it represents the input information in a suf-
ﬁciently abstract space and is the last layer preserving geometric information. We can now compute a semantics-based
difference between F and pF : ∆S = h(F) −h(pF ).
Finally, ∆S and ∆O are fused in order to obtain a unique
abnormality map. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst upsample ∆S in order
to obtain ∆′
S with the same resolution as ∆O. Then, both ∆′
and ∆O are normalized with respect to their corresponding
channel-value range as follows. For each test video V we
compute the maximum value mO of all the elements of ∆O
over all the input frames of V . The normalized optical-ﬂow
difference map is given by:
NO(i, j) = 1/mO∆O(i, j).
Similarly, the normalized semantic difference map NS is obtained using mS computed over all the elements of ∆′
the frames of V :
NS(i, j) = 1/mS∆′
The ﬁnal abnormality map is obtained by summing NS and
NO: A = NS + λNO. In all our experiments we use λ = 2.
A is our ﬁnal abnormality heatmap.
(a) Frame-level ROC curves.
(b) Pixel-level ROC curves.
Fig. 2. ROC curves on Ped1 (UCSD dataset).
real frame
generated frame
generated OF
abnormality heatmap
Fig. 3. Some examples of abnormality localization on UCSD.
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section we evaluate our method using two well-known
crowd abnormality datasets. We use both a pixel-level and a
frame-level protocol under the original evaluation setup .
The rest of this section describes the datasets, the experimental setup and the obtained results.
GANs Setup. In our experiments, N F →O and N O→F are
trained with the train sequences of the UCSD dataset. All
frames are resized to 256 × 256 pixels. Training is based on
stochastic gradient descent with momentum 0.5, batch size 1.
Each network is trained for 10 epochs.
Datasets and Experimental Setup. We use two standard
datasets: the UCSD Anomaly Detection Dataset and the
UMN SocialForce . The UCSD dataset is split into two
subsets: Ped1, which contains 34 train and 16 test sequences,
and Ped2, which contains 16 train and 12 test videos. This
dataset is challenging due to the low-resolution images, different types of moving objects, the presence of one or more
anomalies in the scene. The UMN dataset contains 11 videos
in 3 different scenes, with a total amount of 7700 frames.
5.1. Results and Discussion
Frame-level abnormality detection. The frame-level abnormality detection criterion is based on checking if the frame
Ped1 (frame-level)
Ped1 (pixel-level)
Ped2 (frame-level)
Social force(SF) 
SF+MPPCA 
Detection at 150fps 
Plug-and-Play CNN 
AMDN (double fusion) 
Proposed Method
Table 1. Comparison with the state of the art on the UCSD dataset. The values of the other methods are taken from .
optical-ﬂow 
Sparse Reconstruction 
Commotion 
Plug-and-Play CNN 
Proposed Method
Table 2. Results on the UMN dataset (all but our values are
taken from ).
contains at least one predicted abnormal pixel: in this case the
abnormal label is assigned to the whole frame. The procedure
is applied over a range of thresholds to build a ROC curve. We
compare our method with the state of the art. Quantitative results using both EER (Equal Error Rate) and AUC (Area Under Curve) are shown in Tab. 1, and the ROC curves in Fig. 2.
The proposed method is also evaluated on UMN dataset using
the same frame level evaluation (Tab. 2).
Pixel-level abnormality localization. The goal of the pixellevel evaluation is to measure the accuracy of the abnormality
localization. Following , a true positive prediction should
cover at least 40% the ground truth abnormal pixels, otherwise the frame is counted as a false positive. Fig. 2 shows
the ROC curves of the localization accuracy over USDC, and
Tab. 1 reports a quantitative comparison with the state of the
art. The results reported in Tab. 1-2 show that the proposed
approach sharply overcomes all the other compared methods.
Information fusion analysis. In order to analyze the impact on the accuracy provided by each network, N O→F and
N F →O, we perform a set of experiments on UCSD Ped1.
In the frame-level evaluation, N O→F obtains 84.1% AUC
and N F →O 95.3% AUC, which are lower than the 97.4%
obtained by the fused version.
In the pixel-level evaluation, however, the performance of N O→F dropped to 30.1%,
while the N F →O is 66.2%. We believe this is due to the low
resolution of ∆S (computed over the results obtained using
N O→F ), which makes the pixel-level localization a hard task.
By fusing appearance and motion we can reﬁne the detected
area, which leads to a better localization accuracy.
Qualitative results.
Fig. 3 shows some results using the
standard visualization protocol for abnormality localization
(red pixels represent abnormal areas). The ﬁgure shows that
our approach can successfully localize different abnormality types.
Moreover, since the generator learned a spatial
distribution of the normal motion in the scene, common perspective issues are automatically alleviated. Fig. 3 also shows
the intuition behind our approach. Normal objects and events
(e.g., walking pedestrians) are generated with a sufﬁcient
accuracy. However, the generators are not able to reproduce
abnormal objects and events (e.g., a vehicle in the ﬁrst row)
and this inability in reproducing abnormalities is what we
exploit in order to detect abnormal areas.
The last row in Fig. 3 shows a failure case, miss detecting
the abnormal object (a skateboard). The failure is probably
due to the fact that the skateboard is very small, has a “normal” motion (the same speed of normal pedestrians), and is
partially occluded.
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we addressed the problem of abnormality detection in crowd videos. We proposed a generative deep learning
method based on two conditional GANs. Since our GANs are
trained using only normal data, they are not able to generate
abnormal events. At testing time, a local difference between
the real and the generated images is used to detect possible abnormalities. Experimental results on standard datasets show
that our approach outperforms the state of the art with respect
to both the frame-level and the pixel-level evaluation protocols. As future work we will investigate the use of Dynamic
Images as an alternative to optical-ﬂow in order to represent motion information collected from more than one frame,
as suggested by an anonymous reviewer of this paper.
7. REFERENCES
 W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly
detection and localization in crowded scenes,” PAMI,
 J. Kim and K. Grauman, “Observe locally, infer globally: a space-time mrf for detecting abnormal activities
with incremental updates,” in CVPR, 2009.
 V. Mahadevan, W. Li, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly
detection in crowded scenes,” in CVPR, 2010.
 R. Mehran, A. Oyama, and M. Shah, “Abnormal crowd
behavior detection using social force model,” in CVPR,
 C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at
150 fps in matlab,” in ICCV, 2013.
 V. Saligrama and Z. Chen, “Video anomaly detection
based on local statistical aggregates,” in CVPR, 2012.
 Y. Cong, J. Yuan, and J. Liu, “Sparse reconstruction cost
for abnormal event detection,” in CVPR, 2011.
 A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in NIPS, 2012.
 R. B. Girshick, “Fast R-CNN,” in ICCV, 2015.
 J. Donahue, Y. Jia, O. Vinyals, J. Hoffman, N. Zhang,
E. Tzeng, and T. Darrell,
“Decaf: A deep convolutional activation feature for generic visual recognition,”
in ICML, 2014.
 A. Sharif Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and
S. Carlsson, “CNN features off-the-shelf: An astounding baseline for recognition,” in CVPRW, 2014.
 B. Zhou,
`A. Lapedriza, J. Xiao, A. Torralba, and
A. Oliva, “Learning deep features for scene recognition
using Places Database,” in NIPS, 2014.
 K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Two-stream convolutional networks for action recognition,” in NIPS, 2014.
 H. Mousavi, S. Mohammadi, A. Perina, R. Chellali, and
V. Murino, “Analyzing tracklets for the detection of abnormal crowd behavior,” in WACV, 2015.
 M. Ravanbakhsh, M. Nabi, H. Mousavi, E. Sangineto,
and N. Sebe,
“Plug-and-play cnn for crowd motion
analysis: An application in abnormal event detection,”
 
 M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, and R. Klette,
“Fully convolutional neural network for fast anomaly
detection in crowded scenes,” arXiv:1609.00866, 2016.
 D. Xu, Y. Yan, E. Ricci, and N. Sebe, “Detecting anomalous events in videos by learning deep representations of
appearance and motion,” CVIU, 2016.
 I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu,
D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” in NIPS, 2014.
 R. Raghavendra, M. Cristani, A. Del Bue, E. Sangineto,
and V. Murino, “Anomaly detection in crowded scenes:
A novel framework based on swarm optimization and
social force modeling,”
in Modeling, Simulation and
Visual Analysis of Crowds. 2013.
 H. Rabiee et al, “Novel dataset for ﬁne-grained abnormal behavior understanding in crowd,” in AVSS, 2016.
 H. Mousavi, M. Nabi, H. K. Galoogahi, A. Perina, and
V. Murino, “Abnormality detection with improved histogram of oriented tracklets,” in ICIAP, 2015.
 H. Rabiee et al,
“Crowd behavior representation: an
attribute-based approach,” SpringerPlus, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 1179, 2016.
 H. Rabiee et al, “Detection and localization of crowd
behavior using a novel tracklet-based model,” Journal
of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (JMLC), 2017.
 X. Huang, W. Wang, G. Shen, X. Feng, and X. Kong,
“Crowd activity classiﬁcation using category constrained correlated topic model,” KSII TIIS, 2016.
 Tim Salimans, I. J. Goodfellow, Wo. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. Radford, and X. Chen, “Improved techniques
for training GANs,” in NIPS, 2016.
 A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised
representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” ICLR, 2016.
 P. Isola, J. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros,
“Imageto-image translation with conditional adversarial networks,” in CVPR, 2017.
 T. Brox, A. Bruhn, N. Papenberg, and J. Weickert,
“High accuracy optical ﬂow estimation based on a theory for warping,” in ECCV, 2004.
 O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, et al., “Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge,” IJCV, 2015.
 H. Mousavi, M. Nabi, H. Kiani, A. Perina, and
V. Murino, “Crowd motion monitoring using trackletbased commotion measure,” in ICIP, 2015.
 H. Bilen, B. Fernando, E. Gavves, A. Vedaldi, and
S. Gould, “Dynamic image networks for action recognition,” in CVPR, 2016.