HAL Id: hal-00564979
 
Submitted on 10 Feb 2011
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Face Recognition Based on Image Sets
Hakan Cevikalp, William Triggs
To cite this version:
Hakan Cevikalp, William Triggs. Face Recognition Based on Image Sets. CVPR 2010 - IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Jun 2010, San Francisco, United States. pp.2567-
2573, ￿10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539965￿. ￿hal-00564979￿
Face Recognition Based on Image Sets
Hakan Cevikalp
Eskisehir Osmangazi University
Meselik Kampusu, 26480, Eskisehir, Turkey
 
Bill Triggs
Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann
B.P. 53, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France
 
We introduce a novel method for face recognition from
image sets. In our setting each test and training example
is a set of images of an individual’s face, not just a single
image, so recognition decisions need to be based on comparisons of image sets. Methods for this have two main
aspects: the models used to represent the individual image
sets; and the similarity metric used to compare the models.
Here, we represent images as points in a linear or
afﬁne feature space and characterize each image set by a
convex geometric region (the afﬁne or convex hull) spanned
by its feature points. Set dissimilarity is measured by geometric distances (distances of closest approach) between
convex models. To reduce the inﬂuence of outliers we use
robust methods to discard input points that are far from the
ﬁtted model. The kernel trick allows the approach to be extended to implicit feature mappings, thus handling complex
and nonlinear manifolds of face images. Experiments on
two public face datasets show that our proposed methods
outperform a number of existing state-of-the-art ones.
1. Introduction
Face recognition has traditionally been posed as the
problem of identifying a face from a single image, and many
methods assume that images are taken in controlled environments. However facial appearance changes dramatically
under variations in pose, illumination, expression, etc., and
images captured under controlled conditions may not suf-
ﬁce for reliable recognition under the more varied conditions that occur in real surveillance and video retrieval applications.
Recently there has been growing interest in face recognition from sets of images . Here, rather
than supplying a single query image, the user supplies a set
of images of the same unknown individual. In general the
This work was supported in part by the Young Scientists Award Programme of the Turkish Academy of Sciences.
gallery also contains a set of images for each known individual, so the system must recover the individual whose gallery
set is the best match for the given query set. The query
and gallery sets may contain large variations in pose, illumination, and scale. For example, even if the images were
taken on the same occasion they may come from different
viewpoints or from face tracking in surveillance video over
several minutes.
Methods based on image sets are expected to give better performance than ones based on individual images both
because they incorporate information about the variability
of the individual’s appearance and because they allow the
decision process to be based on comparisons of the most
similar pairs of query and gallery images – or on local models based on these. In many applications (e.g. surveillance
systems incorporating tracking or correspondence between
different cameras), image sets are also the most natural form
of input to the system.
In this paper we develop a general geometric approach to
set based face recognition that is particularly suited to cases
where the sets contain a relatively wide range of images
(e.g. ones collected over an extended period of time or under
many different conditions). We represent each image as a
feature vector in some linear or afﬁne feature space, then
for each image set we build a simple convex approximation
to the region of feature space that is occupied by the set’s
feature vectors. Many convex models are possible but here
we give results for the afﬁne hull (afﬁne subspace) and the
convex hull of the set’s feature space points.
To compare different sets, we use the geometric distances (distances of closest approach) between their convex
models. This is a reasonable strategy because although sets
from the same individual taken under different conditions
are unlikely to overlap everywhere, they are more likely to
lie close to one another at at least some points. Indeed, to
the extent that it is permissible to synthesize new examples
within each set by arbitrary linear or convex combinations
of feature vectors, ﬁnding the distance between the sets corresponds to synthesizing the closest pair of examples, one
from each set, then ﬁnding the distance between them. This
can be viewed as an approximate method of handling differences in lighting, viewpoint, scale, etc.
Classiﬁcation methods based on convex models of sets of
feature vectors have been used in a number of other contexts
(e.g. ). Even though they only provide coarse geometric bounds for their underlying point sets – insensitive, e.g.,
to details of the distribution of the points within the convex set – this is still a reasonable strategy for classiﬁcation
with high-dimensional descriptors because in any case ﬁne
details of geometry or distribution can not be resolved with
practical numbers of samples in high dimensions .
C.f. the successes of afﬁne methods such as linear SVM
in many high-dimensional vision problems. Secondly, like
SVM, the kernel trick can be used to extend such methods
to nonlinear ones capable of handling, e.g. nonlinear manifolds of facial appearances. Finally, to reduce the inﬂuence
of outliers and noise, robust methods can be used to estimate the convex models.
1.1. Related Work
Existing classiﬁcation methods using image sets differ
in the ways in which they model the sets and compute distances between them. Fitzgibbon and Zisserman (see
also ) use image sets to recognize the principal characters in movies. They model faces detected in contiguous
frames as afﬁne subspaces in feature space, use Joint Manifold Distance (JMD) to measure distances between these,
then apply a JMD-based clustering algorithm to discover
the principal cast of the movie. Another approach is
to ﬁt a parametric distribution function to each image set,
then use Kullback-Leibler divergence to measure the similarity between the distributions. However as noted in ,
these methods must solve a difﬁcult parameter estimation
problem, they are not very robust when the test sets have
only weak statistical relationships to the training ones, and
large set sizes may be needed to approximate the distribution functions accurately.
Yamaguchi et al. developed a mutual subspace
based method in which image sets are modeled using linear subspaces and similarities between subspaces are measured using the canonical angles between them. Fukui and
Yamaguchi extended this approach to include a prior
projection onto a more discriminative subspace. A basic
limitation of these methods is that they incorporate only relatively weak information (linear subspace angles) about the
locations of the samples in input space: for many feature
sets, models based on afﬁne subspaces are more discriminative than linear subspace based ones.
The above methods approximate image sets with linear
or afﬁne subspaces. There are also many methods that seek
to build nonlinear approximations of the manifold of face
appearances, typically embedding local linearity within a
globally nonlinear model. This idea has been used widely in
both descriptor dimensionality reduction and single-image
face recognition .
Recently, used approaches of this kind for image set based face recognition.
Fan and Yeung use hierarchical clustering to discover
local structures, approximate each local structure with a linear (not afﬁne) subspace, quantify similarities between subspaces using canonical angles, and ﬁnally measure similarities between face image sets by combining these local similarities using majority voting. Wang et al. follow a similar approach, using nearest neighbor clustering to ﬁnd the
local structures forming the nonlinear manifold. They again
use linear (not afﬁne) subspaces and canonical angles, but
also incorporate distances between the centers of the clusters into the similarity metric between local structures. Both
of the above works were inspired by the nonlinear manifold
modelling approach of Roweis and Saul , but they replace the locally afﬁne / distance-based models used in 
with locally linear / angle-based ones. For many feature
sets, we believe that this reduces discrimination. Hadid and
Pietikainen also use local linearity to approximate nonlinear face manifolds. They reduce the dimensionality using
Locally Linear Embedding, apply k-means clustering, represent the local patches using the resulting cluster centers as
exemplars, and measure similarities between image sets by
combining the pairwise distances between their exemplars.
In contrast to the above methods, we approximate each
image set with a simple convex model – the afﬁne or convex hull of the feature vectors of the set’s images. Both approaches can be seen as enhancements of nearest neighbor
classiﬁcation that attempt to reduce its sensitivity to random variations in sample placement by “ﬁlling in
the gaps” around the examples. Although still based on the
closest-point idea, they replace point-to-point or point-tomodel comparisons with training-model to test-model ones.
As we will see below, they have a number of attractive properties: the model for each individual can be ﬁtted independently; computing distances between models is straightforward due to convexity; resistance to outliers can be incorporated by using robust ﬁtting to estimate the convex models; and if desired they can be kernelized to produce more
local nonlinear models. Moreover, as the experiments below show and despite their intrinsic simplicity, they provide more accurate classiﬁcation than state-of-the-art methods that build nonlinear approximations to face manifolds
by combining local linear models.
Let the face image samples be xci ∈IRd where c =
1, . . . , C indexes the C image sets (individuals) and i =
1, . . . , nc indexes the nc samples of image set c.
method approximates each gallery and test image set with a
convex model – either an afﬁne or a convex hull – then uses
distances between such models to assign class labels. A test
individual is assigned to the gallery member whose image
set’s model is closest to the test individual’s one.
Given convex sets H and H′, the distance between them
is the inﬁmum of the distances between any point in H and
any point in H′ :
D(H, H′) =
x∈H, y∈H′||x −y||.
To implement this we need to introduce parametric forms
for the points in H and H′ and explicitly minimize the interpoint distance using mathematical programming.
2.1. Afﬁne Hull Method
First consider the case where image sets are approximated by the afﬁne hulls of their training samples, i.e., the
smallest afﬁne subspaces containing them:
, c = 1, . . . , C.
The afﬁne model implicitly treats any afﬁne combination of
a person’s face descriptor vectors as a valid face descriptor
for him. This typically gives a rather loose approximation
to the data, and one that is insensitive to the positions of the
samples within the afﬁne subspace.
To parametrize the afﬁne hull, we can choose any point
µc on it as a reference (e.g. one of the samples xck, or their
k=1 xck), and rewrite the hull as
x = µc + Ucvc
Here, Uc is an orthonormal basis for the directions spanned
by the afﬁne subspace and vc is a vector of free parameters
that provides reduced coordinates for the points within the
subspace, expressed with respect to the basis Uc. Numerically, Uc is obtained by applying the thin Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) to [xc1 −µc, . . . , xcnc −µc]. We
discard directions corresponding to near-zero singular values in order to remove spurious noise dimensions within
data. The effective dimension of Uc and the hull is the number of signiﬁcantly non-zero singular values.
L2 norm based ﬁtting procedures such as SVD are sensitive to outliers. Hulls can also be estimated using robust
procedures such as the L1 norm based estimators of .
However we used SVD in the experiments below because it
proved adequate for the data sets studied there.
Given two non-intersecting afﬁne hulls {Uivi + µi}
, the closest points on them can be found
by solving the following optimization problem
vi,vj ||(Uivi + µi) −(Ujvj + µj)||2.
Deﬁning U ≡
and v ≡( vi
vj ), this can be
written as a standard least squares problem
||U v −(µj −µi)||2,
whose solution is v = (U⊤U)−1U⊤(µj −µi). It follows
that the distance between the hulls can be written as
j ) = ||(I −P)(µi −µj)||
where P = U(U⊤U)−1U⊤is the orthogonal projection
onto the joint span of the directions contained in the two
subspaces and I −P is the corresponding projection onto
the orthogonal complement of this span. If the matrix U⊤U
is not invertible, P can be computed as ˜U ˜U⊤, where ˜U is
an orthonormal basis for U obtained using thin SVD.
2.2. Reduced Afﬁne Hull Method
The above formulation fails if several gallery hulls intersect the given test one, because the test class will have
distance zero to each of the corresponding gallery classes.
This can occur for several reasons. Firstly, if there are outliers (incorrect or very poor images) in any of the image
sets, the corresponding afﬁne hulls may be over-large. The
solution in this case is to use a more robust hull ﬁtting procedure or some other form of outlier removal. Secondly, if
the feature set is too weak, the features may not sufﬁce to
linearly separate the candidates. In this case one can either
use more discriminative features, or possibly kernelize the
method to make the corresponding decision rules more local and nonlinear. Thirdly, if the afﬁne hulls overlap but the
underlying image sets do not, afﬁne approximations may be
too loose to give good discrimination and it may be preferable to use a tighter convex approximation. The convex hull
of the samples is the tightest convex model containing the
samples, but unless the number of samples is exponential
in their effective dimension it is typically a signiﬁcant underestimate of the region spanned by the class. Here we
develop a parametric family that includes both afﬁne and
convex hulls and many models intermediate between them.
The approach is based on constraining the coefﬁcients that
can be used to form afﬁne combinations – c.f. the reduced
convex hulls of .
To produce our reduced afﬁne hulls we introduce lower
and upper bounds L, U on the allowable α coefﬁcients in
(2) to control the looseness of the convex approximation:
αck = 1, L ≤αck ≤U
In the full afﬁne case the bounds are inactive, (L, U) =
(−∞, ∞). In the convex hull case, L = 0 and U ≥1 is
irrelevant. If L = 0 and U < 1, several samples need to be
active to ensure P
k αck = 1, giving a convex approximation that lies strictly inside the convex hull of the samples.
Similarly, if −∞< L < 0, U ≥1, the region is larger than
the convex hull, but smaller than the afﬁne one.
We can write the points of Hraff
more compactly in the
form {x = Xc αc} where Xc is a matrix whose columns
are the feature vectors of set c and αc is a vector containing
the corresponding αck coefﬁcients. Hraff
is convex because
any convex sum of its points, i.e. of αc vectors satisfying the
sum 1 and L, U constraints, still satisﬁes these constraints.
For simplicity we apply the same L, U constraints to each
αck coefﬁcient, although this is not strictly necessary.
Given two such reduced afﬁne hulls, the distance between them can be found by solving the following constrained convex optimization problem
j) = arg min
||Xi αi −Xj αj||2
L ≤αik, αjk′ ≤U
and taking D(Hraff
j ) = ||Xi α∗
j||. As before we can write this as a constrained least squares problem
min ∥X α∥2 in terms of X =
and α = ( αi
but the constraints are now nonstandard.
The individual examples (feature vectors) xck only appear in the quadratic term of (8) so it is easy to kernelize
the method by rewriting the quadratic in terms of dot products x⊤
ckxc′k′ and replacing these with kernel evaluations
k(xck, xc′k′). In the general case there is no reason to expect sparsity so all of the gallery and test points need to be
retained in their respective models (although for each given
pair of convex models, the corresponding closest point solution is usually sparse). However the size of the computation
typically remains modest because each class (individual) is
ﬁtted separately.
2.3. Convex Hull Approximation
Taking L=0, U ≥1 in (7) approximates the examples
with their convex hull (the smallest convex set containing
them). As mentioned above, this is much tighter than the
afﬁne approximation, but – particularly for small numbers
of samples in high dimensions – it can seriously underestimate the true extent of the underlying class, which sometimes leads to false rejections of candidates.
Distances between convex hulls can be found using (8)
with L=0 and no U constraint. This problem is closely related to the classical hard margin SVM, which ﬁnds a separating hyperplane between the two convex hulls based on
exactly the same pair of closest points, but scales its solution differently. Thus – at the cost of SVM training for
small problems at run time – one can also ﬁnd convex hull
distances by training an SVM that separates the given test
set from the given gallery one, and taking the inter-hull distance to be 2/∥w∥where w is the SVM weight vector.
Similarly, to handle outliers we can produce an even
more restrictive inner approximation by setting U < 1, and
the resulting problem can be related to the classical softmargin SVM and the ν-SVM .
3. Experiments
We tested1 the linear and kernelized versions of the proposed methods, AHISD (Afﬁne Hull based Image Set Distance) and CHISD (Convex Hull based Image Set Distance),
on two public face recognition data sets: Honda/UCSD 
and CMU MoBo .
These contain several video sequences each from a number of different individuals. Image sets for training and test were constructed by detecting faces in each video sequence using a Viola-Jones face
detector . To allow comparison with the literature we
followed the simple protocol of : the detected face images were histogram equalized but no further preprocessing
such as alignment or background removal was performed on
them, and the image features were simple pixel (gray level)
values. For CMU MoBo we also tested a Local Binary Pattern (LBP) feature set. For the linear AHISD method,
the best separating hyperplane is determined by using afﬁne
subspace estimation formulation, and subspace dimensions
are set by retaining enough leading eigenvectors to account
for 98% of the overall energy in the eigen-decomposition.
For the nonlinear AHISD method, we set the bounds as
−L = U = τ, where the value of τ is chosen between
1 and 5. The upper bound of nonlinear CHISD method is
set to U = 0.7 for the Honda/UCSD database, but we used
SVM algorithm to compute the distances between convex
hulls for CMU MoBo because of speed issues. We set the
error penalty term of SVM to C = 100 for gray values and
to C = 50 for LBP features. For all kernelized methods we
used the Gaussian kernels.
We compared the proposed linear methods to the Mutual Subspace Method (MSM) and the kernelized
ones to manifold learning methods that use patchwise local
representations . Representative examples and linear
subspaces were used to model local patches as in ,
but instead of Locally Linear Embedding and Isomap based
clustering, we used Spectral Clustering to determine samples forming the local patches. In addition to testing locally constant (exemplar) and locally linear subspace (LS)
patchwise models, we also tested locally afﬁne (AH) ones
to illustrate that the latter are often superior. We used a
Gaussian kernel based similarity function for edge weighting during Spectral Clustering and set the number of local
patches to 6 for each manifold learning algorithm. To combine the decisions of the local models regarding the label of
1For software see 
Figure 1. Some detected face images from videos of two subjects
from the Honda/UCSD data set.
the test manifold, the majority voting scheme of was
3.1. Experiments on the Honda/UCSD Data Set
The Honda/UCSD data set was collected for video-based
face recognition. It consists of 59 video sequences involving 20 individuals. Each sequence contains approximately
300–500 frames. Twenty sequences were set aside for training, leaving the remaining 39 for testing. The detected faces
were resized to 40×40 gray-scale images and histogram
equalized, and the resulting pixel values were used as feature vectors. Some examples are shown in Fig. 1.
Linear Methods
Clean Noisy G. Noisy T. Noisy G+T.
Linear AHISD
Linear CHISD
Nonlinear Methods
Kernel AHISD
Kernel CHISD
Spec Clus + Exemp.
Spec Clus + LS
Spec Clus + AH
Table 1. Classiﬁcation Rates (%) on the Honda/UCSD data set,
respectively for the clean data, the data with noisy gallery sets but
clean test ones, the data with clean gallery sets and noisy test ones,
and the data with noise in both gallery and test sets.
The results are summarized in Table 1. For outlier free
image sets (ﬁrst column), classiﬁcation is relatively easy
and all of the methods tested yielded high recognition rates.
To demonstrate the different methods’ resistance to outliers,
we ran three more experiments in which the training and/or
the test sets were systematically corrupted by adding one
image from all other classes.
Among the linear methods tested, our AHISD one performed the best in all cases. MSM does well on clean image sets but its performance drops signiﬁcantly for the cor-
Figure 2. Some detected face images from videos of two subjects
from the MoBo data set.
rupted ones, especially when both the training and the test
sets are corrupted. Among the nonlinear methods tested,
our kernelized AHISD and CHISD ones outperformed the
manifold learning ones in most of the cases tested. The kernelized methods also outperform their linear counterparts,
especially on the corrupted image sets. Among the manifold learning methods, the one based on exemplars yields
the worst accuracies but there is not a clear winner between
the locally linear and locally afﬁne subspace based ones.
Overall our proposed methods seem to be the best performers, winning in most of the cases tested, particularly on the
more corrupted data sets.
3.2. Experiments on the MoBo Data Set
The MoBo (Motion of Body) data set contains 96 image
sequences of 24 individuals walking on a treadmill. The
images were collected from multiple cameras under four
different walking situations: slow walking, fast walking, incline walking, and carrying a ball. Thus, there are 4 image sets for each individual. Each image set includes both
frontal and proﬁle views of the subject’s faces. Some examples of the detected faces are shown in Fig. 2. As before,
the detected faces were converted to 40×40 gray-scale images and histogram equalized, with the resulting pixel values used as features. We also tested a Local Binary Pattern
feature set in which each 40×40 image is partitioned into
25 8×8-pixel squares, with a uniform LBP histogram using circular (8,1) neighborhoods being extracted from each
square and the resulting histograms being concatenated to
produce the ﬁnal feature vector.
We randomly selected one image set from each class (individual) for the gallery and used the remaining 3 for testing. This was repeated 10 times and we report averages and
standard deviations of the resulting classiﬁcation rate over
the 10 runs. Fig. 3 shows the classiﬁcation rates of each run
for the gray level features, and the overall results are shown
in Table 2. The asterisks indicate performance differences
Linear Methods
Gray Level
Linear AHISD
92.7∗± 3.3
94.6∗± 2.3
Linear CHISD
94.2 ± 2.7
98.1 ± 0.9
92.0∗± 3.0
92.4∗± 1.9
Nonlinear Methods
Kernel AHISD
93.8 ± 2.8
97.6 ± 1.8
Kernel CHISD
95.3 ± 2.2
98.0 ± 1.1
Spec. Clus. + Exemplar
85.5∗± 4.4
91.6∗± 3.0
Spec. Clus. + LS
88.2∗± 4.5
93.0∗± 2.8
Spec. Clus. + AH
89.5∗± 5.0
92.8∗± 2.2
Table 2. Mean classiﬁcation rates (%) and their standard deviations across the 10 trials on the MoBo data set, for gray level pixel
features and LBP features.
that are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level between the
given method and the best method for that feature set (indicated in bold).
For the gray level features, our kernelized CHISD
method either matches or outperforms all of the others
tested in each trial, and overall it signiﬁcantly outperforms
the others. Our linear CHISD method is second best, followed by kernelized AHISD. Among the manifold learning methods, the one based on exemplar images performs
the worst, as before, while the locally afﬁne method outperforms the locally linear one. Our methods are signiﬁcantly
more consistent than the manifold learning ones across the
different trials. Similar conclusions hold for the LBP features, with the linear and kernelized CHISD methods leading the table and exemplar based manifold learning trailing
it as before. Replacing gray level features with LBP ones
improves the performance for all methods tested, and these
improvements are signiﬁcant most of the time. Overall, our
methods signiﬁcantly outperform the existing state-of-theart.
4. Discussion and Conclusions
In this work we developed methods for face recognition
from sets of images (rather than from individual images).
Our methods characterize each image set (individual) from
the gallery and the test set in terms of a convex region in feature space – the afﬁne hull or the convex hull of the feature
vectors of its images. Recognition is performed by ﬁnding
the gallery region (individual) that is closest to the given
test region (individual) in the sense of minimum distance
between convex sets. The methods can be made resistant
to outliers by using robust ﬁtting procedures, and they can
easily be kernelized because they are based on Euclidean
geometry in feature space. Each class is handled separately
so the size of the resulting kernel matrices remains modest.
In experiments on two publicly available face video data
sets, we tested our linear and kernelized methods against
one (MSM) based on ﬁtting global linear subspaces to the
image sets and using canonical angles between subspaces as
a similarity measure, and against several others designed to
model nonlinear face manifolds by ﬁtting patchwise constant (exemplar), patchwise linear or patchwise
afﬁne models to the samples. Our methods performed best
overall. Both MSM and the manifold models had lower
overall performance and were less consistent over trials and
more sensitive to outliers in the data. In part this variability
is due to the nonconvex optimization problem that must be
solved for the manifold based methods, whereas our methods lead to convex problems. On the data sets tested, the
accuracy of our linear methods was only slightly worse than
that of the corresponding kernelized ones, although the latter were also slightly stabler on the whole.
Our methods are not limited to face images. They can
also be used in other visual recognition problems where
each example is represented by a set of images, and more
generally in machine learning problems where the classes
and test examples are represented by sets of feature vectors. One machine learning use of this kind is to supplement
each input example with a set of virtual examples generated
using known invariances of the problem. For example, in
hand written digit recognition, virtual examples can be created by applying small spatial transformations, changes in
thickness of the pen strokes, etc., to the input data .
In such cases, the problem becomes one of set matching.
Traditional approaches such as DeCoste and Sch¨olkopf’s
kernel jittering use pairwise distances between the generated examples for matching. However as demonstrated in
our experiments, if the number of such exemplars is limited, methods that interpolate a dense set (convex model)
between the exemplars often do better than ones based on
the exemplars alone.