Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Interactive Natural Language Technology for Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 8–13,
Tokyo, Japan, October 29 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Survey of Explainable AI Terminology
Miruna A. Clinciu and Helen F. Hastie
Edinburgh Centre for Robotics
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
{mc191, H.Hastie}@hw.ac.uk
The ﬁeld of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
attempts to solve the problem of algorithmic
opacity. Many terms and notions have been
introduced recently to deﬁne Explainable AI,
however, these terms seem to be used interchangeably, which is leading to confusion in
this rapidly expanding ﬁeld. As a solution to
overcome this problem, we present an analysis
of the existing research literature and examine
how key terms, such as transparency, intelligibility, interpretability, and explainability are
referred to and in what context. This paper,
thus, moves towards a standard terminology
for Explainable AI.
Keywords— Explainable AI, black-box, NLG, Theoretical Issues, Transparency, Intelligibility, Interpretability, Explainability
Introduction
In recent years, there has been an increased interest in the ﬁeld of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI). However, there is clear evidence
from the literature that there are a variety of terms
being used interchangeably such as transparency,
intelligibility, interpretability, and explainability,
which is leading to confusion. Establishing a set of
standard terms to be used by the community will
become increasingly important as XAI is mandated by regulation, such as the GDPR and as standards start to appear such as the IEEE standard in
transparency (P7001). This paper works towards
this goal.
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence is not a new
area of research and the term explainable has existed since the mid-1970s . However, XAI has come to the forefront
in recent times due to the advent of deep machine
learning and the lack of transparency of “blackbox” models. We introduce below, some descriptions of XAI collected from the literature:
• “Explainable AI can present the user with an
easily understood chain of reasoning from the
user's order, through the AI's knowledge and
inference, to the resulting behaviour” .
• “XAI is a research ﬁeld that aims to make AI
systems results more understandable to humans” .
Thus, we conclude that XAI is a research ﬁeld that
focuses on giving AI decision-making models the
ability to be easily understood by humans. Natural
language is an intuitive way to provide such Explainable AI systems. Furthermore, XAI will be
key for both expert and non-expert users to enable
them to have a deeper understanding and the appropriate level of trust, which will hopefully lead
to increased adoption of this vital technology.
This paper ﬁrstly examines the various notions
that are frequently used in the ﬁeld of Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Section 2 and attempts to
organise them diagrammatically. We then discuss
these terms with respect to Natural Language Generation in Section 3 and provide conclusions.
Terminology
In this section, we examine four key terms found
frequently in the literature for describing various
techniques for XAI. These terms are illustrated in
Figure 1, where we organise them as a Venn diagram that describes how a transparent AI system
has several facets, which include intelligibility, explainability, and interpretability. Below, we discuss how intelligibility can be discussed in terms
of explainability and/or interpretability. For each
of these terms, we present the dictionary deﬁnitions extracted from modern and notable English
dictionaries, quotes from the literature presented
in tables and discuss how they support the proposed structure given in Figure 1. In every table,
we emphasise related words and context, in order
to connect ideas and build up coherent relationships within the text.
In this paper, the ﬁrst phase of the selection criteria of publications was deﬁned by the relevance
of the paper and related key words. The second
phase was performed manually by choosing the
papers that deﬁne or describe the meaning of the
speciﬁed terms or examine those terms for ways in
which they are different, alike, or related to each
Figure 1: A Venn Diagram of the relationship between
frequently used terms, that offers a representation of
the authors' interpretation for the ﬁeld, excluding posthoc interpretation.
Transparency
Dictionary deﬁnitions: The word “transparent”
refers to something that is “clear and easy to
understand” ; or
“easily seen through, recognized, understood, detected; manifest, evident, obvious, clear” ; or “language or information that is transparent is clear and easy to understand” .
Conversely, an opaque AI system is a system
with the lowest level of transparency, known as a
“black-box” model. A similar deﬁnition is given
by Tomsett et al. in Table 1.
Tintarev and Masthoff state that transparency “explains how the system works” and it is
considered one of the possible explanation facilities that could inﬂuence good recommendations in
recommender systems.
In the research paper by Cramer et al. ,
transparency aims to increase understanding and
entails offering the user insight as to how a system
works, for example, by offering explanations for
system choices and behaviour.
“Transparency clearly describing the model
structure, equations, parameter values, and
assumptions to enable interested parties to
understand the model” .
Tomsett et al. deﬁned transparency as a
“level to which a system provides information
about its internal workings or structure” and
both “explainability and transparency are important for improving creator-interpretability”.
“Informally, transparency is the opposite of
opacity or blackbox-ness.
It connotes some
sense of understanding the mechanism by
which the model works. We consider transparency at the level of the model (simulatability), at the level of individual components
parameters) (decomposability), and at
the level of the training algorithm (algorithmic
transparency)” .
Table 1: Various notions of Transparency presented in
recent research papers
Intelligibility
Dictionary deﬁnitions: An “intelligible” system
should be “clear enough to be understood” according to Cambridge Dictionary ; or “capable of being understood; comprehensible” ; or “easily understood” .
The concept of intelligibility was deﬁned by
Bellotti and Edwards from the perspective
of “context-aware systems that seek to act upon
what they infer about the context must be able to
represent to their users what they know, how they
know it, and what they are doing about it” .
As illustrated in Table 2, it is challenging to
deﬁne how intelligible AI systems could be designed, as they would need to communicate very
complex computational processes to various types
of users . Per the Venn diagram in Figure 1, we consider that an AI system
could become intelligible in a number of ways,
but also through explanations (e.g. in natural language) and/or interpretations. We discuss both of
these in turn below.
“It remains remarkably hard to specify what
makes a system intelligible; The key challenge
for designing intelligible AI is communicating
a complex computational process to a human.
Speciﬁcally, we say that a model is intelligible to the degree that a human user can predict
how a change to a feature” , the word “interpret” deﬁnition is “to decide what the intended meaning
of something is”; or “to expound the meaning
of (something abstruse or mysterious); to render
(words, writings, an author, etc.) clear or explicit;
to elucidate; to explain” ; or “to explain the meaning of something” .
Considering a “black-box” model, we will try to
understand how users and developers could deﬁne
the model interpretability. A variety of deﬁnitions
of the term interpretability have been suggested in
recent research papers, as presented in Table 3.
Various techniques have been used to give insights into an AI model through interpretations,
such as Feature Selection Techniques , Shapley Values ; the interpretation of the AI model interpretation e.g. Hybrid AI models , by combining interpretable models with
opaque models, and output interpretation , and Visualisation Techniques Interpretation
 ). Thus
in our model in Figure 1, we deﬁne interpretability
as intersecting with explainability as some models may be interpretable without needing explanations.
model-agnostic
interpretability,
model is treated as a black-box. Interpretable
models may also be more desirable when
interpretability is much more important than
accuracy, or when interpretable models trained
on a small number of carefully engineered
features are as accurate as black-box models”.
 
“An explanation can be evaluated in two ways:
according to its interpretability, and according
to its completeness” .
“We deﬁne interpretable machine learning
as the use of machine-learning models for
the extraction of relevant knowledge about domain relationships contained in data...” .
Table 3: Various notions of Interpretability presented
in recent research papers
Explainability
Dictionary Deﬁnitions: For the word “explain”
were extracted the following deﬁnitions: “to make
something clear or easy to understand by describing or giving information about it” Cambridge
Dictionary ; or “to provide an explanation
for something. to make plain or intelligible” ; or “to tell someone about something in a way that is clear or easy
to understand. to give a reason for something or to
be a reason for something” .
Per these deﬁnitions, providing explanations is
about improving the user’s mental model of how a
system works. Ribera and Lapedriza consider that we do not have a concrete deﬁnition for
explanation in the literature. However, according
to these authors, every deﬁnition relates “explanations with “why” questions or causality reasonings”. Given the nature of the explanations, Ribera and Lapedriza proposed to categorise
the explainees in three main groups, based on their
goals, background, and relationship with the product, namely: developers and AI researchers, domain experts, and lay users. Various types of explanations have been presented in the literature
such as “why” and “why not” or Adadi and Berrada ’s four types
of explanations that are used to “justify, control,
discover and improve”. While it is out of scope
to go into detail here, what is clear is that in most
uses of the term explainability, it means providing
a way to improve the understanding of the user,
whomever they may be.
“Explanation is considered closely related to
the concept of interpretability” .
“Transparent design: model is inherently interpretable (globally or locally)” .
“Systems are interpretable if their operations
can be understood by a human, either through
introspection or through a produced explanation” .
In the paper ,
interpretability is deﬁned as something “that
cannot be manipulated or measured, and could
be deﬁned by people, not algorithms”.
Table 4: Various notions of Explainability presented in
recent research papers
The Role of NLG in XAI
An intuitive medium to provide such explanations
is through natural language. The human-like capability of Natural Language Generation (NLG)
has the potential to increase the intelligibility of
an AI system and enable a system to provide explanations that are tailored to the end-user .
One can draw an analogy between natural language generation of explanations and Lacave and
Diez’s model of explanation generation for expert
systems ; or Reiter and
Dale’s NLG pipeline with
stages for determining “what” to say in an explanation (content selection) and “how” to say it (surface realisation). Lacave and Diez’s model also
emphasises the importance of adapting to the user,
which is also a focus area in NLG ).
Other studies have looked at agents and robots
providing a rationalisation of their behaviour
 by providing a running commentary in language. Whilst this is not necessarily
how humans behave, it is beneﬁcial to be able to
provide such rationalisation, especially in the face
of unusual behaviour and, again, natural language
is one way to do this. Deﬁned as a process of producing an explanation for an agent or system behavior as if a human had performed the behaviour,
AI rationalisation has multiple advantages to be
taken into consideration: “naturally accessible and
intuitive to humans, especially non-experts, could
increase the satisfaction, conﬁdence, rapport, and
willingness to use autonomous systems and could
offer real-time response” .
Conclusions and Future work
In this paper, we introduced various terms that
could be found in the ﬁeld of Explainable AI and
their concrete deﬁnition.
In Figure 1, we have
attempted to deﬁne the relationship between the
main terms that deﬁne Explainable AI. Intelligibility could be achieved through explanations and
interpretations, where the type of user, their background, goal and current mental model are taken
into consideration.
As mentioned previously, interpretability is de-
ﬁned as a concept close to explainability . Our Venn diagram given in
Figure 1 illustrates that transparent systems could
be, by their nature interpretable, without providing
explanations and that the activities of interpreting
a model and explaining why a system behaves the
way it does are fundamentally different. We posit,
therefore, that the ﬁeld moving forward should be
wary of using such terms interchangeably. Natural Language Generation will be key to providing
explanations, and rationalisation is one approach
that we have discussed here.
Evaluation of NLG is challenging area with objective measures such as
BLEU being shown not to reﬂect human ratings
 . How natural language explanations are evaluated will likely be based on, in
the near term at least, subjective measures that try
to evaluate an explanation in terms of whether it
improves a system’s intelligibility, interpretability
and transparency along with other typical metrics
related to the quality and clarity of the language
used .
In future work, it would be advisable to perform
empirical analysis of research papers related to
the various terms and notions introduced here and
continuously being added into the ﬁeld of XAI.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support
Inˆes Cecilio, Prof.
Mike Chantler, and
Dr. Vaishak Belle. This research was funded by
Schlumberger Cambridge Research Centre Doctoral programme.