Exponential Smoothing with a Damped Multiplicative Trend
James W. Taylor
International Journal of Forecasting, 2003, Vol. 19, pp. 715-725.
Address for Correspondence:
James W. Taylor
Saïd Business School
University of Oxford
Park End Street
Oxford OX1 1HP, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 288927
Fax: +44 (0)1865 288805
Email: 
Exponential Smoothing with a Damped Multiplicative Trend
Exponential Smoothing with a Damped Multiplicative Trend
Multiplicative trend exponential smoothing has received very little attention in the literature.
It involves modelling the local slope by smoothing successive ratios of the local level, and
this leads to a forecast function that is the product of level and growth rate. By contrast, the
popular Holt method uses an additive trend formulation. It has been argued that more real
series have multiplicative trends than additive. However, even if this is true, it seems likely
that the more conservative forecast function of the Holt method will be more robust when
applied in an automated way to a large batch of series with different types of trend. In view of
the improvements in accuracy seen in dampening the Holt method, in this paper, we
investigate a new damped multiplicative trend approach. An empirical study, using the
monthly time series from the M3-Competition, gave encouraging results for the new approach at
a range of forecast horizons, when compared to the established exponential smoothing methods.
Key words: Damped Trend Exponential Smoothing; Pegels Classification; Multiplicative Trend.
1. Introduction
The robustness and accuracy of exponential smoothing forecasting has led to its
widespread use in applications where a large number of series necessitates an automated
procedure, such as inventory control. Although Holt’s method has tended to be the most
popular approach for trending series, its linear forecast function has been criticised for
tending to overshoot the data beyond the short-term. Gardner and McKenzie address
this problem by including an extra parameter in Holt’s method to dampen the projected trend.
Empirical studies show that the damped method tends to offer improvements in accuracy
 . If the extra parameter is
permitted to be greater than one, the method can also produce an exponential forecast
function, which would seem to be useful for series with exponential trend. An alternative
method for dealing with such series is multiplicative trend exponential smoothing, which is
described by Pegels and Hyndman et al. . It involves modelling the local growth
rate by smoothing successive ratios of the local level, and leads naturally to a forecast
function that is the product of the growth rate and level. The trend is thus modelled in a
multiplicative way. By contrast, all the established exponential smoothing methods assume
an additive trend.
The multiplicative trend method has received very little attention in the literature.
This is a little surprising, given the preference for multiplicative, rather than additive,
modelling of seasonality in the Holt-Winters approach. Pegels suggests that more real
series have multiplicative trends than additive. Regardless of whether this is true, it seems
likely that the more conservative forecast function of Holt’s method will be more robust
when applied in an automated way to a large batch of series with different types of trend.
Motivated by the improvements seen in dampening the Holt method, in this paper, we
introduce a damped Pegels exponential smoothing method. The method has the appeal of
modelling trends in a multiplicative fashion but includes a dampening term, which should
lead to more robust forecasting performance.
In Section 2 of the paper, we review the literature on exponential smoothing methods
for additive and multiplicative trends, and in particular the methods of Holt and Pegels.
Section 3 introduces our new damped multiplicative trend exponential smoothing method. In
Section 4, we use a large data set of real time series to compare the new method with existing
approaches. The final section provides a summary and concluding comments.
2. Exponential Smoothing with Additive and Multiplicative Trends
Pegels’ classification of exponential smoothing methods includes nine different
methods. Each method is classified as being suitable for series with either constant level,
additive trend or multiplicative trend, and with either no seasonality, additive seasonality or
multiplicative seasonality. Hyndman et al. have recently extended this taxonomy to
include damped additive trend with either no seasonality, additive seasonality or multiplicative
seasonality. From among the various methods, simple, Holt’s, damped Holt’s and Holt-Winters’
exponential smoothing have been very popular with practitioners and researchers. The Holt-
Winters method with multiplicative seasonality has been widely used. By contrast, with the
exceptions of Pegels , Makridakis et al. and Hyndman et al. , the
multiplicative trend methods have been very largely ignored. Indeed, we are not aware of any
software packages that include multiplicative trend exponential smoothing. Later in this section,
we return to the multiplicative trend formulation but let us first consider the standard Holt
additive trend method, which is given in expressions (1)-(3). The method estimates the local
growth, Tt, by smoothing successive differences, (St - St-1), of the local level, St. The forecast
function is the sum of level and projected growth.
where Xt is the actual observation,
is the m-step-ahead forecast, and α and γ are
smoothing parameters. Despite its popularity, empirical evidence has shown that the Holt linear
forecast function tends to overestimate . In view of this, Gardner
and McKenzie describe how a dampening parameter, φ, can be used within Holt’s
method to give more control over trend extrapolation. The damped Holt method is presented in
expressions (4)-(6).
Gardner and McKenzie explain that if 0 < φ < 1, the trend is damped and the forecasts
approach an asymptote given by the horizontal straight line St+Ttφ /(1-φ). If φ = 1, the method
is identical to the standard Holt method presented in expressions (1)-(3). If φ = 0, the method
is identical to standard simple exponential smoothing. If φ > 1, the forecast function has an
exponential trend. Interestingly, Hyndman et al. suggest a slightly different damped
formulation where there is no dampening of the trend for the first forecast period.
Gardner and McKenzie write that φ > 1 is probably a dangerous option in an
automatic forecasting procedure. However, Tashman and Kruk show that there can be
value in allowing φ > 1, if it is applied only to strongly trending series. Indeed, as the method
has an exponential forecast function, it would seem to be suited to series with exponential
trends. However, we feel that it is a clumsy way to handle such series as the local slope is
rather unsatisfactorily modelled as an additive trend by smoothing successive differences of
the local level. We feel that if the process is exponential, then an appropriate method would
be one that actually models this sort of trend, such as the method of Pegels , which is
presented in expressions (7)-(9). The method models the local growth rate, Rt, by smoothing
successive ratios, (St / St-1), of the local level St.
The method can be described as modelling the trend in a multiplicative way because the
forecasts are formed from the product of the level and growth rate. A logarithmic transformation
is sometimes used to convert a multiplicative trend into an additive trend. The resultant forecasts
must then be transformed back into the original units, along with prediction intervals. The Pegels
method has the appeal of simplicity in that the transformation is avoided.
The fact that the Pegels method expresses the trend in a unitless form can be very
useful. For example, consider the introduction of a new product that is a variation on an
existing product. The two products would probably share similar behaviours and could be
classified together. When the product is first introduced, a forecast method would have to be
implemented starting with no data. To help initialise the method, it would be reasonable to
use information about the aggregate product class. Although the sales volume of the new
product may be quite different to other products in the same class, they may share the same
behaviour in terms of trend. With the Pegels multiplicative trend formulation, the trend for
the new product could be initialised using the trend from the application of the method to a
more aggregated product class, since the trend is unitless. By contrast, it is not possible to use
an aggregated trend from an additive trend model.
3. Damped Mulitplicative Trend Exponential Smoothing
Pegels suggests that his multiplicative trend method may be more useful than the
Holt additive trend method, as multiplicative trends “appear more probable in real-life
applications”. If he is correct, then his method should perform well relative to the standard
methods, which all use an additive trend. However, an obvious reason for using Holt’s additive
trend method in preference to Pegels’ multiplicative trend method is that the more conservative
trend extrapolation, provided by the additive trend method, may be more robust when applied to
a variety of different series in a large-scale, automated forecasting application. In view of this,
there may be value in including an extra parameter in the Pegels formulation to dampen the
extrapolated trend, in an analogous fashion to the dampening parameter in the damped Holt
method. Our new damped Pegels multiplicative trend method is given in expressions (10)-(12).
The forecast function in expression (12) is analogous to the forecast function for
damped Holt’s exponential smoothing. The growth rate undergoes a further dampening for
each period into the future. Hence, the forecast function is derived as:
If 0 < φ < 1, the multiplicative trend is damped and the forecasts approach an
asymptote given by the horizontal straight line StRt
φ /(1−φ). If φ = 1, the method is identical to
the standard Pegels method presented in expressions (4)-(6). If φ = 0, the method is identical
to standard simple exponential smoothing. If φ > 1, the forecast function has a multiplicative
inflationary term which exponentially increases over time. Our preference is to use the
formulation with 0 < φ < 1 in order simply to provide a damped version of Pegels’ method.
In Fig. 1, we show forecast profiles for the Holt method and for damped Holts with
three different choices for the dampening parameter (0 < φ < 1). Decreasing the value of
φ, increases the degree of dampening but it does not alter the concave shape of the forecast
profile. Fig. 2 presents forecast profiles for the Pegels method and for damped Pegels with
three different choices for the dampening parameter (0 < φ < 1). As with the Holt method,
decreasing φ, increases the degree of dampening for the damped Pegels method. However,
unlike the Holt method, the shape of the damped forecast profile varies. Although the profile
will eventually approach a horizontal asymptote, for relatively early forecast lead times, the
profile can be convex, nearly linear or concave.
---------- Figs. 1 and 2 ----------
Although Hyndman et al. do consider trend dampening, their taxonomy of
methods does not include a damped multiplicative trend. In Table 1, we present an extended
version of their taxonomy, in which we use similar notation to theirs. The method N-N is
simple exponential smoothing, A-N is Holt’s, DA-N is damped Holt’s, A-A and A-M are the
Holt-Winters’ seasonal methods, and M-N is Pegels’ multiplicative trend method. M-A and
M-M are seasonal versions of the multiplicative trend method. The bottom row of the table is
the extension of the taxonomy of Hyndman et al. The method DM-N is damped Pegels,
which is the focus of this paper. The methods DM-A and DM-M, also in the bottom row, are
seasonal versions of damped Pegels. Although these seasonal versions are straightforward to
formulate, we concentrate in this introductory paper on the non-seasonal method.
---------- Table 1 ----------
Many users of exponential smoothing methods find it easier to work with errorcorrection forms. For the damped Pegels method, the error-correction form is given by
expressions (13)-(15):
where et is the 1-step-ahead forecast error,
An important issue for many forecasting applications is the estimation of prediction
intervals to accompany point forecasts. For example, in inventory control, intervals enable the
setting of appropriate levels of safety stock. Theoretical forecast error variance formulae are
often derived for exponential smoothing methods by referring to the equivalent ARIMA model.
However, there is no equivalent ARIMA model for either the Pegels or the new damped Pegels
methods. The lack of equivalent ARIMA models for various non-linear exponential smoothing
methods has led to prediction intervals being based on the equivalent state-space model.
Hyndman et al. derive theoretical forecast error variance formulae from the state-space
models and Hyndman et al. generate prediction intervals by applying simulation to the
models. In expressions (16)-(18), we present the state-space formulation for the damped Pegels
where εt is a Gaussian white noise process. An alternative to the theoretical and model-based
approaches is to use an empirical approach to estimate prediction intervals, such as that of
Gardner or Taylor and Bunn .
4. Empirical Results
4.1. Description of the Study
We carried out empirical analysis in order to address two main issues. Firstly, we
wished to investigate whether the inclusion of a dampening term would lead to improvement
in the accuracy of the Pegels method. Secondly, we wanted to compare the Pegels and
damped Pegels methods with the established exponential smoothing methods.
The data used was the 1,428 monthly time series from the recent M3-Competition,
which is described by Makridakis and Hibon . The data set is a mixture of industry,
demographic, meteorological, financial, microeconomic and macroeconomic series. The
series vary in length from 48 to 126 with a median of 115. Since all the series consist of
monthly observations and we wished largely to compare non-seasonal exponential smoothing
methods, we deseasonalised the data prior to forecasting. We used the seasonal
decomposition method based on ratio-to-moving averages, which was used in the M3-
Competition. By applying exponential smoothing methods in an automated way to a large
number of series, we replicated common practice in inventory and productions management.
We did not consider the quarterly or yearly series from the M3-Competition because
automated forecasting procedures are rarely applied to data of such low frequencies. We
should acknowledge at this stage that none of the 1,428 monthly series from the M3-
Competition contain zeros. Multiplicative trend methods, such as Pegels and damped Pegels,
are likely to be less suitable for series with embedded zeros .
We produced forecasts using seven exponential smoothing methods. We derived
parameter values by the common procedure of minimising the sum of squared one-step-ahead
forecast errors, and we employed the constrained non-linear optimisation routine of the
statistical programming language Gauss.
Method 1: Simple exponential smoothing with α restricted to lie between zero and one.
Method 2: Holt’s with α and γ restricted to lie between zero and one.
Method 3: Damped Holt’s with α, γ and φ restricted to lie between zero and one.
Method 4: Damped Holt’s with α and γ restricted to lie between zero and one, and
φ restricted to lie between zero and two. We refer to this as the ‘generalised Holt’ method.
Method 5: Pegels’ with α and γ restricted to lie between zero and one.
Method 6: Damped Pegels’ with α, γ and φ restricted to lie between zero and one.
Method 7: Holt-Winters for multiplicative seasonality with parameters restricted to lie
between zero and one. As this method is suited to seasonal series, the data was not
deseasonalised beforehand.
Chatfield and Yar describe how the use of different approaches for the
derivation of initial values for the smoothed level, trend and seasonal components can give
rise to substantially different optimised parameter values, which can lead to substantially
different forecasts. Although there are theoretical arguments in favour of backcasting
 , it frequently gave poor initial values in the M-Competition
 . Another approach is to use a simple linear regression on time to
produce initial slope and trend . Our experience is that this can
give poor results for series that are notably different to a simple linear trend.
We feel that a more robust approach is to use simple averages of the first few data
observations to calculate initial smoothed components, as in the work of Gardner . We
implemented the procedure of Williams and Miller who adapt the method of simple
averages for monthly data. For all the exponential smoothing methods, except Pegels’ and
damped Pegels’, the initial growth, T0, was chosen as the average of (1) one-twelfth the
difference between the mean of the first 12 and second 12 deseasonalised observations, and
(2) the average of the first differences for the first 24 deseasonalised observations. The initial
level, S0, was chosen as the mean of the first 24 deseasonalised observations minus 12.5 times
the initial growth. We used the same initial level, S0, for the Pegels and damped Pegels
methods and we set the initial growth rate, R0, equal to (S0+T0)/S0.
The initial value for each of the smoothed seasonal indices in the Holt-Winters
method was set as the average of the ratios of actual observation to 12-point centred moving
average taken from the corresponding month in each of the first two years of the time series.
The same ratios were used to deseasonalise the data for the nonseasonal forecasting methods.
Using each of the seven methods, we produced forecasts for lead times from one to 18
for each of the 1,428 series. We chose these lead times because they had been used with the
monthly data in both the M-Competition and M3-Competition.
4.2. Results for All 1,428 Series
Table 2 summarises the ex ante symmetric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE) for
each of the seven exponential smoothing methods applied to all 1,428 series. Although the
SMAPE has received some criticism , it is the one summary
error measure reported in numerical detail by Makridakis and Hibon in their presentation
of the results of the M3-Competition. They describe how the measure has the advantage over the
more traditional MAPE of avoiding large errors when the actual, xi, is close to zero and large
differences between the absolute percentage error when xi is greater than the forecast, fi, and
when fi is greater than xi.
For simplicity, we do not show the SMAPE results for each of the 18 forecast horizons.
Instead, Table 2 displays the average SMAPE for forecast horizons one to six (the short-term),
for horizons seven to 12 (the medium-term), for horizons 13 to 18 (the long-term) and for all 18
horizons. The best results for each forecast horizon category are indicated in bold. The Holt-
Winters method is the worst of all seven methods for all three forecast horizon categories. For
Holt’s, generalised Holt’s and Pegels’, the results are similar. Given that the Pegels and
generalised Holt methods are suited to strongly trending series, it is not unexpected to see that
they perform relatively poorly beyond the short-term, as the 1,428 series have a variety of
different strength trends. Perhaps it is a little surprising to see that Holt’s is slightly
outperformed by Pegels’ beyond the short-term. This suggests that the assumption of
multiplicative trend is not as dangerous as one might have surmised. Holt’s is also outperformed
by generalised Holt’s. This can, at least partially, be explained by the fact that the optimised φ
parameter for generalised Holt’s was greater than one for only 203 of the 1,428 series, indicating
that the method was the same as damped Holt’s for a large proportion of the series. In the next
subsection, we return to the issue of how well the methods perform on the 203 series for which
the optimised generalised Holt’s φ parameter was greater than one. Table 2 shows that the best
methods were simple exponential smoothing, damped Holt’s and damped Pegels’. Interestingly,
damped Pegels’ outperforms all other methods for all three lead time categories with the
improvement increasing with the lead time.
---------- Table 2 ----------
The median absolute percentage error (MedAPE) is another measure reported by
Makridakis and Hibon in their presentation of the results of the M3-Competition.
Here, the percentage error is defined simply as the ratio of error to actual. In the forecasting
literature, the median is often preferred to the mean APE because it is more robust to outliers,
and because the distribution of absolute percentage errors is often skewed. Table 3 summarises
the median APE results for the seven exponential smoothing methods applied to all 1,428 series.
Using the MedAPE criterion, the relative performances of the methods are broadly in line with
those shown in Table 2 for the SMAPE measure. However, there are two notable differences.
First, the Holt-Winters method is more competitive when judged by the MedAPE and, second,
the simple exponential smoothing method was the weakest method at all horizons according to
the MedAPE. The MedAPE results in Table 3 show Pegels’ as being a little more accurate than
Holt’s. Both of these methods are improved by including the dampening parameter, and, of the
two damped methods, damped Pegels’ performed slightly better than damped Holt’s.
---------- Table 3 ----------
The fact that damped Pegels’ was able to match and, indeed, slightly outperform damped
Holt’s is very encouraging for the new method, given that damped Holt’s is so widely used and
respected. The similarity of the accuracy summary measures, particularly the MedAPE results,
for damped Holt’s and damped Pegels’ prompted us to investigate further the estimated
parameters and resultant forecasts. Comparison of the forecasts produced by damped Holt’s and
damped Pegels’ indicated that, for many series, the forecasts were very similar. For these series,
the change in the level of the series (or growth) tended to be much smaller than the level of the
series. In the appendix, we show analytically that when this is the case, the damped Pegels
smoothing equations and forecast function, given in expressions (10)-(12), approximate those of
the damped Holt method, given in expressions (4)-(6). Intuitively, we feel that it is reasonable
that the two methods are equivalent when the growth is much smaller than the level of the series;
in this situation, it is probably difficult to decipher whether the trend is additive or
multiplicative. We also found that for series with growth much smaller than the level, simple
exponential smoothing produced forecasts reasonably similar to the damped Holt and damped
Pegels methods. This is not surprising given that damped Holt’s and damped Pegels’ are
equivalent to simple exponential smoothing when applied to series with no growth.
4.3. Results for the Series for which φ > 1 in Generalised Holt’s
In large-scale forecasting applications, which require an automated forecasting
procedure, such as inventory control, it is common to apply the same exponential smoothing
method to each series. In view of this, there is clear value in empirical studies that compare the
performance of a number of methods across a wide variety of series, such as our analysis of the
1,428 monthly series. However, certain methods, that have little value when applied across a
variety of different series, can be very useful when selectively applied to appropriate series. In
order to investigate further the standard Pegels and new damped Pegels methods, we felt that it
would be interesting to analyse their respective performances for series for which they might be
considered particularly suitable. Pegels and Gardner clearly feel that the Pegels
method is suitable for series with strong trend.
The method selection protocol of Gardner and McKenzie provides a simple
procedure for categorising the strength of the trend component in a series. It involves calculating
the variance of the original series, the variance of the series differenced once and the variance of
the series differenced twice. If the variance of the original series is the least of the three, the
series is considered to have no trend and simple exponential smoothing is recommended; if it is
least for the series differenced just once, the series is considered to have moderate trend and
damped Holt’s is recommended; and, if it is least for the series differenced twice, the series is
considered to have strong trend in which case Holt’s should be used. However, Tashman and
Kruk found that the performance of damped Holt’s was best for the series classified by
the Gardner-McKenzie procedure as strongly trending. They also point out that the procedure
does not make a distinction between a linear and exponential trend. Unfortunately, therefore, we
cannot expect this trend classification approach to be able to identify strongly trending series for
which the Pegels and damped Pegels methods are more suitable than damped Holt’s. Indeed, we
found that the results for damped Holt’s and damped Pegels’ were similar for the 63 series, out
of the 1,428 monthly series, which were classified by the Gardner-McKenzie procedure as
strongly trending. We also found that some of the 1,428 series, which are clearly trending, are
classified by the procedure as stationary. This seems to be the result of a reasonably large degree
of variability in the original series. We agree with Tashman and Kruk that much work remains to
be done on method selection rules for exponential smoothing.
In the previous subsection, we described how the generalised Holt’s φ parameter was
larger than one for 203 of the 1,428 series. For these series, the constrained optimisation routine
derived a value of one for the damped Holt’s φ parameter. A value greater that one for the
generalised Holt’s φ parameter suggests that damped Holt’s will not be able to satisfactorily
forecast the trend in these series and that other forecasting methods may be preferable. We
investigated whether the Pegels and damped Pegels methods are more suitable for these series.
Tables 4 and 5 summarise the SMAPE and MedAPE measures, respectively, for the seven
exponential smoothing methods applied to the subset of 203 series. The most alarming finding
in Tables 4 and 5 is that generalised Holt’s performs extremely poorly. Clearly, in Tables 2 and
3, the success of this method for the other 1,225 series hid the poor performance resulting when
the φ parameter was greater than one. According to the SMAPE results in Table 4, Pegels’ is a
little better than Holt’s but the ranking is reversed for the MedAPE results in Table 5.
Comparing the damped methods, we find that damped Pegels’ comfortably outperformed
damped Holt’s for all forecast horizon categories according to the SMAPE in Table 4. The
MedAPE results in Table 5 are less impressive but damped Pegels’ was noticeably better for the
long-term.
---------- Tables 4 and 5 ----------
5. Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have introduced a new damped exponential smoothing method. The
method follows the multiplicative trend formulation of Pegels but includes an extra
parameter to dampen the projected trend. We used the 1,428 monthly time series from the M3-
Competition to compare the method to the standard Pegels method and the established
exponential smoothing methods. The performance of the standard Pegels method was similar to
that of the standard Holt method. This is an interesting result as there have been no previous
empirical studies comparing the post-sample forecasting accuracy of the standard Pegels method
with that of other exponential smoothing methods. It suggests that the assumption of a
multiplicative trend is not as dangerous as might have been expected. We found that the damped
Pegels method comfortably outperformed the standard Pegels method at all forecast horizons.
Furthermore, the new damped version of the method also slightly outperformed the popular
damped Holt method.
The generalised Holt formulation is identical to damped Holt’s except that the φ
parameter is permitted to take values greater than one. This occurred for 203 of the 1,428 series.
An optimised value greater that one for the generalised Holt’s φ parameter suggests that damped
Holt’s will not be able to satisfactorily forecast the trend in these series and that other forecasting
methods may be preferable. We investigated whether the multiplicative trend formulation of the
standard Pegels and damped Pegels methods is preferable for these series. We compared the
accuracy of these methods to the established exponential smoothing methods for the subset of
203 series. The standard Pegels method outperformed standard Holt’s according to the
Symmetric Mean APE summary error measure but not according to the Median APE. Of all the
seven methods considered, the best results were achieved for both error measures using the
damped Pegels method. This suggests that the damped Pegels method could at least be useful as
an alternative to the popular and successful damped Holt method for series for which the latter
seems unsuitable. In view of this, there would seem to be strong appeal in including the damped
Pegels method as a candidate in automated method selection approaches, such as that of
Hyndman et al. . In conclusion, we feel that the results for the 1,428 series and for the
subset of 203 suggest that the new damped Pegels method is a considerable improvement on the
standard Pegels method, and that it is a potentially useful alternative to the established
exponential smoothing methods.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the helpful comments of two anonymous referees.
In this appendix, we show that if the growth, Tt, in the series is much less than the
level of the series, St, the forecasts from the damped Holt and damped Pegels methods will be
very similar. If we write the growth rate as
, expression (10) in the damped Pegels
formulation becomes
If the growth, Tt-1, is less than the level, St-1, we can expand this expression to give
Comparing this with the damped Holt smoothing equation for the local level in expression
(4), we can see that the two expressions are approximately the same if Tt-1 « St-1.
If we write
, expression (11) of the damped Pegels formulation becomes
Rearranging this, we get
If the growth, Tt-1, is less than the level, St-1, we can expand this expression to give
Comparing this with the damped Holt smoothing equation for the local growth in expression
(5), we can see that the two expressions are approximately the same if Tt-1 « St-1. Note that the
condition Tt-1 « St-1 implies that St ≈ St-1.
Substituting
in expression (12) of the damped Pegels formulation, we get
If the growth, Tt, is less than the level, St, we can expand this expression to give
Comparing this with the damped Holt forecast function in expression (6), we can see that the
two expressions are approximately the same if Tt « St.