Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
Stephen Merity
 
Caiming Xiong
 
James Bradbury
 
Richard Socher
 
MetaMind - A Salesforce Company, Palo Alto, CA, USA
Recent neural network sequence models with
softmax classiﬁers have achieved their best language modeling performance only with very
large hidden states and large vocabularies. Even
then they struggle to predict rare or unseen words
even if the context makes the prediction unambiguous.
We introduce the pointer sentinel
mixture architecture for neural sequence models
which has the ability to either reproduce a word
from the recent context or produce a word from a
standard softmax classiﬁer. Our pointer sentinel-
LSTM model achieves state of the art language
modeling performance on the Penn Treebank
(70.9 perplexity) while using far fewer parameters than a standard softmax LSTM. In order to
evaluate how well language models can exploit
longer contexts and deal with more realistic vocabularies and larger corpora we also introduce
the freely available WikiText corpus.1
1. Introduction
A major difﬁculty in language modeling is learning when
to predict speciﬁc words from the immediate context. For
instance, imagine a new person is introduced and two paragraphs later the context would allow one to very accurately
predict this person’s name as the next word. For standard
neural sequence models to predict this name, they would
have to encode the name, store it for many time steps in
their hidden state, and then decode it when appropriate. As
the hidden state is limited in capacity and the optimization
of such models suffer from the vanishing gradient problem, this is a lossy operation when performed over many
timesteps. This is especially true for rare words.
Models with soft attention or memory components have
been proposed to help deal with this challenge, aiming to
allow for the retrieval and use of relevant previous hidden
1Available for download at the WikiText dataset site
p(Yellen) = g pvocab(Yellen) + (1 −g) pptr(Yellen)
p(Yellen) = g pvocab(Yellen) + (1 −g) pptr(Yellen)
pvocab(Yellen)
pvocab(Yellen)
pptr(Yellen)
pptr(Yellen)
Figure 1. Illustration of the pointer sentinel-RNN mixture model.
g is the mixture gate which uses the sentinel to dictate how much
probability mass to give to the vocabulary.
states, in effect increasing hidden state capacity and providing a path for gradients not tied to timesteps. Even with
attention, the standard softmax classiﬁer that is being used
in these models often struggles to correctly predict rare or
previously unknown words.
Pointer networks provide one potential solution for rare and out of vocabulary (OoV) words as
a pointer network uses attention to select an element from
the input as output. This allows it to produce previously
unseen input tokens. While pointer networks improve performance on rare words and long-term dependencies they
are unable to select words that do not exist in the input.
We introduce a mixture model, illustrated in Fig. 1, that
combines the advantages of standard softmax classiﬁers
with those of a pointer component for effective and efﬁcient language modeling. Rather than relying on the RNN
hidden state to decide when to use the pointer, as in the recent work of G¨ulc¸ehre et al. , we allow the pointer
component itself to decide when to use the softmax vocabulary through a sentinel. The model improves the state of
the art perplexity on the Penn Treebank. Since this commonly used dataset is small and no other freely available
alternative exists that allows for learning long range dependencies, we also introduce a new benchmark dataset for
language modeling called WikiText.
 
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
RNN Distribution
pvocab(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
pvocab(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
Pointer Distribution
pptr(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
pptr(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
Output Distribution
p(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
p(yN|w1, . . . , wN−1)
Mixture gate g
Figure 2. Visualization of the pointer sentinel-RNN mixture model. The query, produced from applying an MLP to the last output of the
RNN, is used by the pointer network to identify likely matching words from the past. The ⊙nodes are inner products between the query
and the RNN hidden states. If the pointer component is not conﬁdent, probability mass can be directed to the RNN by increasing the
value of the mixture gate g via the sentinel, seen in grey. If g = 1 then only the RNN is used. If g = 0 then only the pointer is used.
2. The Pointer Sentinel for Language
Given a sequence of words w1, . . . , wN−1, our task is to
predict the next word wN.
2.1. The softmax-RNN Component
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have seen widespread
use for language modeling due to
their ability to, at least in theory, retain long term dependencies. RNNs employ the chain rule to factorize the joint
probabilities over a sequence of tokens: p(w1, . . . , wN) =
i=1 p(wi|w1, . . . , wi−1). More precisely, at each time
step i, we compute the RNN hidden state hi according to
the previous hidden state hi−1 and the input xi such that
hi = RNN(xi, hi−1). When all the N −1 words have
been processed by the RNN, the ﬁnal state hN−1 is fed
into a softmax layer which computes the probability over
a vocabulary of possible words:
pvocab(w) = softmax(UhN−1),
where pvocab ∈RV , U ∈RV ×H, H is the hidden size, and
V the vocabulary size. RNNs can suffer from the vanishing
gradient problem. The LSTM architecture has been proposed to deal with this by
updating the hidden state according to a set of gates. Our
work focuses on the LSTM but can be applied to any RNN
architecture that ends in a vocabulary softmax.
2.2. The Pointer Network Component
In this section, we propose a modiﬁcation to pointer networks for language modeling. To predict the next word in
the sequence, a pointer network would select the member
of the input sequence p(w1, . . . , wN−1) with the maximal
attention score as the output.
The simplest way to compute an attention score for a speciﬁc hidden state is an inner product with all the past hidden states h, with each hidden state hi ∈RH. However, if
we want to compute such a score for the most recent word
(since this word may be repeated), we need to include the
last hidden state itself in this inner product. Taking the inner product of a vector with itself results in the vector’s
magnitude squared, meaning the attention scores would be
strongly biased towards the most recent word. Hence we
project the current hidden state to a query vector q ﬁrst. To
produce the query q we compute
q = tanh(WhN−1 + b),
where W ∈RH×H, b ∈RH, and q ∈RH. To generate the
pointer attention scores, we compute the match between the
previous RNN output states hi and the query q by taking the
inner product, followed by a softmax activation function to
obtain a probability distribution:
zi = qT hi,
a = softmax(z),
where z ∈RL, a ∈RL, and L is the total number of hidden
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
states. The probability mass assigned to a given word is the
sum of the probability mass given to all token positions
where the given word appears:
where I(w, x) results in all positions of the word w in the
input x and pptr ∈RV .
This technique, referred to as
pointer sum attention, has been used for question answering .
Given the length of the documents used in language modeling, it may not be feasible for the pointer network to evaluate an attention score for all the words back to the beginning of the dataset. Instead, we may elect to maintain only a
window of the L most recent words for the pointer to match
against. The length L of the window is a hyperparameter
that can be tuned on a held out dataset or by empirically analyzing how frequently a word at position t appears within
the last L words.
To illustrate the advantages of this approach, consider a
long article featuring two sentences President Obama discussed the economy and President Obama then ﬂew to
Prague. If the query was Which President is the article
about?, probability mass could be applied to Obama in
either sentence. If the question was instead Who ﬂew to
Prague?, only the latter occurrence of Obama provides the
proper context. The attention sum model ensures that, as
long as the entire attention probability mass is distributed
on the occurrences of Obama, the pointer network can
achieve zero loss.
This ﬂexibility provides supervision
without forcing the model to put mass on supervision signals that may be incorrect or lack proper context. This feature becomes an important component in the pointer sentinel mixture model.
2.3. The Pointer Sentinel Mixture Model
While pointer networks have proven to be effective, they
cannot predict output words that are not present in the input, a common scenario in language modeling. We propose
to resolve this by using a mixture model that combines a
standard softmax with a pointer.
Our mixture model has two base distributions: the softmax
vocabulary of the RNN output and the positional vocabulary of the pointer model. We refer to these as the RNN
component and the pointer component respectively.
combine the two base distributions, we use a gating function g = p(zi = k|xi) where zi is the latent variable stating
which base distribution the data point belongs to. As we
only have two base distributions, g can produce a scalar in
the range . A value of 0 implies that only the pointer
is used and 1 means only the softmax-RNN is used.
p(yi|xi) = g pvocab(yi|xi) + (1 −g) pptr(yi|xi).
While the models could be entirely separate, we re-use
many of the parameters for the softmax-RNN and pointer
components. This sharing minimizes the total number of
parameters in the model and capitalizes on the pointer network’s supervision for the RNN component.
2.4. Details of the Gating Function
To compute the new pointer sentinel gate g, we modify the
pointer component. In particular, we add an additional element to z, the vector of attention scores as deﬁned in Eq. 3.
This element is computed using an inner product between
the query and the sentinel2 vector s ∈RH. This change
can be summarized by changing Eq. 4 to:
a = softmax
We deﬁne a ∈RV +1 to be the attention distribution over
both the words in the pointer window as well as the sentinel
state. We interpret the last element of this vector to be the
gate value: g = a[V + 1].
Any probability mass assigned to g is given to the standard softmax vocabulary of the RNN. The ﬁnal updated,
normalized pointer probability over the vocabulary in the
window then becomes:
pptr(yi|xi) =
1 −g a[1 : V ],
where we denoted [1 : V ] to mean the ﬁrst V elements of
the vector. The ﬁnal mixture model is the same as Eq. 6 but
with the updated Eq. 8 for the pointer probability.
This setup encourages the model to have both components
compete: use pointers whenever possible and back-off to
the standard softmax otherwise. This competition, in particular, was crucial to obtain our best model. By integrating
the gating function directly into the pointer computation, it
is inﬂuenced by both the RNN hidden state and the pointer
window’s hidden states.
2.5. Motivation for the Sentinel as Gating Function
To make the best decision possible regarding which component to use the gating function must have as much context
as possible. As we increase both the number of timesteps
and the window of words for the pointer component to consider, the RNN hidden state by itself isn’t guaranteed to
2A sentinel value is inserted at the end of a search space in order to ensure a search algorithm terminates if no matching item is
found. Our sentinel value terminates the pointer search space and
distributes the rest of the probability mass to the RNN vocabulary.
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
accurately recall the identity or order of words it has recently seen . This is an obvious limitation
of encoding a variable length sequence into a ﬁxed dimensionality vector.
In our task, where we may want a pointer window where
the length L is in the hundreds, accurately modeling all of
this information within the RNN hidden state is impractical. The position of speciﬁc words is also a vital feature
as relevant words eventually fall out of the pointer component’s window. To correctly model this would require the
RNN hidden state to store both the identity and position of
each word in the pointer window. This is far beyond what
the ﬁxed dimensionality hidden state of an RNN is able to
accurately capture.
For this reason, we integrate the gating function directly
into the pointer network by use of the sentinel. The decision to back-off to the softmax vocabulary is then informed
by both the query q, generated using the RNN hidden state
hN−1, and from the contents of the hidden states in the
pointer window itself. This allows the model to accurately
query what hidden states are contained in the pointer window and avoid having to maintain state for when a word
may have fallen out of the pointer window.
2.6. Pointer Sentinel Loss Function
cross-entropy
yij log p(yij|xi), where ˆyi is a one hot encoding of the correct output. During training, as ˆyi is one hot,
only a single mixed probability p(yij) must be computed
for calculating the loss.
This can result in a far more
efﬁcient GPU implementation. At prediction time, when
we want all values for p(yi|xi), a maximum of L word
probabilities must be mixed, as there is a maximum of L
unique words in the pointer window of length L.
mixing can occur on the CPU where random access
indexing is more efﬁcient than the GPU.
Following the pointer sum attention network, the aim is to
place probability mass from the attention mechanism on the
correct output ˆyi if it exists in the input. In the case of our
mixture model the pointer loss instead becomes:
where I(y, x) results in all positions of the correct output
y in the input x. The gate g may be assigned all probability mass if, for instance, the correct output ˆyi exists only
in the softmax-RNN vocabulary. Furthermore, there is no
penalty if the model places the entire probability mass, on
any of the instances of the correct word in the input window. If the pointer component places the entirety of the
probability mass on the gate g, the pointer network incurs
no penalty and the loss is entirely determined by the loss of
the softmax-RNN component.
2.7. Parameters and Computation Time
The pointer sentinel-LSTM mixture model results in a
relatively minor increase in parameters and computation
time, especially when compared to the size of the models required to achieve similar performance using standard
LSTM models.
The only two additional parameters required by the model
are those required for computing q, speciﬁcally W
RH×H and b ∈RH, and the sentinel vector embedding,
s ∈RH. This is independent of the depth of the RNN as
the the pointer component only interacts with the output of
the ﬁnal RNN layer. The additional H2 + 2H parameters
are minor compared to a single LSTM layer’s 8H2 + 4H
parameters. Most state of the art models also require multiple LSTM layers.
In terms of additional computation, a pointer sentinel-
LSTM of window size L only requires computing the
query q (a linear layer with tanh activation), a total of L
parallelizable inner product calculations, and the attention
scores for the L resulting scalars via the softmax function.
3. Related Work
Considerable research has been dedicated to the task of language modeling, from traditional machine learning techniques such as n-grams to neural sequence models in deep
Mixture models composed of various knowledge sources
have been proposed in the past for language modeling.
Rosenfeld uses a maximum entropy model to combine a variety of information sources to improve language
modeling on news text and speech.
These information
sources include complex overlapping n-gram distributions
and n-gram caches that aim to capture rare words. The ngram cache could be considered similar in some ways to
our model’s pointer network, where rare or contextually
relevant words are stored for later use.
Beyond n-grams, neural sequence models such as recurrent
neural networks have been shown to achieve state of the art
results . A variety of RNN regularization methods have been explored, including a number of
dropout variations which
prevent overﬁtting of complex LSTM language models.
Other work has improved language modeling performance
by modifying the RNN architecture to better handle increased recurrence depth .
In order to increase capacity and minimize the impact of
vanishing gradients, some language and translation mod-
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
Penn Treebank
WikiText-2
WikiText-103
103,227,021
Vocab size
Table 1. Statistics of the Penn Treebank, WikiText-2, and WikiText-103. The out of vocabulary (OoV) rate notes what percentage of
tokens have been replaced by an ⟨unk⟩token. The token count includes newlines which add to the structure of the WikiText datasets.
els have also added a soft attention or memory component . These mechanisms allow for the retrieval and
use of relevant previous hidden states. Soft attention mechanisms need to ﬁrst encode the relevant word into a state
vector and then decode it again, even if the output word
is identical to the input word used to compute that hidden state or memory. A drawback to soft attention is that
if, for instance, January and March are both equally attended candidates, the attention mechanism may blend the
two vectors, resulting in a context vector closest to February . Even with attention, the standard
softmax classiﬁer being used in these models often struggles to correctly predict rare or previously unknown words.
Attention-based pointer mechanisms were introduced in
Vinyals et al. where the pointer network is able
to select elements from the input as output. In the above
example, only January or March would be available as
options, as February does not appear in the input. The
use of pointer networks have been shown to help with
geometric problems , code generation , summarization , question answering . While pointer networks improve performance on
rare words and long-term dependencies they are unable to
select words that do not exist in the input.
G¨ulc¸ehre et al. introduce a pointer softmax model
that can generate output from either the vocabulary
softmax of an RNN or the location softmax of the pointer
Not only does this allow for producing OoV
words which are not in the input, the pointer softmax
model is able to better deal with rare and unknown words
than a model only featuring an RNN softmax. Rather than
constructing a mixture model as in our work, they use a
switching network to decide which component to use. For
neural machine translation, the switching network is conditioned on the representation of the context of the source text
and the hidden state of the decoder. The pointer network is
not used as a source of information for switching network
as in our model. The pointer and RNN softmax are scaled
according to the switching network and the word or location with the highest ﬁnal attention score is selected for output. Although this approach uses both a pointer and RNN
component, it is not a mixture model and does not combine
the probabilities for a word if it occurs in both the pointer
location softmax and the RNN vocabulary softmax. In our
model the word probability is a mix of both the RNN and
pointer components, allowing for better predictions when
the context may be ambiguous.
Extending this concept further, the latent predictor network
 generates an output sequence conditioned on an arbitrary number of base models where each
base model may have differing granularity. In their task of
code generation, the output could be produced one character at a time using a standard softmax or instead copy entire
words from referenced text ﬁelds using a pointer network.
As opposed to G¨ulc¸ehre et al. , all states which produce the same output are merged by summing their probabilities. Their model however requires a more complex
training process involving the forward-backward algorithm
for Semi-Markov models to prevent an exponential explosion in potential paths.
4. WikiText - A Benchmark for Language
We ﬁrst describe the most commonly used language modeling dataset and its pre-processing in order to then motivate
the need for a new benchmark dataset.
4.1. Penn Treebank
In order to compare our model to the many recent neural
language models, we conduct word-level prediction experiments on the Penn Treebank (PTB) dataset , pre-processed by Mikolov et al. . The dataset
consists of 929k training words, 73k validation words, and
82k test words. As part of the pre-processing performed by
Mikolov et al. , words were lower-cased, numbers
were replaced with N, newlines were replaced with ⟨eos⟩,
and all other punctuation was removed. The vocabulary is
the most frequent 10k words with the rest of the tokens be-
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
ing replaced by an ⟨unk⟩token. For full statistics, refer to
4.2. Reasons for a New Dataset
While the processed version of the PTB above has been
frequently used for language modeling, it has many limitations. The tokens in PTB are all lower case, stripped of
any punctuation, and limited to a vocabulary of only 10k
words. These limitations mean that the PTB is unrealistic
for real language use, especially when far larger vocabularies with many rare words are involved. Fig. 3 illustrates
this using a Zipﬁan plot over the training partition of the
PTB. The curve stops abruptly when hitting the 10k vocabulary. Given that accurately predicting rare words, such as
named entities, is an important task for many applications,
the lack of a long tail for the vocabulary is problematic.
Other larger scale language modeling datasets exist. Unfortunately, they either have restrictive licensing which prevents widespread use or have randomized sentence ordering which is unrealistic for most language use and prevents the effective learning and evaluation of longer term dependencies. Hence, we constructed
a language modeling dataset using text extracted from
Wikipedia and will make this available to the community.
4.3. Construction and Pre-processing
We selected articles only ﬁtting the Good or Featured article criteria speciﬁed by editors on Wikipedia. These articles have been reviewed by humans and are considered
well written, factually accurate, broad in coverage, neutral
in point of view, and stable. This resulted in 23,805 Good
articles and 4,790 Featured articles. The text for each article was extracted using the Wikipedia API. Extracting the
raw text from Wikipedia mark-up is nontrivial due to the
large number of macros in use. These macros are used
extensively and include metric conversion, abbreviations,
language notation, and date handling.
Once extracted, speciﬁc sections which primarily featured
lists were removed by default. Other minor bugs, such as
sort keys and Edit buttons that leaked in from the HTML,
were also removed.
Mathematical formulae and LATEX
code, were replaced with ⟨formula⟩tokens. Normalization and tokenization were performed using the Moses tokenizer , slightly augmented to further
split numbers (8,600 →8 @,@ 600) and with some additional minor ﬁxes. Following Chelba et al. a vocabulary was constructed by discarding all words with a count
below 3. Words outside of the vocabulary were mapped to
the ⟨unk⟩token, also a part of the vocabulary.
To ensure the dataset is immediately usable by existing language modeling tools, we have provided the dataset in the
Algorithm 1 Calculate truncated BPTT where every k1
timesteps we run back propagation for k2 timesteps
for t = 1 to t = T do
Run the RNN for one step, computing ht and zt
if t divides k1 then
Run BPTT from t down to t −k2
same format and following the same conventions as that of
the PTB dataset above.
4.4. Statistics
The full WikiText dataset is over 103 million words in size,
a hundred times larger than the PTB. It is also a tenth the
size of the One Billion Word Benchmark , one of the largest publicly available language modeling benchmarks, whilst consisting of articles that allow
for the capture and usage of longer term dependencies as
might be found in many real world tasks.
The dataset is available in two different sizes: WikiText-2
and WikiText-103. Both feature punctuation, original casing, a larger vocabulary, and numbers. WikiText-2 is two
times the size of the Penn Treebank dataset. WikiText-103
features all extracted articles. Both datasets use the same
articles for validation and testing with the only difference
being the vocabularies. For full statistics, refer to Table 1.
5. Experiments
5.1. Training Details
As the pointer sentinel mixture model uses the outputs of
the RNN from up to L timesteps back, this presents a challenge for training. If we do not regenerate the stale historical outputs of the RNN when we update the gradients,
backpropagation through these stale outputs may result in
incorrect gradient updates. If we do regenerate all stale outputs of the RNN, the training process is far slower. As we
can make no theoretical guarantees on the impact of stale
outputs on gradient updates, we opt to regenerate the window of RNN outputs used by the pointer component after
each gradient update.
We also use truncated backpropagation through time
(BPTT) in a different manner to many other RNN language
models. Truncated BPTT allows for practical time-efﬁcient
training of RNN models but has fundamental trade-offs that
are rarely discussed.
For running truncated BPTT, BPTT is run for k2 timesteps
every k1 timesteps, as seen in Algorithm 1. For many RNN
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
Figure 3. Zipﬁan plot over the training partition in Penn Treebank and WikiText-2 datasets. Notice the severe drop on the Penn Treebank
when the vocabulary hits 104. Two thirds of the vocabulary in WikiText-2 are past the vocabulary cut-off of the Penn Treebank.
language modeling training schemes, k1 = k2, meaning
that every k timesteps truncated BPTT is performed for the
k previous timesteps. This results in only a single RNN
output receiving backpropagation for k timesteps, with the
other extreme being that the ﬁrst token receives backpropagation for 0 timesteps. This issue is compounded by the
fact that most language modeling code split the data temporally such that the boundaries are always the same. As
such, most words in the training data will never experience
a full backpropagation for k timesteps.
In our task, the pointer component always looks L
timesteps into the past if L past timesteps are available. We
select k1 = 1 and k2 = L such that for each timestep we
perform backpropagation for L timesteps and advance one
timestep at a time. Only the loss for the ﬁnal predicted
word is used for backpropagation through the window.
5.2. Model Details
Our experimental setup reﬂects that of Zaremba et al.
 and Gal .
We increased the number of
timesteps used during training from 35 to 100, matching
the length of the window L. Batch size was increased to
32 from 20. We also halve the learning rate when validation perplexity is worse than the previous iteration, stopping training when validation perplexity fails to improve
for three epochs or when 64 epochs are reached. The gradients are rescaled if their global norm exceeds 1 .3 We evaluate the medium model conﬁguration which features a hidden size of H = 650 and a two
layer LSTM. We compare against the large model conﬁgu-
3The highly aggressive clipping is likely due to the increased
BPTT length. Even with such clipping early batches may experience excessively high perplexity, though this settles rapidly.
ration which features a hidden size of 1500 and a two layer
We produce results for two model types, an LSTM model
that uses dropout regularization and the pointer sentinel-
LSTM model. The variants of dropout used were zoneout and variational inference based
dropout . Zoneout, which stochastically forces
some recurrent units to maintain their previous values, was
used for the recurrent connections within the LSTM. Variational inference based dropout, where the dropout mask for
a layer is locked across timesteps, was used on the input to
each RNN layer and also on the output of the ﬁnal RNN
layer. We used a value of 0.5 for both dropout connections.
5.3. Comparison over Penn Treebank
Table 2 compares the pointer sentinel-LSTM to a variety of other models on the Penn Treebank dataset. The
pointer sentinel-LSTM achieves the lowest perplexity, followed by the recent Recurrent Highway Networks . The medium pointer sentinel-LSTM model
also achieves lower perplexity than the large LSTM models. Note that the best performing large variational LSTM
model uses computationally intensive Monte Carlo (MC)
dropout averaging. Monte Carlo dropout averaging is a
general improvement for any sequence model that uses
dropout but comes at a greatly increased test time cost.
In Gal it requires rerunning the test model with
1000 different dropout masks. The pointer sentinel-LSTM
is able to achieve these results with far fewer parameters
than other models with comparable performance, speciﬁcally with less than a third the parameters used in the large
variational LSTM models.
We also test a variational LSTM that uses zoneout, which
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
serves as the RNN component of our pointer sentinel-
LSTM mixture. This variational LSTM model performs
BPTT for the same length L as the pointer sentinel-LSTM,
where L = 100 timesteps. The results for this model ablation are worse than that of Gal ’s variational LSTM
without Monte Carlo dropout averaging.
5.4. Comparison over WikiText-2
As WikiText-2 is being introduced in this dataset, there are
no existing baselines. We provide two baselines to compare
the pointer sentinel-LSTM against: our variational LSTM
using zoneout and the medium variational LSTM used in
Gal .4 Attempts to run the Gal large model
variant, a two layer LSTM with hidden size 1500, resulted
in out of memory errors on a 12GB K80 GPU, likely due
to the increased vocabulary size. We chose the best hyperparameters from PTB experiments for all models.
Table 3 shows a similar gain made by the pointer sentinel-
LSTM over the variational LSTM models. The variational
LSTM from Gal again beats out the variational
LSTM used as a base for our experiments.
6. Analysis
6.1. Impact on Rare Words
A hypothesis as to why the pointer sentinel-LSTM can outperform an LSTM is that the pointer component allows the
model to effectively reproduce rare words. An RNN may
be able to better use the hidden state capacity by deferring
to the pointer component. The pointer component may also
allow for a sharper selection of a single word than may be
possible using only the softmax.
Figure 4 shows the improvement of perplexity when comparing the LSTM to the pointer sentinel-LSTM with words
split across buckets according to frequency. It shows that
the pointer sentinel-LSTM has stronger improvements as
words become rarer. Even on the Penn Treebank, where
there is a relative absence of rare words due to only selecting the most frequent 10k words, we can see the pointer
sentinel-LSTM mixture model provides a direct beneﬁt.
While the improvements are largest on rare words, we can
see that the pointer sentinel-LSTM is still helpful on relatively frequent words. This may be the pointer component
directly selecting the word or through the pointer supervision signal improving the RNN by allowing gradients to
ﬂow directly to other occurrences of the word in that window.
4 
Word buckets of equal size (frequent words on left)
Mean difference in log perplexity (higher = better)
Figure 4. Mean difference in log perplexity on PTB when using
the pointer sentinel-LSTM compared to the LSTM model. Words
were sorted by frequency and split into equal sized buckets.
6.2. Qualitative Analysis of Pointer Usage
In a qualitative analysis, we visualized the gate use and
pointer attention for a variety of examples in the validation
set, focusing on predictions where the gate primarily used
the pointer component. These visualizations are available
in the supplementary material.
As expected, the pointer component is heavily used for rare
names such as Seidman (23 times in training), Iverson (7
times in training), and Rosenthal (3 times in training).
The pointer component was also heavily used when it came
to other named entity names such as companies like Honeywell (8 times in training) and Integrated (41 times in training, though due to lowercasing of words this includes integrated circuits, fully integrated, and other generic usage).
Surprisingly, the pointer component was also used for
many frequent tokens. For selecting the unit of measurement (tons, kilograms, ...) or the short scale of numbers
(thousands, millions, billions, ...), the pointer would refer
to previous recent usage. This is to be expected, especially
when phrases are of the form increased from N tons to N
tons. The model can even be found relying on a mixture of
the softmax and the pointer for predicting certain frequent
verbs such as said.
Finally, the pointer component can be seen pointing to
words at the very end of the 100 word window (position
97), a far longer horizon than the 35 steps that most language models truncate their backpropagation training to.
This illustrates why the gating function must be integrated
into the pointer component. If the gating function could
only use the RNN hidden state, it would need to be wary
of words that were near the tail of the pointer, especially
if it was not able to accurately track exactly how long it
Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models
Parameters
Validation
Mikolov & Zweig - KN-5
Mikolov & Zweig - KN5 + cache
Mikolov & Zweig - RNN
Mikolov & Zweig - RNN-LDA
Mikolov & Zweig - RNN-LDA + KN-5 + cache
Pascanu et al. - Deep RNN
Cheng et al. - Sum-Prod Net
Zaremba et al. - LSTM (medium)
Zaremba et al. - LSTM (large)
Gal - Variational LSTM (medium, untied)
81.9 ± 0.2
79.7 ± 0.1
Gal - Variational LSTM (medium, untied, MC)
78.6 ± 0.1
Gal - Variational LSTM (large, untied)
77.9 ± 0.3
75.2 ± 0.2
Gal - Variational LSTM (large, untied, MC)
73.4 ± 0.0
Kim et al. - CharCNN
Zilly et al. - Variational RHN
Zoneout + Variational LSTM (medium)
Pointer Sentinel-LSTM (medium)
Table 2. Single model perplexity on validation and test sets for the Penn Treebank language modeling task. For our models and the
models of Zaremba et al. and Gal , medium and large refer to a 650 and 1500 units two layer LSTM respectively. The
medium pointer sentinel-LSTM model achieves lower perplexity than the large LSTM model of Gal while using a third of the
parameters and without using the computationally expensive Monte Carlo (MC) dropout averaging at test time. Parameter numbers with
‡ are estimates based upon our understanding of the model and with reference to Kim et al. .
Parameters
Validation
Variational LSTM implementation from Gal 
Zoneout + Variational LSTM
Pointer Sentinel-LSTM
Table 3. Single model perplexity on validation and test sets for the WikiText-2 language modeling task. All compared models use a two
layer LSTM with a hidden size of 650 and the same hyperparameters as the best performing Penn Treebank model.
was since seeing a word. By integrating the gating function into the pointer component, we avoid the RNN hidden
state having to maintain this intensive bookkeeping.
7. Conclusion
We introduced the pointer sentinel mixture model and the
WikiText language modeling dataset. This model achieves
state of the art results in language modeling over the Penn
Treebank while using few additional parameters and little
additional computational complexity at prediction time.
We have also motivated the need to move from Penn Treebank to a new language modeling dataset for long range
dependencies, providing WikiText-2 and WikiText-103 as
potential options. We hope this new dataset can serve as a
platform to improve handling of rare words and the usage
of long term dependencies in language modeling.