THE BIG CHALLENGES
OF BIG DATA
As they grapple with increasingly large data sets,
biologists and computer scientists uncork new bottlenecks.
BY VIVIEN MARX
iologists are joining the big-data club.
With the advent of high-throughput
genomics, life scientists are starting to
grapple with massive data sets, encountering
challenges with handling, processing and mov­
ing information that were once the domain of
astronomers and high-energy physicists1.
With every passing year, they turn more
often to big data to probe everything from
the regulation of genes and the evolution of
genomes to why coastal algae bloom, what
microbes dwell where in human body cavities
and how the genetic make-up of different can­
cers influences how cancer patients fare2. The
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in
Hinxton, UK, part of the European Molecular
Biology Laboratory and one of the world’s larg­
est biology-data repositories, currently stores
20 petabytes (1 petabyte is 1015 bytes) of data
and back-ups about genes, proteins and small
molecules. Genomic data account for 2 peta­
bytes of that, a number that more than doubles
every year3 (see ‘Data explosion’).
This data pile is just one-tenth the size of the
data store at CERN, Europe’s particle-physics
laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland. Every
year, particle-collision events in CERN’s Large
Hadron Collider generate around 15 petabytes
of data — the equivalent of about 4 million
high-definition feature-length films. But the
EBI and institutes like it face similar datawrangling challenges to those at CERN, says
Ewan Birney, associate director of the EBI. He
and his colleagues now regularly meet with
organizations such as CERN and the European
Space Agency (ESA) in Paris to swap lessons
about data storage, analysis and sharing.
All labs need to manipulate data to yield
research answers. As prices drop for highthroughput instruments such as automated
Extremely powerful computers are needed to help biologists to handle big-data traffic jams.
TECHNOLOGY FEATURE
1 3 J U N E 2 0 1 3 | V O L 4 9 8 | N A T U R E | 2 5 5
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
genome sequencers, small biology labs can
become big-data generators. And even labs
without such instruments can become bigdata users by accessing terabytes (1012 bytes)
of data from public repositories at the EBI or
the US National Center for Biotechnology
Information in Bethesda, Maryland. Each
day last year, the EBI received about 9 mil­
lion online requests to query its data, a 60%
increase over 2011.
Biology data mining has challenges all of
its own, says Birney. Biological data are much
more heterogeneous than those in physics.
They stem from a wide range of experiments
that spit out many types of information, such
as genetic sequences, interactions of proteins
or findings in medical records. The complexity
is daunting, says Lawrence Hunter, a compu­
tational biologist at the University of Colo­
rado Denver. “Getting the most from the data
requires interpreting them in light of all the
relevant prior knowledge,” he says.
That means scientists have to store large data
sets, and analyse, compare and share them —
not simple tasks. Even a single sequenced
human genome is around 140 gigabytes in size.
Comparing human genomes takes more than
a personal computer and online file-sharing
applications such as DropBox.
In an ongoing study, Arend Sidow, a com­
putational biologist at Stanford University in
California, and his team are looking at specific
changes in the genome sequences of tumours
from people with breast cancer. They wanted
to compare their data with the thousands of
other published breast-cancer genomes and
look for similar patterns in the scores of dif­
ferent cancer types. But that is a tall order:
downloading the data is time-consuming,
and researchers must be sure that their com­
putational infrastructure and software tools
are up to the task. “If I could, I would routinely
look at all sequenced cancer genomes,” says
Sidow. “With the current infrastructure, that’s
impossible.”
In 2009, Sidow co-founded a company
called DNAnexus in Mountain View, Califor­
nia, to help with large-scale genetic analyses.
Numerous other commercial and academic
efforts also address the infrastructure needs of
big-data biology. With the new types of data
traffic jam honking for attention, “we now have
non-trivial engineering problems”, says Birney,
LIFE OF THE DATA-RICH
Storing and interpreting big data takes both
real and virtual bricks and mortar. On the EBI
campus, for example, construction is under
way to house the technical command centre
of ELIXIR, a project to help scientists across
Europe safeguard and share their data, and to
support existing resources such as databases
and computing facilities in individual coun­
tries. Whereas CERN has one super­collider
producing data in one location, biological
research generating high volumes of data is
distributed across many labs — highlighting
the need to share resources.
Much of the construction in big-data biol­
ogy is virtual, focused on cloud computing
— in which data and software are situated in
huge, off-site centres that users can access on
demand, so that they do not need to buy their
own hardware and maintain it on site. Labs that
do have their own hardware can supplement it
with the cloud and use both as needed. They
can create virtual spaces for data, software and
results that anyone can access, or they can lock
the spaces up behind a firewall so that only a
select group of collaborators can get to them.
Working with the CSC — IT Center for Sci­
ence in Espoo, Finland, a government-run
high-performance computing centre, the
EBI is developing Embassy Cloud, a cloudcomputing component for ELIXIR that offers
secure data-analysis environments and is cur­
rently in its pilot phase. External organizations
can, for example, run data-driven experiments
in the EBI’s computational environment, close
to the data they need. They can also download
data to compare with their own.
The idea is to broaden access to computing
power, says Birney. A researcher in the Czech
Republic, for example, might have an idea
about how to reprocess cancer data to help the
hunt for cancer drugs. If he or she lacks the
computational equipment to develop it, he or
she might not even try. But access to a highpowered cloud allows “ideas to come from any
place”, says Birney.
Even at the EBI, many scientists access
databases and software tools on the Web
and through clouds. “People rarely work on
straight hardware anymore,” says Birney. One
heavily used resource is the Ensembl Genome
Browser, run jointly by the EBI and the Well­
come Trust Sanger Institute in Hinxton. Life
scientists use it to search through, down­
load and analyse genomes from armadillo to
zebrafish. The main Ensembl site is based on
hardware in the United Kingdom, but when
users in the United States and Japan had dif­
ficulty accessing the data quickly, the EBI
resolved the bottleneck by hosting mirror
sites at three of the many remote data centres
that are part of Amazon Web Services’ Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2). Amazon’s data centres
are geographically closer to the users than the
EBI base, giving researchers quicker access to
the information they need.
More clouds are coming. Together with
CERN and ESA, the EBI is building a cloudbased infrastructure called Helix Nebula
— The Science Cloud. Also involved are infor­
mation-technology
companies such
as Atos in Bezons,
France; CGI in Mon­
treal, Canada; SixSq
in Geneva; and T-Sys­
tems in Frankfurt,
Cloud computing is
particularly attractive
in an era of reduced
research funding, says Hunter, because cloud
users do not need to finance or maintain hard­
ware. In addition to academic cloud projects,
scientists can choose from many commercial
providers, such as Rackspace, headquartered
in San Antonio, Texas, or VMware in Palo
Alto, California, as well as larger companies
including Amazon, headquartered in Seattle,
Washington, IBM in Armonk, New York, or
Microsoft in Redmond, Washington.
BIG-DATA PARKING
Clouds are a solution, but they also throw
up fresh challenges. Ironically, their prolif­
eration can cause a bottleneck if data end
up parked on several clouds and thus still
need to be moved to be shared. And using
clouds means entrusting valuable data to a
distant service provider who may be subject
to power outages or other disruptions. “I use
cloud services for many things, but always
keep a local copy of scientifically important
data and software,” says Hunter. Scientists
experiment with different constellations to
DATA EXPLOSION
The amount of genetic sequencing data stored
at the European Bioinformatics Institute takes
less than a year to double in size.
Sequencers begin
giving flurries of data
Andreas Sundquist says amounts of data are now
larger than the tools used to analyse them.
SOURCE: EMBL–EBI
“If I could, I
would routinely
look at all
cancer genomes.
With the current
infrastructure,
impossible.”
1 3 J U N E 2 0 1 3 | V O L 4 9 8 | N A T U R E | 2 5 7
BIG DATA TECHNOLOGY
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
suit their needs and trust levels.
Most researchers tend to download remote
data to local hardware for analysis. But this
method is “backward”, says Andreas Sundquist,
chief technology officer of DNAnexus. “The
data are so much larger than the tools, it makes
no sense to be doing that.” The alternative is to
use the cloud for both data storage and com­
puting. If the data are on a cloud, researchers
can harness both the computing power and the
tools that they need online, without the need
to move data and software (see ‘Head in the
clouds’). “There’s no reason to move data out­
side the cloud. You can do analysis right there,”
says Sundquist. Everything required is avail­
able “to the clever people with the clever ideas”,
regardless of their local computing resources,
says Birney.
Various academic and commercial ventures
are engineering ways to bring data and analysis
tools together — and as they build, they have to
address the continued data growth. Xing Xu,
director of cloud computing at BGI (formerly
the Beijing Genomics Institute) in Shenzen,
China, knows that challenge well. BGI is one
of the largest producers of genomic data in the
world, with 157 genome sequencing instru­
ments working around the clock on samples
from people, plants, animals and microbes.
Each day, it generates 6 terabytes of genomic
data. Every instrument can decode one human
genome per week, an effort that used to take
months or years and many staff.
DATA HIGHWAY
Once a genome sequencer has cranked out its
snippets of genomic information, or ‘reads’,
they must be assembled into a continuous
stretch of DNA using computing and software.
Xu and his team try to automate as much of
this process as possible to enable scientists to
get to analyses quickly.
Next, either the reads or the analysis, or
both, have to travel to scientists. Generally,
researchers share biological data with their
peers through public repositories, such as the
EBI or ones run by the US National Center
for Biotechnology Information in Bethesda,
Mary­land. Given the size of the data, this
travel often means physically delivering hard
drives — and risks data getting lost, stolen or
damaged. Instead, BGI wants to use either its
own clouds or others of the customer’s choos­
ing for electronic delivery. But that presents a
problem, because big-data travel often means
big traffic jams.
Currently, BGI can transfer about 1 tera­
byte per day to its customers. “If you transfer
one genome at a time, it’s OK,” says Xu. “If you
sequence 50, it’s not so practical for us to trans­
fer that through the Internet. That takes about
BGI is exploring a variety of technologies
to accelerate electronic data transfer, among
them fasp, software developed by Aspera in
Emeryville, California, which helps to deliver
data for film-production studios and the oil
and gas industry as well as the life sciences.
In an experiment last year, BGI tested a faspenabled data transfer between China and the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD).
It took 30 seconds to move a 24-gigabyte file.
“That’s really fast,” says Xu.
Data transfer with fasp is hundreds of times
quicker than methods using the normal Inter­
net protocol, says software engineer Michelle
Munson, chief executive and co-founder of
Aspera. However, all transfer protocols share
challenges associated with transferring large,
unstructured data sets.
The test transfer between BGI and UCSD
was encouraging because Internet connec­
tions between China and the United States are
“riddled with challenges” such as variations
in signal strength that interrupt data transfer,
says Munson. The protocol has to handle such
road bumps and ensure speedy transfer, data
integrity and privacy. Data transfer often slows
when the passage is
bumpy, but with fasp
it does not. Trans­
fers can fail when a
file is partially sent;
with ordinary Inter­
net connections,
this relaunches the
entire transfer. By contrast, fasp restarts where
the previous transfer stopped. Data that are
already on their way do not get resent, but
continue on their travels.
Xu says that he liked the experiment with
fasp, but the software does not solve the datatransfer problem. “The main problem is not
technical, it is economical,” he says. BGI
would need to maintain a large Internet con­
nection bandwidth for data transfer, which
would be prohibitively expensive, especially
given that Xu and his team do not send out big
data in a continuous flow. “If we only transfer
periodically, it doesn’t make any economic
sense for us to have this infrastructure, espe­
cially if the user wants that for free,” he says.
Data-sharing among many collaborators
also remains a challenge. When BGI uses fasp
to share data with customers or collaborators,
it must have a software licence, which allows
customers to download or upload the data for
free. But customers who want to share data with
each other using this transfer protocol will need
their own software licences. Putting the data on
the cloud and not moving them would bypass
this problem; teams would go to the large data
sets, rather than the other way around. Xu and
his team are exploring this approach, alongside
the use of Globus Online, a free Web-based filetransfer service from the Computation Institute
at the University of Chicago and the Argonne
National Laboratory in Illinois. In April,
the Computation Institute team launched a
genome-sequencing-analysis service called
Globus Genomics on the Amazon cloud.
Munson says that Aspera has set up a
pay-as-you-go system on the Amazon cloud
to address the issue of data-sharing. Later
this year, the company will begin selling an
updated version of its software that can be
embedded on the desktop of any kind of com­
puter and will let users browse large data sets
much like a file-sharing application. Files can
be dragged and dropped from one location to
another, even if those locations are commercial
or academic clouds.
The cost of producing, acquiring and dis­
seminating data is decreasing, says James
Taylor, a computational biologist at Emory
University in Atlanta, Georgia, who thinks
that “everyone should have access to the
skills and tools” needed to make sense of all
the information. Taylor is a co-founder of an
academic platform called Galaxy, which lets
scientists analyse their data and share soft­
ware tools and workflows for free. Through
“There’s no
reason to move
data outside the
cloud. You can
do analysis right
HEAD IN THE CLOUDS
In cloud computing, large data sets are
processed on remote Internet servers,
rather than on researchers’ local computers.
Cloud platform
SOURCE: ASPERA
2 5 8 | N A T U R E | V O L 4 9 8 | 1 3 J U N E 2 0 1 3
TECHNOLOGY
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Web-based access to computing facilities at
Pennsylvania State University (PSU) in Uni­
versity Park, scientists can download Galaxy’s
platform of tools to their local hardware, or
use it on the Galaxy cloud. They can then plug
in their own data, perform analyses and save
the steps in them, or try out workflows set up
by their colleagues.
Spearheaded by Taylor and Anton
Nekrutenko, a molecular biologist at PSU,
the Galaxy project draws on a community of
around 100 software developers. One feature
is Tool Shed, a virtual area with more than
2,700 software tools that users can upload,
try out and rate. Xu says that he likes the col­
lection and its ratings, because without them,
scientists must always check if a software tool
actually runs before they can use it.
KNOWLEDGE IS POWER
Galaxy is a good fit for scientists with some
computing know-how, says Alla Lapidus, a
computational biologist in the algorithmic
biology lab at St Petersburg Academic Univer­
sity of the Russian Academy of Sciences, which
is led by Pavel Pevzner, a computer scientist at
UCSD. But, she says, the platform might not
be the best choice for less tech-savvy research­
ers. When Lapidus wanted to disseminate the
software tools that she developed, she chose
to put them on DNAnexus’s newly launched
second-generation commercial cloud-based
analysis platform.
That platform is also designed to cater to
non-specialist users, says Sundquist. It is pos­
sible for a computer scientist to build his or her
own biological data-analysis suite with software
tools on the Amazon cloud, but DNAnexus
uses its own engineering to help researchers
without the necessary computer skills to get to
the analysis steps.
Catering for non-specialists is important
when developing tools, as well as platforms. The
Biomedical Information Science and Technol­
ogy Initiative (BISTI) run by the US National
Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Mary­
land, supports development of new computa­
tional tools and the maintenance of existing
ones. “We want a deployable tool,” says Vivien
Bonazzi, programme director in computational
biology and bioinformatics at the National
Human Genome Research Institute, who is
involved with BISTI. Scientists who are not
heavy-duty informatics types need to be able to
set up these tools and use them successfully, she
says. And it must be possible to scale up tools
and update them as data volume grows.
Bonazzi says that although many life
scientists have significant computational
skills, others do not understand computer
lingo enough to know that in the tech world,
Python is not a snake and Perl is not a gem
(they are programming languages). But even if
biologists can’t develop or adapt the software,
says Bonazzi, they have a place in big-data sci­
ence. Apart from anything else, they can offer
valuable feedback to their computationally flu­
ent colleagues because of different needs and
approaches to the science, she says.
Increasingly, big genomic data sets are being
used in biotechnology companies, drug firms
and medical centres, which also have specific
needs. Robert Mulroy, president of Merrimack
Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge, Massachu­
setts, says that his teams handle mountains
of data that hide drug candidates. “Our view
is that biology functions through systems
dynamics,” he says.
Merrimack researchers focus on interro­
gating molecular signalling networks in the
healthy body and in tumours, hoping to find
new ways to corner cancer cells. They generate
and use large amounts of information from the
genome and other factors that drive a cell to
become cancerous, says Mulroy. The company
stores its data and conducts analysis on its own
computing infrastructure, rather than a cloud,
to keep the data private and protected.
Drug developers have been hesitant about
cloud computing. But, says Sundquist, that fear
is subsiding in some quarters: some companies
that have previously avoided clouds because of
security problems are now exploring them. To
assuage these users’ concerns, Sundquist has
engineered the DNAnexus cloud to be compli­
ant with US and European regulatory guide­
lines. Its security features include encryption
for biomedical information, and logs to allow
users to address potential queries from audi­
tors such as regulatory agencies, all of which is
important in drug development.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Harnessing powerful computers and numer­
ous tools for data analysis is crucial in drug dis­
covery and other areas of big-data biology. But
that is only part of the problem. Data and tools
need to be more than close — they must talk to
one another. Lapidus says that results produced
by one tool are not always in a format that can
be used by the next tool in a workflow. And if
software tools are not easily installed, computer
specialists will have to intervene on behalf of
those biologists without computer skills.
Even computationally savvy researchers can
get tangled up when wrestling with software
and big data. “Many of us are getting so busy
analysing huge data sets that we don’t have
time to do much else,” says Steven Salzberg,
a computational biologist at Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore, Maryland. “We have
to spend some of our time figuring out ways to
make the analysis faster, rather than just using
the tools we have.”
Yet other big-data pressures come from
the need to engineer tools for stability and
longevity. Too many software tools crash too
often. “Everyone in the field runs into similar
problems,” says Hunter. In addition, research
teams may not be able to acquire the resources
they need, he says, especially in countries
such as the United States, where an academic
does not gain as much recognition for soft­
ware engineering as for publishing a paper.
With its dedicated focus on data and software
infrastructure designed to serve scientists, the
EBI offers an “interesting contrast to the US
model”, says Hunter.
US funding agencies are not entirely ignor­
ing software engineering, however. In addi­
tion to BISTI, the NIH is developing Big Data
to Knowledge (BD2K), an initiative focused on
managing large data sets in biomedicine, with
elements such as data handling and standards,
informatics training and software sharing. And
as the cloud emerges as a popular place to do
research, the agency is also reviewing datause policies. An approved study usually lays
out specific data uses, which may not include
placing genomic data on a cloud, says Bonazzi.
When a person consents to have his or her data
used in one way, researchers cannot suddenly
change that use, she says. In a big-data age that
uses the cloud in addition to local hardware,
new technologies in encryption and secure
Various data-transfer protocols handle problems
in different ways, says Michelle Munson.
STANFORD UNIV./DNANEXUS
Arend Sidow wants to move data mountains
without feeling pinched by infrastructure.
1 3 J U N E 2 0 1 3 | V O L 4 9 8 | N A T U R E | 2 5 9
BIG DATA TECHNOLOGY
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
transmission will need to address such privacy
Big data takes large numbers of people. BGI
employs more than 600 engineers and software
developers to manage its information-technol­
ogy infrastructure, handle data and develop
software tools and workflows. Scores of infor­
maticians look for biologically relevant mes­
sages in the data, usually tailored to requests
from researchers and commercial customers,
says Xu. And apart from its stream of research
collaborations, BGI offers a sequencing and
analysis service to customers. Early last year,
the institute expanded its offerings with a
cloud-based genome-analysis platform called
Easy­Genomics.
In late 2012, it also bought the faltering US
company Complete Genomics (CG), which
offered human genome sequencing and
analysis for customers in academia or drug
discovery. Although the sale dashed hopes
for earnings among CG’s investors, it doesn’t
seem to have dimmed their view of the pros­
pects for sequencing and analysis services. “It
is now just a matter of time before sequencing
data are used with regularity in clinical prac­
tice,” says one investor, who did not wish to be
identified. But the sale shows how difficult it
can be to transition ideas into a competitive
marketplace, the investor says.
When tackling data mountains, BGI uses
not only its own data-analysis tools, but also
some developed in the academic community.
To ramp up analysis speed and capacity as data
sets grow, BGI assembled a cloud-based series
of analysis steps into a workflow called Gaea,
which uses the Hadoop open-source software
framework. Hadoop was written by volunteer
developers from companies and universities,
and can be deployed on various types of com­
puting infrastructure. BGI programmers built
on this framework to instruct software tools to
perform large-scale
data analysis across
many computers at
the same time.
If 50 genomes are
to be analysed and
the results com­
pared, hundreds of
computational steps
are involved. The
steps can run either
sequentially or in parallel; with Gaea, they
run in parallel across hundreds of cloud-based
computers, reducing analysis time rather like
many people working on a single large puzzle
at once. The data are on the BGI cloud, as are
the tools. “If you perform analysis in a nonparallel way, you will maybe need two weeks
to fully process those data,” says Xu. Gaea takes
around 15 hours for the same number of data.
To leverage Hadoop’s muscle, Xu and his
team needed to rewrite software tools. But the
investment is worth it because the Hadoop
framework allows analysis to continue as the
data mountains grow, he says.
They are still ironing out some issues with
Gaea, comparing its performance on the cloud
with its performance on local infrastructure.
Once testing is complete, BGI plans to mount
Gaea on a cloud such as Amazon for use by the
wider scientific community.
Other groups are also trying to speed up
analysis to cater to scientists who want to use
big data. For example, Bina Technologies in
Redwood City, California, a spin-out from Stan­
ford University and the University of Califor­
nia, Berkeley, has developed high-performance
computing components for its genome-analysis
services. Customers can buy the hardware,
called the Bina Box, with software, or use Bina’s
analysis platform on the cloud.
FROM VIVO TO SILICO
Data mountains and analysis are altering the
way science progresses, and breeding biologists
who get neither their feet nor their hands wet.
“I am one of a small original group who made
the first leap from the wet world to the in silico
world to do biology,” says Marcie McClure, a
computational biologist at Montana State Uni­
versity in Bozeman. “I never looked back,”
During her graduate training, McClure ana­
lysed a class of viruses known as retroviruses in
fish, doing the work of a “wet-worlder”, as she
calls it. Since then, she and her team have dis­
covered 11 fish retroviruses without touching
water in lake or lab, by analysing genomes com­
putationally and in ways that others had not. She
has also developed software tools to find such
viruses in the genomes of other species, includ­
ing humans. Her work generates terabytes of
data, which she shares with other researchers.
Given that big-data analysis in biology is
incredibly difficult, Hunter says, open science
is becoming increasingly important. As he
explains, researchers need to make their data
available to the scientific community in a use­
ful form, for others to mine. New science can
emerge from the analysis of existing data sets:
McClure generates some of her findings from
other people’s data. But not everyone recog­
nizes that kind of biology as an equal. “The
cultural baggage of biology that privileges data
generation over all other forms of science is
holding us back,” says Hunter.
A number of McClure’s graduate students
are microbial ecologists, and she teaches them
how to rethink their findings in the face of so
many new data. “Before taking my class, none
of these students would have imagined that
they could produce new, meaningful knowl­
edge, and new hypotheses, from existing data,
not their own,” she says. Big data in biology
add to the possibilities for scientists, she says,
because data sit “under-analysed in databases
all over the world”. ■
Vivien Marx is technology editor at Nature
and Nature Methods.
1. Mattmann, C. Nature 493, 473–475 .
2. Greene, C. S. & Troyanskaya, O. G. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 8, e1002816 .
3. EMBL–European Bioinformatics Institute EMBL-EBI
Annual Scientific Report 2012 .
“The cultural
baggage of
biology that
privileges data
generation
over all other
forms of science
is holding us
A simplified array of breast-cancer subtypes, produced by researchers at Merrimack Pharmaceuticals,
who use their own computational infrastructure to hunt for new cancer drugs.
MERRIMACK PHARMACEUTICALS
2 6 0 | N A T U R E | V O L 4 9 8 | 1 3 J U N E 2 0 1 3
TECHNOLOGY
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved