In Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 4 , 355-385.
A Survey of Augmented Reality
Ronald T. Azuma
Hughes Research Laboratories
3011 Malibu Canyon Road, MS RL96
Malibu, CA 90265
 
 
W: (310) 317-5151
Fax: (310) 317-5695
This paper surveys the field of Augmented Reality, in which 3-D virtual
objects are integrated into a 3-D real environment in real time. It describes the
medical, manufacturing, visualization, path planning, entertainment and military
applications that have been explored. This paper describes the characteristics of
Augmented Reality systems, including a detailed discussion of the tradeoffs between
optical and video blending approaches. Registration and sensing errors are two of the
biggest problems in building effective Augmented Reality systems, so this paper
summarizes current efforts to overcome these problems. Future directions and areas
requiring further research are discussed. This survey provides a starting point for
anyone interested in researching or using Augmented Reality.
Introduction
This paper surveys the current state-of-the-art in Augmented Reality. It
describes work performed at many different sites and explains the issues and
problems encountered when building Augmented Reality systems. It summarizes the
tradeoffs and approaches taken so far to overcome these problems and speculates on
future directions that deserve exploration.
A survey paper does not present new research results. The contribution comes
from consolidating existing information from many sources and publishing an
extensive bibliography of papers in this field. While several other introductory
papers have been written on this subject [Barfield95] [Bowskill95] [Caudell94]
[Drascic93b] [Feiner94a] [Feiner94b] [Milgram94b] [Rolland94], this survey is more
comprehensive and up-to-date. This survey provides a good beginning point for
anyone interested in starting research in this area.
Section 1 describes what Augmented Reality is and the motivations for
developing this technology. Six classes of potential applications that have been
explored are described in Section 2. Then Section 3 discusses the issues involved in
building an Augmented Reality system. Currently, two of the biggest problems are in
registration and sensing: the subjects of Sections 4 and 5. Finally, Section 6 describes
some areas that require further work and research.
Definition
Augmented Reality (AR) is a variation of Virtual Environments (VE), or
Virtual Reality as it is more commonly called. VE technologies completely immerse
a user inside a synthetic environment. While immersed, the user cannot see the real
world around him. In contrast, AR allows the user to see the real world, with virtual
objects superimposed upon or composited with the real world. Therefore, AR
supplements reality, rather than completely replacing it. Ideally, it would appear to
the user that the virtual and real objects coexisted in the same space, similar to the
effects achieved in the film "Who Framed Roger Rabbit?" Figure 1 shows an
example of what this might look like. It shows a real desk with a real phone. Inside
this room are also a virtual lamp and two virtual chairs. Note that the objects are
combined in 3-D, so that the virtual lamp covers the real table, and the real table
covers parts of the two virtual chairs. AR can be thought of as the "middle ground"
between VE (completely synthetic) and telepresence (completely real) [Milgram94a]
[Milgram94b].
Figure 1: Real desk with virtual lamp and two virtual chairs. (Courtesy ECRC)
Some researchers define AR in a way that requires the use of Head-Mounted
Displays (HMDs). To avoid limiting AR to specific technologies, this survey defines
AR as systems that have the following three characteristics:
1) Combines real and virtual
2) Interactive in real time
3) Registered in 3-D
This definition allows other technologies besides HMDs while retaining the
essential components of AR. For example, it does not include film or 2-D overlays.
Films like "Jurassic Park" feature photorealistic virtual objects seamlessly blended
with a real environment in 3-D, but they are not interactive media. 2-D virtual
overlays on top of live video can be done at interactive rates, but the overlays are not
combined with the real world in 3-D. However, this definition does allow monitor-
based interfaces, monocular systems, see-through HMDs, and various other
combining technologies. Potential system configurations are discussed further in
Section 3.
Motivation
Why is Augmented Reality an interesting topic? Why is combining real and
virtual objects in 3-D useful? Augmented Reality enhances a user's perception of and
interaction with the real world. The virtual objects display information that the user
cannot directly detect with his own senses. The information conveyed by the virtual
objects helps a user perform real-world tasks. AR is a specific example of what Fred
Brooks calls Intelligence Amplification (IA): using the computer as a tool to make a
task easier for a human to perform [Brooks96].
At least six classes of potential AR applications have been explored: medical
visualization, maintenance and repair, annotation, robot path planning, entertainment,
and military aircraft navigation and targeting. The next section describes work that
has been done in each area. While these do not cover every potential application area
of this technology, they do cover the areas explored so far.
Applications
Doctors could use Augmented Reality as a visualization and training aid for
surgery. It may be possible to collect 3-D datasets of a patient in real time, using
non-invasive sensors like Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed
Tomography scans (CT), or ultrasound imaging. These datasets could then be
rendered and combined in real time with a view of the real patient. In effect, this
would give a doctor "X-ray vision" inside a patient. This would be very useful during
minimally-invasive surgery, which reduces the trauma of an operation by using small
incisions or no incisions at all. A problem with minimally-invasive techniques is that
they reduce the doctor's ability to see inside the patient, making surgery more
difficult. AR technology could provide an internal view without the need for larger
incisions.
AR might also be helpful for general medical visualization tasks in the
surgical room. Surgeons can detect some features with the naked eye that they cannot
see in MRI or CT scans, and vice-versa. AR would give surgeons access to both
types of data simultaneously. This might also guide precision tasks, such as
displaying where to drill a hole into the skull for brain surgery or where to perform a
needle biopsy of a tiny tumor. The information from the non-invasive sensors would
be directly displayed on the patient, showing exactly where to perform the operation.
AR might also be useful for training purposes [Kancherla95]. Virtual
instructions could remind a novice surgeon of the required steps, without the need to
look away from a patient to consult a manual. Virtual objects could also identify
organs and specify locations to avoid disturbing [Durlach95].
Several projects are exploring this application area. At UNC Chapel Hill, a
research group has conducted trial runs of scanning the womb of a pregnant woman
with an ultrasound sensor, generating a 3-D representation of the fetus inside the
womb and displaying that in a see-through HMD (Figure 2). The goal is to endow
the doctor with the ability to see the moving, kicking fetus lying inside the womb,
with the hope that this one day may become a "3-D stethoscope" [Bajura92]
[State94]. More recent efforts have focused on a needle biopsy of a breast tumor.
Figure 3 shows a mockup of a breast biopsy operation, where the virtual objects
identify the location of the tumor and guide the needle to its target [State96b]. Other
groups at the MIT AI Lab [Grimson94] [Grimson95] [Mellor95a] [Mellor95b],
General Electric [Lorensen93], and elsewhere [Betting95] [Edwards95] [Taubes94]
are investigating displaying MRI or CT data, directly registered onto the patient.
Figure 2: Virtual fetus inside womb of pregnant patient. (Courtesy UNC Chapel
Hill Dept. of Computer Science.)
Figure 3: Mockup of breast tumor biopsy. 3-D graphics guide needle insertion.
(Courtesy UNC Chapel Hill Dept. of Computer Science.)
Manufacturing and repair
Another category of Augmented Reality applications is the assembly,
maintenance, and repair of complex machinery. Instructions might be easier to
understand if they were available, not as manuals with text and pictures, but rather as
3-D drawings superimposed upon the actual equipment, showing step-by-step the
tasks that need to be done and how to do them. These superimposed 3-D drawings
can be animated, making the directions even more explicit.
Several research projects have demonstrated prototypes in this area. Steve
Feiner's group at Columbia built a laser printer maintenance application [Feiner93a],
shown in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 shows an external view, and Figure 5 shows the
user's view, where the computer-generated wireframe is telling the user to remove the
paper tray. A group at Boeing is developing AR technology to guide a technician in
building a wiring harness that forms part of an airplane's electrical system. Storing
these instructions in electronic form will save space and reduce costs. Currently,
technicians use large physical layout boards to construct such harnesses, and Boeing
requires several warehouses to store all these boards. Such space might be emptied
for other use if this application proves successful [Caudell92] [Janin93] [Sims94].
Boeing is using a Technology Reinvestment Program (TRP) grant to investigate
putting this technology onto the factory floor [BoeingTRP94]. Figure 6 shows an
external view of Adam Janin using a prototype AR system to build a wire bundle.
Eventually, AR might be used for any complicated machinery, such as automobile
engines [Tuceryan95].
Figure 4: External view of Columbia printer maintenance application. Note that
all objects must be tracked. (Courtesy Steve Feiner, Blair MacIntyre, and Dorée
Seligmann, Columbia University.)
Figure 5: Prototype laser printer maintenance application, displaying how to
remove the paper tray. (Courtesy Steve Feiner, Blair MacIntyre, and Dorée
Seligmann, Columbia University.)
Figure 6: Adam Janin demonstrates Boeing's prototype wire bundle assembly
application. (Courtesy David Mizell, Boeing)
Annotation and visualization
AR could be used to annotate objects and environments with public or private
information. Applications using public information assume the availability of public
databases to draw upon. For example, a hand-held display could provide information
about the contents of library shelves as the user walks around the library
[Fitzmaurice93] [Rekimoto95a] [Rekimoto95b]. At the European Computer-Industry
Research Centre (ECRC), a user can point at parts of an engine model and the AR
system displays the name of the part that is being pointed at [Rose95]. Figure 7
shows this, where the user points at the exhaust manifold on an engine model and the
label "exhaust manifold" appears.
Figure 7: Engine model part labels appear as user points at them. (Courtesy
Alternately, these annotations might be private notes attached to specific
objects. Researchers at Columbia demonstrated this with the notion of attaching
windows from a standard user interface onto specific locations in the world, or
attached to specific objects as reminders [Feiner93b]. Figure 8 shows a window
superimposed as a label upon a student. He wears a tracking device, so the computer
knows his location. As the student moves around, the label follows his location,
providing the AR user with a reminder of what he needs to talk to the student about.
Figure 8: Windows displayed on top of specific real-world objects. (Courtesy
Steve Feiner, Blair MacIntyre, Marcus Haupt, and Eliot Solomon, Columbia
University.)
AR might aid general visualization tasks as well. An architect with a seethrough HMD might be able to look out a window and see how a proposed new
skyscraper would change her view. If a database containing information about a
building's structure was available, AR might give architects "X-ray vision" inside a
building, showing where the pipes, electric lines, and structural supports are inside
the walls [Feiner95]. Researchers at the University of Toronto have built a system
called Augmented Reality through Graphic Overlays on Stereovideo (ARGOS)
[Milgram95], which among other things is used to make images easier to understand
during difficult viewing conditions [Drascic93a]. Figure 9 shows wireframe lines
drawn on top of a space shuttle bay interior, while in orbit. The lines make it easier to
see the geometry of the shuttle bay. Similarly, virtual lines and objects could aid
navigation and scene understanding during poor visibility conditions, such as
underwater or in fog.
Figure 9: Virtual lines help display geometry of shuttle bay, as seen in orbit.
(Courtesy David Drascic and Paul Milgram, U. Toronto.)
Robot path planning
Teleoperation of a robot is often a difficult problem, especially when the robot
is far away, with long delays in the communication link. Under this circumstance,
instead of controlling the robot directly, it may be preferable to instead control a
virtual version of the robot. The user plans and specifies the robot's actions by
manipulating the local virtual version, in real time. The results are directly displayed
on the real world. Once the plan is tested and determined, then user tells the real
robot to execute the specified plan. This avoids pilot-induced oscillations caused by
the lengthy delays. The virtual versions can also predict the effects of manipulating
the environment, thus serving as a planning and previewing tool to aid the user in
performing the desired task. The ARGOS system has demonstrated that stereoscopic
AR is an easier and more accurate way of doing robot path planning than traditional
monoscopic interfaces [Drascic93b] [Milgram93]. Others have also used registered
overlays with telepresence systems [Kim93] [Kim96] [Oyama93] [Tharp94] [Yoo93].
Figure 10 shows how a virtual outline can represent a future location of a robot arm.
Figure 10: Virtual lines show a planned motion of a robot arm (Courtesy David
Drascic and Paul Milgram, U. Toronto.)
Entertainment
At SIGGRAPH '95, several exhibitors showed "Virtual Sets" that merge real
actors with virtual backgrounds, in real time and in 3-D. The actors stand in front of
a large blue screen, while a computer-controlled motion camera records the scene.
Since the camera's location is tracked, and the actor's motions are scripted, it is
possible to digitally composite the actor into a 3-D virtual background. For example,
the actor might appear to stand inside a large virtual spinning ring, where the front
part of the ring covers the actor while the rear part of the ring is covered by the actor.
The entertainment industry sees this as a way to reduce production costs: creating and
storing sets virtually is potentially cheaper than constantly building new physical sets
from scratch. The ALIVE project from the MIT Media Lab goes one step further by
populating the environment with intelligent virtual creatures that respond to user
actions [Maes95].
Military aircraft
For many years, military aircraft and helicopters have used Head-Up Displays
(HUDs) and Helmet-Mounted Sights (HMS) to superimpose vector graphics upon the
pilot's view of the real world. Besides providing basic navigation and flight
information, these graphics are sometimes registered with targets in the environment,
providing a way to aim the aircraft's weapons. For example, the chin turret in a
helicopter gunship can be slaved to the pilot's HMS, so the pilot can aim the chin
turret simply by looking at the target. Future generations of combat aircraft will be
developed with an HMD built into the pilot's helmet [Wanstall89].
Characteristics
This section discusses the characteristics of AR systems and design issues
encountered when building an AR system. Section 3.1 describes the basic
characteristics of augmentation. There are two ways to accomplish this
augmentation: optical or video technologies. Section 3.2 discusses their
characteristics and relative strengths and weaknesses. Blending the real and virtual
poses problems with focus and contrast (Section 3.3), and some applications require
portable AR systems to be truly effective (Section 3.4). Finally, Section 3.5
summarizes the characteristics by comparing the requirements of AR against those
for Virtual Environments.
Augmentation
Besides adding objects to a real environment, Augmented Reality also has the
potential to remove them. Current work has focused on adding virtual objects to a
real environment. However, graphic overlays might also be used to remove or hide
parts of the real environment from a user. For example, to remove a desk in the real
environment, draw a representation of the real walls and floors behind the desk and
"paint" that over the real desk, effectively removing it from the user's sight. This has
been done in feature films. Doing this interactively in an AR system will be much
harder, but this removal may not need to be photorealistic to be effective.
Augmented Reality might apply to all senses, not just sight. So far,
researchers have focused on blending real and virtual images and graphics. However,
AR could be extended to include sound. The user would wear headphones equipped
with microphones on the outside. The headphones would add synthetic, directional
3–D sound, while the external microphones would detect incoming sounds from the
environment. This would give the system a chance to mask or cover up selected real
sounds from the environment by generating a masking signal that exactly canceled
the incoming real sound [Durlach95]. While this would not be easy to do, it might be
possible. Another example is haptics. Gloves with devices that provide tactile
feedback might augment real forces in the environment. For example, a user might
run his hand over the surface of a real desk. Simulating such a hard surface virtually
is fairly difficult, but it is easy to do in reality. Then the tactile effectors in the glove
can augment the feel of the desk, perhaps making it feel rough in certain spots. This
capability might be useful in some applications, such as providing an additional cue
that a virtual object is at a particular location on a real desk [Wellner93].
Optical vs. video
A basic design decision in building an AR system is how to accomplish the
combining of real and virtual. Two basic choices are available: optical and video
technologies. Each has particular advantages and disadvantages. This section
compares the two and notes the tradeoffs. For additional discussion, see [Rolland94].
A see-through HMD is one device used to combine real and virtual. Standard
closed-view HMDs do not allow any direct view of the real world. In contrast, a seethrough HMD lets the user see the real world, with virtual objects superimposed by
optical or video technologies.
Optical see-through HMDs work by placing optical combiners in front of the
user's eyes. These combiners are partially transmissive, so that the user can look
directly through them to see the real world. The combiners are also partially
reflective, so that the user sees virtual images bounced off the combiners from headmounted monitors. This approach is similar in nature to Head-Up Displays (HUDs)
commonly used in military aircraft, except that the combiners are attached to the
head. Thus, optical see-through HMDs have sometimes been described as a "HUD
on a head" [Wanstall89]. Figure 11 shows a conceptual diagram of an optical seethrough HMD. Figure 12 shows two optical see-through HMDs made by Hughes
Electronics.
The optical combiners usually reduce the amount of light that the user sees
from the real world. Since the combiners act like half-silvered mirrors, they only let
in some of the light from the real world, so that they can reflect some of the light
from the monitors into the user's eyes. For example, the HMD described in
[Holmgren92] transmits about 30% of the incoming light from the real world.
Choosing the level of blending is a design problem. More sophisticated combiners
might vary the level of contributions based upon the wavelength of light. For
example, such a combiner might be set to reflect all light of a certain wavelength and
none at any other wavelengths. This would be ideal with a monochrome monitor.
Virtually all the light from the monitor would be reflected into the user's eyes, while
almost all the light from the real world (except at the particular wavelength) would
reach the user's eyes. However, most existing optical see-through HMDs do reduce
the amount of light from the real world, so they act like a pair of sunglasses when the
power is cut off.
Figure 11:
Optical see-through HMD conceptual diagram
Figure 12:
Two optical see-through HMDs, made by Hughes Electronics
In contrast, video see-through HMDs work by combining a closed-view HMD
with one or two head-mounted video cameras. The video cameras provide the user's
view of the real world. Video from these cameras is combined with the graphic
images created by the scene generator, blending the real and virtual. The result is
sent to the monitors in front of the user's eyes in the closed-view HMD. Figure 13
shows a conceptual diagram of a video see-through HMD. Figure 14 shows an actual
video see-through HMD, with two video cameras mounted on top of a Flight Helmet.
Video compositor
Video cameras
Combined video
Figure 13:
Video see-through HMD conceptual diagram
Figure 14:
An actual video see-through HMD. (Courtesy Jannick Rolland,
Frank Biocca, and UNC Chapel Hill Dept. of Computer Science. Photo by Alex
Video composition can be done in more than one way. A simple way is to use
chroma-keying: a technique used in many video special effects. The background of
the computer graphic images is set to a specific color, say green, which none of the
virtual objects use. Then the combining step replaces all green areas with the
corresponding parts from the video of the real world. This has the effect of
superimposing the virtual objects over the real world. A more sophisticated
composition would use depth information. If the system had depth information at
each pixel for the real world images, it could combine the real and virtual images by a
pixel-by-pixel depth comparison. This would allow real objects to cover virtual
objects and vice-versa.
AR systems can also be built using monitor-based configurations, instead of
see-through HMDs. Figure 15 shows how a monitor-based system might be built. In
this case, one or two video cameras view the environment. The cameras may be
static or mobile. In the mobile case, the cameras might move around by being
attached to a robot, with their locations tracked. The video of the real world and the
graphic images generated by a scene generator are combined, just as in the video seethrough HMD case, and displayed in a monitor in front of the user. The user does not
wear the display device. Optionally, the images may be displayed in stereo on the
monitor, which then requires the user to wear a pair of stereo glasses. Figure 16
shows an external view of the ARGOS system, which uses a monitor-based
configuration.
Stereo glasses
(optional)
Video cameras
real world
Figure 15:
Monitor-based AR conceptual diagram
Figure 16:
External view of the ARGOS system, an example of monitor-based
AR. (Courtesy David Drascic and Paul Milgram, U. Toronto.)
Finally, a monitor-based optical configuration is also possible. This is similar
to Figure 11 except that the user does not wear the monitors or combiners on her
head. Instead, the monitors and combiners are fixed in space, and the user positions
her head to look through the combiners. This is typical of Head-Up Displays on
military aircraft, and at least one such configuration has been proposed for a medical
application [Peuchot95].
The rest of this section compares the relative advantages and disadvantages of
optical and video approaches, starting with optical. An optical approach has the
following advantages over a video approach:
1) Simplicity: Optical blending is simpler and cheaper than video blending.
Optical approaches have only one "stream" of video to worry about: the graphic
images. The real world is seen directly through the combiners, and that time delay is
generally a few nanoseconds. Video blending, on the other hand, must deal with
separate video streams for the real and virtual images. Both streams have inherent
delays in the tens of milliseconds. Digitizing video images usually adds at least one
frame time of delay to the video stream, where a frame time is how long it takes to
completely update an image. A monitor that completely refreshes the screen at 60 Hz
has a frame time of 16.67 ms. The two streams of real and virtual images must be
properly synchronized or temporal distortion results. Also, optical see-through
HMDs with narrow field-of-view combiners offer views of the real world that have
little distortion. Video cameras almost always have some amount of distortion that
must be compensated for, along with any distortion from the optics in front of the
display devices. Since video requires cameras and combiners that optical approaches
do not need, video will probably be more expensive and complicated to build than
optical-based systems.
2) Resolution: Video blending limits the resolution of what the user sees, both
real and virtual, to the resolution of the display devices. With current displays, this
resolution is far less than the resolving power of the fovea. Optical see-through also
shows the graphic images at the resolution of the display device, but the user's view
of the real world is not degraded. Thus, video reduces the resolution of the real
world, while optical see-through does not.
3) Safety: Video see-through HMDs are essentially modified closed-view
HMDs. If the power is cut off, the user is effectively blind. This is a safety concern
in some applications. In contrast, when power is removed from an optical seethrough HMD, the user still has a direct view of the real world. The HMD then
becomes a pair of heavy sunglasses, but the user can still see.
4) No eye offset: With video see-through, the user's view of the real world is
provided by the video cameras. In essence, this puts his "eyes" where the video
cameras are. In most configurations, the cameras are not located exactly where the
user's eyes are, creating an offset between the cameras and the real eyes. The
distance separating the cameras may also not be exactly the same as the user's
interpupillary distance (IPD). This difference between camera locations and eye
locations introduces displacements from what the user sees compared to what he
expects to see. For example, if the cameras are above the user's eyes, he will see the
world from a vantage point slightly taller than he is used to. Video see-through can
avoid the eye offset problem through the use of mirrors to create another set of optical
paths that mimic the paths directly into the user's eyes. Using those paths, the
cameras will see what the user's eyes would normally see without the HMD.
However, this adds complexity to the HMD design. Offset is generally not a difficult
design problem for optical see-through displays. While the user's eye can rotate with
respect to the position of the HMD, the resulting errors are tiny. Using the eye's
center of rotation as the viewpoint in the computer graphics model should eliminate
any need for eye tracking in an optical see-through HMD [Holloway95].
Video blending offers the following advantages over optical blending:
1) Flexibility in composition strategies: A basic problem with optical seethrough is that the virtual objects do not completely obscure the real world objects,
because the optical combiners allow light from both virtual and real sources.
Building an optical see-through HMD that can selectively shut out the light from the
real world is difficult. In a normal optical system, the objects are designed to be in
focus at only one point in the optical path: the user's eye. Any filter that would
selectively block out light must be placed in the optical path at a point where the
image is in focus, which obviously cannot be the user's eye. Therefore, the optical
system must have two places where the image is in focus: at the user's eye and the
point of the hypothetical filter. This makes the optical design much more difficult
and complex. No existing optical see-through HMD blocks incoming light in this
fashion. Thus, the virtual objects appear ghost-like and semi-transparent. This
damages the illusion of reality because occlusion is one of the strongest depth cues.
In contrast, video see-through is far more flexible about how it merges the real and
virtual images. Since both the real and virtual are available in digital form, video seethrough compositors can, on a pixel-by-pixel basis, take the real, or the virtual, or
some blend between the two to simulate transparency. Because of this flexibility,
video see-through may ultimately produce more compelling environments than
optical see-through approaches.
2) Wide field-of-view: Distortions in optical systems are a function of the
radial distance away from the optical axis. The further one looks away from the
center of the view, the larger the distortions get. A digitized image taken through a
distorted optical system can be undistorted by applying image processing techniques
to unwarp the image, provided that the optical distortion is well characterized. This
requires significant amounts of computation, but this constraint will be less important
in the future as computers become faster. It is harder to build wide field-of-view
displays with optical see-through techniques. Any distortions of the user's view of
the real world must be corrected optically, rather than digitally, because the system
has no digitized image of the real world to manipulate. Complex optics are expensive
and add weight to the HMD. Wide field-of-view systems are an exception to the
general trend of optical approaches being simpler and cheaper than video approaches.
3) Real and virtual view delays can be matched: Video offers an approach for
reducing or avoiding problems caused by temporal mismatches between the real and
virtual images. Optical see-through HMDs offer an almost instantaneous view of the
real world but a delayed view of the virtual. This temporal mismatch can cause
problems. With video approaches, it is possible to delay the video of the real world to
match the delay from the virtual image stream. For details, see Section 4.3.
4) Additional registration strategies: In optical see-through, the only
information the system has about the user's head location comes from the head
tracker. Video blending provides another source of information: the digitized image
of the real scene. This digitized image means that video approaches can employ
additional registration strategies unavailable to optical approaches. Section 4.4
describes these in more detail.
5) Easier to match the brightness of real and virtual objects: This is discussed
in Section 3.3.
Both optical and video technologies have their roles, and the choice of
technology depends on the application requirements. Many of the mechanical
assembly and repair prototypes use optical approaches, possibly because of the cost
and safety issues. If successful, the equipment would have to be replicated in large
numbers to equip workers on a factory floor. In contrast, most of the prototypes for
medical applications use video approaches, probably for the flexibility in blending
real and virtual and for the additional registration strategies offered.
Focus and contrast
Focus can be a problem for both optical and video approaches. Ideally, the
virtual should match the real. In a video-based system, the combined virtual and real
image will be projected at the same distance by the monitor or HMD optics.
However, depending on the video camera's depth-of-field and focus settings, parts of
the real world may not be in focus. In typical graphics software, everything is
rendered with a pinhole model, so all the graphic objects, regardless of distance, are
in focus. To overcome this, the graphics could be rendered to simulate a limited
depth-of-field, and the video camera might have an autofocus lens.
In the optical case, the virtual image is projected at some distance away from
the user. This distance may be adjustable, although it is often fixed. Therefore, while
the real objects are at varying distances from the user, the virtual objects are all
projected to the same distance. If the virtual and real distances are not matched for
the particular objects that the user is looking at, it may not be possible to clearly view
both simultaneously.
Contrast is another issue because of the large dynamic range in real
environments and in what the human eye can detect. Ideally, the brightness of the
real and virtual objects should be appropriately matched. Unfortunately, in the worst
case scenario, this means the system must match a very large range of brightness
levels. The eye is a logarithmic detector, where the brightest light that it can handle is
about eleven orders of magnitude greater than the smallest, including both darkadapted and light-adapted eyes. In any one adaptation state, the eye can cover about
six orders of magnitude. Most display devices cannot come close to this level of
contrast. This is a particular problem with optical technologies, because the user has
a direct view of the real world. If the real environment is too bright, it will wash out
the virtual image. If the real environment is too dark, the virtual image will wash out
the real world. Contrast problems are not as severe with video, because the video
cameras themselves have limited dynamic response, and the view of both the real and
virtual is generated by the monitor, so everything must be clipped or compressed into
the monitor's dynamic range.
Portability
In almost all Virtual Environment systems, the user is not encouraged to walk
around much. Instead, the user navigates by "flying" through the environment,
walking on a treadmill, or driving some mockup of a vehicle. Whatever the
technology, the result is that the user stays in one place in the real world.
Some AR applications, however, will need to support a user who will walk
around a large environment. AR requires that the user actually be at the place where
the task is to take place. "Flying," as performed in a VE system, is no longer an
option. If a mechanic needs to go to the other side of a jet engine, she must
physically move herself and the display devices she wears. Therefore, AR systems
will place a premium on portability, especially the ability to walk around outdoors,
away from controlled environments. The scene generator, the HMD, and the tracking
system must all be self-contained and capable of surviving exposure to the
environment. If this capability is achieved, many more applications that have not
been tried will become available. For example, the ability to annotate the
surrounding environment could be useful to soldiers, hikers, or tourists in an
unfamiliar new location.
Comparison against virtual environments
The overall requirements of AR can be summarized by comparing them
against the requirements for Virtual Environments, for the three basic subsystems that
they require.
1) Scene generator: Rendering is not currently one of the major problems in
AR. VE systems have much higher requirements for realistic images because they
completely replace the real world with the virtual environment. In AR, the virtual
images only supplement the real world. Therefore, fewer virtual objects need to be
drawn, and they do not necessarily have to be realistically rendered in order to serve
the purposes of the application. For example, in the annotation applications, text and
3-D wireframe drawings might suffice. Ideally, photorealistic graphic objects would
be seamlessly merged with the real environment (see Section 7), but more basic
problems have to be solved first.
2) Display device: The display devices used in AR may have less stringent
requirements than VE systems demand, again because AR does not replace the real
world. For example, monochrome displays may be adequate for some AR
applications, while virtually all VE systems today use full color. Optical see-through
HMDs with a small field-of-view may be satisfactory because the user can still see
the real world with his peripheral vision; the see-through HMD does not shut off the
user's normal field-of-view. Furthermore, the resolution of the monitor in an optical
see-through HMD might be lower than what a user would tolerate in a VE
application, since the optical see-through HMD does not reduce the resolution of the
real environment.
3) Tracking and sensing: While in the previous two cases AR had lower
requirements than VE, that is not the case for tracking and sensing. In this area, the
requirements for AR are much stricter than those for VE systems. A major reason for
this is the registration problem, which is described in the next section. The other
factors that make the tracking and sensing requirements higher are described in
Section 5.
Registration
The registration problem
One of the most basic problems currently limiting Augmented Reality
applications is the registration problem. The objects in the real and virtual worlds
must be properly aligned with respect to each other, or the illusion that the two worlds
coexist will be compromised. More seriously, many applications demand accurate
registration. For example, recall the needle biopsy application. If the virtual object is
not where the real tumor is, the surgeon will miss the tumor and the biopsy will fail.
Without accurate registration, Augmented Reality will not be accepted in many
applications.
Registration problems also exist in Virtual Environments, but they are not
nearly as serious because they are harder to detect than in Augmented Reality. Since
the user only sees virtual objects in VE applications, registration errors result in
visual-kinesthetic and visual-proprioceptive conflicts. Such conflicts between
different human senses may be a source of motion sickness [Pausch92]. Because the
kinesthetic and proprioceptive systems are much less sensitive than the visual system,
visual-kinesthetic and visual-proprioceptive conflicts are less noticeable than visualvisual conflicts. For example, a user wearing a closed-view HMD might hold up her
real hand and see a virtual hand. This virtual hand should be displayed exactly where
she would see her real hand, if she were not wearing an HMD. But if the virtual hand
is wrong by five millimeters, she may not detect that unless actively looking for such
errors. The same error is much more obvious in a see-through HMD, where the
conflict is visual-visual.
Furthermore, a phenomenon known as visual capture [Welch78] makes it
even more difficult to detect such registration errors. Visual capture is the tendency
of the brain to believe what it sees rather than what it feels, hears, etc. That is, visual
information tends to override all other senses. When watching a television program,
a viewer believes the sounds come from the mouths of the actors on the screen, even
though they actually come from a speaker in the TV. Ventriloquism works because
of visual capture. Similarly, a user might believe that her hand is where the virtual
hand is drawn, rather than where her real hand actually is, because of visual capture.
This effect increases the amount of registration error users can tolerate in Virtual
Environment systems. If the errors are systematic, users might even be able to adapt
to the new environment, given a long exposure time of several hours or days
[Welch78].
Augmented Reality demands much more accurate registration than Virtual
Environments [Azuma93]. Imagine the same scenario of a user holding up her hand,
but this time wearing a see-through HMD. Registration errors now result in visualvisual conflicts between the images of the virtual and real hands. Such conflicts are
easy to detect because of the resolution of the human eye and the sensitivity of the
human visual system to differences. Even tiny offsets in the images of the real and
virtual hands are easy to detect.
What angular accuracy is needed for good registration in Augmented Reality?
A simple demonstration will show the order of magnitude required. Take out a dime
and hold it at arm's length, so that it looks like a circle. The diameter of the dime
covers about 1.2 to 2.0 degrees of arc, depending on your arm length. In comparison,
the width of a full moon is about 0.5 degrees of arc! Now imagine a virtual object
superimposed on a real object, but offset by the diameter of the full moon. Such a
difference would be easy to detect. Thus, the angular accuracy required is a small
fraction of a degree. The lower limit is bounded by the resolving power of the human
eye itself. The central part of the retina is called the fovea, which has the highest
density of color-detecting cones, about 120 per degree of arc, corresponding to a
spacing of half a minute of arc [Jain89]. Observers can differentiate between a dark
and light bar grating when each bar subtends about one minute of arc, and under
special circumstances they can detect even smaller differences [Doenges85].
However, existing HMD trackers and displays are not capable of providing one
minute of arc in accuracy, so the present achievable accuracy is much worse than that
ultimate lower bound. In practice, errors of a few pixels are detectable in modern
Registration of real and virtual objects is not limited to AR. Special-effects
artists seamlessly integrate computer-generated 3-D objects with live actors in film
and video. The difference lies in the amount of control available. With film, a
director can carefully plan each shot, and artists can spend hours per frame, adjusting
each by hand if necessary, to achieve perfect registration. As an interactive medium,
AR is far more difficult to work with. The AR system cannot control the motions of
the HMD wearer. The user looks where she wants, and the system must respond
within tens of milliseconds.
Registration errors are difficult to adequately control because of the high
accuracy requirements and the numerous sources of error. These sources of error can
be divided into two types: static and dynamic. Static errors are the ones that cause
registration errors even when the user's viewpoint and the objects in the environment
remain completely still. Dynamic errors are the ones that have no effect until either
the viewpoint or the objects begin moving.
For current HMD-based systems, dynamic errors are by far the largest
contributors to registration errors, but static errors cannot be ignored either. The next
two sections discuss static and dynamic errors and what has been done to reduce
them. See [Holloway95] for a thorough analysis of the sources and magnitudes of
registration errors.
Static errors
The four main sources of static errors are:
• Optical distortion
• Errors in the tracking system
• Mechanical misalignments
• Incorrect viewing parameters (e.g., field of view, tracker-to-eye position
and orientation, interpupillary distance)
1) Distortion in the optics: Optical distortions exist in most camera and lens
systems, both in the cameras that record the real environment and in the optics used
for the display. Because distortions are usually a function of the radial distance away
from the optical axis, wide field-of-view displays can be especially vulnerable to this
error. Near the center of the field-of-view, images are relatively undistorted, but far
away from the center, image distortion can be large. For example, straight lines may
appear curved. In a see-through HMD with narrow field-of-view displays, the optical
combiners add virtually no distortion, so the user's view of the real world is not
warped. However, the optics used to focus and magnify the graphic images from the
display monitors can introduce distortion. This mapping of distorted virtual images
on top of an undistorted view of the real world causes static registration errors. The
cameras and displays may also have nonlinear distortions that cause errors
[Deering92].
Optical distortions are usually systematic errors, so they can be mapped and
compensated. This mapping may not be trivial, but it is often possible. For example,
[Robinett92b] describes the distortion of one commonly-used set of HMD optics.
The distortions might be compensated by additional optics. [Edwards93] describes
such a design for a video see-through HMD. This can be a difficult design problem,
though, and it will add weight, which is not desirable in HMDs. An alternate
approach is to do the compensation digitally. This can be done by image warping
techniques, both on the digitized video and the graphic images. Typically, this
involves predistorting the images so that they will appear undistorted after being
displayed [Watson95]. Another way to perform digital compensation on the graphics
is to apply the predistortion functions on the vertices of the polygons, in screen space,
before rendering [Rolland93]. This requires subdividing polygons that cover large
areas in screen space. Both digital compensation methods can be computationally
expensive, often requiring special hardware to accomplish in real time. Holloway
determined that the additional system delay required by the distortion compensation
adds more registration error than the distortion compensation removes, for typical
head motion [Holloway95].
2) Errors in the tracking system: Errors in the reported outputs from the
tracking and sensing systems are often the most serious type of static registration
errors. These distortions are not easy to measure and eliminate, because that requires
another "3-D ruler" that is more accurate than the tracker being tested. These errors
are often non-systematic and difficult to fully characterize. Almost all commerciallyavailable tracking systems are not accurate enough to satisfy the requirements of AR
systems. Section 5 discusses this important topic further.
3) Mechanical misalignments: Mechanical misalignments are discrepancies
between the model or specification of the hardware and the actual physical properties
of the real system. For example, the combiners, optics, and monitors in an optical
see-through HMD may not be at the expected distances or orientations with respect to
each other. If the frame is not sufficiently rigid, the various component parts may
change their relative positions as the user moves around, causing errors. Mechanical
misalignments can cause subtle changes in the position and orientation of the
projected virtual images that are difficult to compensate. While some alignment
errors can be calibrated, for many others it may be more effective to "build it right"
initially.
4) Incorrect viewing parameters: Incorrect viewing parameters, the last major
source of static registration errors, can be thought of as a special case of alignment
errors where calibration techniques can be applied. Viewing parameters specify how
to convert the reported head or camera locations into viewing matrices used by the
scene generator to draw the graphic images. For an HMD-based system, these
parameters include:
• Center of projection and viewport dimensions
• Offset, both in translation and orientation, between the location of the
head tracker and the user's eyes
• Field of view
Incorrect viewing parameters cause systematic static errors. Take the example
of a head tracker located above a user's eyes. If the vertical translation offsets
between the tracker and the eyes are too small, all the virtual objects will appear
lower than they should.
In some systems, the viewing parameters are estimated by manual
adjustments, in a non-systematic fashion. Such approaches proceed as follows: place
a real object in the environment and attempt to register a virtual object with that real
object. While wearing the HMD or positioning the cameras, move to one viewpoint
or a few selected viewpoints and manually adjust the location of the virtual object and
the other viewing parameters until the registration "looks right." This may achieve
satisfactory results if the environment and the viewpoint remain static. However,
such approaches require a skilled user and generally do not achieve robust results for
many viewpoints. Achieving good registration from a single viewpoint is much
easier than registration from a wide variety of viewpoints using a single set of
parameters. Usually what happens is satisfactory registration at one viewpoint, but
when the user walks to a significantly different viewpoint, the registration is
inaccurate because of incorrect viewing parameters or tracker distortions. This means
many different sets of parameters must be used, which is a less than satisfactory
Another approach is to directly measure the parameters, using various
measuring tools and sensors. For example, a commonly-used optometrist's tool can
measure the interpupillary distance. Rulers might measure the offsets between the
tracker and eye positions. Cameras could be placed where the user's eyes would
normally be in an optical see-through HMD. By recording what the camera sees,
through the see-through HMD, of the real environment, one might be able to
determine several viewing parameters. So far, direct measurement techniques have
enjoyed limited success [Janin93].
View-based tasks are another approach to calibration. These ask the user to
perform various tasks that set up geometric constraints. By performing several tasks,
enough information is gathered to determine the viewing parameters. For example,
[Azuma94] asked a user wearing an optical see-through HMD to look straight
through a narrow pipe mounted in the real environment. This sets up the constraint
that the user's eye must be located along a line through the center of the pipe.
Combining this with other tasks created enough constraints to measure all the viewing
parameters. [Caudell92] used a different set of tasks, involving lining up two circles
that specified a cone in the real environment. [Oishi96] moves virtual cursors to
appear on top of beacons in the real environment. All view-based tasks rely upon the
user accurately performing the specified task and assume the tracker is accurate. If
the tracking and sensing equipment is not accurate, then multiple measurements must
be taken and optimizers used to find the "best-fit" solution [Janin93].
For video-based systems, an extensive body of literature exists in the robotics
and photogrammetry communities on camera calibration techniques; see the
references in [Lenz88] for a start. Such techniques compute a camera's viewing
parameters by taking several pictures of an object of fixed and sometimes unknown
geometry. These pictures must be taken from different locations. Matching points in
the 2-D images with corresponding 3-D points on the object sets up mathematical
constraints. With enough pictures, these constraints determine the viewing
parameters and the 3-D location of the calibration object. Alternately, they can serve
to drive an optimization routine that will search for the best set of viewing parameters
that fits the collected data. Several AR systems have used camera calibration
techniques, including [ARGOS94] [Bajura93] [Drascic91] [Tuceryan95]
[Whitaker95].
Dynamic errors
Dynamic errors occur because of system delays, or lags. The end-to-end
system delay is defined as the time difference between the moment that the tracking
system measures the position and orientation of the viewpoint to the moment when
the generated images corresponding to that position and orientation appear in the
displays. These delays exist because each component in an Augmented Reality
system requires some time to do its job. The delays in the tracking subsystem, the
communication delays, the time it takes the scene generator to draw the appropriate
images in the frame buffers, and the scanout time from the frame buffer to the
displays all contribute to end-to-end lag. End-to-end delays of 100 ms are fairly
typical on existing systems. Simpler systems can have less delay, but other systems
have more. Delays of 250 ms or more can exist on slow, heavily loaded, or
networked systems.
End-to-end system delays cause registration errors only when motion occurs.
Assume that the viewpoint and all objects remain still. Then the lag does not cause
registration errors. No matter how long the delay is, the images generated are
appropriate, since nothing has moved since the time the tracker measurement was
taken. Compare this to the case with motion. For example, assume a user wears a
see-through HMD and moves her head. The tracker measures the head at an initial
time t. The images corresponding to time t will not appear until some future time t2,
because of the end-to-end system delays. During this delay, the user's head remains
in motion, so when the images computed at time t finally appear, the user sees them at
a different location than the one they were computed for. Thus, the images are
incorrect for the time they are actually viewed. To the user, the virtual objects appear
to "swim around" and "lag behind" the real objects. This was graphically
demonstrated in a videotape of UNC's ultrasound experiment shown at SIGGRAPH
'92 [Bajura92]. In Figure 17, the picture on the left shows what the registration looks
like when everything stands still. The virtual gray trapezoidal region represents what
the ultrasound wand is scanning. This virtual trapezoid should be attached to the tip
of the real ultrasound wand. This is the case in the picture on the left, where the tip of
the wand is visible at the bottom of the picture, to the left of the "UNC" letters. But
when the head or the wand moves, large dynamic registration errors occur, as shown
in the picture on the right. The tip of the wand is now far away from the virtual
trapezoid. Also note the motion blur in the background, which is caused by the user's
head motion.
Figure 17:
Effect of motion and system delays on registration. Picture on the
left is a static scene. Picture on the right shows motion. (Courtesy UNC Chapel
Hill Dept. of Computer Science)
System delays seriously hurt the illusion that the real and virtual worlds
coexist because they cause large registration errors. With a typical end-to-end lag of
100 ms and a moderate head rotation rate of 50 degrees per second, the angular
dynamic error is 5 degrees. At a 68 cm arm length, this results in registration errors
of almost 60 mm. System delay is the largest single source of registration error in
existing AR systems, outweighing all others combined [Holloway95].
Methods used to reduce dynamic registration fall under four main categories:
• Reduce system lag
• Reduce apparent lag
• Match temporal streams (with video-based systems)
• Predict future locations
1) Reduce system lag: The most direct approach is simply to reduce, or ideally
eliminate, the system delays. If there are no delays, there are no dynamic errors.
Unfortunately, modern scene generators are usually built for throughput, not minimal
latency [Foley90]. It is sometimes possible to reconfigure the software to sacrifice
throughput to minimize latency. For example, the SLATS system completes
rendering a pair of interlaced NTSC images in one field time (16.67 ms) on Pixel-
Planes 5 [Olano95]. Being careful about synchronizing pipeline tasks can also reduce
the end-to-end lag [Wloka95a].
System delays are not likely to completely disappear anytime soon. Some
believe that the current course of technological development will automatically solve
this problem. Unfortunately, it is difficult to reduce system delays to the point where
they are no longer an issue. Recall that registration errors must be kept to a small
fraction of a degree. At the moderate head rotation rate of 50 degrees per second,
system lag must be 10 ms or less to keep angular errors below 0.5 degrees. Just
scanning out a frame buffer to a display at 60 Hz requires 16.67 ms. It might be
possible to build an HMD system with less than 10 ms of lag, but the drastic cut in
throughput and the expense required to construct the system would make alternate
solutions attractive. Minimizing system delay is important, but reducing delay to the
point where it is no longer a source of registration error is not currently practical.
2) Reduce apparent lag: Image deflection is a clever technique for reducing
the amount of apparent system delay for systems that only use head orientation
[Burbidge89] [Regan94] [Riner92] [So92]. It is a way to incorporate more recent
orientation measurements into the late stages of the rendering pipeline. Therefore, it
is a feed-forward technique. The scene generator renders an image much larger than
needed to fill the display. Then just before scanout, the system reads the most recent
orientation report. The orientation value is used to select the fraction of the frame
buffer to send to the display, since small orientation changes are equivalent to shifting
the frame buffer output horizontally and vertically.
Image deflection does not work on translation, but image warping techniques
might [Chen93] [McMillan95a] [McMillan95b]. After the scene generator renders
the image based upon the head tracker reading, small adjustments in orientation and
translation could be done after rendering by warping the image. These techniques
assume knowledge of the depth at every pixel, and the warp must be done much more
quickly than rerendering the entire image.
3) Match temporal streams: In video-based AR systems, the video camera
and digitization hardware impose inherent delays on the user's view of the real world.
This is potentially a blessing when reducing dynamic errors, because it allows the
temporal streams of the real and virtual images to be matched. Additional delay is
added to the video from the real world to match the scene generator delays in
generating the virtual images. This additional delay to the video streeam will
probably not remain constant, since the scene generator delay will vary with the
complexity of the rendered scene. Therefore, the system must dynamically
synchronize the two streams.
Note that while this reduces conflicts between the real and virtual, now both
the real and virtual objects are delayed in time. While this may not be bothersome for
small delays, it is a major problem in the related area of telepresence systems and will
not be easy to overcome. For long delays, this can produce negative effects such as
pilot-induced oscillation.
4) Predict: The last method is to predict the future viewpoint and object
locations. If the future locations are known, the scene can be rendered with these
future locations, rather than the measured locations. Then when the scene finally
appears, the viewpoints and objects have moved to the predicted locations, and the
graphic images are correct at the time they are viewed. For short system delays
(under ~80 ms), prediction has been shown to reduce dynamic errors by up to an
order of magnitude [Azuma94]. Accurate predictions require a system built for realtime measurements and computation. Using inertial sensors makes predictions more
accurate by a factor of 2-3. Predictors have been developed for a few AR systems
[Emura94] [Zikan94b], but the majority were implemented and evaluated with VE
systems (see the reference list in [Azuma94]). More work needs to be done on ways
of comparing the theoretical performance of various predictors [Azuma95a]
[Azuma95b] and in developing prediction models that better match actual head
motion [Wu95].
Vision-based techniques
Mike Bajura and Ulrich Neumann [Bajura95] point out that registration based
solely on the information from the tracking system is like building an "open-loop"
controller. The system has no feedback on how closely the real and virtual actually
match. Without feedback, it is difficult to build a system that achieves perfect
matches. However, video-based approaches can use image processing or computer
vision techniques to aid registration. Since video-based AR systems have a digitized
image of the real environment, it may be possible to detect features in the
environment and use those to enforce registration. They call this a "closed-loop"
approach, since the digitized image provides a mechanism for bringing feedback into
the system.
This is not a trivial task. This detection and matching must run in real time
and must be robust. This often requires special hardware and sensors. However, it is
also not an "AI-complete" problem because this is simpler than the general computer
vision problem.
For example, in some AR applications it is acceptable to place fiducials in the
environment. These fiducials may be LEDs [Bajura95] or special markers
[Mellor95a] [Mellor95b] [Neumann96]. Recent ultrasound experiments at UNC
Chapel Hill have used colored dots as fiducials [State96a]. The locations or patterns
of the fiducials are assumed to be known. Image processing detects the locations of
the fiducials, then those are used to make corrections that enforce proper registration.
These routines assume that one or more fiducials are visible at all times;
without them, the registration can fall apart. But when the fiducials are visible, the
results can be accurate to one pixel, which is as about close as one can get with video
techniques. Figure 18, taken from [Bajura95], shows a virtual arrow and a virtual
chimney exactly aligned with their desired points on two real objects. The real
objects each have an LED to aid the registration. Figures 19 through 21 show
registration from [Mellor95a], which uses dots with a circular pattern as the fiducials.
The registration is also nearly perfect. Figure 22 demonstrates merging virtual
objects with the real environment, using colored dots as the fiducials in a video-based
approach. In the picture on the left, the stack of cards in the center are real, but the
ones on the right are virtual. Notice that they penetrate one of the blocks. In the
image on the right, a virtual spiral object interpenetrates the real blocks and table and
also casts virtual shadows upon the real objects [State96a].
Figure 18:
A virtual arrow and virtual chimney aligned with two real objects.
(Courtesy Mike Bajura, UNC Chapel Hill Dept. of Computer Science, and
Ulrich Neumann, USC)
Figure 19:
Real skull with five fiducials. (Courtesy J.P. Mellor, MIT AI Lab)
Figure 20:
Virtual wireframe skull registered with real skull. (Courtesy J.P.
Mellor, MIT AI Lab)
Figure 21:
Virtual wireframe skull registered with real skull moved to a
different position. (Courtesy J.P. Mellor, MIT AI Lab)
Figure 22:
Virtual cards and spiral object merged with real blocks and table.
(Courtesy Andrei State, UNC Chapel Hill Dept. of Computer Science.)
Instead of fiducials, [Uenohara95] uses template matching to achieve
registration. Template images of the real object are taken from a variety of
viewpoints. These are used to search the digitized image for the real object. Once
that is found, a virtual wireframe can be superimposed on the real object.
Recent approaches in video-based matching avoid the need for any
calibration. [Kutukalos96] represents virtual objects in a non-Euclidean, affine frame
of reference that allows rendering without knowledge of camera parameters. [Iu96]
extracts contours from the video of the real world, then uses an optimization
technique to match the contours of the rendered 3-D virtual object with the contour
extracted from the video. Note that calibration-free approaches may not recover all
the information required to perform all potential AR tasks. For example, these two
approaches do not recover true depth information, which is useful when compositing
the real and the virtual.
Techniques that use fiducials as the sole tracking source determine the relative
projective relationship between the objects in the environment and the video camera.
While this is enough to ensure registration, it does not provide all the information one
might need in some AR applications, such as the absolute (rather than relative)
locations of the objects and the camera. Absolute locations are needed to include
virtual and real objects that are not tracked by the video camera, such as a 3-D pointer
or other virtual objects not directly tied to real objects in the scene.
Additional sensors besides video cameras can aid registration. Both
[Mellor95a] [Mellor95b] and [Grimson94] [Grimson95] use a laser rangefinder to
acquire an initial depth map of the real object in the environment. Given a matching
virtual model, the system can match the depth maps from the real and virtual until
they are properly aligned, and that provides the information needed for registration.
Another way to reduce the difficulty of the problem is to accept the fact that
the system may not be robust and may not be able to perform all tasks automatically.
Then it can ask the user to perform certain tasks. The system in [Sharma94] expects
manual intervention when the vision algorithms fail to identify a part because the
view is obscured. The calibration techniques in [Tuceryan95] are heavily based on
computer vision techniques, but they ask the user to manually intervene by specifying
correspondences when necessary.
Current status
The registration requirements for AR are difficult to satisfy, but a few systems
have achieved good results. [Azuma94] is an open-loop system that shows
registration typically within ±5 millimeters from many viewpoints for an object at
about arm's length. Closed-loop systems, however, have demonstrated nearly perfect
registration, accurate to within a pixel [Bajura95] [Mellor95a] [Mellor95b]
[Neumann96] [State96a].
The registration problem is far from solved. Many systems assume a static
viewpoint, static objects, or even both. Even if the viewpoint or objects are allowed
to move, they are often restricted in how far they can travel. Registration is shown
under controlled circumstances, often with only a small number of real-world objects,
or where the objects are already well-known to the system. For example, registration
may only work on one object marked with fiducials, and not on any other objects in
the scene. Much more work needs to be done to increase the domains in which
registration is robust. Duplicating registration methods remains a nontrivial task, due
to both the complexity of the methods and the additional hardware required. If
simple yet effective solutions could be developed, that would speed the acceptance of
AR systems.
Accurate registration and positioning of virtual objects in the real environment
requires accurate tracking of the user's head and sensing the locations of other objects
in the environment. The biggest single obstacle to building effective Augmented
Reality systems is the requirement of accurate, long-range sensors and trackers that
report the locations of the user and the surrounding objects in the environment. For
details of tracking technologies, see the surveys in [Ferrin91] [Meyer92] and Chapter
5 of [Durlach95]. Commercial trackers are aimed at the needs of Virtual
Environments and motion capture applications. Compared to those two applications,
Augmented Reality has much stricter accuracy requirements and demands larger
working volumes. No tracker currently provides high accuracy at long ranges in real
time. More work needs to be done to develop sensors and trackers that can meet
these stringent requirements.
Specifically, AR demands more from trackers and sensors in three areas:
• Greater input variety and bandwidth
• Higher accuracy
• Longer range
Input variety and bandwidth
VE systems are primarily built to handle output bandwidth: the images
displayed, sounds generated, etc. The input bandwidth is tiny: the locations of the
user's head and hands, the outputs from the buttons and other control devices, etc.
AR systems, however, will need a greater variety of input sensors and much more
input bandwidth [Buxton93]. There are a greater variety of possible input sensors
than output displays. Outputs are limited to the five human senses. Inputs can come
from anything a sensor can detect. Robinett speculates that Augmented Reality may
be useful in any application that requires displaying information not directly available
or detectable by human senses by making that information visible (or audible,
touchable, etc.) [Robinett92a]. Recall that the proposed medical applications in
Section 2.1 use CT, MRI and ultrasound sensors as inputs. Other future applications
might use sensors to extend the user's visual range into infrared or ultraviolet
frequencies, and remote sensors would let users view objects hidden by walls or hills.
Conceptually, anything not detectable by human senses but detectable by machines
might be transduced into something that a user can sense in an AR system.
Range data is a particular input that is vital for many AR applications
[Aliaga97] [Breen96]. The AR system knows the distance to the virtual objects,
because that model is built into the system. But the AR system may not know where
all the real objects are in the environment. The system might assume that the entire
environment is measured at the beginning and remains static thereafter. However,
some useful applications will require a dynamic environment, in which real objects
move, so the objects must be tracked in real time. However, for some applications a
depth map of the real environment would be sufficient. That would allow real objects
to occlude virtual objects through a pixel-by-pixel depth value comparison.
Acquiring this depth map in real time is not trivial. Sensors like laser rangefinders
might be used. Many computer vision techniques for recovering shape through
various strategies (e.g., "shape from stereo," or "shape from shading") have been
tried. A recent work [Wloka95b] uses intensity-based matching from a pair of stereo
images to do depth recovery. Recovering depth through existing vision techniques is
difficult to do robustly in real time.
Finally, some annotation applications require access to a detailed database of
the environment, which is a type of input to the system. For example, the
architectural application of "seeing into the walls" assumes that the system has a
database of where all the pipes, wires and other hidden objects are within the
building. Such a database may not be readily available, and even if it is, it may not be
in a format that is easily usable. For example, the data may not be grouped to
segregate the parts of the model that represent wires from the parts that represent
pipes. Thus, a significant modelling effort may be required and should be taken into
consideration when building an AR application.
High accuracy
The accuracy requirements for the trackers and sensors are driven by the
accuracies needed for visual registration, as described in Section 4. For many
approaches, the registration is only as accurate as the tracker. Therefore, the AR
system needs trackers that are accurate to around a millimeter and a tiny fraction of a
degree, across the entire working range of the tracker.
Few trackers can meet this specification, and every technology has
weaknesses. Some mechanical trackers are accurate enough, although they tether the
user to a limited working volume. Magnetic trackers are vulnerable to distortion by
metal in the environment, which exists in many desired AR application environments.
Ultrasonic trackers suffer from noise and are difficult to make accurate at long ranges
because of variations in the ambient temperature. Optical technologies [Janin94]
have distortion and calibration problems. Inertial trackers drift with time. Of the
individual technologies, optical technologies show the most promise due to trends
toward high-resolution digital cameras, real-time photogrammetric techniques, and
structured light sources that result in more signal strength at long distances. Future
tracking systems that can meet the stringent requirements of AR will probably be
hybrid systems [Azuma93] [Durlach95] [Foxlin96] [Zikan94b], such as a
combination of inertial and optical technologies. Using multiple technologies opens
the possibility of covering for each technology's weaknesses by combining their
strengths.
Attempts have been made to calibrate the distortions in commonly-used
magnetic tracking systems [Bryson92] [Ghazisaedy95]. These have succeeded at
removing much of the gross error from the tracker at long ranges, but not to the level
required by AR systems [Holloway95]. For example, mean errors at long ranges can
be reduced from several inches to around one inch.
The requirements for registering other sensor modes are not nearly as
stringent. For example, the human auditory system is not very good at localizing
deep bass sounds, which is why subwoofer placement is not critical in a home theater
Long range
Few trackers are built for accuracy at long ranges, since most VE applications
do not require long ranges. Motion capture applications track an actor's body parts to
control a computer-animated character or for the analysis of an actor's movements.
This is fine for position recovery, but not for orientation. Orientation recovery is
based upon the computed positions. Even tiny errors in those positions can cause
orientation errors of a few degrees, which is too large for AR systems.
Two scalable tracking systems for HMDs have been described in the literature
[Ward92] [Sowizral93]. A scalable system is one that can be expanded to cover any
desired range, simply by adding more modular components to the system. This is
done by building a cellular tracking system, where only nearby sources and sensors
are used to track a user. As the user walks around, the set of sources and sensors
changes, thus achieving large working volumes while avoiding long distances
between the current working set of sources and sensors. While scalable trackers can
be effective, they are complex and by their very nature have many components,
making them relatively expensive to construct.
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is used to track the locations of vehicles
almost anywhere on the planet. It might be useful as one part of a long range tracker
for AR systems. However, by itself it will not be sufficient. The best reported
accuracy is approximately one centimeter, assuming that many measurements are
integrated (so that accuracy is not generated in real time), when GPS is run in
differential mode. That is not sufficiently accurate to recover orientation from a set
of positions on a user.
Tracking an AR system outdoors in real time with the required accuracy has
not been demonstrated and remains an open problem.
Future directions
This section identifies areas and approaches that require further research to
produce improved AR systems.
Hybrid approaches: Future tracking systems may be hybrids, because
combining approaches can cover weaknesses. The same may be true for other
problems in AR. For example, current registration strategies generally focus on a
single strategy. Future systems may be more robust if several techniques are
combined. An example is combining vision-based techniques with prediction. If the
fiducials are not available, the system switches to open-loop prediction to reduce the
registration errors, rather than breaking down completely. The predicted viewpoints
in turn produce a more accurate initial location estimate for the vision-based
techniques.
Real-time systems and time-critical computing: Many VE systems are not
truly run in real time. Instead, it is common to build the system, often on UNIX, and
then see how fast it runs. This may be sufficient for some VE applications. Since
everything is virtual, all the objects are automatically synchronized with each other.
AR is a different story. Now the virtual and real must be synchronized, and the real
world "runs" in real time. Therefore, effective AR systems must be built with realtime performance in mind. Accurate timestamps must be available. Operating
systems must not arbitrarily swap out the AR software process at any time, for
arbitrary durations. Systems must be built to guarantee completion within specified
time budgets, rather than just "running as quickly as possible." These are
characteristics of flight simulators and a few VE systems [Krueger92]. Constructing
and debugging real-time systems is often painful and difficult, but the requirements
for AR demand real-time performance.
Perceptual and psychophysical studies: Augmented Reality is an area ripe for
psychophysical studies. How much lag can a user detect? How much registration
error is detectable when the head is moving? Besides questions on perception,
psychological experiments that explore performance issues are also needed. How
much does head-motion prediction improve user performance on a specific task?
How much registration error is tolerable for a specific application before performance
on that task degrades substantially? Is the allowable error larger while the user moves
her head versus when she stands still? Furthermore, not much is known about
potential optical illusions caused by errors or conflicts in the simultaneous display of
real and virtual objects [Durlach95].
Few experiments in this area have been performed. Jannick Rolland, Frank
Biocca and their students conducted a study of the effect caused by eye displacements
in video see-through HMDs [Rolland95]. They found that users partially adapted to
the eye displacement, but they also had negative aftereffects after removing the
HMD. Steve Ellis' group at NASA Ames has conducted work on perceived depth in
a see-through HMD [Ellis94] [Ellis95]. ATR has also conducted a study [Utsumi94].
Portability: Section 3.4 explained why some potential AR applications
require giving the user the ability to walk around large environments, even outdoors.
This requires making the equipment self-contained and portable. Existing tracking
technology is not capable of tracking a user outdoors at the required accuracy.
Multimodal displays: Almost all work in AR has focused on the visual sense:
virtual graphic objects and overlays. But Section 3.1 explained that augmentation
might apply to all other senses as well. In particular, adding and removing 3-D sound
is a capability that could be useful in some AR applications.
Social and political issues: Technological issues are not the only ones that
need to be considered when building a real application. There are also social and
political dimensions when getting new technologies into the hands of real users.
Sometimes, perception is what counts, even if the technological reality is different.
For example, if workers perceive lasers to be a health risk, they may refuse to use a
system with lasers in the display or in the trackers, even if those lasers are eye safe.
Ergonomics and ease of use are paramount considerations. Whether AR is truly a
cost-effective solution in its proposed applications has yet to be determined. Another
important factor is whether or not the technology is perceived as a threat to jobs, as a
replacement for workers, especially with many corporations undergoing recent
layoffs. AR may do well in this regard, because it is intended as a tool to make the
user's job easier, rather than something that completely replaces the human worker.
Although technology transfer is not normally a subject of academic papers, it is a real
problem. Social and political concerns should not be ignored during attempts to
move AR out of the research lab and into the hands of real users.
Conclusion
Augmented Reality is far behind Virtual Environments in maturity. Several
commercial vendors sell complete, turnkey Virtual Environment systems. However,
no commercial vendor currently sells an HMD-based Augmented Reality system. A
few monitor-based "virtual set" systems are available, but today AR systems are
primarily found in academic and industrial research laboratories.
The first deployed HMD-based AR systems will probably be in the
application of aircraft manufacturing. Both Boeing [ARPA95] [BoeingTRP94] and
McDonnell Douglas [Neumann96] are exploring this technology. The former uses
optical approaches, while the latter is pursuing video approaches. Boeing has
performed trial runs with workers using a prototype system but has not yet made any
deployment decisions. Annotation and visualization applications in restricted,
limited-range environments are deployable today, although much more work needs to
be done to make them cost effective and flexible. Applications in medical
visualization will take longer. Prototype visualization aids have been used on an
experimental basis, but the stringent registration requirements and ramifications of
mistakes will postpone common usage for many years. AR will probably be used for
medical training before it is commonly used in surgery.
The next generation of combat aircraft will have Helmet-Mounted Sights with
graphics registered to targets in the environment [Wanstall89]. These displays,
combined with short-range steerable missiles that can shoot at targets off-boresight,
give a tremendous combat advantage to pilots in dogfights. Instead of having to be
directly behind his target in order to shoot at it, a pilot can now shoot at anything
within a 60-90 degree cone of his aircraft's forward centerline. Russia and Israel
currently have systems with this capability, and the U.S. is expected to field the AIM-
9X missile with its associated Helmet-Mounted Sight in 2002 [Dornheim95a]
[Dornheim95b]. Registration errors due to delays are a major problem in this
application [Dornheim95c].
Augmented Reality is a relatively new field, where most of the research
efforts have occurred in the past four years, as shown by the references listed at the
end of this paper. The SIGGRAPH "Rediscovering Our Fire" report identified
Augmented Reality as one of four areas where SIGGRAPH should encourage more
submissions [Mair94]. Because of the numerous challenges and unexplored avenues
in this area, AR will remain a vibrant area of research for at least the next several
One area where a breakthrough is required is tracking an HMD outdoors at the
accuracy required by AR. If this is accomplished, several interesting applications will
become possible. Two examples are described here: navigation maps and
visualization of past and future environments.
The first application is a navigation aid to people walking outdoors. These
individuals could be soldiers advancing upon their objective, hikers lost in the woods,
or tourists seeking directions to their intended destination. Today, these individuals
must pull out a physical map and associate what they see in the real environment
around them with the markings on the 2–D map. If landmarks are not easily
identifiable, this association can be difficult to perform, as anyone lost in the woods
can attest. An AR system makes navigation easier by performing the association step
automatically. If the user's position and orientation are known, and the AR system
has access to a digital map of the area, then the AR system can draw the map in 3-D
directly upon the user's view. The user looks at a nearby mountain and sees graphics
directly overlaid on the real environment explaining the mountain's name, how tall it
is, how far away it is, and where the trail is that leads to the top.
The second application is visualization of locations and events as they were in
the past or as they will be after future changes are performed. Tourists that visit
historical sites, such as a Civil War battlefield or the Acropolis in Athens, Greece, do
not see these locations as they were in the past, due to changes over time. It is often
difficult for a modern visitor to imagine what these sites really looked like in the past.
To help, some historical sites stage "Living History" events where volunteers wear
ancient clothes and reenact historical events. A tourist equipped with an outdoors AR
system could see a computer-generated version of Living History. The HMD could
cover up modern buildings and monuments in the background and show, directly on
the grounds at Gettysburg, where the Union and Confederate troops were at the
fateful moment of Pickett's charge. The gutted interior of the modern Parthenon
would be filled in by computer-generated representations of what it looked like in 430
BC, including the long-vanished gold statue of Athena in the middle. Tourists and
students walking around the grounds with such AR displays would gain a much better
understanding of these historical sites and the important events that took place there.
Similarly, AR displays could show what proposed architectural changes would look
like before they are carried out. An urban designer could show clients and politicians
what a new stadium would look like as they walked around the adjoining
neighborhood, to better understand how the stadium project will affect nearby
residents.
After the basic problems with AR are solved, the ultimate goal will be to
generate virtual objects that are so realistic that they are virtually indistinguishable
from the real environment [Fournier94]. Photorealism has been demonstrated in
feature films, but accomplishing this in an interactive application will be much
harder. Lighting conditions, surface reflections, and other properties must be
measured automatically, in real time. More sophisticated lighting, texturing, and
shading capabilities must run at interactive rates in future scene generators.
Registration must be nearly perfect, without manual intervention or adjustments.
While these are difficult problems, they are probably not insurmountable. It took
about 25 years to progress from drawing stick figures on a screen to the photorealistic
dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park." Within another 25 years, we should be able to wear a
pair of AR glasses outdoors to see and interact with photorealistic dinosaurs eating a
tree in our backyard.
Acknowledgements
This paper is an updated version of my course notes for an ACM SIGGRAPH
'95 class called "Developing Advanced Virtual Reality Applications," given in Los
Angeles, CA, in August 1995.
I thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive criticism and
suggestions for improving this paper. I also thank the following individuals and
organizations for sending pictures to include with this paper:
• Mike Bajura, Andrei State, and Linda Houseman, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of Computer Science
• David Drascic and Paul Milgram, University of Toronto
• Steve Feiner and Blair MacIntyre, Columbia University
• Alessandro Giacalone, The European Computer-Industry Research Centre
(ECRC) and David Breen, Caltech
• J.P. Mellor, MIT AI Laboratory
• David Mizell, Boeing
• Ulrich Neumann, University of Southern California
• Jannick Rolland, Center for Research and Engineering in Optics and Lasers
(CREOL) at the University of Central Florida ( )
References and Bibliography
Note: some of these references are available electronically at the following sites on
the World Wide Web:
Columbia U.
 
 
MIT AI Lab
 
UNC Chapel Hill
 
U. Toronto
 
Ahlers, Klaus H., André Kramer, David E. Breen, Pierre-Yves
Chevalier, Chris Crampton, Eric Rose, Mihran Tuceryan, Ross T.
Whitaker and Douglas Greer. Distributed Augmented Reality for
Collaborative Design Applications. Proceedings of Eurographics
'95 , 3-14.
Aliaga, Daniel G. Virtual Objects in the Real World.
Communications of the ACM 40, 3 , 49-54.
ARGOS Virtual Pointer Camera Calibration Procedure. WWW
page = 
Calibration.html
WWW page = 
Azuma, Ronald. Tracking Requirements for Augmented Reality.
Communications of the ACM 36, 7 , 50-51.
Azuma, Ronald, and Gary Bishop. Improving Static and Dynamic
Registration in a See-Through HMD. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
‘94 . In Computer Graphics,
Annual Conference Series, 1994, 197-204.
Azuma, Ronald T. Predictive Tracking for Augmented Reality.
Ph.D. dissertation. UNC Chapel Hill Department of Computer
Science technical report TR95-007 .
Azuma, Ronald, and Gary Bishop. A Frequency-Domain Analysis
of Head-Motion Prediction. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ‘95 . In Computer Graphics, Annual
Conference Series, 1995, 401-408.
Barfield95
Barfield, Woodrow, Craig Rosenberg, and Wouter A. Lotens.
Augmented-Reality Displays. In Barfield, Woodrow and Thomas
A. Furness III (editors). Virtual Environments and Advanced
Interface Design. Oxford University Press , 542-575. ISBN
0-19-507555-2.
Bajura, Mike, Henry Fuchs, and Ryutarou Ohbuchi. Merging
Virtual Reality with the Real World: Seeing Ultrasound Imagery
Within the Patient. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ‘92 . In Computer Graphics 26, 2 , 203-
Bajura, Mike. Camera Calibration for Video See-Through Head-
Mounted Display. UNC Chapel Hill Department of Computer
Science technical report TR93-048 , 6 pages.
Bajura, Michael and Ulrich Neumann. Dynamic Registration
Correction in Video-Based Augmented Reality Systems. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 15, 5 , 52-
Betting, Fabienne, Jacques Feldmar, Nicholas Ayache, and
Frédéric Devernay. A New Framework for Fusing Stereo Images
with Volumetric Medical Images. Proceedings of Computer
Vision, Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95 (CVRMed
'95) , 30-39.
BoeingTRP94
WWW page = 
TDS/Factsheets/Boeing.html .
Bowskill95
Bowskill, Jerry and John Downie. Extending the Capabilities of
the Human Visual System: An Introduction to Enhanced Reality.
Computer Graphics 29, 2 , 61-65.
Breen, David E., Ross T. Whitaker, Eric Rose and Mihran
Tuceryan. Interactive Occlusion and Automatic Object Placement
for Augmented Reality. Proceedings of Eurographics '96
 , 11-22.
Brooks, Frederick P. Jr. The Computer Scientist as Toolsmith II.
CACM 39, 3 , 61-68.
Bryson, Steve. Measurement and Calibration of Static Distortion
of Position Data from 3D Trackers. Proceedings of SPIE Vol.
1669: Stereoscopic Displays and Applications III , 244-255.
Burbidge89
Burbidge, Dick, and Paul M. Murray. Hardware Improvements to
the Helmet-Mounted Projector on the Visual Display Research
Tool (VDRT) at the Naval Training Systems Center. SPIE
Proceedings Vol. 1116 Head-Mounted Displays , 52-59.
Buxton, Bill. Personal communication. MIT Workshop on
Ubiquitous Computing and Augmented Reality .
Caudell, Thomas P. and David W. Mizell. Augmented Reality: An
Application of Heads-Up Display Technology to Manual
Manufacturing Processes. Proceedings of Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences , 659-669.
Caudell, Thomas P. Introduction to Augmented Reality. SPIE
Proceedings volume 2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence
Technologies , 272-
Chen, Shenchang Eric, and Lance Williams. View Interpolation
for Image Synthesis. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ‘93 . In Computer Graphics, Annual Conference
Series, 1993, 279-288.
Deering, Michael. High Resolution Virtual Reality. Proceedings
of SIGGRAPH '92 . In Computer
Graphics 26, 2 , 195-202.
Doenges, Peter K. Overview of Computer Image Generation in
Visual Simulation. SIGGRAPH '85 Course Notes #14 on High
Performance Image Generation Systems .
Dornheim95a
Dornheim, Michael A. and David Hughes. U.S. Intensifies Efforts
to Meet Missile Threat. Aviation Week and Space Technology 143,
16 , 36-39.
Dornheim95b
Dornheim, Michael A. U.S. Fighters to Get Helmet Displays After
2000. Aviation Week and Space Technology 143, 17 , 46-48.
Dornheim95c
Dornheim, Michael A. Helmet-Mounted Sights Must Overcome
Delays. Aviation Week and Space Technology 143, 17 , 54.
Drascic, David and Paul Milgram. Positioning Accuracy of a
Virtual Stereographic Pointer in a Real Stereoscopic Video World.
SPIE Proceedings Volume 1457 - Stereoscopic Displays and
Applications II , 302-313.
Drascic93a
Drascic, D., J.J. Grodski, P. Milgram, K. Ruffo, P. Wong, and S.
Zhai. ARGOS: A Display System for Augmenting Reality. Video
Proceedings of INTERCHI '93: Human Factors in Computing
Systems . Also in
ACM SIGGRAPH Technical Video Review, Volume 88.
Extended abstract in Proceedings of INTERCHI '93, 521.
Drascic93b
Drascic, David. Stereoscopic Vision and Augmented Reality.
Scientific Computing & Automation 9, 7 , 31-34.
Durlach, Nathaniel I. and Anne S. Mavor (editors). Virtual
Reality: Scientific and Technological Challenges. (Report of the
Committee on Virtual Reality Research and Development to the
National Research Council) National Academy Press .
ISBN 0-309-05135-5.
Edwards, Emily, Jannick Rolland, and Kurtis Keller. Video Seethrough Design for Merging of Real and Virtual Environments.
Proceedings of IEEE VRAIS '93 , 222-233.
Edwards, P.J., D.L.G. Hill, D.J. Hawkes, R. Spink, A.C.F.
Colchester, A. Strong, and M. Gleeson. Neurosurgical Guidance
Using the Stereo Microscope. Proceedings of Computer Vision,
Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95 (CVRMed '95)
 , 555-564.
Ellis, Stephen R. and Urs J. Bucher. Distance Perception of
Stereoscopically Presented Virtual Objects Optically
Superimposed on Physical Objects by a Head-Mounted See-
Through Display. Proceedings of 38th Annual Meeting of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , 1300-1305.
Ellis, Stephen R. and Brian M. Menges. Judged Distance to
Virtual Objects in the Near Visual Field. Proceedings of 39th
Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
 , 1400-1404.
Emura, Satoru and Susumu Tachi. Compensation of Time Lag
Between Actual and Virtual Spaces by Multi-Sensor Integration.
Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE International Conference on
Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems , 463-469.
Feiner, Steven, Blair MacIntyre, and Dorée Seligmann.
Knowledge-based Augmented Reality. Communications of the
ACM 36, 7 , 52-62.
Feiner, Steven, Blair MacIntyre, Marcus Haupt, and Eliot
Solomon. Windows on the World: 2D Windows for 3D
Augmented Reality. Proceedings of UIST '93 , 145-155.
Feiner, Steven. Augmented Reality. Course Notes, 2: ACM
SIGGRAPH 1994, 7:1-7:11.
Feiner, Steven. Redefining the User Interface: Augmented Reality.
Course Notes, 2: ACM SIGGRAPH 1994, 18:1-18:7.
Feiner, Steven K., Anthony C. Webster, Theodore E. Krueger III,
Blair MacIntyre, and Edward J. Keller. Architectural Anatomy.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 4, 3 , 318-325.
Ferrin, Frank J. Survey of Helmet Tracking Technologies. SPIE
Proceedings Vol. 1456 Large-Screen Projection, Avionic, and
Helmet-Mounted Displays , 86-94.
Fitzmaurice93
Fitzmaurice, George. Situated Information Spaces: Spatially
Aware Palmtop Computers. CACM 36, 7 , 38-49.
Foley, James D., Andries van Dam, Steven K. Feiner, and John F.
Hughes. Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice (2nd
edition). Addison-Wesley .
Fournier94
Fournier, Alain. Illumination Problems in Computer Augmented
Reality. Journée INRIA, Analyse / Synthèse D'Images , 1-21.
Foxlin, Eric. Inertial Head-Tracker Sensor Fusion by a
Complementary Separate-Bias Kalman Filter. Proceedings of
VRAIS '96 , 185-194.
Ghazisaedy95
Ghazisaedy, Morteza, David Adamczyk, Daniel J. Sandin, Robert
V. Kenyon, and Thomas A. DeFanti. Ultrasonic Calibration of a
Magnetic Tracker in a Virtual Reality Space. Proceedings of
VRAIS '95 , 179-
Grimson, W., T. Lozano-Pérez, W. Wells, G. Ettinger, S. White
and R. Kikinis. An Automatic Registration Method for Frameless
Stereotaxy, Image Guided Surgery, and Enhanced Reality
Visualization. Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
Grimson, W.E.L., G.J. Ettinger, S.J. White, P.L. Gleason, T.
Lozano-Pérez, W.M. Wells III, and R. Kikinis. Evaluating and
Validating an Automated Registration System for Enhanced
Reality Visualization in Surgery. Proceedings of Computer Vision,
Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95 (CVRMed '95)
 , 3-12.
Holloway95
Holloway, Richard. Registration Errors in Augmented Reality.
Ph.D. dissertation. UNC Chapel Hill Department of Computer
Science technical report TR95-016 .
Holmgren92
Holmgren, Douglas E. Design and Construction of a 30-Degree
See-Through Head-Mounted Display. UNC Chapel Hill
Department of Computer Science technical report TR 92-030 , 4 pages.
Iu, Siu-Leong and Kevin W. Rogovin. Registering Perspective
Contours with 3-D Objects Without Correspondence Using
Orthogonal Polynomials. Proceedings of VRAIS '96 , 37-44.
Jain, Anil K. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing. Prentice
Hall . ISBN 0-13-336165-9.
Janin, Adam L., David W. Mizell, and Thomas P. Caudell.
Calibration of Head-Mounted Displays for Augmented Reality
Applications. Proceedings of IEEE VRAIS '93 , 246-255.
Janin, Adam, Karel Zikan, David Mizell, Mike Banner, and Henry
Sowizral. A Videometric Head Tracker for Augmented Reality.
SPIE Proceedings volume 2351: Telemanipulator and
Telepresence Technologies , 308-315.
Kancherla95
Kancherla, Anantha R., Jannick P. Rolland, Donna L. Wright, and
Grigore Burdea. A Novel Virtual Reality Tool for Teaching
Dynamic 3D Anatomy. Proceedings of Computer Vision, Virtual
Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95 (CVRMed '95) , 163-169.
Kim, Won S. Advanced Teleoperation, Graphics Aids, and
Application to Time Delay Environments. Proceedings of the 1st
Industrial Virtual Reality Show and Conference (IVR '93)
 , 202-207.
Kim, Won S. Virtual Reality Calibration and Preview / Predictive
Displays for Telerobotics. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 5, 2 , 173-190.
Krueger, Myron W. Simulation Versus Artificial Reality.
Proceedings of IMAGE VI Conference , 147-155.
Kutulakos96
Kutulakos, Kiriakos N. and James Vallino. Affine Object
Representations for Calibration-Free Augmented Reality.
Proceedings of VRAIS '96 , 25-36.
Lenz, Reimar K. and Roger Y. Tsai. Techniques for Calibration of
the Scale Factor and Image Center for High Accuracy 3-D
Machine Vision Metrology. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 10, 5 , 713-
Lion, Dav, Craig Rosenberg, and Woodrow Barfield. Overlaying
Three-Dimensional Computer Graphics with Stereoscopic Live
Motion Video: Applications for Virtual Environments. Society for
Information Display International Symposium Digest of Technical
Papers , 483-486.
Lorensen93
Lorensen, William, Harvey Cline, Christopher Nafis, Ron Kikinis,
David Altobelli, and Langham Gleason. Enhancing Reality in the
Operating Room. Proceedings of Visualization '93 , 410-415.
MacKay, Wendy, Gilles Velay, Kathy Carter, Chaoying Ma, and
Daniele Pagani. Augmenting Reality: Adding Computational
Dimensions to Paper. CACM 36, 7 , 96-97.
Maes, Pattie. Artificial Life Meets Entertainment: Lifelike
Autonomous Agents. CACM 38, 11 , 108-114.
Madritsch96
Madritsch, F. and M. Gervautz. CCD-Camera Based Optical
Beacon Tracking for Virtual and Augmented Reality. Proceedings
of Eurographics '96 , 288-296.
McMillan95a
McMillan, Leonard and Gary Bishop. Head-Tracked Stereoscopic
Display Using Image Warping. SPIE Proceedings 2409 Electronic
Imaging Science and Technology , 21-30.
McMillan95b
McMillan, Leonard and Gary Bishop. Plenoptic Modeling.
Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ‘95 . In Computer Graphics, Annual Conference Series, 1995,
Mellor, J. P. Enhanced Reality Visualization in a Surgical
Environment. MS Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering,
MIT .
Mellor, J.P. Realtime Camera Calibration for Enhanced Reality
Visualization. Proceedings of Computer Vision, Virtual Reality,
and Robotics in Medicine '95 (CVRMed '95) , 471-475.
Meyer, Kenneth, Hugh L. Applewhite, and Frank A. Biocca. A
Survey of Position-Trackers. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 1, 2 , 173-200.
Milgram, Paul, Shumin Zhai, David Drascic, and Julius J. Grodski.
Applications of Augmented Reality for Human-Robot
Communication. Proceedings of International Conference on
Intelligent Robotics and Systems ,
1467-1472.
Milgram94a
Milgram, Paul, and Fumio Kishino. A Taxonomy of Mixed
Reality Virtual Displays. IEICE Transactions on Information and
Systems E77-D, 9 , 1321-1329.
Milgram94b
Milgram, Paul, Haruo Takemura, Akira Utsumi, and Fumio
Kishino. Augmented Reality: A Class of Displays on the Reality-
Virtuality Continuum. SPIE Proceedings volume 2351:
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies , 282-292.
Milgram, Paul, David Drascic, Julius J. Grodski, Anu Restogi,
Shumin Zhai, and Chin Zhou. Merging Real and Virtual Worlds.
Proceedings of IMAGINA '95 ,
Mine, Mark R. Characterization of End-to-End Delays in Head-
Mounted Display Systems. UNC Chapel Hill Department of
Computer Science technical report TR 93-001 , 11
Neumann, Ulrich and Youngkwan Cho. A Self-Tracking
Augmented Reality System. Proceedings of VRST '96 , 109-115.
Oishi, Takashi and Susumu Tachi. Methods to Calibrate
Projection Transformation Parameters for See-Through Head-
Mounted Displays. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 5, 1 , 122-135.
Olano, Marc, Jon Cohen, Mark Mine, and Gary Bishop.
Combating Graphics System Latency. Proceedings of 1995
Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics , 19-24.
Oyama, Eimei, Naoki Tsunemoto, Susumu Tachi, and Yasuyuki
Inoue. Experimental Study on Remote Manipulation Using Virtual
Reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 2, 2
 , 112-124.
Pausch, Randy, Thomas Crea, and Matthew Conway. A Literature
Survey for Virtual Environments: Military Flight Simulator Visual
Systems and Simulator Sickness. Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments 1, 3 , 344-363.
Peuchot, Bernard, Alain Tanguy, and Michel Eude. Virtual
Reality as an Operative Tool During Scoliosis Surgery.
Proceedings of Computer Vision, Virtual Reality, and Robotics in
Medicine '95 (CVRMed '95) , 549-
Regan, Matthew, and Ronald Pose. Priority Rendering with a
Virtual Reality Address Recalculation Pipeline. Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH ‘94 . In Computer
Graphics, Annual Conference Series, 1994, 155-162.
Rekimoto95a
Rekimoto, Jun, and Katashi Nagao. The World Through the
Computer: Computer Augmented Interaction with Real World
Environments. Proceedings of UIST '95 , 29-36.
Rekimoto95b
Rekimoto, Jun. The Magnifying Glass Approach to Augmented
Reality Systems. Proceedings of ICAT '95 .
Riner, Bruce and Blair Browder. Design Guidelines for a Carrier-
Based Training System. Proceedings of IMAGE VI , 65-73.
Robinett92a
Robinett, Warren. Synthetic Experience: A Proposed Taxonomy.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1, 2 , 229-247.
Robinett92b
Robinett, Warren and Jannick Rolland. A Computational Model
for the Stereoscopic Optics of a Head-Mounted Display.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1, 1 , 45-62.
Rolland, Jannick P., and Terry Hopkins. A Method of
Computational Correction for Optical Distortion in Head-Mounted
Displays. UNC Chapel Hill Department of Computer Science
technical report TR93-045 .
Rolland, Jannick, Rich Holloway, and Henry Fuchs. A Comparison
of Optical and Video See-Through Head-Mounted Displays. SPIE
Proceedings volume 2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence
Technologies , 293-
Rolland, Jannick, Frank Biocca, Todd Barlow, and Anantha
Kancherla. Quantification of Adaptation to Virtual-Eye Location
in See-Thru Head-Mounted Displays. Proceedings of IEEE VRAIS
'95 , 56-66.
Rose, Eric, David Breen, Klaus Ahlers, Chris Crampton, Mihran
Tuceryan, Ross Whitaker, and Douglas Greer. Annotating Real-
World Objects Using Augmented Reality. Proceedings of
Computer Graphics International '95 , 357-370.
Rosen, Joseph M., Hooman Soltanian, Richard J. Redett and
Donald R. Laub. Evolution of Virtual Reality: From Planning to
Performing Surgery. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
15, 2 , 16-22.
Sharma, Rajeev, and Jose Molineros. Role of Computer Vision in
Augmented Virtual Reality. SPIE Proceedings volume 2351:
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies , 220-231.
Simon, David A., Martial Hebert, and Takeo Kanade. Techniques
for Fast and Accurate Intra-Surgical Registration. Proceedings of
the First International Symposium on Medical Robotics and
Computer Assisted Surgery (MRCAS) , 90-97.
Sims, Dave. New Realities in Aircraft Design and Manufacture.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 14, 2 ,
So, Richard H. Y. and Michael J. Griffin. Compensating Lags in
Head-Coupled Displays Using Head Position Prediction and Image
Deflection. Journal of Aircraft 29, 6 , 1064-1068.
Sowizral93
Sowizral, Henry, and James Barnes. Tracking Position and
Orientation in a Large Volume. Proceedings of IEEE VRAIS '93
 , 132-139.
State, Andrei, David T. Chen, Chris Tector, Andrew Brandt, Hong
Chen, Ryutarou Ohbuchi, Mike Bajura and Henry Fuchs. Case
Study: Observing a Volume Rendered Fetus within a Pregnant
Patient. Proceedings of IEEE Visualization '94 , 364-368.
State, Andrei, Gentaro Hirota, David T. Chen, Bill Garrett, and
Mark Livingston. Superior Augmented Reality Registration by
Integrating Landmark Tracking and Magnetic Tracking.
Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ‘96 , 429-438.
State, Andrei, Mark A. Livingston, Gentaro Hirota, William F.
Garrett, Mary C. Whitton, Henry Fuchs and Etta D. Pisano.
Techniques for Augmented-Reality Systems: Realizing
Ultrasound-Guided Needle Biopsies. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
‘96 , 439-446.
Taubes, Gary. Surgery in Cyberspace. Discover 15, 12
 , 84-94.
Tharp, Greg, Samad Hayati and Linh Phan. Virtual Window
Telepresence System for Telerobotic Inspection. SPIE
Proceedings volume 2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence
Technologies , 366-
Torrance95
Torrance, Mark C. Advances in Human-Computer Interaction:
The Intelligent Room. CHI '95 Research Symposium .
Tuceryan95
Tuceryan, Mihran, Douglas S. Greer, Ross T. Whitaker, David
Breen, Chris Crampton, Eric Rose, and Klaus H. Ahlers.
Calibration Requirements and Procedures for Augmented Reality.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 1, 3
 , 255-273.
Uenohara95
Uenohara, Michihiro and Takeo Kanade. Vision-Based Object
Registration for Real-Time Image Overlay. Proceedings of
Computer Vision, Virtual Reality, and Robotics in Medicine '95
(CVRMed '95) , 13-22.
Utsumi, Akira, Paul Milgram, Haruo Takemura, and Fumio
Kishino. Effects of Fuzziness in Perception of Stereoscopically
Presented Virtual Object Location. SPIE Proceedings volume
2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies , 337-344.
Wanstall89
Wanstall, Brian. HUD on the Head for Combat Pilots. Interavia
44 , 334-338. [A89-39227].
Ward, Mark, Ronald Azuma, Robert Bennett, Stefan Gottschalk,
and Henry Fuchs. A Demonstrated Optical Tracker with Scalable
Work Area for Head-Mounted Display Systems. Proceedings of
1992 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics , 43-52.
Watson, Benjamin and Larry Hodges. Using Texture Maps to
Correct for Optical Distortion in Head-Mounted Displays.
Proceedings of IEEE VRAIS '95 , 172-178.
Welch, Robert B. Perceptual Modification: Adapting to Altered
Sensory Environments. Academic Press . ISBN 0-12-
Wellner, Pierre. Interacting with Paper on the DigitalDesk.
CACM 36, 7 , 86-96.
Whitaker95
Whitaker, Ross T., Chris Crampton, David E. Breen, Mihran
Tuceryan and Eric Rose. Object Calibration for Augmented
Reality. Proceedings of Eurographics '95 , 15-27.
Wloka, Matthias M. Lag in Multiprocessor Virtual Reality.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 4, 1 , 50-63.
Wloka, Matthias M. and Brian G. Anderson. Resolving Occlusion
in Augmented Reality. Proceedings of 1995 Symposium on
Interactive 3D Graphics , 5-12.
Wu, Jiann-Rong and Ming Ouhyoung. A 3D Tracking Experiment
on Latency and its Compensation Methods in Virtual
Environments. Proceedings of UIST '95 , 41-49.
Yoo, Terry S., and T. Marc Olano. Instant Hole™ (Windows Onto
Reality). UNC Chapel Hill Department of Computer Science
technical report TR93-027 , 13 pages.
Zikan, Karel, W. Dan Curtis, Henry Sowizral, and Adam Janin.
Fusion of Absolute and Incremental Position and Orientation
Sensors. SPIE Proceedings volume 2351: Telemanipulator and
Telepresence Technologies , 316-327.
Zikan, Karel, W. Dan Curtis, Henry A. Sowizral, and Adam L.
Janin. A Note on Dynamics of Human Head Motions and on
Predictive Filtering of Head-Set Orientations. SPIE Proceedings
volume 2351: Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies
 , 328-336.