DenseCap: Fully Convolutional Localization Networks for Dense Captioning
Justin Johnson∗
Andrej Karpathy∗
Li Fei-Fei
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{jcjohns, karpathy, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu
We introduce the dense captioning task, which requires a
computer vision system to both localize and describe salient
regions in images in natural language. The dense captioning task generalizes object detection when the descriptions
consist of a single word, and Image Captioning when one
predicted region covers the full image. To address the localization and description task jointly we propose a Fully Convolutional Localization Network (FCLN) architecture that
processes an image with a single, efﬁcient forward pass, requires no external regions proposals, and can be trained
end-to-end with a single round of optimization. The architecture is composed of a Convolutional Network, a novel
dense localization layer, and Recurrent Neural Network
language model that generates the label sequences.
evaluate our network on the Visual Genome dataset, which
comprises 94,000 images and 4,100,000 region-grounded
captions. We observe both speed and accuracy improvements over baselines based on current state of the art approaches in both generation and retrieval settings.
1. Introduction
Our ability to effortlessly point out and describe all aspects
of an image relies on a strong semantic understanding of a
visual scene and all of its elements. However, despite numerous potential applications, this ability remains a challenge for our state of the art visual recognition systems.
In the last few years there has been signiﬁcant progress
in image classiﬁcation , where the task is
to assign one label to an image. Further work has pushed
these advances along two orthogonal directions: First, rapid
progress in object detection has identiﬁed models that efﬁciently identify and label multiple salient regions
of an image. Second, recent advances in image captioning
 have expanded the complexity of
the label space from a ﬁxed set of categories to sequence of
words able to express signiﬁcantly richer concepts.
However, despite encouraging progress along the label
density and label complexity axes, these two directions have
∗Indicates equal contribution.
Classification
Captioning
skateboard
Skateboard
Dense Captioning
Orange spotted cat
Skateboard with
red wheels
Cat riding a
skateboard
Brown hardwood
label density
Whole Image
Image Regions
complexity
Figure 1. We address the Dense Captioning task (bottom right) by
generating dense, rich annotations with a single forward pass.
remained separate. In this work we take a step towards unifying these two inter-connected tasks into one joint framework. First, we introduce the dense captioning task (see
Figure 1), which requires a model to predict a set of descriptions across regions of an image. Object detection is hence
recovered as a special case when the target labels consist
of one word, and image captioning is recovered when all
images consist of one region that spans the full image.
Additionally, we develop a Fully Convolutional Localization Network architecture (FCLN) to address the dense
captioning task. Our model is inspired by recent work in
image captioning in that it is composed
of a Convolutional Neural Network followed by a Recurrent Neural Network language model. However, drawing on
work in object detection , our second core contribution
is to introduce a new dense localization layer. This layer is
fully differentiable and can be inserted into any neural network that processes images to enable region-level training
and predictions. Internally, the localization layer predicts a
set of regions of interest in the image and then uses bilinear interpolation to smoothly extract the activations
inside each region.
We evaluate the model on the large-scale Visual Genome
dataset, which contains 94,000 images and 4,100,000 region
captions. Our results show both performance and speed improvements over approaches based on previous state of the
art. We make our code and data publicly available to support further progress on the dense captioning task.
 
2. Related Work
Our work draws on recent work in object detection, image captioning, and soft spatial attention that allows downstream processing of particular regions in the image.
Object Detection. Our core visual processing module is a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) , which has
emerged as a powerful model for visual recognition tasks
 . The ﬁrst application of these models to dense prediction tasks was introduced in R-CNN , where each region of interest was processed independently. Further work
has focused on processing all regions with only single forward pass of the CNN , and on eliminating explicit
region proposal methods by directly predicting the bounding boxes either in the image coordinate system ,
or in a fully convolutional and hence position-invariant
settings . Most related to our approach is the
work of Ren et al. who develop a region proposal network (RPN) that regresses from anchors to regions of interest. However, they adopt a 4-step optimization process,
while our approach does not require training pipelines. Additionally, we replace their RoI pooling mechanism with a
differentiable, spatial soft attention mechanism . In
particular, this change allows us to backpropagate through
the region proposal network and train the whole model
Image Captioning. Several pioneering approaches have
explored the task of describing images with natural language .
More recent approaches based on neural networks have adopted Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) as the core architectural
element for generating captions. These models have previously been used in language modeling ,
where they are known to learn powerful long-term interactions . Several recent approaches to Image Captioning rely on a combination of RNN
language model conditioned on image information. A recent related approach is the work of Xu et al. who use
a soft attention mechanism over regions of the input image with every generated word. Our approach to spatial attention is more general in that the network can process arbitrary afﬁne regions in the image instead of only discrete
grid positions in an intermediate conv volume. However, for
simplicity, during generation we follow Vinyals et al. ,
where the visual information is only passed to the language
model once on the ﬁrst time step.
Finally, the metrics we develop for the dense captioning
task are inspired by metrics developed for image captioning
 .
Overview. Our goal is to design an architecture that jointly
localizes regions of interest and then describes each with
natural language. The primary challenge is to develop a
model that supports end-to-end training with a single step of
optimization, and both efﬁcient and effective inference. Our
proposed architecture (see Figure 2) draws on architectural
elements present in recent work on object detection, image
captioning and soft spatial attention to simultaneously address these design constraints.
In Section 3.1 we ﬁrst describe the components of our
model. Then in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we address the loss
function and the details of training and inference.
3.1. Model Architecture
Convolutional Network
We use the VGG-16 architecture for its state-of-the-art
performance . It consists of 13 layers of 3 × 3 convolutions interspersed with 5 layers of 2 × 2 max pooling.
We remove the ﬁnal pooling layer, so an input image of
shape 3 × W × H gives rise to a tensor of features of shape
C×W ′×H′ where C = 512, W ′ =
, and H′ =
The output of this network encodes the appearance of the
image at a set of uniformly sampled image locations, and
forms the input to the localization layer.
Fully Convolutional Localization Layer
The localization layer receives an input tensor of activations, identiﬁes spatial regions of interest and smoothly extracts a ﬁxed-sized representation from each region. Our
approach is based on that of Faster R-CNN , but we
replace their RoI pooling mechanism with bilinear
interpolation , allowing our model to propagate gradients backward through the coordinates of predicted regions. This modiﬁcation opens up the possibility of predicting afﬁne or morphed region proposals instead of bounding
boxes , but we leave these extensions to future work.
Inputs/outputs. The localization layer accepts a tensor of
activations of size C × W ′ × H′. It then internally selects
B regions of interest and returns three output tensors giving
information about these regions:
1. Region Coordinates: A matrix of shape B × 4 giving
bounding box coordinates for each output region.
2. Region Scores: A vector of length B giving a con-
ﬁdence score for each output region.
Regions with
high conﬁdence scores are more likely to correspond
to ground-truth regions of interest.
3. Region Features: A tensor of shape B × C × X × Y
giving features for output regions; is represented by an
X × Y grid of C-dimensional features.
Convolutional Anchors. Similar to Faster R-CNN ,
our localization layer predicts region proposals by regressing offsets from a set of translation-invariant anchors. In
particular, we project each point in the W ′ × H′ grid of
Conv features:
C x W’ x H’
Region features:
B x C x X x Y
Region Codes:
Striped gray cat
Cats watching TV
Localization Layer
Region Proposals:
4k x W’ x H’
Region scores:
k x W’ x H’
Conv features:
C x W’ x H’
Bilinear Sampler
Region features:
B x 512 x 7 x 7
Sampling Grid:
B x X x Y x 2
Best Proposals:
Recognition
Figure 2. Model overview. An input image is ﬁrst processed a CNN. The Localization Layer proposes regions and smoothly extracts a
batch of corresponding activations using bilinear interpolation. These regions are processed with a fully-connected recognition network
and described with an RNN language model. The model is trained end-to-end with gradient descent.
input features back into the W × H image plane, and consider k anchor boxes of different aspect ratios centered at
this projected point.
For each of these k anchor boxes,
the localization layer predicts a conﬁdence score and four
scalars regressing from the anchor to the predicted box coordinates. These are computed by passing the input feature
map through a 3 × 3 convolution with 256 ﬁlters, a rectiﬁed
linear nonlinearity, and a 1 × 1 convolution with 5k ﬁlters.
This results in a tensor of shape 5k × W ′ × H′ containing
scores and offsets for all anchors.
Box Regression. We adopt the parameterization of 
to regress from anchors to the region proposals. Given an
anchor box with center (xa, ya), width wa, and height ha,
our model predicts scalars (tx, ty, tw, th) giving normalized
offsets and log-space scaling transforms, so that the output
region has center (x, y) and shape (w, h) given by
x = xa + txwa
y = ya + tyha
w = wa exp(tw)
h = ha exp(hw)
Box Sampling. Processing a typical image of size W =
720, H = 540 with k = 12 anchor boxes gives rise to
17,280 region proposals. Since running the recognition network and the language model for all proposals would be
prohibitively expensive, it is necessary to subsample them.
At training time, we follow the approach of and
sample a minibatch containing B = 256 boxes with at most
B/2 positive regions and the rest negatives. A region is positive if it has an intersection over union (IoU) of at least 0.7
with some ground-truth region; in addition, the predicted
region of maximal IoU with each ground-truth region is
A region is negative if it has IoU < 0.3 with
all ground-truth regions. Our sampled minibatch contains
BP ≤B/2 positive regions and BN = B −BP negative
regions, sampled uniformly without replacement from the
set of all positive and all negative regions respectively.
At test time we subsample using greedy non-maximum
suppression (NMS) based on the predicted proposal conﬁdences to select the B = 300 most conﬁdent propoals.
The coordinates and conﬁdences of the sampled proposals are collected into tensors of shape B × 4 and B respectively, and are output from the localization layer.
Bilinear Interpolation. After sampling, we are left with
region proposals of varying sizes and aspect ratios. In order
to interface with the full-connected recognition network and
the RNN language model, we must extract a ﬁxed-size feature representation for each variably sized region proposal.
To solve this problem, Fast R-CNN proposes an RoI
pooling layer where each region proposal is projected onto
the W ′ ×H′ grid of convolutional features and divided into
a coarse X × Y grid aligned to pixel boundaries by rounding. Features are max-pooled within each grid cell, resulting in an X × Y grid of output features.
The RoI pooling layer is a function of two inputs: convolutional features and region proposal coordinates. Gradients
can be propagated backward from the output features to the
input features, but not to the input proposal coordinates. To
overcome this limitation, we replace the RoI pooling layer
with with bilinear interpolation .
Concretely, given an input feature map U of shape C ×
W ′ × H′ and a region proposal, we interpolate the features
of U to produce an output feature map V of shape C ×X ×
Y . After projecting the region proposal onto U we follow
 and compute a sampling grid G of shape X × Y × 2
associating each element of V with real-valued coordinates
into U. If Gi,j = (xi,j, yi,j) then Vc,i,j should be equal to U
at (c, xi,j, yi,j); however since (xi,j, yi,j) are real-valued,
we convolve with a sampling kernel k and set
Uc,i′,j′k(i′ −xi,j)k(j′ −yi,j).
We use bilinear sampling, corresponding to the kernel
k(d) = max(0, 1 −|d|). The sampling grid is a linear
function of the proposal coordinates, so gradients can be
propagated backward into predicted region proposal coordinates. Running bilinear interpolation to extract features for
all sampled regions gives a tensor of shape B ×C ×X ×Y ,
forming the ﬁnal output from the localization layer.
Recognition Network
The recognition network is a fully-connected neural network that processes region features from the localization
layer. The features from each region are ﬂattened into a vector and passed through two full-connected layers, each using rectiﬁed linear units and regularized using Dropout. For
each region this produces a code of dimension D = 4096
that compactly encodes its visual appearance. The codes
for all positive regions are collected into a matrix of shape
B × D and passed to the RNN language model.
In addition, we allow the recognition network one more
chance to reﬁne the conﬁdence and position of each proposal region. It outputs a ﬁnal scalar conﬁdence of each proposed region and four scalars encoding a ﬁnal spatial offset to be applied to the region proposal. These two outputs
are computed as a linear transform from the D-dimensional
code for each region. The ﬁnal box regression uses the same
parameterization as Section 3.1.2.
RNN Language Model
Following previous work , we use the
region codes to condition an RNN language model [16,
Concretely, given a training sequence of tokens s1, . . . , sT , we feed the RNN T + 2 word vectors
x−1, x0, x1, . . . , xT , where x−1 = CNN(I) is the region
code encoded with a linear layer and followed by a ReLU
non-linearity, x0 corresponds to a special START token, and
xt encode each of the tokens st, t = 1, . . . , T. The RNN
computes a sequence of hidden states ht and output vectors
yt using a recurrence formula ht, yt = f(ht−1, xt) (we use
the LSTM recurrence). The vectors yt have size |V |+1
where V is the token vocabulary, and where the additional
one is for a special END token. The loss function on the
vectors yt is the average cross entropy, where the targets at
times t = 0, . . . , T −1 are the token indices for st+1, and
the target at t = T is the END token. The vector y−1 is
ignored. Our tokens and hidden layers have size 512.
At test time we feed the visual information x−1 to the
RNN. At each time step we sample the most likely next
token and feed it to the RNN in the next time step, repeating
the process until the special END token is sampled.
3.2. Loss function
During training our ground truth consists of positive boxes
and descriptions. Our model predicts positions and conﬁdences of sampled regions twice: in the localization layer
and again in the recognition network. We use binary logistic lossses for the conﬁdences trained on sampled positive
and negative regions. For box regression, we use a smooth
L1 loss in transform coordinate space similar to . The
ﬁfth term in our loss function is a cross-entropy term at every time-step of the language model.
We normalize all loss functions by the batch size and
sequence length in the RNN. We searched over an effective setting of the weights between these contributions and
found that a reasonable setting is to use a weight of 0.1 for
the ﬁrst four criterions, and a weight of 1.0 for captioning.
3.3. Training and optimization
We train the full model end-to-end in a single step of optimization. We initialize the CNN with weights pretrained on
ImageNet and all other weights from a gaussian with
standard deviation of 0.01. We use stochastic gradient descent with momentum 0.9 to train the weights of the convolutional network, and Adam to train the other components of the model. We use a learning rate of 1 × 10−6
and set β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99. We begin ﬁne-tuning the layers of the CNN after 1 epoch, and for efﬁciency we do not
ﬁne-tune the ﬁrst four convolutional layers of the network.
Our training batches consist of a single image that has
been resized so that the longer side has 720 pixels. Our
implementation uses Torch7 and . One mini-batch
runs in approximately 300ms on a Titan X GPU and it takes
about three days of training for the model to converge.
4. Experiments
Dataset. Existing datasets that relate images and natural
language either only include full image captions ,
or ground words of image captions in regions but do not
provide individual region captions . We perform our experiments using the Visual Genome (VG) region captions
dataset 1 This dataset contains 94,313 images and 4,100,413
snippets of text (43.5 per image), each grounded to a region of an image. Images were taken from the intersection
of MS COCO and YFCC100M , and annotations were
collected on Amazon Mechanical Turk by asking workers
to draw a bounding box on the image and describe its content in text. Example captions from the dataset include “cats
play with toys hanging from a perch”, “newspapers are scattered across a table”, “woman pouring wine into a glass”,
“mane of a zebra”, and “red light”.
1Dataset in submission, obtained via personal communication.
commit to releasing the relevant parts upon publication.
A man and a woman sitting
at a table with a cake.
A train is traveling down the tracks near a forest.
A large jetliner flying through a blue sky.
A teddy bear with
a red bow on it.
Our Model:
Full Image RNN:
Figure 3. Example captions generated and localized by our model on test images. We render the top few most conﬁdent predictions. On
the bottom row we additionally contrast the amount of information our model generates compared to the Full image RNN.
Preprocessing. We collapse words that appear less than
15 times into a special <UNK> token, giving a vocabulary
of 10,497 words. We strip referring phrases such as “there
is...”, or “this seems to be a”. For efﬁciency we discard all
annotations with more than 10 words (7% of annotations).
We also discard all images that have fewer than 20 or more
than 50 annotations to reduce the variation in the number
of regions per image. We are left with 87,398 images; we
assign 5,000 each to val/test splits and the rest to train.
For test time evaluation we also preprocess the ground
truth regions in the validation/test images by merging heavily overlapping boxes into single boxes with several reference captions. For each image we iteratively select the box
with the highest number of overlapping boxes (based on
IoU with threshold of 0.7), and merge these together (by
taking the mean) into a single box with multiple reference
captions. We then exclude this group and repeat the process.
4.1. Dense Captioning
In the dense captioning task the model receives a single image and produces a set of regions, each annotated with a
conﬁdence and a caption.
Evaluation metrics. Intuitively, we would like our model
to produce both well-localized predictions (as in object detection) and accurate descriptions (as in image captioning).
Inspired by evaluation metrics in object detection and image captioning , we propose to measure the
mean Average Precision (AP) across a range of thresholds
for both localization and language accuracy. For localization we use intersection over union (IoU) thresholds .3, .4,
.5, .6, .7. For language we use METEOR score thresholds
0, .05, .1, .15, .2, .25. We adopt METEOR since this metric
was found to be most highly correlated with human judgments in settings with a low number of references . We
measure the average precision across all pairwise settings
of these thresholds and report the mean AP.
To isolate the accuracy of language in the predicted captions without localization we also merge ground truth captions across each test image into a bag of references sentences and evaluate predicted captions with respect to these
references without taking into account their spatial position.
Baseline models. Following Karpathy and Fei-Fei , we
train only the Image Captioning model (excluding the localization layer) on individual, resized regions. We refer to this
approach as a Region RNN model. To investigate the differences between captioning trained on full images or regions
we also train the same model on full images and captions
from MS COCO (Full Image RNN model).
At test time we consider three sources of region proposals. First, to establish an upper bound we evaluate the model
on ground truth boxes (GT). Second, similar to we use
Language (METEOR)
Dense captioning (AP)
Test runtime (ms)
Region source
Full image RNN 
Region RNN 
FCLN on EB 
Our model (FCLN)
Table 1. Dense captioning evaluation on the test set of 5,000 images. The language metric is METEOR (high is good), our dense captioning
metric is Average Precision (AP, high is good), and the test runtime performance for a 720 × 600 image with 300 proposals is given in
milliseconds on a Titan X GPU (ms, low is good). EB, RPN, and GT correspond to EdgeBoxes , Region Proposal Network , and
ground truth boxes respectively, used at test time. Numbers in GT columns (italic) serve as upper bounds assuming perfect localization.
an external region proposal method to extract 300 boxes for
each test image. We use EdgeBoxes (EB) due to their
strong performance and speed. Finally, EdgeBoxes have
been tuned to obtain high recall for objects, but our regions
data contains a wide variety of annotations around groups of
objects, stuff, etc. Therefore, as a third source of test time
regions we follow Faster R-CNN and train a separate
Region Proposal Network (RPN) on the VG regions data.
This corresponds to training our full model except without
the RNN language model.
As the last baseline we reproduce the approach of Fast
R-CNN , where the region proposals during training are
ﬁxed to EdgeBoxes instead of being predicted by the model
(FCLN on EB). The results of this experiment can be found
in Table 1. We now highlight the main takeaways.
Discrepancy between region and image level statistics.
Focusing on the ﬁrst two rows of Table 1, the Region RNN
model obtains consistently stronger results on METEOR
alone, supporting the difference in the language statistics
present on the level of regions and images. Note that these
models were trained on nearly the same images, but one on
full image captions and the other on region captions. However, despite the differences in the language, the two models
reach comparable performance on the ﬁnal metric.
RPN outperforms external region proposals. In all cases
we obtain performance improvements when using the RPN
network instead of EB regions. The only exception is the
FCLN model that was only trained on EB boxes. Our hypothesis is that this reﬂects people’s tendency of annotating
regions more general than those containing objects. The
RPN network can learn these distributions from the raw
data, while the EdgeBoxes method was designed for high
recall on objects. In particular, note that this also allows our
model (FCLN) to outperform the FCLN on EB baseline,
which is constrained to EdgeBoxes during training (5.24
vs. 4.88 and 5.39 vs. 3.21). This is despite the fact that
their localization-independent language scores are comparable, which suggests that our model achieves improvements speciﬁcally due to better localization. Finally, the
noticeable drop in performance of the FCLN on EB model
when evaluating on RPN boxes (5.39 down to 3.21) also
suggests that the EB boxes have particular visual statistics,
and that the RPN boxes are likely out of sample for the
FCLN on EB model.
Our model outperforms individual region description.
Our ﬁnal model performance is listed under the RPN column as 5.39 AP. In particular, note that in this one cell of
Table 1 we report the performance of our full joint model
instead of our model evaluated on the boxes from the independently trained RPN network. Our performance is quite
a bit higher than that of the Region RNN model, even when
the region model is evaluated on the RPN proposals (5.93
vs. 4.26). We attribute this improvement to the fact that our
model can take advantage of visual information from the
context outside of the test regions.
Qualitative results. We show example predictions of the
dense captioning model in Figure 3. The model generates
rich snippet descriptions of regions and accurately grounds
the captions in the images. For instance, note that several
parts of the elephant are correctly grounded and described
(“trunk of an elephant”, “elephant is standing”, and both
“leg of an elephant”). The same is true for the airplane example, where the tail, engine, nose and windows are correctly localized. Common failure cases include repeated
detections (e.g. the elephant is described as standing twice).
Runtime evaluation. Our model is efﬁcient at test time:
a 720 × 600 image is processed in 240ms. This includes
running the CNN, computing B = 300 region proposals,
and sampling from the language model for each region.
Table 1 (right) compares the test-time runtime performance of our model with baselines that rely on EdgeBoxes.
Regions RNN is slowest since it processes each region with
an independent forward pass of the CNN; with a runtime of
3170ms it is more than 13× slower than our method.
FCLN on EB extracts features for all regions after a single forward pass of the CNN. Its runtime is dominated by
EdgeBoxes, and it is ≈1.5× slower than our method.
Our method takes 88ms to compute region proposals, of
which nearly 80ms is spent running NMS to subsample regions in the Localization Layer. This time can be drastically
reduced by using fewer proposals: using 100 region proposals reduces our total runtime to 166ms.
Localization
Full Image RNN 
EB + Full Image RNN 
Region RNN 
Our model (FCLN)
Table 2. Results for image retrieval experiments. We evaluate ranking using recall at k (R@K, higher is better) and median rank of the
target image (Med.rank, lower is better). We evaluate localization using ground-truth region recall at different IoU thresholds (IoU@t,
higher is better) and median IoU (Med. IoU, higher is better). Our method outperforms baselines at both ranking and localization.
Query phrases
Retrieved Images
Figure 4. Example image retrieval results using our dense captioning model. From left to right, each row shows a grund-truth test image,
ground-truth region captions describing the image, and the top images retrieved by our model using the text of the captions as a query. Our
model is able to correctly retrieve and localize people, animals, and parts of both natural and man-made objects.
4.2. Image Retrieval using Regions and Captions
In addition to generating novel descriptions, our dense captioning model can support image retrieval using naturallanguage queries, and can localize these queries in retrieved
images. We evaluate our model’s ability to correctly retrieve
images and accurately localize textual queries.
Experiment setup.
We use 1000 random images from
the VG test set for this experiment. We generate 100 test
queries by repeatedly sampling four random captions from
some image and then expect the model to correct retrieve
the source image for each query.
Evaluation. To evaluate ranking, we report the fraction of
queries for which the correct source image appears in the
top k positions for k ∈{1, 5, 10} (recall at k) and the median rank of the correct image across all queries.
To evaluate localization, for each query caption we
examine the image and ground-truth bounding box from
which the caption was sampled. We compute IoU between
this ground-truth box and the model’s predicted grounding
for the caption. We then report the fraction of query caption for which this overlap is greater than a threshold t for
t ∈{0.1, 0.3, 0.5} (recall at t) and the median IoU across
all query captions.
Models. We compare the ranking and localization performance of full model with baseline models from Section 4.1.
For the Full Image RNN model trained on MS COCO,
we compute the probability of generating each query caption from the entire image and rank test images by mean
probability across query captions. Since this does not localize captions we only evaluate its ranking performance.
The Full Image RNN and Region RNN methods are
trained on full MS COCO images and ground-truth VG regions respectively. In either case, for each query and test
image we generate 100 region proposals using EdgeBoxes
and for each query caption and region proposal we compute
the probability of generating the query caption from the region. Query captions are aligned to the proposal of maximal
probability, and images are ranked by the mean probability
head of a giraffe
legs of a zebra
red and white sign
white tennis shoes
hands holding a phone
front wheel of a bus
Figure 5. Example results for open world detection. We use our dense captioning model to localize arbitrary pieces of text in images, and
display the top detections on the test set for several queries.
of aligned caption / region pairs.
The process for the full FCLN model is similar, but uses
the top 100 proposals from the localization layer rather than
EdgeBoxes proposals.
Discussion.
Figure 4 shows examples of ground-truth
images, query phrases describing those images, and images retrieved from these queries using our model.
model is able to localize small objects (“hand of the clock”,
“logo with red letters”), object parts, (“black seat on bike”,
“chrome exhaust pipe”), people (“man is wet”) and some
actions (“man playing tennis outside”).
Quantitative results comparing our model against the
baseline methods is shown in Table 2. The relatively poor
performance of the Full Image RNN model (Med. rank 13
vs. 9,7,5) may be due to mismatched statistics between its
train and test distributions: the model was trained on full
images, but in this experiment it must match region-level
captions to whole images (Full Image RNN) or process image regions rather than full images (EB + Full Image RNN).
The Region RNN model does not suffer from a mismatch
between train and test data, and outperforms the Full Image
RNN model on both ranking and localization. Compared to
Full Image RNN, it reduces the median rank from 9 to 7 and
improves localization recall at 0.5 IoU from 0.053 to 0.108.
Our model outperforms the Region RNN baseline for
both ranking and localization under all metrics, further reducing the median rank from 7 to 5 and increasing localization recall at 0.5 IoU from 0.108 to 0.153.
The baseline uses EdgeBoxes which was tuned to localize objects, but not all query phrases refer to objects. Our
model achieves superior results since it learns to propose
regions from the training data.
Open-world Object Detection Using the retrieval setup described above, our dense captioning model can also be used
to localize arbitrary pieces of text in images. This enables
“open-world” object detection, where instead of committing to a ﬁxed set of object classes at training time we can
specify object classes using natural language at test-time.
We show example results for this task in Figure 5, where we
display the top detections on the test set for several phrases.
Our model can detect animal parts (“head of a giraffe”,
“legs of a zebra”) and also understands some object attributes (“red and white sign”, “white tennis shoes”) and interactions between objects (“hands holding a phone”). The
phrase “front wheel of a bus” is a failure case: the model
correctly identiﬁes wheels of buses, but cannot distinguish
between the front and back wheel.
5. Conclusion
We introduced the dense captioning task, which requires a
model to simultaneously localize and describe regions of an
image. To address this task we developed the FCLN architecture, which supports end-to-end training and efﬁcient
test-time performance. Our FCLN architecture is based on
recent CNN-RNN models developed for image captioning
but includes a novel, differentiable localization layer that
can be inserted into any neural network to enable spatiallylocalized predictions. Our experiments in both generation
and retrieval settings demonstrate the power and efﬁciency
of our model with respect to baselines related tp previous
work, and qualitative experiments show visually pleasing
results. In future work we would like to relax the assumption of rectangular proposal regions and to discard test-time
NMS in favor of a trainable spatial suppression layer.
6. Acknowledgments
Our work is partially funded by an ONR MURI grant
and an Intel research grant. We thank Vignesh Ramanathan,
Yuke Zhu, Ranjay Krishna, and Joseph Lim for helpful
comments and discussion. We gratefully acknowledge the
support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the
GPUs used for this research.