ORIGINAL PAPER
Should we welcome robot teachers?
Amanda J. C. Sharkey1
Published online: 10 February 2016
 The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Current uses of robots in classrooms are
reviewed and used to characterise four scenarios: (s1)
Robot as Classroom Teacher; (s2) Robot as Companion
and Peer; (s3) Robot as Care-eliciting Companion; and (s4)
Telepresence Robot Teacher. The main ethical concerns
associated with robot teachers are identiﬁed as: privacy;
attachment, deception, and loss of human contact; and
control and accountability. These are discussed in terms of
the four identiﬁed scenarios. It is argued that classroom
robots are likely to impact children’s’ privacy, especially
when they masquerade as their friends and companions,
when sensors are used to measure children’s responses, and
when records are kept. Social robots designed to appear as
if they understand and care for humans necessarily involve
some deception (itself a complex notion), and could
increase the risk of reduced human contact. Children could
form attachments to robot companions (s2 and s3), or robot
teachers (s1) and this could have a deleterious effect on
their social development. There are also concerns about the
ability, and use of robots to control or make decisions
about children’s behaviour in the classroom. It is concluded
that there are good reasons not to welcome fully ﬂedged
robot teachers (s1), and that robot companions (s2 and 3)
should be given a cautious welcome at best. The limited
circumstances in which robots could be used in the classroom to improve the human condition by offering otherwise unavailable educational experiences are discussed.
Robot teacher  Robot companion  Robot
ethics  Attachment  Deception  Privacy  Classroom
One looks back with appreciation to the brilliant
teachers, but with gratitude to those who touched our
human feelings. The curriculum is so much necessary
raw material, but warmth is the vital element for the
growing plant and for the soul of the child. (Carl Jung
Introduction
Many children ﬁnd the idea of robots exciting. Imagine a
school visit to a museum, where a small friendly humanoid
robot explains to a group of children why they should eat
enough vegetables. The children are likely to pay attention
and to enjoy the encounter. They might even remember the
lesson more than they would if it had been delivered at
school by their regular teacher. There seems little reason to
object to such a presentation. But if the children were to
arrive at school the next morning to ﬁnd a robot in the
place of their familiar teacher, they (and their parents)
might not be so happy.
People are worried about the use of robots in schools. In
2012, a European survey of public attitudes to robots of
over 27,000 people found that 34 % thought robots should
be banned from the ﬁeld of education . 60 % thought that robots should be banned from the
care of children, the elderly or the disabled. Only 3 % of
those surveyed thought that robots should be used in education. Are these negative views justiﬁed? In this article,
we will look at current and near future uses of robots in the
& Amanda J. C. Sharkey
 ; 
Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld,
Regent Court, Portobello Rd, Shefﬁeld S1 4DP, UK
Ethics Inf Technol 18:283–297
DOI 10.1007/s10676-016-9387-z
classroom and discuss the extent to which there are good
reasons to be concerned about their use.
Robotics has progressed to a point where there is a real
possibility of robots taking on social roles in our lives, and
it has become crucial to look at the ethical issues raised by
such developments. We need to think about where robots
can and should be used, and where they would be best
avoided, before we travel too far along a path towards
complete automation. The ﬁeld of robot ethics is currently
undergoing quite a rapid development , and
there have been a number of ethical assessments of the use
of robots in society. These range from considerations of the
advantages and risks posed by robot nannies , to using robots to care for older people
 ,
or even for the provision of sexual services . In
this paper, we focus upon the ethical issues raised by the
idea of robots teaching in the classroom. In order to provide a realistic grounding for this discussion, we begin with
a review of the social robots that are currently being used in
classrooms. On the basis of this review, four representative
scenarios will be identiﬁed. These will be used as the basis
for an ensuing discussion of the ethical concerns that they
Current robots in the classroom
Robots as objects to be manipulated and operated by students have become common place in schools. For quite
some time they have been used as intermediary tools to
explain concepts in mathematics and science, and as a
means of involving students in technology by building and
programming robots and working in teams . Our focus here is instead
on the idea of using ‘social’ robots to act as teachers, or as
classroom companions. When a robot is acting as a teacher,
or as a companion, the children are encountering an
apparently social being, and are not involved in programming, or building it.
There are already some examples of social robots being
used in classrooms. One example is Saya, a humanoid
robot deployed in classrooms in Japan to deliver material
about the principles of leverage, and an introduction to
robotics. Saya is a remote controlled humanoid robot with
a female appearance. She (or it) consists of a movable head
with the ability to make emotional facial expressions,
attached to a manikin body . An
operator in a control room can hear and observe the students in the classroom by means of a video camera and the
robot’s CCD camera. When the robot is operated in ‘interactive’ mode, it can articulate brief sentences and
accompany them with an appropriate facial expression, for
instance telling the class to ‘‘Be quiet!’’ whilst displaying
an angry facial expression. Despite this, questionnaire
responses from elementary school pupils indicated that the
class was enjoyable.
The Saya robot was presented in the role of a teacher.
More often, classroom robots are presented in the role of a
companion or peer. For instance, ‘Rubi’, a low cost ‘sociable’ robot, was used to explore whether a robot could
improve toddlers’ vocabulary skills .
The robot was immersed in an Early Childhood Education
Centre for 2 weeks. It operated autonomously during this
period, and could sing and dance; play a physical game of
taking and giving back objects using its physical actuators;
and play Flash-based educational games targeting vocabulary development. It switched between games depending
on an ‘interest estimator’ which took into account the
number of faces detected and the number of touches
received in the past minute. The researchers reported evidence of a 27 % improvement in 18–24 month toddlers’
knowledge of the target words taught by the robot as
compared to a matched set of control words that were not
taught. They concluded that ‘sociable robots may be an
effective and low cost technology to enrich Early Childhood Education environments’.
Kanda et al. describe an 18 day ﬁeld trial at a
Japanese elementary school in which two English-speaking
‘Robovie’ robots operated autonomously to interact with
ﬁrst and sixth grade pupils. The robots could identify the
children by means of the wireless tags they wore. The
robots spoke English with children that approached it, and
had a vocabulary of around 300 sentences for speaking, and
50 words for recognition. A picture-word matching test
was administered to the children before the study, after
1 week and after 2 weeks, and the frequency of interactions between the children and the robots was recorded.
Improvements in English skills as measured by the pictureword matching test were found in those children who
interacted with the robot more often. Kanda et al. stressed
the need to investigate the development of longer term
relationships with robots, as opposed to the brief initial
encounters that are often studied. The robots’ ability to use
the children’s names was found to encourage interaction.
Evidence of an improvement in English scores was found
for those students who continued to interact with the robot
over the 2 week period, and who could be said to have
formed some kind of a relationship with it.
In a subsequent study, Kanda et al. developed a
classroom robot installation designed to encourage children
to continue to interact with a robot for a longer period. The
ﬁeld trial was performed over an 8 week period in an
elementary school in Japan, placing a Robovie robot in a
class with 37 students aged 10–11 years. The children were
given the opportunity to interact with the robot during the
A. J. C. Sharkey
lunch time break. As well as being able to identify the
children by means of RFID tags, the robot could keep track
of how often individual children interacted with it. It was
programmed to exhibit ‘pseudo development’: adding
more behaviours to its repertoire over time. In addition, the
robot informed the children that it would tell them a secret
if they spent time with it: the personal information it
divulged varied depending on how long the child had spent
with it. For instance, it would tell children that it liked the
teacher, or what its favourite baseball team was.
As well as studies in which classroom robots are presented as companions, some researchers have explored
young children’s interactions with robots designed to elicit
care-giving behaviour from them. Tanaka et al. 
placed a robot in a classroom of 18–24 month old toddlers
for 45 sessions each lasting approximately 50 min over a
period of 5 months. The aim was not to get the robot to
teach the children, but to look at the social interactions
between the children and the robot. The QRIO robot
received some input from a human operator specifying a
walking direction, head direction, and six different behavioural categories (dance, sit down, stand up, lie down,
hand gesture and giggle). An automatic giggle reaction
when its head was patted was set up for the robot, to ensure
a contingent response. The researchers claim to have found
evidence of ‘long term bonding’ between the robot and the
children in their study. The children continued to interact
with the robot over time, and exhibited a variety of social
and care taking behaviours towards the robot. They touched the robot more often than a static toy robot or a teddy
bear, and the researchers claimed that they came to treat it
as a peer rather than as a toy.
Tanaka and Matsuzoe introduced a ‘care-receiving’ robot into an English language school for Japanese
children. The robot was smaller than the children, made
mistakes, and seemed to need their help. 17 children aged
between 3 and 6 years were involved in the study with the
aim of seeing whether the children would learn English
verbs if they ‘taught’ them to the robot. They identiﬁed a
set of 4 previously unknown English verbs for each child.
Two of the verbs were taught to the children by the
experimenter (who asked them to match up the word and
the appropriate gesture). For the other two verbs, the
experimenter showed the child how to teach the robot to
match the word and the gesture, and then encouraged the
children to teach the robot in the same way. The verbs the
children taught to the robot were remembered better than
the words the experimenter taught them directly. The
authors conclude that these preliminary results suggest that
getting children to teach ‘care-receiving’ robots can have
some educational beneﬁts. Hood et al. also report
research in which children taught a robot. Children aged
6–8 years taught a Nao robot to form handwritten letters.
The robot was programmed to make the same errors as
typically made by children, and to gradually improve its
performance based on the example letters that the children
formed on a tablet computer. The children were keen to
teach the robot, although it is not clear whether or not
teaching the robot led to improvements in their own
handwriting.
Telepresence robots represent another form of robots to
be found in classrooms. They have been used to enable
telepresence communication between pupils and remote
teachers and also between pupils in different classrooms.
Tanaka et al. report a study in which a child-operated telepresence robot was used to link remote classrooms
of children aged 6–8 years old in Australia and Japan.
Their preliminary results suggested that when individual
children controlled a remote robot to interact with a distant
English teacher, they were more engaged than when they
interacted with the teacher via a Skype screen. Similarly,
when Australian children remotely controlled a robot in a
Japanese classroom, the Japanese students were keen to
interact, and to try using English phrases to address the
There has been considerable interest in South Korea in
using robots for English language teaching .
Han et al. report studies of the educational effectiveness of the IROBI robot, a so called home educational
robot. They found better learning of English from the robot
compared to other media (books with an audio tape, and a
computer program). The EngKey robot has been deployed
in South Korean classrooms to teach students English via
telepresence. The EngKey has a dumpy egg shaped
appearance and was designed to seem friendly and accessible. It has been used to enable remote teachers in the
Phillipines to teach English to South Korean students, and
found to improve students’ performance when deployed in
ﬁeld tests in 29 elementary schools in South Korea . The Robosem robot developed by Yujin
Robotics has also been used as a telepresence robot for
remote language teaching in Korea .
Telepresence robots differ from the autonomous robots
used in some of the studies described here, in being overtly
controlled by a human operator. They usually have an
anthropomorphic appearance, and some, like the EngKey
and Robosem robots, can operate in either telepresence or
autonomous mode (a useful classroom feature when the
remote connection breaks down). By contrast, the Robovie
robots investigated by Kanda and colleagues are designed
to operate autonomously, without human input. Then there
are robots such as Saya that are presented as if they were
autonomous, but are remotely controlled in a Wizard of Oz
set up. Other robots are operated semi-autonomously, with
some human supervision. For example, the QRIO robot
researched by Tanaka and colleagues exhibited some
Should we welcome robot teachers?
autonomous behaviour but could also be directed by a
human operator so that it responded more appropriately to
what was going on in the classroom.
It is evident from this review that the idea of robot
teachers in the classroom is not just the stuff of science
ﬁction. At the same time, it is apparent that the current
abilities of robot teachers to operate autonomously are still
quite limited, and often aided by covert or even overt
human intervention or remote control. The underlying
motivation of several of these studies is often more one of
exploring whether the robot would be accepted in the
classroom than of demonstrating its effectiveness at
teaching. Some of the studies, such as those by Kanda et al.
 and Tanaka et al. are designed to
investigate children’s relationships to robots over a longer
time period than many human-robot interaction studies
cover. Others explore some of the factors that affect children’s interest in the robots, such as the ability of the robot
to call the children by name , or to give
them privileged (secret) information .
The studies do show that children can learn from robots,
particularly in the application area of robot language
teaching. Kanda et al. found improvements in
English scores. Tanaka and Matsuzoe found better
learning of the words that children taught to robots as
compared to the words the experimenter taught them.
Movellan et al. report an improvement in vocabulary scores, and Yun et al. report an improvement in
student performance as a consequence of the robot’s
telepresence operation. Nonetheless there is a need for
more careful experimental design here. It is important to
compare the robot’s teaching efﬁcacy to other teaching
methods; especially so given the greater cost usually
associated with robotics. Comparisons between the effectiveness of a human teacher and a robot teacher are rarely
undertaken . Comparisons between the effects of language teaching by
means of a telepresence robot and a Skype interface
 , and an educational robot and other
media represent steps towards more
convincing assessments.
There is also scope for more detailed investigations of
the extent that children learn and retain the information
delivered by a robot, and of the factors that determine the
robot’s teaching effectiveness. The appearance of the
robot and its ability to interact with and respond to its
audience are prime candidates for such factors. Komatsubara et al. carried out a ﬁeld trial with a social
robot that quizzed children about science lessons they
had received from a human teacher, and told them the
correct answer together with a simple explanation.
However they found no evidence that the robot increased
their knowledge and it was suggested that the children
may have been bored by its delivery, especially when it
continued to give an explanation when the children had
already understood.
An interesting question that needs to be explored is the
extent to which children trust and believe in robots that are
presented in a teaching role, and the factors that affect that
trust. Some recent work on selective trust has begun to
explore the factors that inﬂuence a child’s beliefs in what
they are told . As Koenig and
Sabbagh point out, ‘children do not blindly trust the
words of others’, but exhibit selective learning; making
decisions about who to believe about what. A robot that is
unable to answer children’s questions when they stray
beyond the featured topic would probably be viewed quite
sceptically by the children it is ‘teaching’. It is also likely
that the appearance and behaviour of a robot will affect the
extent to which the information it provides will be
believed, with different results from robots with different
appearances and behaviours. It is also possible that trust
and belief in a robot will depend on the topic being considered. When Gaudiello et al. (submitted) considered
people’s trust in an iCub robot and the robot’s inﬂuence on
their decision making, they found it had more inﬂuence
when its answers related to functional and technical questions (e.g. the weight of objects) and less when they related
to social questions (which items were more suitable for
different social contexts). This implies that people might be
more willing to believe and trust information provided by a
robot when it concerns factual and functional topics, than
when it deals with emotional and social issues. The phenomena of automation bias and algorithm
aversion , are also relevant here,
although their relationship to robots in the classroom have
not yet been explored. There is a need for further research
here: if robots are to be placed in classrooms, it is important that they are given an appropriate level of trust and
acceptance.
Four scenarios for robots in the classroom
The ensuing discussion of the ethical issues raised by robot
teachers will be made more speciﬁc by basing it on a set of
four representative scenarios. These scenarios are identiﬁed
on the basis of the classroom contexts exempliﬁed in the
studies described above, in a review that presents a picture
of the current state of the art in 2015. First, the Saya robot
was presented in the role of an authoritative classroom
teacher (even though it was actually remotely controlled).
This leads to the identiﬁcation of Scenario 1, Robot as
Classroom Teacher. In the investigations reported by
Movellan et al. , Tanaka et al. , Kanda et al.
 , the robots were presented to the children as
A. J. C. Sharkey
companions and peers rather than as a teacher. On the basis
of these studies, we identify Scenario 2, Robot as Companion and Peer. Some researchers used companion robots designed to elicit care-giving from children:
these examples form the basis for Scenario 3, Robot as
Care-eliciting Companion. And ﬁnally there are the
Telepresence robots, used to enable a remote teacher to
teach the class, which lead to the identiﬁcation of Scenario
4, Telepresence Robot Teacher.
Scenario 1: Robot as Classroom Teacher.
Scenario 2: Robot as Companion and Peer.
Scenario 3: Robot as Care-eliciting Companion.
Scenario 4: Telepresence Robot Teacher.
As well as being based on the reviewed studies of classroom robots, it is claimed that these scenarios represent an
interesting range of roles for robots in the classroom. They
vary in the extent to which the robot replaces or supplements the human teacher. The most extreme version of a
robot teacher is represented by the Classroom teacher in
Scenario 1, since it involves the robot replacing the human
teacher for at least a limited period. A Classroom teacher
robot would need to act as a ﬁgure of authority and as an
explicit source of knowledge. By contrast, the Companion
robot and the Care-eliciting companion robot scenarios do
not involve replacing a human teacher, and could depend
on a human teacher to be present and in charge of the
classroom. Neither would require the presentation of the
robot as an authoritative ﬁgure, and both have a goal of
implicit rather than explicit teaching. The Telepresence
robot by contrast could be used to replace (or to supplement) physically present human teachers with a remote,
albeit human, educator. These four scenarios are not the
only ones possible, and different situations could arise in
future studies. However it is claimed that identifying and
discussing these provides a necessary and useful ﬁrst step
towards an ethical consideration of robot teachers, and
enables a consideration of whether some of these scenarios
represent better goals than others.
Ethical concerns about robot teachers
In order to determine the ethical issues that are most relevant to the idea of robot teachers, as exempliﬁed by the
four scenarios, we begin by examining the ethical concerns
previously raised elsewhere in discussions about social
robots in related situations and contexts.
A number of questions about the impacts of social
robots on the privacy of individuals have been previously
raised . Social robots
can affect the privacy of individuals by collecting personal
identifying information about them that can be accessed by
other people. The privacy of individuals would be intruded
upon if a social robot was used to enable direct surveillance. For instance, information picked up by the robot’s
sensors that enabled the identiﬁcation of the person being
monitored could be directly transmitted to human monitors,
even though that person might consider themselves to be
alone and unobserved. Alternatively (or additionally) such
personal information could be stored on the robot, and
subsequently accessed by others. An insightful discussion
about the impact of robots on the privacy of individuals can
be found in Calo . As he points out, robots in social
spaces highlight questions about increased direct surveillance, since they are ‘equipped with the ability to sense,
process and record the world around them’. As mobile
devices, robots may be allowed increased access to historically protected spaces such as the home. Also, by dint
of what Calo terms their ‘social meaning’, and their
apparent social nature, robots may extract conﬁdences from
people that computers or other machines would not. There
are particular reasons to be worried about the privacy
implications of robots in the classroom, and this forms the
starting point for the ethical consideration that follows.
As well as privacy, there is another set of interrelated
concerns that arise as consequence of the presentation of
robots as social entities. If a robot is built to resemble a
human being, or at least a being with emotions, those who
encounter it may expect it to be able to care for and look
after people. However, this appearance is, in some respects,
deceptive (although the issue of deception is a complex
one, as discussed in ‘‘Attachment, deception and loss of
human contact’’ section). Questions have been asked about
the ability of robots to provide meaningful care for older
people , and
about the impact of robot care on the dignity of older
people . Such questions are relevant to
robot teachers, since one aspect of what is required of a
good teacher is that they should provide care for the children in their charge.
In related work, Sharkey and Sharkey identiﬁed a
number of ethical concerns associated with the idea of
Robot Nannies. As well as misgivings about their effects
on children’s privacy, several of these concerns were
related to questions about attachment, or lack of attachment, between children and robots, and about the deception
this could involve. The idea of robot nannies differs in
several respects from that of robot teachers. For a start, a
‘nanny’ robot is more likely to be used at home than in the
classroom. A robot nanny is also more likely to be used
with very young children and babies, and to come with a
strong risk of psychological harm if used for any extended
periods of time. Nonetheless, many of these concerns are
still relevant to the idea of robot teachers in the classroom.
Should we welcome robot teachers?
highlighted
deception that may be engendered by robots, particularly in
discussions of robot companions and robot pets. Sparrow
 takes exception to the deception and self-deception
that he claims robot companions and robot pets rely on.
Wallach and Allen also suggest that the techniques
used to enable robots to detect and respond to human social
cues are ‘arguably forms of deception’. It therefore seems
important to consider the extent to which robot teachers or
classroom companions involve some form of deception,
and whether this could lead to negative consequences.
Another common concern is the loss of human contact
that could result from the deployment of social robots in
some circumstances. Sparrow and Sparrow were
suspicious about the reduction in human contact that would
result from the introduction of any robots, social or not,
into the care of the elderly. As well as loss of human
contact, Sharkey and Sharkey were also concerned
about the reduction in human contact that could result from
the use of robots to care for the elderly, or from their use as
robot nannies .
Attachment, deception and loss of human contact are all
pertinent to the idea of robot teachers. The concepts cannot
be easily disentangled from each other. For instance, the
deceptive appearance of robots as real social entities could
lead people to form attachments to them, or to imagine that
they were capable of or worthy of attachment. This could
in turn increase the loss of human contact that could result
from the introduction of robots in the classroom. Because
they are so interrelated, the ethical issues relating to
attachment, deception and loss of human contact are considered together under one heading.
Other pressing ethical concerns that have been raised in
papers on robot ethics, and that seem particularly relevant
to the use of robots in the classroom, are those that pertain
to control and accountability. Placing robots in charge of
human beings, whether they are vulnerable elderly people
 , or young children , gives rise to questions about control
and accountability. To what extent should robots be trusted
to make the right decisions about what humans should do?
To what extent can they be held accountable for such
decisions? It seems important to consider these questions
with respect to robots in the classroom.
Following this analysis, in this ethical assessment of the
idea of robot teachers, we will concentrate on discussions
of (1) Privacy; (2) Attachment, deception and loss of
human contact and (3) Control and accountability. These
topics do not exhaust the list of possible issues for consideration—there are others such as safety and liability,
which are also relevant. However safety and liability issues
are common to all robotic applications that involve contact
with humans, and we suggest that they are best discussed in
the context of robotics as a whole. The three headings used
here have been chosen because they seem the most relevant
and the most in need of reinterpretation and articulation in
terms of robot teachers.
The more technology is used in the classroom, the more
issues about privacy of information come to the fore. A
robot’s ability to interact with children is enabled by sensors. If those sensors are used to enable a reactive response,
without storing information, there seems little reason to
worry. For instance, a robot might use its sensors to detect
whether or not a child or a group of children was standing
in front of it in order to trigger its presentation. But if the
information detected by the robot is recorded, or categorised and recorded, this gives rise to concern about what
information should be stored, and who is permitted access
to it. In addition, even if the information is not stored, the
use of sensors and associated algorithms that make it
possible to detect children’s emotional state could be
viewed by some as a step too far.
As is apparent from the studies described earlier, robots
in the classroom can be enabled to recognise individuals.
This can be accomplished by means of RFID tags worn by
the children enabling the robot to call them by their names.
Alternatively, face recognition algorithms could be used to
recognise individual children. Recognising and naming a
child does not necessarily mean that further information
about that child will be stored, but it raises questions about
record keeping. Indeed, Kanda et al. describe how
the robot they used kept a record of which children had
interacted with it, and even of friendship groups amongst
the children. This strikes a disturbing note. Is it too farfetched to imagine that, in the future, robots might be used
to categorise and monitor children’s behaviours; keeping a
record of disruptive behaviour, or alerting the teacher?
In the present post-Snowden climate, there is uneasiness
about technologically based invasions of privacy. Of
course, when experimental research studies are conducted
in a classroom there are established protocols to follow
about the storage of personal information. However, if
robots are to be really used in the classroom, the personal
information they store will not be deleted at the end of the
study in the same way. There are many questions to be
considered here, including the extent to which such information should be used as the basis for educational decisions made about the child. The storage of personal
information is covered in the UK by legislation such as the
Data Protection Act, but the mobility and connectedness of
robots provide new challenges. In 2015, concerns about the
collection of ‘big data’ in schools were raised by President
Obama in USA where there are plans to introduce the
A. J. C. Sharkey
Student Digital Privacy Act to curtail the use of information about students collected by schools in order to provide
personalised educational services and to limit targeted
advertising and selling of the data. In UK, although the
Data Protection Act provides some protection of personal
data, the full implications of an increasing ability to sense
and store enormous amounts of personal data have not yet
been thoroughly addressed.
Sensors in the classroom also give rise to the possibility
of a more intimate form of privacy invasion. Physiological
measures, and emotional facial expression recognition,
offer the potential to detect and possibly record information
about the emotional state of children interacting with a
robot. For instance, a biometric bracelet named the
Q-sensor was developed by Affectiva (an MIT media lab
spin off company) to measure Galvanic Skin Response
(GSR) and the emotional arousal of the wearer (http://
affect.media.mit.edu/projectpages/iCalm/iCalm-2-Q.html).
It was suggested that it could be used as an ‘engagement
pedometer’, indicating when students are engaged and
when they are bored and disinterested. Affectiva has subsequently diverted its attentions to the development of
other software. Nonetheless, both physiological measures,
and emotional expression recognition have the potential of
being used in the classroom to track students’ engagement.
Of course, a robot that is able to detect the level of
engagement of its audience may deliver a better performance. Mutlu and Szaﬁr programmed a Wakamaru
humanoid robot to monitor the engagement of its users and
to adjust its behaviour to increase that engagement. They
monitored real time student attention using neural signals
captured using a wireless EEG headset as the robot told a
story to individual participants. The robot was able to nod
its head, and engage in eye contact during the story. In
addition, it could display ‘immediacy cues’ by increasing
its volume and making arm gestures. In three different
conditions it (1) displayed these immediacy cues at random
intervals, or (2) displayed them adaptively when the EEG
indicated a drop in the participant’s level of engagement or
(3) did not change its volume or use gestures. Performance
on a memory test for a story told by the robot indicated that
participants’ memory for the story was signiﬁcantly better
when the robot responded adaptively to detected decreases
in engagement.
Even though a robot might well increase the engagement
of its audience through the use of sensors, there are still
reasons to be concerned about their use. One problem is
that high levels of arousal might have nothing to do with
the material or delivery but could be caused by other events
in the classroom. Higher levels of arousal could also be
created by exciting behaviours on the part of the robot that
do not result in better learning or understanding of the
communicated,
educational system towards a form of ‘edutainment’ in
which any difﬁcult and potentially boring topics were
In addition, the use of emotional detectors and sensors
can be viewed as an invasion of privacy. Although a human
teacher may be able to recognise the emotions and feelings
of their pupils to some extent, this is not the same as the
kind of recognition that might become possible if the pupils
had to wear sensors on their body that could transmit
information about their present emotional state. Teachers
and other adults sometimes complain about the eye rolling
behaviour of children, but what if they could further
legitimise this complaint by referring to data on the children’s emotional response tracked by a digital device?
Does the relevance of these privacy issues differ for the
four scenarios for robots in the classroom? Most apply
equally to all four scenarios, because personal data might
be stored or used in any of them. There are additional
concerns about the privacy of information stored and
conveyed by means of a telepresence robot (Scenario 4)
because of the potential to cross national boundaries (e.g.
South Korea to the Philippines), complicating the application of national legislation such as the Data Protection
Act. There are also concerns that apply particularly to the
scenario in which the robot is presented as a companion or
peer (Scenarios 2 and 3). Presenting a robot to children as
their ‘friend’ could encourage them to share information,
and even conﬁde secrets, in ways that could result in a
violation of their privacy. This issue is tied up with the
questions about deception and attachment that will be
explicated further in the following section.
Attachment, deception and loss of human contact
There is a growing knowledge of the factors that contribute
to the illusion that a robot is able to relate to humans. A
robot’s sensors, as discussed earlier, can allow it to respond
to and interact with humans in ways that foster the semblance of understanding. For example, a robot that is able
to detect a person’s emotional facial expression and
respond with a matching one of its own, or an appropriate
verbal comment, will seem responsive. A robot that can
look into the eyes of the person talking to it is more likely
to seem sentient. Likewise a robot that can detect when a
person is paying attention to it, or what they are paying
attention to may be seen as one that understands what is
going on. A robot’s ability to respond contingently to
humans can be enabled by its sensors, and makes for a
more convincing robot . The
appearance and behaviour of a robot also plays an important role. The illusion of understanding can be more convincing if the robot’s appearance avoids the uncanny
valley, and it behaves like a human whilst not looking too
Should we welcome robot teachers?
much like one. This is probably because we are so skilled
at rapidly evaluating human behaviour and monitoring it
for any signs of abnormality. A good match between a
robot’s voice and its appearance helps , as does its ability to respond with emotional
expressions that are appropriate to the surrounding context
 .
The creation and development of robots that are able to
respond appropriately to humans can certainly have the
effect of making them easier to interact with and more fun
to have around. At the same time, the argument has been
made by some that such development is inherently
deceptive. Sparrow and Sparrow writing about the
use of robots for elder care, argue that ‘to intend to deceive
others, even for their own subjective beneﬁt is unethical,
especially when the result of the deception will actually
constitute a harm to the person being deceived’. Wallach
and Allen also consider the techniques being used to
give robots the ability to detect social cues and respond
with social gestures, and conclude that ‘from a puritanical
perspective, all such techniques are arguably forms of
deception’. Sharkey and Sharkey pointed out that
much research in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, from robotics to
natural language interfaces, depends on creating illusions
and deceiving people.
Of course, the terms ‘deception’ and ‘deceptive’ in the
context of robotics do not necessarily imply any evil intent
on the part of those keen to create the illusion of animacy.
The harm that could be created by a robot that gives the
illusion of sentience and understanding is not going to be
immediately obvious, and researchers attempting to create
robots able to respond to humans in a social manner may
not have even considered that their endeavours could lead
to any kind of damage. Since the time of automata makers,
or even earlier , inventors have
enjoyed creating apparently life-like machines. In addition,
those who view and interact with such machines can be
seen as contributing to their own deception, since the
human tendency to enjoy being anthropomorphic is well
known 
point out some of the risks of imagining that machines are
capable of more than they actually are. A robot that is too
good at emulating the behaviour of a human could lead
people to expect too much of it, and to use it for educational purposes for which it is not well enough suited. It
could for instance encourage the view that it could be
placed in a position of authority such as that of a classroom
teacher. The problems associated with such a view will be
discussed in ‘‘Control and accountability’’ section.
The idea of deception and the creation of a convincing
illusion give rise to several important issues relating to the
emotional attachments that might, or might not develop
between children and classroom robots. There are particular risks associated with the convincing presentation of a
classroom robot as a companion or peer. If a classroom
robot is presented as a friendly companion (Scenarios 2 and
3), the children might imagine that the robot cares about
them. They might feel anxious or sad when the robot is
absent, or choose to spend time with the robot in preference
to their less predictable human peers. Instead of learning
how to cope with the natural give and take involved in
playing with fellow students they might get used to being
able to tell their robot companion what to do. In other
words, some of their learning about social skills could be
Children do sometimes try to abuse robots . A child could be
unpleasant and cruel to a robot and it would not notice. The
child might as a result learn that bad behaviour in friendships does not have any consequences. Tanaka and Kimura
 mention the expectation that ‘people who treat nonliving objects with respect naturally act in the same way
towards living things too’. However, the impact that
human-robot relationship have on subsequent relationships
with other human beings is unknown. Supposing that a
child were to treat the robot badly, what impact would this
have on their behaviour towards other children?
There is also the possibility that a child’s trust in relationships could be weakened if they thought the robot was
their friend, but came to realise that the robot was just a
programmed entity, and as likely to form a friendship with
the next child as with them. Similarly, the pseudo relationship formed with the robot could affect the child’s
views and understanding of how relationships work.
Thinking you have a relationship with a robot could be like
imagining you have a relationship with a psychopath: any
kind and empathetic feelings that you have for the robot are
deﬁnitely not reciprocated.
It could be argued that an attachment formed to a robot
is no different to the attachments that children feel for their
favourite cuddly toy. But there are important differences. A
cuddly toy does not move, and any attachment that the
child feels for it is based on their imagination. A social
robot is also not a living entity. However unlike the toy, it
can be programmed to move and behave as if it were alive.
As a result it is can be more compelling to interact with,
and children may be less clear about whether or not it is a
living being, and about whether or not it can reciprocate in
a relationship. There is good reason to believe that a robot
A. J. C. Sharkey
(like the Care-eliciting robot in Scenario 3) that seems to
be vulnerable and in need of care is particularly hard to
resist. There have been various computer games that have
exploited children’s caring natures: think about the Tamagotchi craze at the turn of the century, when children
spent hours looking after a digital pet on a screen.
It might also be claimed that attachments to a robot are
no more based on deception than a child’s attachment to
the family pet. But again, there are important differences.
First, the family pet is a living creature, and something with
which the child can genuinely form a relationship. Even
though it is often argued that we should not be anthropomorphic and imagine that animals have human-like feelings for us, the family pet will know the child, and will be
directly affected by its actions. The robot, on the other
hand, will only be able to simulate any affective response
to the child. Some might suggest that robots will eventually
be able to feel real emotions, but there is little evidence that
this will happen any time soon.
As well as concerns about robots presented as children’s
companions (Scenarios 2 and 3) there are also questions to
be asked about the attachments children would form, or fail
to form with Telepresence Robot Teachers (Scenario 4).
Any relationship with the distant teacher could be complicated by the children’s views of and relationship with
the Telepresence robot itself. The extent to which a human
teacher’s relationship to the children in the classroom
would be affected by not being physically present is
unknown, and in need of further investigation.
Problems seem likely to result from placing a robot in
the role of a Classroom Teacher (Scenario 1). Children do
form attachments to their human teachers, and can be
attentive to their direction: learning more from them than
just the explicit educational material they deliver. The
quotation from Carl Jung at the beginning of this paper is
apposite here. Teachers are most effective when they
function as an attachment ﬁgure. Bergin and Bergin 
summarise research on attachment style relationships with
teachers where attachment is deﬁned as a deep and
enduring affectionate bond that connects one person to
another across time and space . It is a bond that is ﬁrst formed with a baby and
child’s primary caregiver, and affects their relationship to
the world. A securely attached child feels at liberty to
explore the world, secure in the knowledge that they have a
caregiver they can rely on. Although the main attachment
bonds will be to the child’s primary caregiver, teachers can
also function as attachment ﬁgures. Bergin and Bergin
 claim that attachment is relevant to the classroom in
two respects. First, an attachment bond between child and
teacher can help in the classroom by encouraging the child
to feel secure, and able to explore their environment.
Second, an attachment to a teacher can help to socialise
children, as they adopt the adult’s behaviour and values
and are encouraged to interact harmoniously with other
children. An attachment bond is more likely to be formed
with a teacher who is sensitive to the child’s emotions and
If robots were to be increasingly deployed as Classroom
Teachers in the future, there is a risk that children would
not view them as attachment ﬁgures, and so would lose that
emotional security. By contrast, if they were to perceive the
robot as an attachment ﬁgure, this would open the possibility of the children adopting the robot’s apparent values,
and as in the case of the robot companion, basing their
social skills and world outlook on the behaviour and
apparent attitudes of a machine rather than on a living,
breathing, empathising human.
Control and accountability
The notion of robot teachers highlights concerns about
robots being in charge of human beings. The idea of robots
being in a position to exert control over humans, even (or
especially) when those humans are children, should be
controversial. However it is hard to imagine how a robot
could function as a teacher (Scenario 1) without being able
to exert its authority over the children in the classroom.
Surely it would need to be able to recognise, and prevent,
disruptive behaviour? It would also need to be able to
recognise and reward positive behaviour and successful
learning, and ﬁnd ways of reducing or eliminating negative
behaviour and poor learning outcomes.
Many people might be concerned by the idea of giving
robots the power to restrict the activities of humans. At the
same time, others might like to think that robots would be
fairer than humans. Those who had uncomfortable relationships with teachers in their childhood could argue that a
robot would do better: it would not be prejudiced, vindictive or angry. A similar argument has been made in other
contexts, from care-giving to the battleﬁeld. Borenstein and
Pearson , in a discussion of robot caregivers, suggest
that robots could be preferable to humans in some respects,
because ‘robots are unlikely to suffer from certain kinds of
human failings’ since they
lack empathy and are therefore not susceptible to the ‘dark
side of empathy’: namely indifference and even sadism
 . In a military context, Arkin has
argued that robot soldiers could be more ethical than
human soldiers because they would not get angry or want
to take revenge. The suggestion that a robot would be fairer
and less prejudiced than humans in the classroom is related
to Arkin’s claim that robots can be more ethical than
Arkin proposed the idea of an ethical governor
for robot soldiers, which would evaluate possible actions
Should we welcome robot teachers?
against a set of constraints such that unacceptable levels of
collateral damage would be avoided, and only morally
permissible actions selected. Winﬁeld et al. also
discuss the possibility of an ethical robot that evaluates
possible actions against a set of constraints before selecting
one. They describe an example in which a robot risks its
own safety in order to preserve the safety of another robot
(representing the idea of a robot protecting the safety of a
human). Could a robot teacher be programmed in a similar
way to make ethical decisions in a classroom; decisions for
instance about when to praise or castigate children for their
behaviour?
One problem with this idea is that making a good
decision about what to do in the classroom depends on
having the ability to discriminate between different kinds
of behaviour, and to understand the intentions that underlie
them. Recognising which children are misbehaving and
disturbing the classroom requires a detailed understanding
of the intentions behind a child’s actions. A quiet child
could be studying, or sullenly refusing to participate. A
vociferous child might be actively contributing to the class
discussion, or interfering with it. The problem is further
compounded by the rapidity with which pupils can change
states; the previously studying child can switch to being a
disruptive ring leader. For a robot to exert effective (and
fair) control over children’s behaviour in the classroom, it
would also need a reasonable idea of their probable next
actions, and to have strategies for encouraging good
behaviour and discouraging bad behaviour. These are
abilities that humans have, and that the best teachers can
exploit effectively.
Could a robot have these abilities? It seems unlikely in
the near future. Christof Heyns, the UN Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions argued
against the use of autonomous robots to make lethal decisions on the battleﬁeld on the basis that robots lack ‘human
judgement, common sense, appreciation of the larger picture, understanding of the intentions behind people’s
actions, and understanding of values and anticipation of the
direction in which events are unfolding’ . Clearly robot teachers would not be required to make
lethal decisions, but their actions would still impact the
lives of children, and they also lack the abilities listed by
Could robots develop these abilities in the distant
future? There are good reasons to think they will not. It has
been argued that understanding good and bad behaviour
depends on a sense of morality, which itself has a biological basis. Churchland argued that morality depends
on the biology of interlocking brain processes: caring
(rooted in attachment to kin and kith and care for their well
being); recognition of other’s psychological states (rooted
in the beneﬁts of predicting the behaviour of others);
problem solving in a social context; and learning social
practices. She argues that the basis for caring about others
lies in the neurochemistry of attachment and bonding in
mammals. Neuropeptics, oxytocin and arginine vasopressin
underlie the extension of self-maintenance and avoidance
of pain in mammals to their immediate kin. Humans and
other mammals feel anxious and awful both when their
own well-being is threatened, and also when the well-being
of their loved ones is threatened. They feel pleasure when
their infants are safe, and when they are in the company of
others. Churchland extends her argument about
morality originating in the biology of the brain to explain
the development of more complex social relationships.
This argument implies that robots do not have the necessary biological nature required for a sense of morality.
Without this, how could they make fair decisions about
good or bad behaviour in the classroom? The robot teacher
could ‘decide’ by means of pre-programmed rules, but their
effectiveness would depend on the programmer having
anticipated the situations likely to arise and the appropriate
response to them. The variety of situations and social
encounters that could arise in a classroom makes this
Although it may be possible to create the illusion of
understanding and empathetic robots, it remains the case as
Wallach and Allen acknowledge, that ‘present-day
technology is far from having the kinds of intelligence and
intentions people demand from human moral agents’ (p.
45). Roboticists have begun to consider the relevance of
artiﬁcial empathy to robotics ,
but this research is at an early stage. In the meantime,
robots’ lack of understanding of children’s behaviour
provides a major stumbling block for suggestions that
robots will be able to replace human teachers any time
As well as deﬁcits in moral understanding, robots are
also not necessarily fair and unbiased. Because robots are
developed and programmed by humans, they can exhibit
technological bias. Forms of technological bias were
already being discussed nearly two decades ago . The idea was illustrated in 2009 by
reports showing that Hewlett-Packard webcams’ face
tracking algorithms worked only with white faces, and not
with black faces (the problem was subsequently ﬁxed).
Ensuring that a robot treats all children equally requires the
developers and programmers of the robot to be aware of
possible inequalities that could result from the robot’s
behaviour or sensors. Hewlett-Packard is unlikely to have
intended their face tracking algorithm to be racist; the
developers had just failed to notice that the algorithms they
were using did not perform well with black and darker skin.
It is possible to imagine other forms of bias that a robot
anticipated
A. J. C. Sharkey
programmers and developers. For instance, any speech
recognition systems they use are likely perform better for
children without strong regional accents, or dialects.
As well as questions about a robot’s ability to make
appropriate decisions, robot teachers would also give rise
to legal issues about accountability. Teachers need to be
able to reward and punish the behaviour of children in the
classroom. Under the Children Act 1989, teachers have a
duty of care towards their pupils, a concept referred to as
‘in loco parentis’ that has evolved through legal precedent.
Legally, while not bound by parental responsibility,
teachers must behave as any reasonable parent would do in
promoting the welfare and safety of children in their care.
The principle of ‘in loco parentis’ can be used to justify a
teacher’s reasonable use of punishment, although corporal
punishment in schools has been outlawed in most of Europe for some time. Questions about legal responsibility and
robots are complex and increasingly discussed . It is unlikely that the ‘in loco parentis’ principle
would be applied to a robot, but a robot engaged in
teaching activity would need recourse to some forms of
sanction. Apart from rewarding or punishing behaviour, a
robot teacher might need to prevent a child from performing dangerous actions, or from hurting their classmates, or injuring the robot. It is not clear what kinds of
sanctions a robot could acceptably use. It might be that
such questions mean that a robot could not feasibly be left
in charge of a classroom of children, and would always
need to be able to rely on a human supervisor to maintain
classroom control.
Different roles and scenarios for classroom robots do
create differing perspectives on these questions about
control and accountability, and about decisions about what
to teach. They are particularly salient when considering the
possibility of an autonomous robot teacher (Scenario 1). A
robot teacher could be programmed to teach on a particular
topic, or to follow a given curriculum. However a human
teacher will continuously make decisions about when and
how to teach something, adjusting their delivery in
response to their understanding of the situation and the
audience. A robot, for reasons discussed above, is unlikely
to be able to do this. In addition, in order to function as a
classroom teacher, a robot would have to be able to control
and make decisions about children’s behaviour in the
classroom. The argument is made here, and elsewhere, that
robots do not have the necessary moral and situational
understanding to be able to adequately, or acceptably, fulﬁl
this role.
Control and autonomy are less of a concern in the case
of the Telepresence robot in Scenario 4, since a human
operator, or operators will presumably be involved;
although the extent to which the remote teacher is distanced from the classroom situation is likely to limit their
awareness of what is going on in the classroom. When the
robot is presented as a companion or peer (Scenario 2 and
3), it is not seen as being in a position of authority, and
there is less reason to be concerned about questions of
control and autonomy. Nonetheless, if companion robots
are to be used for teaching purposes, there is still a need to
think carefully about any delegation of decision making
capabilities. Even a robot presented as a companion could
be required to make some decisions about a child’s learning, or performance. Care needs to be taken to ensure that
any such decisions are ones that it is appropriate for a robot
to make. In other words, it should be clear that the decisions are made by programmed algorithms, and not the
result of human-like judgement.
Reasons in favour of robot teachers
Although we have identiﬁed and discussed the main ethical
concerns associated with the introduction of robots in the
classroom in terms of 4 different scenarios, we have not yet
considered the arguments that could be made in favour of
classroom robots. Perhaps the ethical concerns raised here
could be outweighed by compelling reasons in favour of
deploying robots. In order to address this possibility, we
consider the main arguments and reasons for replacing
humans with robots in social roles, and the extent to which
they apply equally, or differently, to the four classroom
scenarios.
There are at least ﬁve general arguments that have been
made in favour of the use of robots in society. First, it is
often suggested that robots are particularly appropriate for
situations that involve tasks that are dangerous, dirty or
dull for humans to undertake, and that by taking on such
tasks robots could free up humans for more interesting and
rewarding activities . A second
reason for placing robots in social roles would be if they
were found to outperform humans. For instance, if it were
shown that children generally learned better from robot
teachers than they did from human teachers, this could be a
reason in favour of their adoption. A third reason for
turning to robots is when they can offer something that
would not otherwise be available. A fourth reason for
deploying robots is as a signal that the organisation
deploying them is technologically advanced and ‘cutting
edge’. A ﬁfth reason in favour of replacing humans with
robots is an economic one, based on claims that they will
be more cost effective than the human alternative.
Do any of these reasons provide compelling justiﬁcations for the introduction of teaching robots into the
classroom? Several do not stand up to much scrutiny. The
ﬁrst does seem particularly relevant to teaching. Few would
see the teacher’s role as being so dangerous, dirty or dull
Should we welcome robot teachers?
for humans that we need to replace them with robots, as in
Scenario 1. There is generally no shortage of people
wanting to become teachers. If, in the future, teaching
came to be perceived as a boring activity best left to robots,
this would not augur well for the future of humanity.
The second reason depends on ﬁnding robot teachers to
be better than human ones, and is one that is particularly
relevant to Scenario 1, and the idea of a robot replacing the
classroom teacher. Given the limited ability of robots to
have a good understanding of what is going on in the
classroom and in children’s minds, this is unlikely to be the
case in the near future. So far research on robots in the
classroom does not usually involve a comparison between
the effectiveness of robots and humans in conveying information. In much of the research reviewed in the section on
‘‘Current robots in the classroom’’ the concern was to show that
children can learn from a robot and accept it in the classroom, and not to compare the robots’ effectiveness to that of
human teachers. When a small scale comparison to human
teachers was undertaken , the robot did not
fare well. Claims that robot teachers will be more motivating
and effective for students than a humans need to be backed
up by convincing evidence, and that evidence is not yet
available. The possibility of robots making fairer decisions
in the classroom than humans was discussed in ‘‘Control and
accountability’’ section and argued to be an unlikely one.
The third reason is more viable, as there are situations and
scenarios in which classroom robots could conceivably offer
unavailable.
Telepresence
(Scenario 4) for instance can be used to enable such a
learning experience. The EngKey robot reviewed earlier was
being used to give South Korean students access to English
tutors in the Philippines. Likewise, a robot companion
(Scenario 2) could augment a human teacher’s lessons by
providing some individual coaching. Children may even be
more willing to admit their lack of understanding to a robot
than to a human. Similarly, they might prefer to practice
speaking a foreign language with a robot companion than
with a person. As discussed in ‘‘Current robots in the
classroom’’ section, an effective use of robots in the classroom that is beginning to emerge is when they are presented
as a peer in need of help (Scenario 3, the Care-eliciting
companion), so that the child has to teach the robot something. This was the case in the study described earlier by
Tanaka and Matsuzoe . Their preliminary results, and
those of Hood et al. , suggest that this approach can
work well since the robot can be programmed to seem to
need help from even a struggling student, thereby giving that
student a rewarding feeling of competence.
The fourth reason for using robots as a means of indicating to the technological sophistication of the school or
educational establishment may reﬂect the underlying
motivations for such developments: but is of questionable
value. Ensuring that children have some knowledge and
experience of robots may well be a good thing, but it is
important to critically evaluate the evidence about the
extent to which robots can be used to enhance and facilitate
learning before diverting too much of the limited educational funding budget towards them. This argument applies
to all four scenarios discussed here. This leads us to the
ﬁfth reason. Replacing human teachers or assistants with
robots because they are more cost effective is surely not
something to be encouraged. Governments and local
authorities might see some advantages to employing robot
teachers; they would not demand pay, or strike, or complain about being asked to follow a prescribed curriculum.
However, to be justiﬁable there would need to be good
evidence of the robots’ adequacy and competence for the
role as compared to human teachers. This argument applies
to all four of the scenarios we have considered. The cost
effectiveness argument is one that may increasingly be
made about robotics in various domains. It is to be hoped
that discussions such as this that highlight the associated
ethical concerns will help to reinforce and strengthen the
arguments against such developments, and to ensure that
robots are only introduced in situations where they can be
shown to lead to an improvement in the human condition.
Most of the reasons we have considered here are not found
to be good ones. Teaching is not a dangerous, dirty or dull task
for which robots could appropriately replace humans. There is
no compelling evidence that robots are better than humans at
teaching children. The economic reason is not a powerful one
unless the robots were shown to outperform humans, and the
same is true for their use as a signal of the technological
sophistication of the school or organisation.
The most convincing reason then in favour of robots in
the classroom is that they can sometimes offer a beneﬁcial
educational experience that might otherwise not be available. This might be the case for the companion robots in
Scenarios 2 and 3, and the Telepresence robots in Scenario
4. Generally, it makes sense to use robots in circumstances
in which they can offer people access to resources and
abilities that would not otherwise be realisable, rather than
in situations where they are being used to replace competent humans. A related argument was made in the context
of robots for older people in favour of deploying robots and
robotic technology that expanded the set of capabilities
accessible to them .
Conclusions
Now that we have considered the main ethical issues raised
by, and the reasons in favour of, classroom robots, some
implications about the relative acceptability of the four
A. J. C. Sharkey
classroom robot scenarios can be drawn. These conclusions
are based on the current and likely near future abilities of
social robots, and it is acknowledged that they might need
to be revisited if robots with signiﬁcantly greater abilities
are developed.
There are reasons to support the use of Telepresence
robots (Scenario 4) when they are used to provide educational opportunities that would otherwise be inaccessible.
For instance, they could be used to facilitate children’s
access to remote skilled teachers unavailable in their
school. Their use as a cost-cutting measure should still be
viewed with suspicion, and they do give rise to concerns
about privacy and sharing of information, but nonetheless
they could usefully supplement regular classroom teaching
in some circumstances. Their use to facilitate contact with
teachers and speakers of a foreign language seems appropriate, and if they are deployed in a classroom in which a
human teacher is also available, there would be less need to
be concerned about the issues of control and autonomy, and
attachment and deception.
Companion and peer robots designed to foster implicit
learning (Scenario 2 and 3) seem quite likely to appear in
schools because they can function under the auspices of the
human teacher without the need to control the classroom,
or to appear fully competent. If such robots are to be
welcomed, their welcome should be a cautious one because
of the need to establish the educational effectiveness of
such measures, particularly when compared to cheaper
alternatives such as educational software and virtual coaches. In addition, since such robots masquerade as children’s friends, there are concerns about the extent to which
they would violate their privacy, and a risk that they would
have a deleterious impact on their learning about social
relationships. Nonetheless, if concerns about privacy and
social relationships were addressed, it is possible that such
robots could be used to offer new educational opportunities. For example, the idea of developing a care-eliciting
robot that encourages children to teach it new concepts or
skills (and thereby reinforce their own learning) seems a
promising one. Similarly companion robots could be
developed to provide individualised practice for children
on tasks that require repetition (and that might be too dull
or time consuming for human teachers). It also seems
plausible that children might be more willing to admit a
lack of understanding, or a need for repeated presentation
of material to a robot than to a human adult.
The use of fully ﬂedged robot teachers (the extreme of
Scenario 1) is surely something that should not be encouraged, or seen as a goal worth striving for. There seems no
good reason to expect that robot teachers would offer extra
educational beneﬁts over a human teacher. It is also apparent
that robot teachers will not be able form an adequate
replacements for humans in the near future. Robots are
unlikely to have the ability to keep control of a room full of
children in the absence of a human teacher (except in a
nightmare situation where they could administer physical
restraint and punishment to make up for their own shortcomings). A robot could be programmed to deliver educational material, but it is not at all clear that children would
learn that material once the initial novelty of the robot teacher had worn off. In addition, even if it were possible to
program robots to deliver a curriculum, that would not make
them good teachers. A good teacher should be able to identify the zone of proximal development for a child, and be able
to teach them just what they need to know, just when they
need to know it . As discussed by Sharkey
 , a robot is unlikely to be able to determine the relevant
information to teach to a student in any meaningful way. As
non-humans, how could robots determine what human
children need to know, or have the intention to pass on the
information that is needed to accomplish the tasks required in
human culture ? First and foremost, children
need to be taught by fellow human beings who understand
them, care for them, and who form appropriate role models
and attachment ﬁgures.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the
European Union Seventh Framework Programme 
under grant agreement No. 611971.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( 
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
unrestricted
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.