Electrocorticography reveals beta desynchronization in the
basal ganglia-cortical loop during rest tremor in Parkinson’s
Salman E. Qasim, BA1, Coralie de Hemptinne, PhD2, Nicole C. Swann, PhD2, Svjetlana
Miocinovic, MD, PhD3, Jill L. Ostrem, MD3, and Philip A. Starr, MD, PhD2
Coralie de Hemptinne: ; Nicole C. Swann: ; Svjetlana Miocinovic:
 ; Jill L. Ostrem: ; Philip A. Starr: 
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University
2Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
3Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
The pathophysiology of rest tremor in Parkinson’s disease (PD) is not well understood, and its
severity does not correlate with the severity of other cardinal signs of PD. We hypothesized that
tremor-related oscillatory activity in the basal-ganglia-thalamocortical loop might serve as a
compensatory mechanism for the excessive beta band synchronization associated with the
parkinsonian state. We recorded electrocorticography (ECoG) from the sensorimotor cortex and
local field potentials (LFP) from the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in patients undergoing lead
implantation for deep brain stimulation (DBS). We analyzed differences in measures of network
synchronization during epochs of spontaneous rest tremor, versus epochs without rest tremor,
occurring in the same subjects. The presence of tremor was associated with reduced beta power in
the cortex and STN. Cortico-cortical coherence and phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) decreased
during rest tremor, as did basal ganglia-cortical coherence in the same frequency band. Cortical
broadband gamma power was not increased by tremor onset, in contrast to the movement-related
gamma increase typically observed at the onset of voluntary movement. These findings suggest
that the cortical representation of rest tremor is distinct from that of voluntary movement, and
support a model in which tremor acts to decrease beta band synchronization within the basal
ganglia-cortical loop.
Corresponding author. Salman Qasim, Columbia University, 116th St & Broadway, New York, NY 10027,
 .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Authors’ contributions and conflict of interest disclosures: Authors report no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
 
Neurobiol Dis. 2016 February ; 86: 177–186. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2015.11.023.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Parkinson’s Disease; Electrocorticography (ECoG); Tremor; Basal Ganglia; Deep Brain
Stimulation (DBS)
INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a movement disorder characterized by severe loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain. This manifests in several cardinal symptoms
including a 4–7 Hz tremor at rest, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability . Though many early studies searched for a single “generator” of tremor activity,
it is now thought that rest tremor emerges from changes in the network dynamics of the
basal ganglia-thalamocortical loop and cerebello-thalamocortical loop . Tremor related oscillatory activity has been observed throughout these networks,
through single unit recording and local field potentials in the subthalamic nucleus , and in mapping of cortical connectivity through the use of
magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG) . However,
most previous studies have recorded only from basal ganglia or cortex rather than studying
the simultaneous activity necessary to observe network changes corresponding to rest
An understanding of the pathogenesis of rest tremor may provide insight into several
mysteries related to the clinical presentation of tremor in patients with PD. Unlike other PD
symptoms, such as bradykinesia or rigidity, the severity of tremor does not correlate with
dopaminergic cell death in the striatum . It also does not correlate with the
severity of the other motor symptoms . Tremor-dominant patients
have slower progression of disability and better prognosis than patients without tremor
 . These characteristics suggest a pathophysiological distinction
between PD with rest tremor and PD without rest tremor. Recent authors have postulated
that these distinctions may indicate a compensatory role for rest tremor . One theory of parkinsonian bradykinesia implicates excessive
neuronal synchronization in the beta (13–30 Hz) band within and between structures of the
motor network , and detailed examination of the network changes
underlying rest tremor would clarify whether rest tremor is acting to counter this
pathological synchronization.
In this study we examined the hypothesis that transient spontaneous epochs of rest tremor
may reflect a state of desychronization in frequency bands other than tremor frequency,
within and between nuclei of the basal ganglia-thalamocortical motor loop. We approached
this using the technique of electrocorticography (ECoG) of sensorimotor cortex, combined
with subthalamic nucleus (STN) local field potential (LFP) recording, during spontaneous
epochs of rest tremor and rest without tremor, in PD patients undergoing surgical
implantation of deep brain stimulator (DBS) leads in the awake state. We found that tremor
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
is associated with a reduction in cortical and subthalamic beta power, cortico-cortical
coherence, cortical-subthalamic coherence and cortical cross frequency coupling. These
findings suggest that tremor acts to counter the excessive beta synchronization associated
with parkinsonian bradykinesia. Our findings also have implications for the development of
closed-loop stimulation algorithms that rely on biomarkers modulated by tremor.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Subject Recruitment
The subjects in this study were recruited from a population of patients undergoing DBS
implantation at one of two campuses: the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), or
the San Francisco Veteran Affairs Medical Center (SFVAMC). Each subject had a diagnosis
of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease confirmed by a movement disorders neurologist. Informed
consent for the temporary intra-operative placement of the cortical strip was obtained prior
to surgery under a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board, according to the
Declaration of Helsinki. Data from some of the same subjects in this study were also used,
for different analyses, in other publications .
Surgery and placement of subdural ECoG electrodes and STN DBS lead
ECoG was recorded using either a 6-contact (n = 22) or 28-contact (n = 5) ECoG strip
temporarily placed over the sensorimotor cortex . The ECoG strip was
inserted under the dura through the burr hole used for the DBS lead placement and advanced
in the direction of the intended target location, the arm area of motor cortex (3 cm from the
midline, on the medial aspect of the “hand knob”) . Six-contact
electrodes were composed of platinum contacts of 4 mm total diameter, 2.3 mm exposed
diameter and 10 mm spacing between contacts (Integra NeuroScience, Plainsboro, NJ, or
Ad-Tech, Racine WI)). Twenty-eight-contact electrodes were composed of platinum
contacts of 2 mm total diameter, 1.2 mm exposed diameter and 4 mm spacing between
contacts (Ad-Tech, Racine, WI).
Localization of the M1 contact was determined both anatomically and functionally.
Anatomical localization was determined using either intraoperative computed tomography
(iCT) merged with pre-operative MRI or lateral fluoroscopy as previously described
 . Functional localization was performed with somatosensory potentials
evoked by median nerve stimulation and used to select contacts for the subsequent analyses
(frequency = 2Hz, pulse width = 200 µsec, pulse train length = 160 µsec, amplitude 25–40
mA). The central sulcus was localized using the N20 reversal technique . The most posterior contact pair showing a reversed N20 potential was defined as the
closest electrode pair to M1, the contact pair immediately posterior to that was defined as
covering the central sulcus, and the contact pair posterior to that with an upward N20
waveform was defined as the closest electrode pair to primary somatosensory cortex (S1).
These methods are illustrated in Figure 1.
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
DBS electrodes were placed in the STN as previously described .
Targeting was confirmed by evaluation of stimulation induced symptom improvement and
adverse effects, as well as by visualization of DBS lead location on an iCT scan
computationally fused to the preoperative MRI .
Intraoperative Data Collection
ECoG potentials were recorded using the Guideline 4000 system (FHC Inc, Bowdoin, ME)
(n =7), the Alpha Omega Microguide Pro (Alpha Omega, Inc, Nazareth, Israel) (n = 14), or
the PZ5 Neurodigitizer (Tucker Davis Technologies, Inc., Alachua, FL) (n= 6). ECoG
potentials recorded with the 6-contact strips were recorded in a bipolar configuration
referencing the five most posterior contacts (contacts 1–5) to the most anterior one. With the
28-contact strip, ECoG potentials were referenced to a scalp needle electrode.
Subcortical local field potentials were recorded using a 4-contact cylindrical DBS lead
(Model 3389, Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis MN). Each contact was 1.5 mm in height and 1.2
mm in diameter, with 0.5 mm intercontact spacing. With contact 0 as the most ventral
contact and contact 3 as the most dorsal contact, LFPs were recorded using contacts 1 and 2.
Subcortical LFPs from subjects implanted with the 6-contact ECoG strips were recorded in a
bipolar configuration while subcortical LFPs from subjects implanted with the 28-contact
strips were recorded in a monopolar configuration and re-referenced in a bipolar
configuration in post-processing.
Six-contact ECoG and subcortical LFP signals were bandpass filtered 1–500 Hz, amplified ×
7000. All signals were recorded at a sampling rate of minimum 1 KHz and up to 3 KHz. All
data recordings after lead insertion were performed 5 to 60 minutes after insertion in order to
minimize the contribution of acute effects related to electrode placement . The Guideline system had slight attenuation up to 20 Hz due to the
slow roll-off characteristics of an intrinsic 1 Hz high pass filter, and this was compensated
for using an empirically determined correction factor . Even so this did
not consistently correct for attenuation below 4 Hz. When results were analyzed separately
for data collected with the GS4000, no differences were found in any condition.
Nevertheless, we discarded frequencies below 4 Hz for group comparisons.
Additional channels were used to record analog signals from surface electromyography
(EMG) from the arm contralateral to the cortical strip over the extensor carpi radialis (ECR)
and/or biceps brachii. We also recorded the same hand’s movement in three-dimensional
space with a tri-axial accelerometer affixed to the wrist (AX2300-365, FHC, Inc, Bowdoin,
ME). These data were recorded at a sampling rate of minimum 1 KHz and up to 25 KHz.
Subjects were lying in a semi-supine position in the operating room for the duration of
surgery and data collection, and instructed to keep their eyes open and refrain from speech
or voluntary movements during recordings. Data were recorded in two conditions: during
rest tremor and rest without tremor.
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pre-Processing
All data were processed and analyzed offline in MATLAB (Mathworks, Inc). All the data
were downsampled to 1 KHz and notch filtered for power line noise (60 Hz) and its
harmonics (at 120, 180, 240 Hz).
DATA ANALYSIS
Identification of Tremor Epochs
In order to identify epochs of tremor, we collected surface EMG and accelerometry data
from subjects’ contralateral arm. Due to a high signal to noise ratio in the EMG data,
residual activation of extraneous muscle groups, and possible bias from sampling only a
proportion of arm muscle, the accelerometer data were used for the clearest possible
discrimination of tremor epochs while EMG was used to confirm the
presence of muscle activity during those epochs. We identified the epochs of tremor and rest
through visual identification of 4–7 Hz rhythmic changes in accelerometer amplitude.
Precise tremor onset and offset was not always clearly identifiable due to the gradual, low
amplitude manner in which tremor may often arise. Due to this difficulty in identifying a
precise onset, we selected data segments for which accelerometry showed at least 6 seconds
of clearly identifiable tremor bounded by at least 1 second of identifiable tremor before and
after to ensure there was no ambiguity about the presence of tremor. These epochs were used
for all analyses, with the exception of cross-frequency coupling analyses. These analyses
required longer epochs of rest and tremor available in a subset of patients (described below).
Spectral Power
Power spectral density was calculated using Welch’s method (MATLAB function pwelch)
with a 50% overlap, resulting in a frequency resolution of approximately 1 Hz and was log
transformed for all comparisons. Peaks in the resulting spectrogram were recorded and log
power was also averaged across frequency bands: theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), low beta
(12–20 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), high beta (20–30 Hz), low gamma (30–55 Hz), gamma (30–80
Hz), and broadband gamma (80–200 Hz).
The amplitude of the beta peak was analyzed by fitting a 5th order polynomial to the PSD
with the beta peak removed to establish a baseline, while the width of the beta peak was
evaluated by modeling the beta peak as a Gaussian curve and calculating the standard
deviation.
Coherence (magnitude-squared coherence) was calculated using Welch’s averaged modified
periodogram method with a 1 s window and a frequency resolution of 1 Hz (MATLAB
function mscohere). Coherence was analyzed along a spectrum of frequencies, and averaged
across the aforementioned frequency bands as well as any additional sub-divisions of
interest. Comparisons were made between peaks in the coherence spectrum as well as
between averaged coherence in a given frequency band. Peak coherence was evaluated using
local maximums in the coherence spectrum that exceeded the threshold determined by
surrogate analysis (see “Statistical Analysis”).
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Phase Synchrony Index (PSI) and Amplitude-Amplitude Coupling (AAC)
Phase synchrony, unlike magnitude squared coherence, is a measure of consistent phase
difference or amount of “phase locking” that occurs between two signals, without taking into
account any amplitude relationships . Amplitude-amplitude coupling
(AAC) is a measure of the correlation between amplitude envelopes independent of phase
interactions . These two connectivity measures were calculated using
custom MATLAB functions. First, each signal was bandpass filtered around the frequency
band of interest using a two way, least squares FIR filter (eegfilt from EEGLAB toolbox)
 . Phase information was extracted from each filtered signal
using the Hilbert transform, and was used to calculate the phase difference, ϕΔ. The angular
phase difference distribution was obtained by transforming ϕΔ onto the unit circle in the
complex plane using Euler’s formula. The mean of this distribution is the phase synchrony
index (PSI), where:
The amplitude envelope for each signal was calculated by taking the square root of the
squared signal plus the squared Hilbert transform of the signal:
Here, x(t) is the bandpass filtered signal, and H(x(t)) is the Hilbert transform of the filtered
signal. Then, Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated between the amplitude
envelopes over the course of each epoch. This correlation coefficient was squared in order to
make it more comparable to magnitude-squared coherence.
Cortical cross frequency AAC was calculated in a subset of subjects (n = 9) who
experienced a long enough epoch of tremor to reliably assess the relationship between low
and high frequency activity (~30 seconds, uninterrupted). Uninterrupted epochs were
selected in order to minimize artifactual coupling stemming from edge effects. STN and
STN-M1 AAC were calculated in a different subset of patients (n = 8) who experienced long
epochs of rest and tremor after lead insertion.
Phase-Amplitude Coupling (PAC)
Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) quantifies the relationship between the phase of one
frequency band and the amplitude of another, either within an area or between areas. This
methodology is described by Tort et al., and application to our data is detailed in our
prior work . Briefly, the signal was bandpass filtered for
both low frequency (4–40 Hz, with a bin bandwidth of 2 Hz) and high frequency (40–400,
with a bin bandwidth of 4 Hz) components. The phase of the low frequency components and
the amplitude of the high frequency components were extracted using the Hilbert transform.
The distribution of the instantaneous amplitude envelope was computed for every 20°
interval of the instantaneous phase. The modulation index (MI) was then calculated between
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the phase of low-frequency rhythm and the high-frequency amplitude by computing the
entropy values of this distribution and normalizing by the maximum entropy value . A mean modulation index was calculated
for each data segment by averaging MI over the phase frequency range of 13–30 Hz (beta)
and the amplitude frequency range of 50–200 Hz (broadband gamma).
Cortical PAC was calculated in a subset of subjects (n = 9) who experienced a long enough
epoch of tremor to reliably calculate a phase-amplitude modulation index (~30 seconds,
uninterrupted). Uninterrupted epochs were selected in order to minimize artifactual coupling
stemming from edge effects. STN PAC and STN-M1 PAC were calculated in a different
subset of patients (n = 8) who experienced long epochs of rest and tremor after lead
insertion.
Statistical Analysis
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (MATLAB function kstest) rejected the null hypothesis that
the paired differences being tested came from a normal distribution, so the nonparametric
paired Wilcoxon signed-rank was used to evaluate differences between the rest and tremor
conditions. All statistics were false discovery rate corrected for multiple comparisons, and
the adjusted p values are presented here .
Surrogates were generated for coherence, PSI, AAC, and PAC analyses by shifting one
signal by a randomly generated number of samples and using this shifted signal in analyses.
These surrogate measures were calculated 300 times to establish a distribution for each
patient. The 95th percentile of the distribution of these surrogate values was used as the
threshold to determine significance.
Study subjects
Potential study subjects were characterized using the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating
Scale part III (UPDRS-III) following withdrawal of anti-parkinsonian medications for 12
hours. Subject inclusion criteria were as follows: age 21–75 years, normal brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) examination, sufficient disease severity in the setting of optimal
medical management to justify treatment by DBS, and ability to cooperate during awake
neurosurgery. Subjects were excluded if their recordings did not contain at least one epoch
(defined as > 6 seconds) of spontaneous rest tremor, as well as a period of rest without
tremor or other movement, during surgery. Thirty-three subjects met these criteria. Of these,
6 subjects had very low ECoG signal amplitudes (characterized by a root mean square
amplitude <10 µV) or very low STN LFP signal amplitudes (characterized by a root mean
square amplitude < 5 µV) and were therefore excluded from analysis. Mean age of studied
subjects was 63 ± 8 years. Twenty-one subjects experienced at least one epoch of rest tremor
and one of rest without tremor after ECoG placement and prior to lead insertion. Nine of
these 21 subjects with pre-lead insertion rest tremor and rest without tremor experienced at
least 30 second epochs of each condition, affording data segments of sufficient length to
analyze cross frequency AAC and PAC in the cortex. After STN lead insertion, 10
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
experienced at least one epoch of rest tremor and of rest without tremor. Eight of these 10
subjects with post-lead insertion rest tremor and rest without tremor experienced at least 30
second epochs of each condition, affording data segments of sufficient length to analyze
cross frequency AAC and PAC in the STN and between the STN and cortex. All
antiparkinsonian medications were stopped 12 hours before the start of surgery. Median
tremor frequency was 5.0 Hz ± 1.79 Hz. Characteristics of study subjects, and delineation of
which study subjects contributed to each analysis, are provided in Table 1.
Tremor is associated with broad (8–55 Hz) desynchronization in M1
Tremor was associated with a significant decrease in alpha and beta power in both S1 (alpha:
p<.05, beta: p<.01) and M1 (alpha: p<.05, beta: p<.001) compared to rest without tremor,
and a significant decrease in low gamma power (30–55 Hz) exclusive to M1 (p<.05) (Figure
2A). In M1, alpha decreased in 16/21 subjects, beta decreased in 20/21 subjects (Figure 2C),
and low gamma (30–55 Hz) decreased in 16/21 subjects. In S1, alpha decreased in 15/21
subjects, while beta decreased in 20/21 subjects, with no group difference in gamma. Neither
theta (4–8 Hz) power nor broadband gamma (50–200 Hz) power changed during tremor
(Figure 2A). Beta peak analysis revealed that maximum cortical beta amplitude decreased in
M1 and S1 with tremor (p<0.05), though the width of the beta peak did not change
significantly. We observed no peaks in other frequency ranges that appeared during tremor.
Low beta cortico-cortical coherence and phase synchronization decrease during tremor
Tremor was associated with a decrease in M1-S1 coherence that was restricted to the low
beta range, from 13–20 Hz (p<0.05). This effect was observed in 15/21 subjects. There was
no significant change in coherence in any other frequency band, including beta coherence
taken as a whole (13–30 Hz) (Figure 3A). Peak coherence values, defined as the local
maximums in a frequency range exceeding the surrogate threshold for significance, were
examined as well. In 13/21 subjects there was peak in the beta frequency band during rest
that disappeared during tremor. Additionally, in 13/21 subjects we observed a narrowband
peak in the alpha frequency range that appeared during tremor, similar to the “double tremor
frequency” activity that has been reported in MEG studies . This
was not reflected in the averaged coherence data, which encompassed a wider frequency
range than the narrowband peak.
To determine whether tremor-associated changes in coherence were driven primarily by
phase effects or amplitude effects, we analyzed PSI and AAC in the frequency range that
showed a tremor-associated reduction in coherence. Phase synchronization between M1 low
beta and S1 low beta decreased during tremor (p<0.05). There was a strong correlation
between the decrease in low beta M1-S1 coherence and this decrease in low beta M1-S1 PSI
(R2 = 0.64, p <.00001), indicating that the decrease in coherence was largely driven by a
decrease in the phase synchronization. The preferred phase difference in the synchronized
rest state varied from patient to patient (Figure 3D). The change in low beta M1-S1
coherence was also (more weakly) correlated with the change in low beta M1-S1 AAC (R2 =
0.41, p <.01), but as there was no significant decrease in AAC during tremor it is unlikely
that this was a driver of the tremor-associated changes in coherence.
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tremor decreases phase-amplitude coupling in M1
We previously showed that rigid-akinetic PD patients have exaggerated beta-gamma phase
amplitude coupling (PAC) in M1, suggesting excessive synchronization of population
spiking to the beta rhythm . Thus we sought to determine
whether tremor had an effect on PAC. Out of 9 subjects with sufficiently long data segments
to contribute to this analysis, 7 showed coupling of low frequency phase (alpha-beta) to high
frequency amplitude (broadband gamma) (Figure 4A). Phase-amplitude coupling decreased
significantly during tremor (p < 0.05) and this effect was observed in 7/9 subjects (Figure
4B). The other two subjects who showed no PAC at rest showed a slight increase in coupling
during tremor, even though both subjects experienced a decrease in beta power. PAC was
also examined in S1, but no significant coupling was found. Cross frequency AAC was also
examined in these subjects, and yielded no significant change during tremor.
Tremor is associated with beta desynchronization in the STN
A subset of subjects (n=10) experienced sufficient epochs of rest and tremor after lead
insertion allowing for simultaneous cortical and subcortical recordings. Analysis of STN
LFP power revealed a decrease in beta power when subjects were experiencing tremor
versus rest (p<0.05) (Figure 5A). This was seen in 8/10 subjects (Figure 5C). Comparisons
at other frequency bands yielded no significant group differences, though we did note that
4/10 subjects showed a narrowband peak in spectral power ~ 9 Hz, approximately double the
tremor frequency during, epochs of tremor. The maximum STN beta peak amplitude did not
differ consistently between conditions, though peak width decreased significantly during
tremor (p<0.05).
Alpha and beta coherence between M1 and STN decreases during tremor
During tremor, coherence between M1 and STN decreased in the alpha and beta frequency
bands (p<0.05). This was the case in 9/10 subjects (Figure 5D). When examining the peak
coherence values, we found that in most subjects there was a prominent broad peak in
coherence in the alpha-beta range, and this peak did not change location during tremor but
instead decreased in amplitude.
We did not find any significant changes in phase synchrony, amplitude-amplitude coupling,
or phase amplitude coupling (Figure 4A) within STN or between cortex and STN. The
decrease in alpha coherence between M1 and STN was not correlated with changes in alpha
phase synchrony (R2 = 0.19, p > 0.05), but was correlated with a decrease in alpha
amplitude-amplitude coupling (R2 = 0.58, p <0.05). The decrease in beta coherence between
M1 and STN trended towards correlation with a decrease in phase synchrony (R2 = 0.44, p =
0.06), and was not correlated with changes in amplitude-amplitude coupling. However, in
the absence of a significant decrease in these measures, it is unclear whether phase or
amplitude effects were the main drivers of the tremor-associated changes in M1-STN
coherence.
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
DISCUSSION
In this study we examined the cortical and subcortical physiological correlates of
parkinsonian rest tremor by analyzing intraoperative sensorimotor ECoG and STN LFP
activity in subjects undergoing awake placement of DBS leads. We found that the
spontaneous onset of tremor was associated with reduced alpha, beta, and low gamma power
in M1, reduced M1 beta phase-gamma amplitude coupling, reduced beta power in the
subthalamic nucleus, and reduced cortico-cortical and cortico-subthalamic beta coherence.
High gamma (broadband) power in sensorimotor cortex, normally increased during
voluntary movement , did not change during tremor.
Tremor reduces pathological synchronization in the beta band
It has long been known that movement is associated with an alpha-beta event related
desynchronization (ERD) in the cortex and subthalamic nucleus. This has been shown for
self-paced voluntary movement passive movement , and imagined movement . Alpha-beta ERD
is typically represented broadly across the sensorimotor cortex ,
occurs prior to movement initiation, and is thought to represent a “pro-kinetic” state of
increased cortical responsiveness . One theory of the pathophysiology
of parkinsonian akinesia and bradykinesia is that these motor signs are generated by
increased oscillatory synchronization in the basal-ganglia thalamocortical loop in the beta
band. Manifestations of this may include increased cortico-cortical coherence , increased cortico-subthalamic coherence and increased
synchronization of neuronal spiking to a specific phase of the beta rhythm . Cortical beta-gamma phase amplitude
coupling is one metric of synchronization of neuronal populations to the beta rhythm, since
cortical high gamma activity is a surrogate marker for population spiking .
This could explain why tremor can decrease in severity with increased DA loss or disappear entirely .
The current study is limited to patients who experience tremor as one of their cardinal PD
motor signs, necessarily excluding comparisons with patients with a pure rigid/bradykinetic
phenotype who do not experience tremor. Comparing metrics of beta synchrony in patients
with rigid-akinetic PD against those in tremor-dominant PD would be useful to further test
the hypothesis that tremor is partly compensatory for elevated beta band synchronization.
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Another implication of these findings is that metrics of excessive beta oscillatory
synchronization might not serve as optimal control signals for closed-loop DBS in PD
patients, as has been previously proposed , if the patient has prominent
tremor. In these patients, an additional biomarker for tremor must be taken into account.
Motor cortex activation in broadband gamma distinguishes voluntary movement from
Although tremor and normal voluntary movement show physiological overlap with respect
to their associated changes in cortical beta band synchronization, this does not seem to be
the case for higher frequency, broadband phenomena. Broadband gamma (50–200 Hz) is a
non-oscillatory physiological signal that we take as a surrogate measure for local population
spiking and afferent activity . Voluntary
movement has been shown to increase power in the broadband gamma frequency range
 in ECoG
recordings over sensorimotor cortex. Therefore, the voluntary movement-related broadband
gamma response may indicate a functional increase in M1 neuronal recruitment. If M1
played the same role in generating both tremor and non-tremor movement, then we would
expect to see an increase in broadband gamma power during tremor. However, we found no
increase in broadband gamma power in M1, S1, or STN during tremor, even though
broadband increases have been shown in other patients with PD during simple voluntary arm
movements . Our results indicate a physiological distinction between
tremor and non-tremor movement identifiable in motor cortex, and support the idea that M1
activation is not necessary for tremor genesis.
Comparison to prior physiological studies of parkinsonian tremor
Several prior publications have explored the cortical physiological correlates of parkinsonian
tremor using MEG , EEG , STN LFP , or MEG combined with STN LFP recording
 . Several of these have shown tremor to be associated with the
emergence of a “double tremor frequency” (9–11 Hz) peak in cortico-cortical coherence.
Our findings, utilizing a distinct technical approach based on ECoG, are largely consistent
with prior studies, in many but not all of our subjects. We also found that a small
narrowband peak in cortico-cortical alpha coherence, or the “double tremor frequency”
range appeared in 13/21 subjects during tremor . Additionally, a
recent MEG study by Hirschmann et al. found a cortical beta ERD during PD rest
tremor, consistent with the present study. One prior study found increased theta power in the
STN during tremor, which we did not find . This is likely because
increased theta was found exclusively 5–9 seconds after the onset of tremor, and we did not
control for the timing of the effects we observed with relation to tremor onset.
Another study found increased low gamma power (35–55 Hz) in the STN during tremor
 . Of note, this increase was in a relatively narrow frequency band,
likely arising from a low gamma oscillatory rhythm, which is physiologically distinct from
the broadband gamma discussed above. Recent work has also shown that STN DBS-induced
suppression of tremor was associated with a reduction in the same low gamma oscillations
Qasim et al.
Neurobiol Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 . Although here we did not find a tremor-associated increase in a low
gamma rhythm in STN, this may reflect the relatively small number of subjects who
provided STN data (compared with cortical data obtained prior to insertion of the STN lead),
or the “microlesion” effect associated with acute STN lead insertion.
Limitations
All data reported in this study came from intraoperative recording, and relied on the
spontaneous appearance and disappearance of rest tremor, limiting the amount of time in
which recordings could take place. To include a sufficient number of subjects, we had to
select a relatively short epoch length for our analyses. Because quantification of cross
frequency analyses such as phase-amplitude coupling and cross frequency amplitudeamplitude coupling requires a somewhat longer data segment, we only analyzed cross
frequency interactions in a subset of subjects with sufficiently long recordings for this
analysis. Also, because we did not systematically record during voluntary movement in this
patient cohort, we were unable to directly compare the network changes associated with
tremor onset to those related to voluntary movement. Another limitation is that, for analyses
of cortico-subthalamic coherence or STN oscillatory activity, data were necessarily collected
after insertion of the DBS lead in the STN, which can result in symptom improvement
through a “microlesion” effect . This may explain why only 10 subjects
experienced tremor after lead insertion. Additionally, differences in recording systems as
well as electrode size and spacing increased data set variability, though we did not observe
any specific trends with respect to electrode type or recording system.
Conclusions
Tremor reduces beta band synchronization within and between structures of the basal
ganglia thalamocortical motor network. Our findings support the hypothesis that rest tremor
in PD may partly compensates for the excessive beta synchronization in this loop that is
thought to drive akinesia and bradykinesia. These compensatory network dynamics may
underlie observed differences in the evolution of tremor, compared to other motor signs, in
the progression of Parkinson’s disease.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the patients who agreed to participate in this study, as well as Nathan Rowland, Nathan Ziman, and
Andrew Miller for their help with this project. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(R01NS090913-01).