Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 540–551,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
Neural Text Summarization: A Critical Evaluation
Wojciech Kry´sci´nski, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann,
Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher
Salesforce Research
{kryscinski,nkeskar,bmccann,cxiong,rsocher}@salesforce.com
Text summarization aims at compressing long
documents into a shorter form that conveys
the most important parts of the original document. Despite increased interest in the community and notable research effort, progress
on benchmark datasets has stagnated. We critically evaluate key ingredients of the current
research setup: datasets, evaluation metrics,
and models, and highlight three primary shortcomings: 1) automatically collected datasets
leave the task underconstrained and may contain noise detrimental to training and evaluation, 2) current evaluation protocol is weakly
correlated with human judgment and does not
account for important characteristics such as
factual correctness, 3) models overﬁt to layout
biases of current datasets and offer limited diversity in their outputs.
Introduction
Text summarization aims at compressing long textual documents into a short, human readable form
that contains the most important information from
the source.
Two strategies of generating summaries are extractive , where salient fragments of the source
document are identiﬁed and directly copied into
the summary, and abstractive , where the salient parts are detected and paraphrased to form the ﬁnal output.
The number of summarization models introduced every year has been increasing rapidly.
Advancements
architectures 
and the availability of large scale data 
enabled the transition from systems based on
expert knowledge and heuristics to data-driven
approaches powered by end-to-end deep neural
Current approaches to text summarization utilize advanced attention and copying
mechanisms , multi-task and multi-reward
training techniques , reinforcement learning strategies , and hybrid extractive-abstractive
models .
Many of the introduced models are trained on the
CNN/DailyMail news
corpus, a popular benchmark for the ﬁeld, and are
evaluated based on n-gram overlap between the
generated and target summaries with the ROUGE
package .
Despite substantial research effort, the progress
on these benchmarks has stagnated. State-of-theart models only slightly outperform the Lead-3
baseline, which generates summaries by extracting the ﬁrst three sentences of the source document.
We argue that this stagnation can be
partially attributed to the current research setup,
which involves uncurated, automatically collected
datasets and non-informative evaluations protocols. We critically evaluate our hypothesis, and
support our claims by analyzing three key components of the experimental setting: datasets, evaluation metrics, and model outputs. Our motivation is
to shift the focus of the research community into
developing a more robust research setup for text
summarization.
Related Work
accommodate
requirements
modern data-driven approaches, several large-scale
datasets have been proposed.
The majority of
available corpora come from the news domain. Gigaword is a set of articles and corresponding titles that was originally
used for headline generation ,
but it has also been adapted to single-sentence
summarization . NYT is a collection of articles from the New York Times magazine with abstracts written by library scientists. It has been primarily used for extractive summarization and phraseimportance prediction . The CNN/DailyMail
 dataset consists of articles with summaries composed of highlights
from the article written by the authors themselves.
It is commonly used for both abstractive and extractive neural summarization.
The collection was originally introduced
as a Cloze-style QA dataset by Hermann et al.
 . XSum is a collection of articles associated with one, singlesentence summary targeted at abstractive models.
Newsroom is a diverse collection of articles sourced from 38 major online
news outlets. This dataset was released together
with a leaderboard and held-out testing split.
Outside of the news domain, several datasets
were collected from open discussion boards and
other portals offering structure information. Reddit TIFU is a collection of
posts scraped from Reddit where users post their
daily stories and each post is required to contain a
Too Long; Didn’t Read (TL;DR) summary. Wiki-
How is a collection of
articles from the WikiHow knowledge base, where
each article contains instructions for performing
procedural, multi-step tasks covering various areas, including: arts, ﬁnance, travel, and health.
Evaluation Metrics
Manual and semi-automatic evaluation
of large-scale summarization models is costly and
cumbersome. Much effort has been made to develop automatic metrics that would allow for fast
and cheap evaluation of models.
The ROUGE package offers a set
of automatic metrics based on the lexical overlap between candidate and reference summaries.
Overlap can be computed between consecutive
(n-grams) and non-consecutive (skip-grams) subsequences of tokens.
ROUGE scores are based
on exact token matches, meaning that computing
overlap between synonymous phrases is not supported.
Many approaches have extended ROUGE with
support for synonyms and paraphrasing. ParaEval uses a three-step comparison strategy, where the ﬁrst two steps perform optimal and greedy paraphrase matching based on
paraphrase tables before reverting to exact token
overlap. ROUGE-WE replaces exact lexical matches with a soft semantic similarity measure approximated with the cosine distances between distributed representations
of tokens. ROUGE 2.0 leverages
synonym dictionaries, such as WordNet, and considers all synonyms of matched words when computing token overlap. ROUGE-G combines lexical and semantic matching by applying graph analysis algorithms to the
WordNet semantic network. Despite being a step
in the direction of a more comprehensive evaluation protocol, none of these metrics gained suf-
ﬁcient traction in the research community, leaving ROUGE as the default automatic evaluation
toolkit for text summarization.
Existing summarization models fall into three categories: abstractive, extractive, and hybrid.
Extractive models select spans of text from
the input and copy them directly into the summary. Non-neural approaches utilized domain expertise
to develop heuristics for summary content selection, whereas more recent, neural techniques allow for end-to-end training. In the most common
case, models are trained as word- or sentencelevel classiﬁers that predict whether a fragment
should be included in the summary . Other approaches
apply reinforcement learning training strategies to
directly optimize the model on task-speciﬁc, nondifferentiable reward functions .
Abstractive models paraphrase the source doc-
uments and create summaries with novel phrases
not present in the source document.
A common approach in abstractive summarization is to
use attention and copying mechanisms . Other
approaches include using multi-task and multireward training , and unsupervised training strategies .
Hybrid models include both extractive and abstractive
modules and allow to separate the summarization
process into two phases – content selection and
paraphrasing.
For the sake of brevity we do not describe details of different models, we refer interested readers to the original papers.
Analysis and Critique
Most summarization research revolves around
new architectures and training strategies that improve the state of the art on benchmark problems.
However, it is also important to analyze and question the current methods and research settings.
Zhang et al. conducted a quantitative
study of the level of abstraction in abstractive
summarization models and showed that wordlevel, copy-only extractive models achieve comparable results to fully abstractive models in the
measured dimension. Kedzie et al. offered
a thorough analysis of how neural models perform
content selection across different data domains,
and exposed data biases that dominate the learning signal in the news domain and architectural
limitations of current approaches in learning robust sentence-level representations. Liu and Liu
 examine the correlation between ROUGE
scores and human judgments when evaluating
meeting summarization data and show that the
correlation strength is low, but can be improved
by leveraging unique meeting characteristics, such
as available speaker information.
et al. inspect how inconsistencies in human annotator judgments affect the ranking of
summaries and correlations with automatic evaluation metrics. The results showed that systemlevel rankings, considering all summaries, were
stable despite inconsistencies in judgments, however, summary-level rankings and automatic metric correlations beneﬁt from improving annotator
consistency. Graham compare the ﬁtness
of the BLEU metric and a
number of different ROUGE variants for evaluating summarization outputs. The study reveals superior variants of ROUGE that are different from
the commonly used recommendations and shows
that the BLEU metric achieves strong correlations
with human assessments of generated summaries.
Schulman et al. study the problems related
to using ROUGE as an evaluation metric with
respect to ﬁnding optimal solutions and provide
proof of NP-hardness of global optimization with
respect to ROUGE.
Similar lines of research, where the authors put
under scrutiny existing methodologies, datasets, or
models were conducted by Callison-Burch et al.
 ; Tan et al. ; Post in machine translation, in natural language generation, Lee et al. ; Chen
et al. ; Kaushik and Lipton in reading comprehension, Gururangan et al. ; Poliak et al. ; Glockner et al. in natural language inference, Goyal et al. in visual question answering, and Xian et al. 
in zero-shot image classiﬁcation. Comments on
the general state of scholarship in the ﬁeld of machine learning were presented by Sculley et al.
 ; Lipton and Steinhardt and references therein.
Underconstrained task
The task of summarization is to compress long
documents by identifying and extracting the most
important information from the source documents.
However, assessing the importance of information
is a difﬁcult task in itself, that highly depends on
the expectations and prior knowledge of the target
We show that the current setting in which models are simply given a document with one associated reference summary and no additional information, leaves the task of summarization underconstrained and thus too ambiguous to be solved
by end-to-end models.
To quantify this effect, we conducted a human
study which measured the agreement between different annotators in selecting important sentences
The glowing blue letters that once lit the Bronx from above Yankee stadium failed to ﬁnd a buyer at an auction at Sotheby’s
on Wednesday. While the 13 letters were expected to bring in anywhere from $300,000 to $600,000, the only person who
raised a paddle - for $260,000 - was a Sotheby’s employee trying to jump start the bidding. The current owner of the signage is
Yankee hall-of-famer Reggie Jackson, who purchased the 10-feet-tall letters for an undisclosed amount after the stadium saw
its ﬁnal game in 2008. No love: 13 letters that hung over Yankee stadium were estimated to bring in anywhere from $300,000
to $600,000, but received no bids at a Sotheby’s auction Wednesday. The 68-year-old Yankee said he wanted ’a new generation
to own and enjoy this icon of the Yankees and of New York City.’, The letters had beamed from atop Yankee stadium near grand
concourse in the Bronx since 1976, the year before Jackson joined the team. (...)
Summary Questions
When was the auction at Sotheby’s?
Who is the owner of the signage?
When had the letters been installed on the stadium?
Constrained Summary A
Unconstrained Summary A
Glowing letters that had been hanging above the Yankee stadium from 1976 to 2008 were placed for auction at Sotheby’s
on Wednesday, but were not sold, The current owner of the
sign is Reggie Jackson, a Yankee hall-of-famer.
There was not a single buyer at the auction at Sotheby’s
on Wednesday for the glowing blue letters that once lit the
Bronx’s Yankee Stadium. Not a single non-employee raised
their paddle to bid. Jackson, the owner of the letters, was surprised by the lack of results. The venue is also auctioning off
other items like Mets memorabilia.
Constrained Summary B
Unconstrained Summary B
An auction for the lights from Yankee Stadium failed to produce any bids on Wednesday at Sotheby’s. The lights, currently owned by former Yankees player Reggie Jackson, lit
the stadium from 1976 until 2008.
The once iconic and attractive pack of 13 letters that was
placed at the Yankee stadium in 1976 and later removed
in 2008 was unexpectedly not favorably considered at the
Sotheby’s auction when the 68 year old owner of the letters
attempted to transfer its ownership to a member the younger
populace. Thus, when the minimum estimate of $300,000
was not met, a further attempt was made by a former player
of the Yankees to personally visit the new owner as an
Table 1: Example summaries collected from human annotators in the constrained (left) and unconstrained (right)
task. In the unconstrained setting, annotators were given a news article and asked to write a summary covering the
parts they considered most important. In the constrained setting, annotators were given a news article with three
associated questions and asked to write a summary that contained the answers to the given questions.
from a fragment of text. We asked workers to write
summaries of news articles and highlight sentences from the source documents that they based
their summaries on.
The experiment was conducted in two settings: unconstrained, where the
annotators were instructed to summarize the content that they considered most important, and constrained, where annotators were instructed to write
summaries that would contain answers to three
questions associated with each article. This is similar to the construction of the TAC 2008 Opinion Summarization Task 1. The questions associated with each article where collected from human
workers through a separate assignment. Experiments were conducted on 100 randomly sampled
articles, further details of the human study can be
found in Appendix A.1.
Table 2 shows the average number of sentences,
per-article, that annotators agreed were important.
1 
summarization/op.summ.08.guidelines.html
The rows show how the average changes with the
human vote threshold needed to reach consensus
about the importance of any sentence. For example, if we require that three or more human votes
are necessary to consider a sentence important, annotators agreed on average on the importance of
0.627 and 1.392 sentences per article in the unconstrained and constrained settings respectively.
The average length (in sentences) of sampled articles was 16.59, with a standard deviation of 5.39.
The study demonstrates the difﬁculty and ambiguity of content selection in text summarization.
We also conducted a qualitative study of summaries written by annotators. Examples comparing summaries written in the constrained and unconstrained setting are shown in Table 1. We noticed that in both cases the annotators correctly
identiﬁed the main topic and important fragments
of the source article. However, constrained summaries were more succinct and targeted, without sacriﬁcing the natural ﬂow of sentences. Un-
Sent. per article considered important
Human vote
Unconstrained
Constrained
Table 2: Average number of sentences, per-article,
which annotators agreed were important. The human
vote threshold investigates how the average agreement
changes with the threshold of human votes required to
consider any sentence important. Rows = 5 and ≥1
correspond to the set intersection and union of selected
sentences accordingly.
constrained writers tended to write more verbose
summaries that did not add information. The study
also highlights the abstractive nature of human
written summaries in that similar content can be
described in unique ways.
Layout bias in news data
Figure 1: The distribution of important sentences over
the length of the article according to human annotators
(blue) and its cumulative distribution (red).
News articles adhere to a writing structure
known in journalism as the ”Inverted Pyramid” .
In this form, initial
paragraphs contain the most newsworthy information, which is followed by details and background
information.
To quantify how strongly articles in the
CNN/DM corpus follow this pattern we conducted
a human study that measured the importance of
different sections of the article. Annotators read
news articles and selected sentences they found
most important. Experiments were conducted on
100 randomly sampled articles, further details of
the human study are described in Appendix A.3.
Figure 1 presents how annotator selections were
distributed over the length of the article.
distribution is skewed towards the ﬁrst quarter of
the length of articles. The cumulative plot shows
that nearly 60% of the important information was
present in the ﬁrst third of the article, and approximately 25% and 15% of selections pointing to the
second and last third, respectively.
It has become standard practice to exploit such
biases during training to increase performance of
 , but the importance of these heuristics has
been accepted without being quantiﬁed.
same heuristics would not apply to books or legal
documents, which lack the Inverted Pyramid layout so common in the news domain, so it is important that these heuristics be part of ablation studies rather than accepted as default pre-processing
Noise in scraped datasets
Given the data requirements of deep neural networks and the vast amounts of diverse resources
available online, automatically scraping web content is a convenient way of collecting data for new
corpora. However, adapting scraped content to the
needs of end-to-end models is problematic. Given
that manual inspection of data is infeasible and human annotators are expensive, data curation is usually limited to removing any markup structure and
applying simple heuristics to discard obviously
ﬂawed examples. This, in turn, makes the quality
of the datasets heavily dependent on how well the
scraped content adheres to the assumptions made
by the authors about its underlying structure.
This issue suggests that available summarization datasets would be ﬁlled with noisy examples.
Manual inspection of the data, particularly the reference summaries, revealed easily detectable, consistent patterns of ﬂawed examples Many such examples can be isolated using simple regular expressions and heuristics, which allows approximation of how widespread these ﬂaws are in the
We investigated this issue in two large summarization corpora scraped from the internet:
CNN/DM - Links to other articles
Michael Carrick has helped Manchester United win their last
six games. Carrick should be selected alongside Gary Cahill
for England. Carrick has been overlooked too many times
by his country. READ : Carrick and Man United team-mates
enjoy second Christmas party.
Newsroom - Links to news sources
Get Washington DC, Virginia,
Maryland and national
Get the latest/breaking news, featuring national
science and courts.
Read news headlines
from the nation and from The Washington Post.
www.washingtonpost.com/nation today.
Table 3: Examples of noisy reference summaries found
in the CNN/DM and Newsroom datasets.
Quick-thinking: Brady Olson, a teacher at North Thurston
High, took down a gunman on Monday. A Washington High
School teacher is being hailed a hero for tackling a 16-yearold student to the ground after he opened ﬁre on Monday
morning (...)
Summary - Factually incorrect
Brady Olson, a Washington High School teacher at North
Thurston High, opened ﬁre on Monday morning. No one
was injured after the boy shot twice toward the ceiling in
the school commons before classes began at North Thurston
High School in Lacey (...)
Table 4: Example of a factually incorrect summary
generated by an abstractive model. Top: ground-truth
article. Bottom: summary generated by model.
CNN/DM and the Newsroom . The problem of noisy
data affects 0.47%, 5.92%, and 4.19% of the training, validation, and test split of the CNN/DM
dataset, and 3.21%, 3.22%, and 3.17% of the respective splits of the Newsroom dataset. Examples of noisy summaries are shown in Table 3.
Flawed examples contained links to other articles and news sources, placeholder texts, unparsed
HTML code, and non-informative passages in the
reference summaries.
Evaluation Metrics
Weak correlation with human judgment
The effectiveness of ROUGE was previously evaluated through statistical correlations with human judgment on the DUC
datasets . However, their setting was substantially different from
the current environment in which summarization
models are developed and evaluated.
To investigate the robustness of ROUGE in the
setting in which it is currently used, we evaluate
how its scores correlate with the judgment of an
average English-speaker using examples from the
CNN/DM dataset.
Following the human evaluation protocol from Gehrmann et al. , we
asked annotators to rate summaries across four dimensions: relevance (selection of important content from the source), consistency (factual alignment between the summary and the source), ﬂuency (quality of individual sentences), and coherence (collective quality of all sentences).
summary was rated by 5 distinct judges with the
ﬁnal score obtained by averaging the individual
scores. Experiments were conducted on 100 randomly sampled articles with the outputs of 13
summarization systems provided by the original
Correlations were computed between
all pairs of Human-, ROUGE-scores, for all systems. Additional summaries were collected from
annotators to inspect the effect of using multiple
ground-truth labels on the correlation with automatic metrics. Further details of the human study
can be found in Appendix A.2.
Results are shown in Table 5. The left section
of the table presents Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients and the right section presents Kendall rank
correlation coefﬁcients. In terms of Pearsons’s coefﬁcients, the study showed minimal correlation
with any of the annotated dimensions for both abstractive and extractive models together and for
abstractive models individually.
Weak correlation was discovered for extractive models primarily with the ﬂuency and coherence dimensions.
We hypothesized that the noise contained in the
ﬁne-grained scores generated by both human annotators and ROUGE might have affected the correlation scores.
We evaluated the relation on a
higher level of granularity by means of correlation
between rankings of models that were obtained
from the ﬁne-grained scores. The study showed
weak correlation with all measured dimensions,
when evaluated for both abstractive and extractive
models together and for abstractive models individually. Moderate correlation was found for extractive models across all dimensions. A surprising result was that correlations grew weaker with
the increase of ground truth references.
Our results align with the observations from Liu
and Liu who also evaluated ROUGE outside of its original setting. The study highlights the
limited utility in measuring progress of the ﬁeld
Pearson correlation
Kendall rank correlation
1 Reference
5 References
10 References
1 Reference
5 References
10 References
All Models
Consistency
Abstractive Models
Consistency
Extractive Models
Consistency
Table 5: Correlations between human annotators and ROUGE scores along different dimensions and multiple
reference set sizes. Left: Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients. Right: Kendall’s rank correlation coefﬁcients.
solely by means of ROUGE scores.
Insufﬁcient evaluation protocol
The goal of text summarization is to automatically generate succinct, ﬂuent, relevant, and factually consistent summaries. The current evaluation protocol depends primarily on the exact lexical overlap between reference and candidate summaries measured by ROUGE. In certain cases,
ROUGE scores are complemented with human
studies where annotators rate the relevance and
ﬂuency of generated summaries. Neither of the
methods explicitly examines the factual consistency of summaries, leaving this important dimension unchecked.
To evaluate the factual consistency of existing
models, we manually inspected randomly sampled articles with summaries coming from randomly chosen, abstractive models. We focused
exclusively on factual incorrectness and ignored
any other issues, such as low ﬂuency. Out of 200
article-summary pairs that were reviewed manually, we found that 60 (30%) contained consistency issues.
Table 4 shows examples of discovered inconsistencies. Some of the discovered
inconsistencies, despite being factually incorrect,
could be rationalized by humans.
However, in
many cases, the errors were substantial and could
have severe repercussions if presented as-is to target readers.
Layout bias in news data
We revisit the problem of layout bias in news data
from the perspective of models.
Kedzie et al.
 showed that in the case of news articles,
the layout bias dominates the learning signal for
neural models. In this section, we approximate
the degree with which generated summaries rely
on the leading sentences of news articles.
We computed ROUGE scores for collected
models in two settings: ﬁrst using the CNN/DM
reference summaries as the ground-truth, and second where the leading three sentences of the
source article were used as the ground-truth, i.e.
the Lead-3 baseline. We present the results in Table 6.
For all examined models we noticed a substantial increase of overlap across all ROUGE variants.
Results suggest that performance of current models is strongly affected by the layout bias of news
corpora. Lead-3 is a strong baseline that exploits
the described layout bias. However, there is still
a large gap between its performance and an upper
bound for extractive models (extractive oracle).
Diversity of model outputs
Models analyzed in this paper are considerably
different from each other in terms of architectures,
training strategies, and underlying approaches.
We inspected how the diversity in approaches
translates into the diversity of model outputs.
We computed ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-4 scores
between pairs of model outputs to compare them
by means of token and phrase overlap. Results are
visualized in Figure 2, where the values above and
below the diagonal are ROUGE-1 and -4 scores
accordingly, and model names (M-) follow the order from Table 6.
Target Reference
Lead-3 Reference
Extractive Oracle 
Lead-3 Baseline
Abstractive Models
Model Hsu et al. 
Model Gehrmann et al. 
Model Jiang and Bansal 
Model Chen and Bansal 
Model See et al. 
Model Kry´sci´nski et al. 
Model Li et al. 
Model Pasunuru and Bansal 
Model Zhang et al. 
Model Guo et al. 
Extractive Models
Model Dong et al. 
Model Wu and Hu 
Model Zhou et al. 
Table 6: ROUGE (R-) scores computed for different models on the test set of the CNN/DM dataset. Left: Scores
computed with the original reference summaries. Right: Scores computed with Lead-3 used as the reference.
We notice that the ROUGE-1 scores vary considerably less than ROUGE-4 scores. This suggests that the models share a large part of the vocabulary on the token level, but differ on how they
organize the tokens into longer phrases.
Comparing results with the n-gram overlap between models and reference summaries (Table 6)
shows a substantially higher overlap between any
model pair than between the models and reference
summaries. This might imply that the training data
contains easy to pick up patterns that all models
overﬁt to, or that the information in the training
signal is too weak to connect the content of the
source articles with the reference summaries.
Conclusions
This critique has highlighted the weak points of
the current research setup in text summarization.
We showed that text summarization datasets require additional constraints to have well-formed
summaries, current state-of-the-art methods learn
to rely too heavily on layout bias associated with
the particular domain of the text being summarized, and the current evaluation protocol reﬂects
human judgments only weakly while also failing
to evaluate critical features (e.g. factual correctness) of text summarization.
We hope that this critique provides the summarization community with practical insights for future research directions that include the construction of datasets, models less ﬁt to a particular do-
Figure 2: Pairwise similarities between model outputs
computed using ROUGE. Above diagonal: Unigram
overlap (ROUGE-1). Below diagonal: 4-gram overlap
(ROUGE-4). Model order (M-) follows Table 6.
main bias, and evaluation that goes beyond current
metrics to capture the most important features of
summarization.
Acknowledgements
We thank all the authors listed in Table 6 for sharing their model outputs and thus contributing to
this work. We also thank Shaﬁq Rayhan Joty for
reviewing this manuscript and providing valuable