Indian Journal of Ophthalmology
Volume 68 Issue 6
Sustaining academics during
COVID‑19 pandemic: The role of
online teaching‑learning
On 11th March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO)
declared the COVID‑19 caused by the 2019 novel
coronavirus  a pandemic. Currently, there are
more than 3 million cases and one lakh deaths reported, and
still counting. This has brought radical changes in all aspects
of our lives. Social distancing and restrictive movement
policies have markedly deranged traditional educational
practices. The time course of these changes is indeterminate.
These have affected conventional in‑person ophthalmic
education and training. There is a pressing need to innovate
and implement alternative educational and assessment
strategies. The COVID‑19 pandemic has provided us with an
opportunity to pave the way for introducing digital learning
in ophthalmology.
In this letter, we discuss the various electronic resources
and strategies which can be used to sustain academics during
this pandemic. We also highlight some of the best practices
and challenges of academics during COVID‑19 pandemic.
Virtual classrooms: Distance education can be synchronous
that happens in real‑time, involving online studies, with
the aid of chat rooms as well as asynchronous occurring
through online channels without real‑time interaction. A real
classroom has now been replaced by the virtual classroom.
Hybrid learning using both can be much more effective and
are easier to use.
The flipped classroom is a simple strategy which refers
to providing learning resources like articles, pre‑recorded
videos, and YouTube links before the class. The online
classroom time is then used to deepen understanding through
discussion with faculty and peers. This is a very effective
way of encouraging skills such as problem‑solving, critical
thinking and self‑directed learning.
E‑seminars, case‑based discussion, journal clubs,
discussion on surgical techniques; clinico‑ epidemiological
presentations can be very effectively conducted using these
virtual classrooms. Discussions on counselling, patient
safety, ethical dilemmas in our Ophthalmic practice which
are usually caught by students while seeing the faculty on
the job can now be taught in these virtual classrooms. Many
effective online teaching strategies are available for free; for
example: “Building a Community of Learning (Southern New
Hampshire University)”. 
The virtual classrooms can be conducted using platforms
such as video conferencing (Google Hangouts Meet, Zoom,
Slack, CiscoWebEx) and customizable cloud‑based learning
management platforms (Elias, Moodle).
Unified communication and collaboration platforms like
Microsoft Teams, Google Classroom, Canvas, Blackboard
allow the teachers to create educational courses, training
and skill development programs. They include options of
workplace chat, video meeting and file storage that keeps
classes organised and easy to work. They usually support
the sharing of a variety of content like Word, PDF, Excel file,
audio, videos etc. These also allow the tracking of student
learning and assessment by using quizzes and also the
rubric‑based assessment of submitted assignments.
Webinars are virtual classes with a much larger audience.
The biggest advantage being that learning can happen from
experts all over the globe. The learning from webinars can
be augmented by a prior or a follow up with department
discussion in virtual classrooms. The webinars are being
hosted by All India Ophthalmic society as well as many
premier eye institutions using options such as YouTube Live,
Gotowebinar, Zoom etc.
Open Online Course ‑ This is a good time to encourage
teachers and students to get a new skill or upgrade an existing
one. Massive Open Online Courses  (MOOCs) are online
courses which allow flexible learning. These include platforms
like Coursera, FutureLearn, Swyam, NPTEL etc. The courses
may be free or may have charges for certification. These can
be on a variety of topics related to ophthalmology or diverse
but essential like research and publication, communication
skills, personality development etc.
Blogs and virtual eye teachers: There are numerous
ophthalmic blogs with a huge number of image atlas
and video galleries. These can make ophthalmic learning
interesting and fun. Some of the most popular sites are
TimRoot Virtual eye professor  ( 
 http://
www.eophtha.com, Muthusamy Virtual University of
Postgraduate Ophthalmology  ( 
com/courses/international‑council‑of‑ophthalmology‑ico/
basic‑sciences‑course), Retinagallery.com  (https://
retinagallery.com), NOVEL: Neuro‑Ophthalmology
Virtual Education  ( Atlas of
Ophthalmology  ( 
frontpage.jsf?locale=en).
These resources have been available for a long time, and
need to be used more often, as we are lacking the hospital
training currently.
Challenges and some best practices towards the digital
transformation of ophthalmic education
COVID pandemic has paved the way for Ophthalmology
students to learn anywhere, anytime and on any device, still
online teaching has many challenges.
• Clinical and surgical skill training: Most of the virtual
learning hand‑on training cannot be imparted by online
teaching alone. This can be partially handled by using
online apps for simulation‑based training. But still, for
Ophthalmology this remains the biggest challenge
• Technology‑related challenge: The students of today are
assumed to be digitally literate and may adapt easily to the
use of gadgets and online education, but all the teachers and
students may not be tech‑savvy. Ensure the students and
teachers to undergo basic technical training in optimum
utilisation of the platform being used. Do not try everything
initially. Go slow and get everyone on board. Creating
students and faculty e‑leaders who are tech‑savvy can help
in assisting the full group in coming on board. Lack of good
internet connectivity, access to laptops etc., which might
hinder digital education. This can be overcome by limiting
online duration, flexible time and a sensitive approach
[Downloaded free from on Friday, June 12, 2020, IP: 47.247.122.36]
Letters to the Editor
towards who are facing these challenges. Having a good
IT team in the institution can therefore go a long way in
adopting distance education
• Student engagement: It is challenging for teachers to
continuously engage students due to issues like attention
span, multi‑tasking while attending sessions, poor audio
and video quality, internet issues etc. This can be overcome
by designing shorter and more interactive classes using tools
like live chat function, pop quizzes, virtual whiteboards,
polls, reflections etc. Use of apps like Kahoot, Google Forms,
Poll Everywhere can ensure students remain attentive.
Hybrid learning using a good blend of synchronous and
asynchronous tools will be most effective
• Infodemic or overload of information: There are suddenly
so many online resources available that it can be daunting
for a student to follow and listen to them all. The teachers
can assist the students by curating the content and guiding
them in selecting appropriate webinars to attend
• Mental well‑being: The mental effects of lack of physical
support from the peer group, lack of books and other
resources, isolation, fear and anxiety associated with
the pandemic, new pedagogy technique may hinder the
student as well as faculty from performing to their full
capacity. Being supportive, sensitive to each other’s needs
and being flexible will assist in creating a non‑threatening
virtual classroom environment is very essential to facilitate
learning. Regular mentoring of postgraduates and
one‑on‑one online meetings can help in this regard
• Assessment: Conducting a secure and valid online
assessment is difficult. This can be made possible without
violating privacy by enabling software such as Proctorio,
a Google Chrome extension that monitors students taking
exams online. Regular formative assessment on smaller
topics with reflections can help in this regard
• Quality check: Improving the online training program and
maintaining good academic standards can be a big challenge.
Regular and feedbacks and use of program evaluation tools
on assessing the effectiveness of programs improving and
finding ways to refine the teaching program can help in
customising departmental training and providing
Distance education in the ophthalmic field is here to stay
even after the pandemic. Ophthalmology as a branch has
always been using cutting edge technology for clinical
and surgical care; it’s time now to use it for training and
education of our residents. We need to use this opportunity
to grow as teachers and as professionals. It is important
to make the best of the situation and maintain a positive
“A diamond is a chunk of coal that did well under pressure” ‑ Henry
Financial support and sponsorship
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
Soujanya Kaup, Rashmi Jain, Siddharudha Shivalli1,
Suresh Pandey2, Soumya Kaup3
Department of Ophthalmology, Yenepoya (Deemed-to-be)
University, Mangalore, 1Department of Medical Statistics,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London,
United Kingdom, 2SuVi Eye Institute and LASIK Laser Center,
Kota, Rajasthan, India, 3Department of Microbiology,
Shridevi Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Hospital,
Tumkur, Karnataka, India
Correspondence to: Dr. Soujanya Kaup,
Department of Ophthalmology,
Yenepoya (Deemed‑to‑be) University,
Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
E‑mail: