NPInter v2.0: an updated database of ncRNA
interactions
Jiao Yuan1,2, Wei Wu1,2, Chaoyong Xie2,3, Guoguang Zhao3, Yi Zhao3,* and
Runsheng Chen1,*
1Laboratory of Noncoding RNA, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China,
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China and 3Bioinformatics Research Group,
Advanced Computing Research Laboratory, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China
Received August 15, 2013; Revised September 29, 2013; Accepted October 12, 2013
( 
database that integrates experimentally
functional interactions between noncoding RNAs
(excluding tRNAs and rRNAs) and other biomolecules
(proteins,
interactions
shown that ncRNAs could act as part of enzymatic
or structural complexes, gene regulators or other
functional
development
high-throughput
biotechnology,
crosslinking immunoprecipitation and high-throughput
sequencing
(CLIP-seq),
ncRNA interactions, especially those formed by
protein binding, has grown rapidly in recent years.
In this work, we updated NPInter to version 2.0 by
collecting ncRNA interactions from recent literature
and related databases, expanding the number of
entries to 201 107 covering 18 species. In addition,
NPInter v2.0 incorporated a service for the BLAST
visualization
interactions.
INTRODUCTION
Interactions of RNA with other biomolecules are fundamental in cellular processes. In particular, noncoding
RNA–protein
interactions
protein synthesis (1,2), gene expression (3,4), RNA processing
developmental
regulation
Interactions
either direct or indirect. Some lncRNAs function as transcriptional regulators through direct association with
transcription
indirectly
in cooperation
functional
importance
ncRNA–protein interactions for correct transcriptional
regulation has been demonstrated (14–19), suggesting
wide-ranging effects of ncRNA–protein interaction. In
addition to targeting or being targeted by proteins or
protein-coding transcripts, ncRNAs could also potentially
target other ncRNAs, resulting in a layer of regulatory
interactions between noncoding RNA classes (11,20).
Consequently, cataloguing interactions of ncRNAs and
other biomolecules is signiﬁcant for gaining insight into
biological processes and understanding the mechanism by
which ncRNAs carry out their regulatory function.
Given the importance of ncRNA interactions in various
pathways, we embarked on a project to build a comprehensive catalogue of such data and established the
NPInter database (21). A large amount of new research
has led to deeper insight into ncRNA interactions at a
variety of levels; thus, NPInter has been updated to v2.0
to accommodate for such expanding data resources.
collection
noncoding molecules in NPInter were automatically
ﬁltered and assigned identiﬁers from NONCODE (22) or
protein-coding
assigned identiﬁers from UniProt (24), RefSeq (25) or
interactions
included. The aim of the database is to provide a
platform that will facilitate both bioinformatic as well
as experimental research. In addition to a user-friendly
interface and a convenient search option that allow
efﬁcient recovery of related interactions and other information,
visualization
platform for related interactions. Whole datasets can be
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +86 10 6488 8543; Fax: +86 10 6487 7837; Email: 
Correspondence may also be addressed to Yi Zhao. Tel: +86 106 260 1010; Fax: +86 106 260 1356; Email: 
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the ﬁrst two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2014, Vol. 42, Database issue
Published online 11 November 2013
doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1057
 Crown copyright 2013.
downloaded and search results can be exported in text
DATA COLLECTION AND ANNOTATION
Based on the ﬁrst version of NPInter database, new
datasets from literature and other related databases were
collected. In this update, data from literature accounts for
the major source. We ﬁrst retrieved literature published in
the last 5 years from PubMed, employing key words
including ‘CLIP interaction’, ‘non-coding RNA bind
post-transcriptional’,
interaction’,
‘lncRNA protein interaction’, ‘lncRNA bind’, ‘RNA
protein cross linking’, ‘RIP non-coding RNA’, etc, and
found 1270 relevant articles. Information on reported
interactions, either veriﬁed by experiments or derived
sequencing,
manually extracted. For the latter, we only extracted processed data by authors, rather than raw sequencing data.
Binding sites were ﬁrst compared with RefSeq coding genes
to eliminate those located within coding regions and
then screened against NONCODE, which serves as an
ncRNA reference database. Binding sites that lie within
discarded.
interaction partners, proteins, protein-coding RNAs and
DNA were assigned UniProt IDs, RefSeq IDs and
UniGene IDs, respectively, while other noncoding RNAs
and DNA were still assigned NONCODE IDs or miRBase
IDs. We also integrated data from external resources,
mainly LncRNADisease (27), which curated 478 experimentally
interactions
levels, including binding, regulation and co-expression.
Molecules from LncRNADisease were subjected to the
same annotation pipeline. By manual curation on data
from literature and integration of data from LncRNA
Disease, NPInter v2.0 provides a multilevel snapshot of
the interactome. A process of redundancy elimination
was then performed on the whole dataset, including previously existing data and newly collected data as mentioned
above. Redundant interactions were aggregated into a
single record. The workﬂow used for the generation of
NPInter is schematically shown in Figure 1.
DATABASE CONTENT AND STRUCTURE
The purpose of the database is to serve as a knowledge
base for experimentally-oriented studies and as a resource
bioinformatics
applications.
NPInter in 2006 contained 700 published functional
Specialized databases
Literature mining
RNA binding sites of individual proteins idenﬁed
using genome-wide techniques were screened
against NONCODE. Binding sites correspond to
NONCODE RNAs were extracted.
Molecules in all interacons were annotated and assigned idenﬁer
codes from UniGene, NONCODE, miRBase, RefSeq, or UniProt.
Redundancy eliminaon according to General Informaon of
interacons.
NPInter v2.0
1. General Informaon
Interacon ID, names of interacng molecules, level
and class of interacon, organism, experimental
informaon and a descripon of the interacon.
2. Molecule Informaon
Molecular enty (based on UniGene, NONCODE,
miRBase, RefSeq and UniProt).
3. Reference
Literature informaon.
Annotaons of NPInter
Extracted ncRNA
interacons
Figure 1. Overview of the NPInter v2.0 Database. NcRNA interactions were obtained from literature and specialized databases. RNA binding sites
of individual proteins identiﬁed using genome-wide techniques were screened against NONCODE and only those correspond to NONCODE RNAs
were extracted.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2014, Vol. 42, Database issue
interactions from six model organisms. NPInter v2.0 presently contains 201 107 ncRNA interactions distributed
on 18 organisms, collected from 529 published articles.
The signiﬁcant growth in the amount of data is primarily
because of systematic identiﬁcation of protein binding
sites on the transcriptome through a combination of
CLIP and RNA sequencing, whereas other interactions,
including ncRNA–RNA interactions and transcript factor
(TF)–ncRNA interactions, were obtained mainly from
interaction studies on individual ncRNA.
The basic information on each interaction contains an
interaction ID, name of ncRNA and its interaction
partner, organism in which the interaction was identiﬁed,
level and class of interaction manually deﬁned in NPInter,
as well as tags manually added. The interaction partners
can be DNA, RNA or protein. For example, at the
binding level, which accounts for most of the NPInter
ncRNAs may
interact with
ncRNA (29), miRNA (30), mRNA (31) and protein
(32). At the level of indirect interactions, ncRNAs may
either regulate or be regulated by an interaction partner
(33,34). The level of interaction deﬁned in NPInter represents the types of interacting molecules and characteristics
of the interaction, including ‘RNA–protein’, ‘RNA–RNA’
interactions into three classes, which are ‘binding’, ‘regulatory’ and ‘co-expression’. Tags are added to give brief
introductions to each interaction, suggesting in which
biological process the interaction participates. Our tags
‘expression
correlation’,
interaction’,
‘genomic location related’, ‘indirect’, ‘miRNA’, ‘miRNA
target interaction’, ‘ncRNA affects synthesis or function
regulated’,
‘ncRNA–protein
binding’, ‘expression, processing, or function of ncRNA
is affected’, ‘ncRNA targets mRNA’, ‘other linkages’,
‘promoter as action site’, ‘regulatory’ and ‘RNA–RNA
interaction’. Each interaction can be labelled simultaneously with several tags. (See Supplementary Data:
Supplementary I).
The NPInter database is composed of three linked tables:
. The Interaction table gives a description of details of
the interaction between two molecules. For example,
for the interaction between Kcnq1ot1 and Dnmt1 in
mouse, information in this table states that this interaction occurs at the level of ‘RNA–protein’ and is
classiﬁed into ‘binding’ class with a tag ‘ncRNA–
protein binding’.
. The Molecule table describes information on interacting molecules, containing identiﬁers from UniGene,
Figure 2. Graph visualization of NPInter interactions. Node colour and size indicates molecule type, while edge colour indicates interaction source.
The initial placement of the nodes is determined by a ‘force-directed’ layout algorithm that aims to keep the more similar nodes closer together, but
the placement may later be adjusted by the user.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2014, Vol. 42, Database issue
NONCODE, miRBase, RefSeq or UniProt as well as
the name, aliases and description of each molecule in
. The Reference table gives the details of literature
references in the interaction table. Each record in the
table includes the MEDLINE standard article code
(PMID) as well as general publication information.
DATA ACCESS AND VISUALIZATION
NPInter allows users to browse interactions by species,
ncRNA classes or interaction tags. Users can also query
the database through the Search interface, using the name
or aliases of molecules, molecule IDs or any other descriptive words. The whole datasets of NPInter can be directly
downloaded from the webpage, and the results of each
search can be exported. In the updated version of the
database, we have also integrated the online BLAST
service (NCBI wwwBLAST version 2.2.17), which allows
sequence similarity searches for both nucleotide and
peptide to be run on NPInter entries. Importantly, for a
noncoding RNA with no recognized name or identiﬁed
function, it is also possible to search its potential interactions with other molecules in NPInter simply based on
its sequence. Additionally, NPInter also offers a graphbased visualization of interactions (Figure 2). In the
visualization graph, each molecule is a node and interactions between molecules are designated as edges. Red
nodes represent proteins or protein-coding RNAs and
DNA, while blue and pink nodes represent ncRNAs and
miRNAs, respectively. Information of each molecule can
be checked in a new window by clicking on the corresponding node. The colour of the edges discriminates the
source of each interaction, green suggesting the interaction
is from NPInter and purple suggesting the interaction
is from STRING (35). The location of the nodes is
determined by the ForceDirected layout algorithm as
implemented in Cytoscape Web (36). The graph can be
opened in the stand-alone webpage to produce high resolution images in which size, colour and location of nodes
and edges can be adjusted. To maintain an up-to-date and
comprehensive resource, we encourage users to submit
newly published ncRNA interactions, with PubMed accession numbers required.
CONCLUSION
Noncoding RNAs have emerged as key molecular players
in different
biological
(37). Characterizing
ncRNA interactions will largely contribute towards the
discovery of novel ncRNA functions. However, existing
databases are not enough to provide a comprehensive
resource for such a purpose. For example, starBase (38)
lists all binding sites of several proteins in the transcriptome, but there is no speciﬁc annotation for noncoding
transcripts. For another example, NPIDB (39) focuses
on nucleic acid–protein complexes from PDB, thus, most
RNAs included are either rRNAs or tRNAs.
In contrast, NPInter is more informative on ncRNA
interactions
databases,
integrating interactions of the other types of ncRNAs
that serve a variety of functions. In other words,
NPInter is one of the most comprehensive databases of
interactions between ncRNAs and other biomolecules.
Compared with the previous version of NPInter, the
new version is a step towards a more integrated knowledge
database. The total number of functional interactions
of ncRNAs has been expanded. NPInter v2.0 is also
developed to present graphical molecular interaction
networks that will enable biological scientists to explore
their data in a more systems-oriented manner. NPInter
will continue to keep track of and promptly collect new
interactions.
whenever there is an accumulation of novel ncRNA interactions reported in literature or other sources.
It is worth mentioning that NPInter is included in our
systematic platform for noncoding RNAs. Our platform
consists of ncRNA resources such as NONCODE and
NPInter, as well as online tools and web servers (40–43)
including CNCI (40) and ncFANs (43) for analysis of
ncRNAs. As a member of the union of speciﬁc databases
and tools for noncoding RNAs, NPInter is expected to
remain an informative and valuable data source on the
biological roles of ncRNAs for the scientiﬁc community.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Andrew Plygawko and Jianjun Luo for
carefully reading our manuscript.
Funding for open access charge: National High-tech
Development
[2012AA020402];
Foundation
 ;
Foundation
 ;
Academy of Science Strategic Project of Leading Science
and Technology [XDA01020402]; National Key Basic
Development
[2009CB825401]; the National Center for Mathematics
and Interdisciplinary Sciences.
Conﬂict of interest statement. None declared.