Toward Integrating Feature Selection
Algorithms for Classification and Clustering
Huan Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, and Lei Yu, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper introduces concepts and algorithms of feature selection, surveys existing feature selection algorithms for
classification and clustering, groups and compares different algorithms with a categorizing framework based on search strategies,
evaluation criteria, and data mining tasks, reveals unattempted combinations, and provides guidelines in selecting feature selection
algorithms. With the categorizing framework, we continue our efforts toward building an integrated system for intelligent feature
selection. A unifying platform is proposed as an intermediate step. An illustrative example is presented to show how existing feature
selection algorithms can be integrated into a meta algorithm that can take advantage of individual algorithms. An added advantage of
doing so is to help a user employ a suitable algorithm without knowing details of each algorithm. Some real-world applications are
included to demonstrate the use of feature selection in data mining. We conclude this work by identifying trends and challenges of
feature selection research and development.
Index Terms—Feature selection, classification, clustering, categorizing framework, unifying platform, real-world applications.
INTRODUCTION
Scomputer and database technologies advance rapidly,
data accumulates in a speed unmatchable by human’s
capacity of data processing. Data mining , , , ,
as a multidisciplinary joint effort from databases, machine
learning, and statistics, is championing in turning mountains of data into nuggets. Researchers and practitioners
realize that in order to use data mining tools effectively,
data preprocessing is essential to successful data mining
 , . Feature selection is one of the important and
frequently used techniques in data preprocessing for data
mining , . It reduces the number of features, removes
irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data, and brings the
immediate effects for applications: speeding up a data
mining algorithm, improving mining performance such as
predictive accuracy and result comprehensibility. Feature
selection has been a fertile field of research and development since the 1970s in statistical pattern recognition ,
 , , , , machine learning , , , , and
data mining , , , and widely applied to many
fields such as text categorization , , , image
retrieval , , customer relationship management ,
intrusion detection , and genomic analysis .
Feature selection is a process that selects a subset of
original features. The optimality of a feature subset is
measured by an evaluation criterion. As the dimensionality
of a domain expands, the number of features N increases.
Finding an optimal feature subset is usually intractable 
and many problems related to feature selection have been
shown to be NP-hard . A typical feature selection process
consists of four basic steps (shown in Fig. 1), namely, subset
generation, subset evaluation, stopping criterion, and result
validation . Subset generation is a search procedure ,
 that produces candidate feature subsets for evaluation
based on a certain search strategy. Each candidate subset is
evaluated and compared with the previous best one
according to a certain evaluation criterion. If the new subset
turns out to be better, it replaces the previous best subset.
The process of subset generation and evaluation is repeated
until a given stopping criterion is satisfied. Then, the
selected best subset usually needs to be validated by prior
knowledge or different tests via synthetic and/or realworld data sets. Feature selection can be found in many
areas of data mining such as classification, clustering,
association rules, and regression. For example, feature
selection is called subset or variable selection in Statistics
 . A number of approaches to variable selection and
coefficient shrinkage for regression are summarized in .
In this survey, we focus on feature selection algorithms for
classification and clustering. Early research efforts mainly
focus on feature selection for classification with labeled data
 , , (supervised feature selection) where class
information is available. Latest developments, however,
show that the above general procedure can be well adopted
to feature selection for clustering with unlabeled data ,
 , , (or unsupervised feature selection) where
data is unlabeled.
Feature selection algorithms designed with different
evaluation criteria broadly fall into three categories: the
filter model , , , , the wrapper model , ,
 , , and the hybrid model , , . The filter
model relies on general characteristics of the data to
evaluate and select feature subsets without involving any
mining algorithm. The wrapper model requires one predetermined mining algorithm and uses its performance as
the evaluation criterion. It searches for features better suited
to the mining algorithm aiming to improve mining
performance, but it also tends to be more computationally
expensive than the filter model , . The hybrid model
attempts to take advantage of the two models by exploiting
their different evaluation criteria in different search stages.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
APRIL 2005
. The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-8809.
E-mail: {hliu, leiyu}@asu.edu.
Manuscript received 14 Oct. 2002; revised 16 July 2003; accepted 11 June
2004; published online 17 Feb. 2005.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
 , and reference IEEECS Log Number 117593.
1041-4347/05/$20.00  2005 IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
This survey attempts to review the field of feature
selection based on earlier works by Doak , Dash and
Liu , and Blum and Langley . The fast development
of the field has produced many new feature selection
methods. Novel research problems and applications
emerge, and new demands for feature selection appear.
In order to review the field and attempt for the next
generation of feature selection methods, we aim to achieve
the following objectives in this survey:
introduce the basic notions, concepts, and procedures of feature selection,
state-of-the-art
techniques,
identify existing problems of feature selection and
propose ways of solving them,
demonstrate feature selection in real-world applications, and
point out current trends and future directions.
This survey presents a collection of existing feature
selection algorithms, and proposes a categorizing framework that systematically groups algorithms into categories
and compares the commonalities and differences between
the categories. It further addresses a problem springing
from the very core of the success of this field—a dilemma
faced by most data mining practitioners: The more feature
selection algorithms available, the more difficult it is to
select a suitable one for a data mining task. This survey,
therefore, proposes a unifying platform that covers major
factors in the selection of a suitable algorithm for an
application, and paves the way for building an integrated
system for intelligent feature selection.
The remainder of this paper is organized into five
sections. Section 2 describes each step of the general feature
selection process. Section 3 groups and compares different
feature selection algorithms based on a three-dimensional
categorizing framework. Section 4 introduces the development of a unifying platform and illustrates the idea of
developing an integrated system for intelligent feature
selection through a preliminary system. Section 5 demonstrates some real-world applications of feature selection in
data mining. Section 6 concludes the survey with discussions on current trends and future directions.
GENERAL PROCEDURE OF FEATURE SELECTION
In this section, we explain in detail the four key steps as
shown in Fig. 1 of Section 1.
Subset Generation
Subset generation is essentially a process of heuristic search,
with each state in the search space specifying a candidate
subset for evaluation. The nature of this process is
determined by two basic issues. First, one must decide the
search starting point (or points) which in turn influences the
search direction. Search may start with an empty set and
successively add features (i.e., forward), or start with a full
set and successively remove features (i.e., backward), or start
with both ends and add and remove features simultaneously (i.e., bidirectional). Search may also start with a
randomly selected subset in order to avoid being trapped
into local optima . Second, one must decide a search
strategy. For a data set with N features, there exist
2N candidate subsets. This search space is exponentially
prohibitive for exhaustive search with even a moderate N.
Therefore, different strategies have been explored: complete, sequential, and random search.
Complete Search. It guarantees to find the optimal result
according to the evaluation criterion used. While an
exhaustive search is complete (i.e., no optimal subset is
missed), a search does not have to be exhaustive in order to
guarantee completeness. Different heuristic functions can
be used to reduce the search space without jeopardizing the
chances of finding the optimal result. Hence, although the
order of the search space is Oð2NÞ, a smaller number of
subsets are evaluated. Some examples are branch and bound
 , and beam search .
Sequential Search. It gives up completeness and thus
risks losing optimal subsets. There are many variations to
the greedy hill-climbing approach, such as sequential forward
selection, sequential backward elimination, and bidirectional
selection . All these approaches add or remove features
one at a time. Another alternative is to add (or remove) p
features in one step and remove (or add) q features in the
next step ðp > qÞ . Algorithms with sequential search are
simple to implement and fast in producing results as the
order of the search space is usually OðN2Þ or less.
Random Search. It starts with a randomly selected
subset and proceeds in two different ways. One is to follow
sequential search, which injects randomness into the above
classical sequential approaches. Examples are random-start
hill-climbing and simulated annealing . The other is to
generate the next subset in a completely random manner
(i.e., a current subset does not grow or shrink from any
previous subset following a deterministic rule), also known
as the Las Vegas algorithm . For all these approaches, the
use of randomness helps to escape local optima in the
search space, and optimality of the selected subset depends
on the resources available.
Subset Evaluation
As we mentioned earlier, each newly generated subset
needs to be evaluated by an evaluation criterion. The
goodness of a subset is always determined by a certain
criterion (i.e., an optimal subset selected using one criterion
may not be optimal according to another criterion). An
evaluation criteria can be broadly categorized into two
groups based on their dependency on mining algorithms
that will finally be applied on the selected feature subset.
We discuss the two groups of evaluation criteria below.
2.2.1 Independent Criteria
Typically, an independent criterion is used in algorithms of
the filter model. It tries to evaluate the goodness of a feature
or feature subset by exploiting the intrinsic characteristics of
the training data without involving any mining algorithm.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
APRIL 2005
Fig. 1. Four key steps of feature selection.
Some popular independent criteria are distance measures,
information measures, dependency measures, and consistency measures , , , .
Distance measures are also known as separability,
divergence, or discrimination measures. For a two-class
problem, a feature X is preferred to another feature Y if X
induces a greater difference between the two-class conditional probabilities than Y, because we try to find the
feature that can separate the two classes as far as possible. X
and Y are indistinguishable if the difference is zero.
Information measures typically determine the information gain from a feature. The information gain from a
feature X is defined as the difference between the prior
uncertainty and expected posterior uncertainty using X.
Feature X is preferred to feature Y if the information gain
from X is greater than that from Y.
Dependency measures are also known as correlation
measures or similarity measures. They measure the ability
to predict the value of one variable from the value of
another. In feature selection for classification, we look for
how strongly a feature is associated with the class. A feature
X is preferred to another feature Y if the association
between feature X and class C is higher than the association
between Y and C. In feature selection for clustering, the
association between two random features measures the
similarity between the two.
Consistency measures are characteristically different
from the above measures because of their heavy reliance
on the class information and the use of the Min-Features
bias in selecting a subset of features. These measures
attempt to find a minimum number of features that separate
classes as consistently as the full set of features can. An
inconsistency is defined as two instances having the same
feature values but different class labels.
2.2.2 Dependent Criteria
A dependent criterion used in the wrapper model requires a
predetermined mining algorithm in feature selection and
uses the performance of the mining algorithm applied on
the selected subset to determine which features are selected.
It usually gives superior performance as it finds features
better suited to the predetermined mining algorithm, but it
also tends to be more computationally expensive, and may
not be suitable for other mining algorithms . For example,
in a task of classification, predictive accuracy is widely used
as the primary measure. It can be used as a dependent
criterion for feature selection. As features are selected by the
classifier that later on uses these selected features in
predicting the class labels of unseen instances, accuracy is
normally high, but it is computationally rather costly to
estimate accuracy for every feature subset .
In a task of clustering, the wrapper model of feature
selection tries to evaluate the goodness of a feature subset
by the quality of the clusters resulted from applying the
clustering algorithm on the selected subset. There exist a
number of heuristic criteria for estimating the quality of
clustering results, such as cluster compactness, scatter
separability, and maximum likelihood. Recent work on
developing dependent criteria in feature selection for
clustering can been found in , , .
Stopping Criteria
A stopping criterion determines when the feature selection process should stop. Some frequently used stopping
criteria are:
The search completes.
Some given bound is reached, where a bound can be
a specified number (minimum number of features or
maximum number of iterations).
Subsequent addition (or deletion) of any feature
does not produce a better subset.
A sufficiently good subset is selected (e.g., a subset
may be sufficiently good if its classification error rate
is less than the allowable error rate for a given task).
Result Validation
A straightforward way for result validation is to directly
measure the result using prior knowledge about the data. If
we know the relevant features beforehand as in the case of
synthetic data, we can compare this known set of features
with the selected features. Knowledge on the irrelevant or
redundant features can also help. We do not expect them to
be selected. In real-world applications, however, we usually
do not have such prior knowledge. Hence, we have to rely
on some indirect methods by monitoring the change of
mining performance with the change of features. For
example, if we use classification error rate as a performance
indicator for a mining task, for a selected feature subset, we
can simply conduct the “before-and-after” experiment to
compare the error rate of the classifier learned on the full set
of features and that learned on the selected subset , .
A CATEGORIZING FRAMEWORK FOR FEATURE
SELECTION ALGORITHMS
Given the key steps of feature selection, we now introduce a
categorizing framework that groups many existing feature
selection algorithms into distinct categories, and summarize
individual algorithms based on this framework.
A Categorizing Framework
There exists a vast body of available feature selection
algorithms. In order to better understand the inner
instrument of each algorithm and the commonalities and
differences among them, we develop a three-dimensional
categorizing framework (shown in Table 1) based on the
previous discussions. We understand that search strategies
and evaluation criteria are two dominating factors in
designing a feature selection algorithm, so they are chosen
as two dimensions in the framework. In Table 1, under
Search Strategies, algorithms are categorized into Complete,
Sequential, and Random. Under Evaluation Criteria, algorithms are categorized into Filter, Wrapper, and Hybrid. We
consider Data Mining Tasks as a third dimension because
the availability of class information in Classification or
Clustering tasks affects evaluation criteria used in feature
selection algorithms (as discussed in Section 2.2). In
addition to these three basic dimensions, algorithms within
the Filter category are further distinguished by specific
evaluation criteria including Distance, Information, Dependency, and Consistency. Within the Wrapper category,
LIU AND YU: TOWARD INTEGRATING FEATURE SELECTION ALGORITHMS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING
Predictive Accuracy is used for Classification, and Cluster
Goodness for Clustering.
Many feature selection algorithms collected in Table 1
can be grouped into distinct categories according to these
characteristics. The categorizing framework serves three
roles. First, it reveals relationships among different algorithms: Algorithms in the same block (category) are most
similar to each other (i.e., designed with similar search
strategies and evaluation criteria, and for the same type of
data mining tasks). Second, it enables us to focus our
selection of feature selection algorithms for a given task on a
relatively small number of algorithms out of the whole
body. For example, knowing that feature selection is
performed for classification, predicative accuracy of a
classifier is suitable to be the evaluation criterion, and
complete search is not suitable for the limited time allowed,
we can conveniently limit our choices to two groups of
algorithms in Table 1: one is defined by Classification,
Wrapper, and Sequential; the other is by Classification,
Wrapper, and Random. Both groups have more than one
algorithm available.1 Third, the framework also reveals
what are missing in the current collection of feature
selection algorithms. As we can see, there are many empty
blocks in Table 1, indicating that no feature selection
algorithm exists for these combinations which might be
suitable for potential future work. In particular, for
example, current feature selection algorithms for clustering
are only limited to sequential search.
With a large number of existing algorithms seen in the
framework, we summarize all the algorithms into three
generalized algorithms corresponding to the filter model,
the wrapper model, and the hybrid model, respectively.
Filter Algorithm
Algorithms within the filter model are illustrated through a
generalized filter algorithm (shown in Table 2). For a given
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
APRIL 2005
1. Some other perspectives are necessary to further differentiate
algorithms in each category. In-depth discussions on choosing a most
suitable feature selection algorithm for a data mining problem is provided
in Section 4.
Categorization of Feature Selection Algorithms in a Three-Dimensional Framework
A Generalized Filter Algorithm
data set D, the algorithm starts the search from a given
subset S0 (an empty set, a full set, or any randomly selected
subset) and searches through the feature space by a
particular search strategy. Each generated subset S is
evaluated by an independent measure M and compared
with the previous best one. If it is found to be better, it is
regarded as the current best subset. The search iterates until
a predefined stopping criterion  (as described in Section 2.3)
is reached. The algorithm outputs the last current best subset
Sbest as the final result. By varying the search strategies and
evaluation measures used in Steps 5 and 6 in the algorithm,
we can design different individual algorithms within the
filter model. Since the filter model applies independent
evaluation criteria without involving any mining algorithm,
it does not inherit any bias of a mining algorithm and it is
also computationally efficient.
Wrapper Algorithm
A generalized wrapper algorithm (shown in Table 3) is very
similar to the generalized filter algorithm except that it
utilizes a predefined mining algorithm A instead of an
independent measure M for subset evaluation. For each
generated subset S, it evaluates its goodness by applying
the mining algorithm to the data with feature subset S and
evaluating the quality of mined results. Therefore, different
mining algorithms will produce different feature selection
results. Varying the search strategies via the function
generate(D) and mining algorithms (A) can result in
different wrapper algorithms. Since mining algorithms are
used to control the selection of feature subsets, the wrapper
model tends to give superior performance as feature subsets
found are better suited to the predetermined mining
algorithm. Consequently, it is also more computationally
expensive than the filter model.
Hybrid Algorithm
To take advantage of the above two models and avoid
the prespecification of a stopping criterion, the hybrid
model is recently proposed to handle large data sets ,
 . A typical hybrid algorithm (shown in Table 4) makes
use of both an independent measure and a mining
independent measure to decide the best subsets for a
given cardinality and uses the mining algorithm to select
the final best subset among the best subsets across
LIU AND YU: TOWARD INTEGRATING FEATURE SELECTION ALGORITHMS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING
A Generalized Wrapper Algorithm
A Generalized Hybrid Algorithm
different cardinalities. Basically, it starts the search from a
given subset S0 (usually, an empty set in sequential
forward selection) and iterates to find the best subsets at
each increasing cardinality. In each round for a best
subset with cardinality c, it searches through all possible
subsets of cardinality c þ 1 by adding one feature from
the remaining features. Each newly generated subset S
with cardinality c þ 1 is evaluated by an independent
measure M and compared with the previous best one. If
S is better, it becomes the current best subset S0
best at level
c þ 1. At the end of each iteration, a mining algorithm A
is applied on S0
best at level c þ 1 and the quality of the
mined result  is compared with that from the best subset
at level c. If S0
best is better, the algorithm continues to find
the best subset at the next level; otherwise, it stops and
outputs the current best subset as the final best subset.
The quality of results from a mining algorithm provides a
natural stopping criterion in the hybrid model.
TOWARD AN INTEGRATED SYSTEM FOR
INTELLIGENT FEATURE SELECTION
Research on feature selection has been active for decades
with attempts to improve well-known algorithms or to
develop new ones. The proliferation of feature selection
algorithms, however, has not brought about a general
methodology that allows for intelligent selection from
existing algorithms. In order to make a “right” choice, a
user not only needs to know the domain well (this is usually
not a problem for the user), but also is expected to
understand technical details of available algorithms (discussed in previous sections). Therefore, the more algorithms available, the more challenging it is to choose a
suitable one for an application. Consequently, a big number
of algorithms are not even attempted in practice and only a
couple of algorithms are always used. Therefore, there is a
pressing need for intelligent feature selection that can
automatically recommend the most suitable algorithm
among many for a given application. In this section, we
present an integrated approach to intelligent feature
selection. First, we introduce a unifying platform which
serves an intermediate step toward building an integrated
system for intelligent feature selection. Second, we illustrate
the idea through a preliminary system based on our
A Unifying Platform
In Section 3.1, we develop a categorizing framework based
on three dimensions (search strategies, evaluation criteria,
and data mining tasks) from an algorithm designer’s
perspective. However, it would be impractical to require a
domain expert or a user to keep abreast of such technical
details about feature selection algorithms. Moreover, in
most cases, it is not sufficient to decide the most suitable
algorithm based merely on this framework. Recall the two
groups of algorithms identified by the three dimensions in
Section 3.1, each group still contains quite a few candidate
algorithms. Assuming that we only have three wrapper
algorithms: WSFG and WSBG in one group and LVW in the
other group, additional information is required to decide
the most suitable one for the given task. We propose a
unifying platform (shown in Fig. 2) that expands the
categorizing framework by introducing more dimensions
from a user’s perspective.
At the top, knowledge and data about feature selection are
two key determining factors. Currently, the knowledge
factor covers Purpose of feature selection, Time concern,
expected Output Type, and M=N Ratio—the ratio between the
expected number of selected features M and the total
number of original features N. The data factor covers Class
Information, Feature Type, Quality of data, and N=I Ratio—the
ratio between the number of features N and the number of
instances I. Each dimension is discussed below.
The purpose of feature selection can be broadly categorized into visualization, data understanding, data cleaning,
redundancy and/or irrelevancy removal, and performance
(e.g., predictive accuracy and comprehensibility) enhancement. Recall that feature selection algorithms are categorized into the filter model, the wrapper model, and the
hybrid model. Accordingly, we can also summarize
different purposes of feature selection into these three
categories to form a generic task hierarchy, as different
purposes imply different evaluation criteria and, thus,
guide the selection of feature selection algorithms differently. For general purpose of redundancy and/or irrelevancy removal, algorithms in the filter model are good
choices as they are unbiased and fast. To enhance the
mining performance, algorithms in the wrapper model
should be preferred than those in the filter model as they
are better suited to the mining algorithms , .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
APRIL 2005
Fig. 2. A unifying platform.
Sometimes, algorithms in the hybrid model are needed to
serve more complicated purposes.
The time concern is about whether the feature selection
process is time critical or not. Different time constraints
affect the selection of algorithms with different search
strategies. When time is not a critical issue, algorithms with
complete search are recommended to achieve higher
optimality of results; otherwise, algorithms with sequential
search or random search should be selected for fast results.
Time constraints can also affect the choice of feature
selection models as different models have different computational complexities. The filter model is preferred in
applications where applying mining algorithms are too
costly, or unnecessary.
The output type of feature selection can sometimes be
known a priori. This aspect divides feature selection
algorithms into two groups: ranked list and minimum
subset. The real difference between the two is about the
order among the selected features. There is no order among
the features in a selected subset. One cannot easily remove
any more feature from the subset, but one can do so for a
ranked list by removing the least important one. Back to the
previous example, among WSFG, WSBG, and LVW, if we
expect to get a ranked list as the result, LVW returning a
minimum subset will be eliminated from the final choice.
The M=N ratio is also very useful in determining a
proper search strategy. If the number of relevant features
(M) is expected to be small, a forward complete search
strategy can be afforded; if the number of irrelevant features
(N  M) is small, a backward complete search strategy can
be adopted even in time critical situations. If we have the
prior knowledge that the number of irrelevant features is
significantly larger than the number of relevant ones, WSFG
using sequential forward search is considered a better
choice than WSBG using sequential backward search.
Within the data factor, the class information is about
whether the data contains class information or not. With
class information, feature selection algorithms for classification are needed, while without class information, feature
selection algorithms for clustering are needed. This dimension is essentially the same as the dimension of data mining
tasks in the categorizing framework, but it reflects a user’s
knowledge about the data.
Different feature types require different data processing
mechanisms. Some types of features inherit order in their
values such as continuous and discrete features; some do
not inherit order such as nominal features. When different
feature types occur in one data set, things become more
complicated: how to consider each feature’s influence.
Mixed data types imply that the range of values for each
feature can vary significantly. It is important to recognize
and allow this complexity for real-world applications in the
selection of feature selection algorithms.
The quality of data is about whether data contains missing
values or noisy data. Different feature selection algorithms
require different levels of data quality to perform well. Some
applications require more preprocessing such as value
discretization , and missing value treatment, while
others are less stringent in this regard.
The N=I ratio recently becomes an interesting problem
when feature selection is applied to text mining , 
and genomic analysis . Usually, the number of total
instances I is greatly larger than the number of total
features N. Sometimes, however, N could be very huge, but
I small as in text mining and gene expression microarray
analysis. In such cases, we should focus on algorithms that
intensively work along the I dimensions (more is discussed
in Section 5).
In addition to the eight dimensions in the unifying
platform, domain knowledge, when available, should also
be used to aid feature selection. For example, a medical
doctor may know that, for a certain type of patient data,
some features are more indicative than others, and some
may be irrelevant. The flexibility of using domain knowledge is not always required or possible, especially in data
mining applications where we usually wish to let data tell
us hidden patterns. When domain knowledge is available,
using it will certainly speed up the feature selection process.
Toward an Integrated System
The unifying platform serves two purposes: 1) to group
existing algorithms with similar characteristics and investigate their strengths and weaknesses on the same platform,
and 2) to provide a guideline in building an integrated
system for intelligent feature selection. We introduce a
preliminary integrated system (shown in Fig. 3) by employing the information on the M=N ratio.
We focus on feature selection algorithms using the
consistency evaluation criterion. The four representative
algorithms employ different search strategies: Focus—forward exhaustive search, ABB—backward complete search,
QBB—random search plus ABB, and SetCover—sequential
search. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results
suggest that each algorithm has its own strengthes and
weaknesses concerning speed and optimality of results .
To guide the selection of a suitable algorithm among the
four, the number of relevant features M is estimated as M0
LIU AND YU: TOWARD INTEGRATING FEATURE SELECTION ALGORITHMS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING
Fig. 3. A preliminary integrated system.
or M00 (shown in Fig. 3), where M0 is an estimate of M by
SetCover, and M00 an estimate of M by QBB. With this
system, Focus or ABB is recommended when either M0 or
N  M0 is small because they guarantee the optimal
selected subset. However, the two could take an impratical
long time to converge when the two conditions are not true.
Therefore, either SetCover or QBB will be used based on the
comparison of M0 and M00. The two algorithms do not
guarantee optimal subsets, but they are efficient in generating near optimal subsets.
The example in Fig. 3 verifies the idea of automatically
choosing a suitable feature selection algorithm within a
limited scope based on the unifying platform. All four
algorithms share the following characteristics: using an
independent evaluation criterion (i.e., the filter model),
searching for a minimum feature subset, time critical, and
dealing with labelled data. The preliminary integrated
system uses the M=N ratio to guide the selection of feature
selection algorithms. How to substantially extend this
preliminary work to a fully integrated system that
incorporates all the factors specified in the unifying platform remains a challenging problem.
After presenting the concepts and state-of-the-art algorithms with a categorizing framework and a unifying
platform, we now examine the use of feature selection in
real-world data mining applications. Feature selection has
found many successes in real-world applications.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATIONS OF FEATURE
The essence of these successful applications lies at the
recognition of a need for effective data preprocessing: Data
mining can be effectively accomplished with the aid of
feature selection. Data is often collected for many reasons
other than data mining (e.g., required by law, easy to collect,
or simply for the purpose of book-keeping). In real-world
applications, one often encounters problems such as too
many features, individual features unable to independently
capture significant characteristics of data, high dependency
among the individual features, and emergent behaviors of
combined features. Humans are ineffective at formulating
and understanding hypotheses when data sets have large
numbers of variables (possibly thousands in cases involving
demographics and hundreds of thousands in cases involving
Web browsing, microarray data analysis, or text document
analysis), and people would find it easy to understand
aspects of the problem in lower-dimensional subspaces ,
 . Feature selection can reduce the dimensionality to
enable many data mining algorithms to work effectively on
data with large dimensionality. Some illustrative applications of feature selection are showcased here.
Text Categorization. Text categorization , is
the problem of automatically assigning predefined categories to free text documents. This problem is of great
practical importance given the massive volume of online
text available through the World Wide Web, e-mails, and
digital libraries. A major characteristic, or difficulty of text
categorization problems, is the high dimensionality of the
feature space. The original feature space consists of many
unique terms (words or phrases) that occur in documents,
and the number of terms can be hundreds of thousands
for even a moderate-sized text collection. This is prohibitively high for many mining algorithms. Therefore, it is
highly desirable to reduce the original feature space
without sacrificing categorization accuracy. In , different
compared in the reduction of a high-dimensional feature
space in text categorization problems. It is reported that
the methods under evaluation can effectively remove
50 percent to 90 percent of the terms while maintaining
the categorization accuracy.
Image Retrieval. Feature selection is applied in to
content-based image retrieval. Recent years have seen a
rapid increase of the size and amount of image collections
from both civilian and military equipments. However, we
cannot access to or make use of the information unless it is
organized so as to allow efficient browsing, searching, and
retrieving. Content-based image retrieval is proposed
to effectively handle the large scale of image collections.
Instead of being manually annotated by text-based keywords, images would be indexed by their own visual
contents (features), such as color, texture, shape, etc. One
of the biggest problems encountered while trying to make
content-based image retrieval truly scalable to large size
image collections is still the “curse of dimensionality” .
As suggested in , the dimensionality of the feature
space is normally of the order of 102. Dimensionality
reduction is a promising approach to solve this problem.
The image retrieval system proposed in uses the
theories of optimal projection to achieve optimal feature
selection. Relevant features are then used to index images
for efficient retrieval.
Customer Relationship Management. A case of feature
selection is presented in for customer relationship
management. In the context that each customer means a big
revenue and the loss of one will likely trigger a significant
segment to defect, it is imperative to have a team of highly
experienced experts monitor each customer’s intention and
movement based on massively collected data. A set of key
indicators are used by the team and proven useful in
predicting potential defectors. The problem is that it is
difficult to find new indicators describing the dynamically
changing business environment among many possible
indicators (features). The machine recorded data is simply
too enormous for any human expert to browse and obtain
any insight from it. Feature selection is employed to search
for new potential indicators in a dynamically changing
environment. They are later presented to experts for
scrutiny and adoption. This approach considerably improves the team’s efficiency in finding new changing
indicators.
Intrusion Detection. As network-based computer systems play increasingly vital roles in modern society, they
have become the targets of our enemies and criminals. The
security of a computer system is compromised when an
intrusion takes place. Intrusion detection is often used as
one way to protect computer systems. In , Lee et al.
proposed a systematic data mining framework for analyzing audit data and constructing intrusion detection models.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
APRIL 2005
Under this framework, a large amount of audit data is first
analyzed using data mining algorithms in order to obtain
the frequent activity patterns. These patterns are then used
to guide the selection of system features as well as the
construction of additional temporal and statistical features
for another phase of automated learning. Classifiers based
on these selected features are then inductively learned
using the appropriately formatted audit data. These
classifiers can be used as intrusion detection models since
they can classify whether an observed system activity is
“legitimate” or “intrusive.” Feature selection plays an
important role in building classification models for intrusion detection.
Genomic Analysis. Structural and functional data from
analysis of the human genome has increased many folds in
recent years, presenting enormous opportunities and
challenges for data mining , . In particular, gene
expression microarray is a rapidly maturing technology that
provides the opportunity to assay the expression levels of
thousands or tens of thousands of genes in a single
experiment. These assays provide the input to a wide
variety of data mining tasks, including classification and
clustering. However, the number of instances in these
experiments is often severely limited. In , for example, a
case involving only 38 training data points in a 7,130 dimensional space is used to exemplify the above situation that
are becoming increasingly common in application of data
mining to molecular biology. In this extreme of very few
observations on a large number of features, Xing et al. 
investigated the possible use of feature selection on a
microarray classification problem. All the classifiers tested
in the experiments performed significantly better in the
reduced feature space than in the full feature space.
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
This survey provides a comprehensive overview of various
aspects of feature selection. We introduce two architectures
—a categorizing framework and a unifying platform. They
categorize the large body of feature selection algorithms,
reveal future directions for developing new algorithms, and
guide the selection of algorithms for intelligent feature
selection. The categorizing framework is developed from an
algorithm designer’s viewpoint that focuses on the technical
details about the general procedures of feature selection
process. A new feature selection algorithm can be incorporated into the framework according to the three dimensions.
The unifying platform is developed from a user’s viewpoint
that covers the user’s knowledge about the domain and
data for feature selection. The unifying platform is one
necessary step toward building an integrated system for
intelligent feature selection. The ultimate goal for intelligent
feature selection is to create an integrated system that will
automatically recommend the most suitable algorithm(s) to
the user while hiding all technical details irrelevant to an
application.
As data mining develops and expands to new application areas, feature selection also faces new challenges. We
represent here some challenges in research and development of feature selection.
Feature Selection with Large Dimensionality. Classically, the dimensionality N is considered large if it is in the
range of hundreds. However, in some recent applications of
feature selection, the dimensionality can be tens or
hundreds of thousands. Such high dimensionality causes
two major problems for feature selection. One is the socalled “curse of dimensionality” . As most existing
feature selection algorithms have quadratic or higher time
complexity about N, it is difficult to scale up with high
dimensionality. Since algorithms in the filter model use
evaluation criteria that are less computationally expensive
than those of the wrapper model, the filter model is often
preferred to the wrapper model in dealing with large
dimensionality. Recently, algorithms of the hybrid model
 , are considered to handle data sets with high
dimensionality. These algorithms focus on combining filter
and wrapper algorithms to achieve best possible performance with a particular mining algorithm with similar time
complexity of filter algorithms. Therefore, more efficient
search strategies and evaluation criteria are needed for
feature selection with large dimensionality. An efficient
correlation-based filter algorithm is introduced in to
effectively handle large-dimensional data with class information. Another difficulty faced by feature selection with
data of large dimensionality is the relative shortage of
instances. That is, the dimensionality N can sometimes
greatly exceed the number of instances I. In such cases, we
should consider algorithms that intensively work along the
I dimension as seen in .
Feature Selection with Active Instance Selection.
Traditional feature selection algorithms perform dimensionality reduction using whatever training data is given to
them. When the training data set is very large, random
sampling , is commonly used to sample a subset of
instances. However, random sampling is blind without
exploiting any data characteristic. The concept of active
feature selection is first introduced and studied in .
Active feature selection promotes the idea to actively select
instances for feature selection. It avoids pure random
sampling and is realized by selective sampling , 
that takes advantage of data characteristics when selecting
instances. The key idea of selective sampling is to select
only those instances with high probabilities to be informative in determining feature relevance. Selective sampling
aims to achieve better or equally good feature selection
results with a significantly smaller number of instances than
that of random sampling. Although some selective sampling methods based on data variance or class information
have proven effective on representative algorithms ,
 , more research efforts are needed to investigate the
effectiveness of selective sampling over the vast body of
feature selection algorithms.
Feature Selection with New Data Types. The field of
feature selection develops fast as data mining is an
application-driven field where research questions tend to
be motivated by real-world data sets. A broad spectrum of
formalisms and techniques has been proposed in a large
number of applications. For example, the work of feature
LIU AND YU: TOWARD INTEGRATING FEATURE SELECTION ALGORITHMS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING
selection mainly focused on labeled data until 1997. Since
1998, we have observed the increasing use of feature
selection for unlabeled data. The best-known data type in
traditional data analysis, data mining, and feature selection
is N-dimensional vectors of measurements on I instances
(or objects, individuals). Such data is often referred to as
multivariate data and can be thought of as an N  I data
matrix . Since data mining emerged, a common form of
data in data mining in many business contexts is records of
individuals conducting transactions in applications like
market basket analysis, insurance, direct-mail marketing,
and health care. This type of data, if it is considered as an
N  I matrix, has a very large number of possible attributes
but is a very sparse matrix. For example, a typical market
basket (an instance) can have tens of items purchased out of
hundreds of thousands of available items. The significant
and rapid growth of computer and Internet/Web techniques makes some other types of data more commonly
available—text-based data (e.g., e-mails, online news,
newsgroups) and semistructure data (e.g., HTML, XML).
The wide deployment of various sensors, surveillance
cameras, and Internet/Web monitoring lately poses a
challenge to deal with another type of data—data streams.
It pertains to data arriving over time, in a nearly continuous
fashion, and is often available only once or in a limited
amount of time . As we have witnessed a growing
number of work of feature selection on unlabeled data, we
are certain to anticipate more research and development on
new types of data for feature selection. It does not seem
reasonable to suggest that the existing algorithms can be
easily modified for these new data types.
Related Challenges for Feature Selection. Shown in
Section 5 are some exemplary cases of applying feature
selection as a preprocessing step in very large databases
collected from Internet, business, scientific, and government
applications. Novel feature selection applications will be
found where creative data reduction has to be conducted
when our ability to capture and store data has far outpaced
our ability to process and utilize it . Feature selection
can help focus on relevant parts of data and improve our
ability to process data. New data mining applications ,
 arise as techniques evolve. Scaling data mining
algorithms to large databases is a pressing issue. As feature
selection is one step in data preprocessing, changes need to
be made for classic algorithms that require multiple
database scans and/or random access to data. Research is
required to overcome limitations imposed when it is costly
to visit large data sets multiple times or access instances at
random as in data streams .
Recently, it has been noticed that in the context of
clustering, many clusters may reside in different subspaces
of very small dimensionality , either with their sets of
dimensions overlapped or nonoverlapped. Many subspace
clustering algorithms are developed . Searching for
subspaces is not exactly a feature selection problem as it
tries to find many subspaces while feature selection only
tries to find one subspace. Feature selection can also be
extended to instance selection in scaling down data
which is a sister issue of scaling up algorithms. In addition
to sampling methods , a suite of methods have been
developed to search for representative instances so that data
mining is performed in a focused and direct way , ,
 . Feature selection is a dynamic field closely connected
to data mining and other data processing techniques. This
paper attempts to survey this fast developing field, show
some effective applications, and point out interesting trends
and challenges. It is hoped that further and speedy
development of feature selection can work with other
related techniques to help evolve data mining into solutions
for insights.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers
and editor. Their many helpful and constructive comments
and suggestions helped us significantly improve this work.
This work is in part supported by a grant from the US
National Science Foundation (No. 0127815), and from ET-I3.