PointPillars: Fast Encoders for Object Detection from Point Clouds
Alex H. Lang
Sourabh Vora
Holger Caesar
Lubing Zhou
Jiong Yang
Oscar Beijbom
nuTonomy: an APTIV company
{alex, sourabh, holger, lubing, jiong.yang, oscar}@nutonomy.com
Object detection in point clouds is an important aspect
of many robotics applications such as autonomous driving.
In this paper we consider the problem of encoding a point
cloud into a format appropriate for a downstream detection
pipeline. Recent literature suggests two types of encoders;
ﬁxed encoders tend to be fast but sacriﬁce accuracy, while
encoders that are learned from data are more accurate, but
slower. In this work we propose PointPillars, a novel encoder which utilizes PointNets to learn a representation of
point clouds organized in vertical columns (pillars). While
the encoded features can be used with any standard 2D convolutional detection architecture, we further propose a lean
downstream network. Extensive experimentation shows that
PointPillars outperforms previous encoders with respect to
both speed and accuracy by a large margin. Despite only
using lidar, our full detection pipeline signiﬁcantly outperforms the state of the art, even among fusion methods, with
respect to both the 3D and bird’s eye view KITTI benchmarks. This detection performance is achieved while running at 62 Hz: a 2 - 4 fold runtime improvement. A faster
version of our method matches the state of the art at 105 Hz.
These benchmarks suggest that PointPillars is an appropriate encoding for object detection in point clouds.
1. Introduction
Deploying autonomous vehicles (AVs) in urban environments poses a difﬁcult technological challenge.
other tasks, AVs need to detect and track moving objects
such as vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists in realtime. To
achieve this, autonomous vehicles rely on several sensors
out of which the lidar is arguably the most important. A
lidar uses a laser scanner to measure the distance to the
environment, thus generating a sparse point cloud representation. Traditionally, a lidar robotics pipeline interprets
such point clouds as object detections through a bottomup pipeline involving background subtraction, followed by
spatiotemporal clustering and classiﬁcation .
Performance (mAP)
All classes
Performance (AP)
Runtime (Hz)
Performance (AP)
Pedestrian
Runtime (Hz)
Performance (AP)
Figure 1. Bird’s eye view performance vs speed for our proposed
PointPillars, PP method on the KITTI test set. Lidar-only
methods drawn as blue circles; lidar & vision methods drawn as
red squares. Also drawn are top methods from the KITTI leaderboard: M : MV3D , A AVOD , C : ContFuse , V :
VoxelNet , F : Frustum PointNet , S : SECOND ,
P+ PIXOR++ . PointPillars outperforms all other lidar-only
methods in terms of both speed and accuracy by a large margin.
It also outperforms all fusion based method except on pedestrians.
Similar performance is achieved on the 3D metric (Table 2).
Following the tremendous advances in deep learning
methods for computer vision, a large body of literature has
investigated to what extent this technology could be applied
towards object detection from lidar point clouds . While there are many similarities
between the modalities, there are two key differences: 1)
the point cloud is a sparse representation, while an image is
dense and 2) the point cloud is 3D, while the image is 2D.
As a result object detection from point clouds does not trivially lend itself to standard image convolutional pipelines.
Some early works focus on either using 3D convolu-
 
tions or a projection of the point cloud into the image
 . Recent methods tend to view the lidar point cloud
from a bird’s eye view . This overhead perspective offers several advantages such as lack of scale ambiguity and the near lack of occlusion.
However, the bird’s eye view tends to be extremely
sparse which makes direct application of convolutional
neural networks impractical and inefﬁcient.
workaround to this problem is to partition the ground plane
into a regular grid, for example 10 x 10 cm, and then perform a hand crafted feature encoding method on the points
in each grid cell . However, such methods
may be sub-optimal since the hard-coded feature extraction
method may not generalize to new conﬁgurations without
signiﬁcant engineering efforts. To address these issues, and
building on the PointNet design developed by Qi et al. ,
VoxelNet was one of the ﬁrst methods to truly do endto-end learning in this domain. VoxelNet divides the space
into voxels, applies a PointNet to each voxel, followed by
a 3D convolutional middle layer to consolidate the vertical
axis, after which a 2D convolutional detection architecture
is applied. While the VoxelNet performance is strong, the
inference time, at 4.4 Hz, is too slow to deploy in real time.
Recently SECOND improved the inference speed of
VoxelNet but the 3D convolutions remain a bottleneck.
In this work we propose PointPillars: a method for object detection in 3D that enables end-to-end learning with
only 2D convolutional layers. PointPillars uses a novel encoder that learn features on pillars (vertical columns) of the
point cloud to predict 3D oriented boxes for objects. There
are several advantages of this approach. First, by learning
features instead of relying on ﬁxed encoders, PointPillars
can leverage the full information represented by the point
cloud. Further, by operating on pillars instead of voxels
there is no need to tune the binning of the vertical direction by hand. Finally, pillars are highly efﬁcient because all
key operations can be formulated as 2D convolutions which
are extremely efﬁcient to compute on a GPU. An additional
beneﬁt of learning features is that PointPillars requires no
hand-tuning to use different point cloud conﬁgurations. For
example, it can easily incorporate multiple lidar scans, or
even radar point clouds.
We evaluated our PointPillars network on the public
KITTI detection challenges which require detection of cars,
pedestrians, and cyclists in either the bird’s eye view (BEV)
or 3D . While our PointPillars network is trained using
only lidar point clouds, it dominates the current state of the
art including methods that use lidar and images, thus establishing new standards for performance on both BEV and 3D
detection (Table 1 and Table 2). At the same time PointPillars runs at 62 Hz, which is orders of magnitude faster than
previous art. PointPillars further enables a trade off between
speed and accuracy; in one setting we match state of the art
performance at over 100 Hz (Figure 5). We have also released code ( 
that can reproduce our results.
1.1. Related Work
We start by reviewing recent work in applying convolutional neural networks toward object detection in general,
and then focus on methods speciﬁc to object detection from
lidar point clouds.
Object detection using CNNs
Starting with the seminal work of Girshick et al. it was
established that convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures are state of the art for detection in images. The
series of papers that followed advocate a two-stage
approach to this problem, where in the ﬁrst stage a region proposal network (RPN) suggests candidate proposals.
Cropped and resized versions of these proposals are then
classiﬁed by a second stage network. Two-stage methods
dominated the important vision benchmark datasets such as
COCO over single-stage architectures originally proposed by Liu et al. . In a single-stage architecture a
dense set of anchor boxes is regressed and classiﬁed in a
single stage into a set of predictions providing a fast and
simple architecture. Recently Lin et al. convincingly
argued that with their proposed focal loss function a single stage method is superior to two-stage methods, both in
terms of accuracy and runtime. In this work, we use a single
stage method.
Object detection in lidar point clouds
Object detection in point clouds is an intrinsically three dimensional problem. As such, it is natural to deploy a 3D
convolutional network for detection, which is the paradigm
of several early works . While providing a straightforward architecture, these methods are slow; e.g. Engelcke
et al. require 0.5s for inference on a single point cloud.
Most recent methods improve the runtime by projecting
the 3D point cloud either onto the ground plane or
the image plane . In the most common paradigm the
point cloud is organized in voxels and the set of voxels in
each vertical column is encoded into a ﬁxed-length, handcrafted, feature encoding to form a pseudo-image which can
be processed by a standard image detection architecture.
Some notable works here include MV3D , AVOD ,
PIXOR and Complex YOLO which all use variations on the same ﬁxed encoding paradigm as the ﬁrst step
of their architectures. The ﬁrst two methods additionally
fuse the lidar features with image features to create a multimodal detector. The fusion step used in MV3D and AVOD
forces them to use two-stage detection pipelines, while
PIXOR and Complex YOLO use single stage pipelines.
Point cloud
Predictions
Feature Net
Head (SSD)
Pillar Index
Figure 2. Network overview. The main components of the network are a Pillar Feature Network, Backbone, and SSD Detection Head. See
Section 2 for more details. The raw point cloud is converted to a stacked pillar tensor and pillar index tensor. The encoder uses the stacked
pillars to learn a set of features that can be scattered back to a 2D pseudo-image for a convolutional neural network. The features from the
backbone are used by the detection head to predict 3D bounding boxes for objects. Note: here we show the backbone dimensions for the
car network.
In their seminal work Qi et al. proposed a simple
architecture, PointNet, for learning from unordered point
sets, which offered a path to full end-to-end learning. VoxelNet is one of the ﬁrst methods to deploy PointNets
for object detection in lidar point clouds. In their method,
PointNets are applied to voxels which are then processed by
a set of 3D convolutional layers followed by a 2D backbone
and a detection head. This enables end-to-end learning, but
like the earlier work that relied on 3D convolutions, Voxel-
Net is slow, requiring 225ms inference time (4.4 Hz) for a
single point cloud. Another recent method, Frustum Point-
Net , uses PointNets to segment and classify the point
cloud in a frustum generated from projecting a detection on
an image into 3D. Frustum PointNet’s achieved high benchmark performance compared to other fusion methods, but
its multi-stage design makes end-to-end learning impractical. Very recently SECOND offered a series of improvements to VoxelNet resulting in stronger performance
and a much improved speed of 20 Hz. However, they were
unable to remove the expensive 3D convolutional layers.
1.2. Contributions
• We propose a novel point cloud encoder and network,
PointPillars, that operates on the point cloud to enable
end-to-end training of a 3D object detection network.
• We show how all computations on pillars can be posed
as dense 2D convolutions which enables inference at
62 Hz; a factor of 2-4 times faster than other methods.
• We conduct experiments on the KITTI dataset and
demonstrate state of the art results on cars, pedestrians, and cyclists on both BEV and 3D benchmarks.
• We conduct several ablation studies to examine the key
factors that enable a strong detection performance.
2. PointPillars Network
PointPillars accepts point clouds as input and estimates
oriented 3D boxes for cars, pedestrians and cyclists. It consists of three main stages (Figure 2): (1) A feature encoder
network that converts a point cloud to a sparse pseudoimage; (2) a 2D convolutional backbone to process the
pseudo-image into high-level representation; and (3) a detection head that detects and regresses 3D boxes.
2.1. Pointcloud to Pseudo-Image
To apply a 2D convolutional architecture, we ﬁrst convert the point cloud to a pseudo-image.
We denote by l a point in a point cloud with coordinates
x, y, z and reﬂectance r. As a ﬁrst step the point cloud
is discretized into an evenly spaced grid in the x-y plane,
creating a set of pillars P with |P| = B. Note that there is
no need for a hyper parameter to control the binning in the
z dimension. The points in each pillar are then augmented
with xc, yc, zc, xp and yp where the c subscript denotes
distance to the arithmetic mean of all points in the pillar and
the p subscript denotes the offset from the pillar x, y center.
The augmented lidar point l is now D = 9 dimensional.
The set of pillars will be mostly empty due to sparsity
of the point cloud, and the non-empty pillars will in general
have few points in them. For example, at 0.162 m2 bins
the point cloud from an HDL-64E Velodyne lidar has 6k-9k
non-empty pillars in the range typically used in KITTI for
∼97% sparsity. This sparsity is exploited by imposing a
limit both on the number of non-empty pillars per sample
(P) and on the number of points per pillar (N) to create a
dense tensor of size (D, P, N). If a sample or pillar holds
too much data to ﬁt in this tensor the data is randomly sampled. Conversely, if a sample or pillar has too little data to
populate the tensor, zero padding is applied.
Figure 3. Qualitative analysis of KITTI results. We show a bird’s-eye view of the lidar point cloud (top), as well as the 3D bounding boxes
projected into the image for clearer visualization. Note that our method only uses lidar. We show predicted boxes for car (orange), cyclist
(red) and pedestrian (blue). Ground truth boxes are shown in gray. The orientation of boxes is shown by a line connected the bottom center
to the front of the box.
Figure 4. Failure cases on KITTI. Same visualize setup from Figure 3 but focusing on several common failure modes.
Next, we use a simpliﬁed version of PointNet where,
for each point, a linear layer is applied followed by Batch-
Norm and ReLU to generate a (C, P, N) sized
tensor. This is followed by a max operation over the channels to create an output tensor of size (C, P). Note that the
linear layer can be formulated as a 1x1 convolution across
the tensor resulting in very efﬁcient computation.
Once encoded, the features are scattered back to the
original pillar locations to create a pseudo-image of size
(C, H, W) where H and W indicate the height and width
of the canvas.
2.2. Backbone
We use a similar backbone as and the structure is
shown in Figure 2. The backbone has two sub-networks:
one top-down network that produces features at increasingly small spatial resolution and a second network that performs upsampling and concatenation of the top-down features. The top-down backbone can be characterized by a series of blocks Block(S, L, F). Each block operates at stride
S (measured relative to the original input pseudo-image).
A block has L 3x3 2D conv-layers with F output channels,
each followed by BatchNorm and a ReLU. The ﬁrst convolution inside the layer has stride
Sin to ensure the block
operates on stride S after receiving an input blob of stride
Sin. All subsequent convolutions in a block have stride 1.
The ﬁnal features from each top-down block are combined through upsampling and concatenation as follows.
First, the features are upsampled, Up(Sin, Sout, F) from an
initial stride Sin to a ﬁnal stride Sout (both again measured
wrt. original pseudo-image) using a transposed 2D convolution with F ﬁnal features. Next, BatchNorm and ReLU
is applied to the upsampled features. The ﬁnal output features are a concatenation of all features that originated from
different strides.
2.3. Detection Head
In this paper, we use the Single Shot Detector (SSD) 
setup to perform 3D object detection. Similar to SSD, we
match the priorboxes to the ground truth using 2D Intersection over Union (IoU) . Bounding box height and
elevation were not used for matching; instead given a 2D
match, the height and elevation become additional regression targets.
3. Implementation Details
In this section we describe our network parameters and
the loss function that we optimize for.
3.1. Network
Instead of pre-training our networks, all weights were
initialized randomly using a uniform distribution as in .
The encoder network has C = 64 output features. The
car and pedestrian/cyclist backbones are the same except
for the stride of the ﬁrst block (S = 2 for car, S = 1 for
pedestrian/cyclist). Both network consists of three blocks,
Block1(S, 4, C), Block2(2S, 6, 2C), and Block3(4S, 6,
4C). Each block is upsampled by the following upsampling
steps: Up1(S, S, 2C), Up2(2S, S, 2C) and Up3(4S, S, 2C).
Then the features of Up1, Up2 and Up3 are concatenated
together to create 6C features for the detection head.
We use the same loss functions introduced in SEC-
OND . Ground truth boxes and anchors are deﬁned by
(x, y, z, w, l, h, θ). The localization regression residuals between ground truth and anchors are deﬁned by:
∆x = xgt −xa
, ∆y = ygt −ya
, ∆z = zgt −za
∆w = log wgt
wa , ∆l = log lgt
la , ∆h = log hgt
where xgt and xa are respectively the ground truth and anchor boxes and da =
(wa)2 + (la)2. The total localization loss is:
b∈(x,y,z,w,l,h,θ)
SmoothL1 (∆b)
Since the angle localization loss cannot distinguish
ﬂipped boxes, we use a softmax classiﬁcation loss on the
discretized directions , Ldir, which enables the network
to learn the heading.
For the object classiﬁcation loss, we use the focal
loss :
Lcls = −αa (1 −pa)γ log pa,
where pa is the class probability of an anchor. We use the
original paper settings of α = 0.25 and γ = 2. The total
loss is therefore:
Npos (βlocLloc + βclsLcls + βdirLdir) ,
where Npos is the number of positive anchors and βloc = 2,
βcls = 1, and βdir = 0.2.
To optimize the loss function we use the Adam optimizer
with an initial learning rate of 2 ∗10−4 and decay the learning rate by a factor of 0.8 every 15 epochs and train for 160
epochs. We use a batch size of 2 for validation set and 4 for
our test submission.
4. Experimental setup
In this section we present our experimental setup, including dataset, experimental settings and data augmentation.
4.1. Dataset
All experiments use the KITTI object detection benchmark dataset , which consists of samples that have both
lidar point clouds and images. We only train on lidar point
clouds, but compare with fusion methods that use both lidar
and images. The samples are originally divided into 7481
training and 7518 testing samples. For experimental studies
we split the ofﬁcial training into 3712 training samples and
3769 validation samples , while for our test submission
we created a minival set of 784 samples from the validation set and trained on the remaining 6733 samples. The
KITTI benchmark requires detections of cars, pedestrians,
and cyclists. Since the ground truth objects were only annotated if they are visible in the image, we follow the standard
convention of only using lidar points that project
into the image. Following the standard literature practice
on KITTI , we train one network for cars and
one network for both pedestrians and cyclists.
4.2. Settings
Unless explicitly varied in an experimental study, we use
an xy resolution: 0.16 m, max number of pillars (P): 12000,
and max number of points per pillar (N): 100.
We use the same anchors and matching strategy as .
Each class anchor is described by a width, length, height,
and z center, and is applied at two orientations: 0 and 90
degrees. Anchors are matched to ground truth using the 2D
IoU with the following rules. A positive match is either
the highest with a ground truth box, or above the positive
match threshold, while a negative match is below the negative threshold. All other anchors are ignored in the loss.
At inference time we apply axis aligned non maximum
suppression (NMS) with an overlap threshold of 0.5 IoU.
This provides similar performance compared to rotational
NMS, but is much faster.
The x, y, z range is [(0, 70.4), (-40, 40), (-3, 1)]
meters respectively. The car anchor has width, length, and
height of (1.6, 3.9, 1.5) m with a z center of -1 m. Matching
uses positive and negative thresholds of 0.6 and 0.45.
Pedestrian & Cyclist.
The x, y, z range of [(0, 48), (-20,
20), (-2.5, 0.5)] meters respectively. The pedestrian anchor
has width, length, and height of (0.6, 0.8, 1.73) meters with
a z center of -0.6 meters, while the cyclist anchor has width,
length, and height of (0.6, 1.76, 1.73) meters with a z center
of -0.6 meters. Matching uses positive and negative thresholds of 0.5 and 0.35.
Pedestrian
Lidar & Img.
Cont-Fuse 
Lidar & Img.
Roarnet 
Lidar & Img.
AVOD-FPN 
Lidar & Img.
F-PointNet 
Lidar & Img.
HDNET 
Lidar & Map
PIXOR++ 
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
PointPillars
Table 1. Results on the KITTI test BEV detection benchmark.
Pedestrian
Lidar & Img.
Cont-Fuse 
Lidar & Img.
Roarnet 
Lidar & Img.
AVOD-FPN 
Lidar & Img.
F-PointNet 
Lidar & Img.
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
PointPillars
Table 2. Results on the KITTI test 3D detection benchmark.
4.3. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is critical for good performance on
the KITTI benchmark .
First, following SECOND , we create a lookup table
of the ground truth 3D boxes for all classes and the associated point clouds that falls inside these 3D boxes. Then
for each sample, we randomly select 15, 0, 8 ground truth
samples for cars, pedestrians, and cyclists respectively and
place them into the current point cloud. We found these
settings to perform better than the proposed settings .
Next, all ground truth boxes are individually augmented.
Each box is rotated (uniformly drawn from [−π/20, π/20])
and translated (x, y, and z independently drawn from
N(0, 0.25)) to further enrich the training set.
Finally, we perform two sets of global augmentations
that are jointly applied to the point cloud and all boxes.
First, we apply random mirroring ﬂip along the x axis ,
then a global rotation and scaling . Finally, we apply a global translation with x, y, z drawn from N(0, 0.2)
to simulate localization noise.
5. Results
In this section we present results of our PointPillars
method and compare to the literature.
Quantitative Analysis.
All detection results are measured using the ofﬁcial KITTI evaluation detection metrics
which are: bird’s eye view (BEV), 3D, 2D, and average orientation similarity (AOS). The 2D detection is done in the
image plane and average orientation similarity assesses the
average orientation (measured in BEV) similarity for 2D detections. The KITTI dataset is stratiﬁed into easy, moderate,
and hard difﬁculties, and the ofﬁcial KITTI leaderboard is
ranked by performance on moderate.
As shown in Table 1 and Table 2, PointPillars outperforms all published methods with respect to mean average
precision (mAP). Compared to lidar-only methods, Point-
Pillars achieves better results across all classes and difﬁculty strata except for the easy car stratum. It also outperforms fusion based methods on cars and cyclists.
While PointPillars predicts 3D oriented boxes, the BEV
and 3D metrics do not take orientation into account. Orientation is evaluated using AOS , which requires projecting
the 3D box into the image, performing 2D detection matching, and then assessing the orientation of these matches.
The performance of PointPillars on AOS signiﬁcantly exceeds in all strata as compared to the only two 3D detection
methods that predict oriented boxes (Table 3). In
general, image only methods perform best on 2D detection
since the 3D projection of boxes into the image can result in
loose boxes depending on the 3D pose. Despite this, Point-
Pillars moderate cyclist AOS of 68.16 outperforms the best
image based method .
For comparison to other methods on val, we note that our
network achieved BEV AP of (87.98, 63.55, 69.71) and 3D
AP of (77.98, 57.86, 66.02) for the moderate strata of cars,
pedestrians, and cyclists respectively.
Pedestrian
SubCNN 
AVOD-FPN 
Lidar & Img.
SECOND 
PointPillars
Table 3. Results on the KITTI test average orientation similarity (AOS) detection benchmark. SubCNN is the best performing image only
method, while AVOD-FPN, SECOND, and PointPillars are the only 3D object detectors that predict orientation.
Qualitative Analysis.
We provide qualitative results in
Figure 3 and 4. While we only train on lidar point clouds,
for ease of interpretation we visualize the 3D bounding box
predictions from the BEV and image perspective. Figure 3
shows our detection results, with tight oriented 3D bounding boxes. The predictions for cars are particularly accurate and common failure modes include false negatives on
difﬁcult samples (partially occluded or faraway objects) or
false positives on similar classes (vans or trams). Detecting pedestrians and cyclists is more challenging and leads
to some interesting failure modes. Pedestrians and cyclists
are commonly misclassiﬁed as each other (see Figure 4a
for a standard example and Figure 4d for the combination
of pedestrian and table classiﬁed as a cyclist). Additionally, pedestrians are easily confused with narrow vertical
features of the environment such as poles or tree trunks (see
Figure 4b). In some cases we correctly detect objects that
are missing in the ground truth annotations (see Figure 4c).
6. Realtime Inference
As indicated by our results (Table 1 and Figure 5), Point-
Pillars represent a signiﬁcant improvement in terms of inference runtime. In this section we break down our runtime and consider the different design choices that enabled
this speedup. We focus on the car network, but the pedestrian and bicycle network runs at a similar speed since the
smaller range cancels the effect of the backbone operating
at lower strides. All runtimes are measured on a desktop
with an Intel i7 CPU and a 1080ti GPU.
The main inference steps are as follows. First, the point
cloud is loaded and ﬁltered based on range and visibility in
the images (1.4 ms). Then, the points are organized in pillars and decorated (2.7 ms). Next, the PointPillar tensor is
uploaded to the GPU (2.9 ms), encoded (1.3 ms), scattered
to the pseudo-image (0.1 ms), and processed by the backbone and detection heads (7.7 ms). Finally NMS is applied
on the CPU (0.1 ms) for a total runtime of 16.2 ms.
The key design to enable this runtime is the
PointPilar encoding. For example, at 1.3 ms it is 2 orders of
magnitude faster than the VoxelNet encoder (190 ms) .
Recently, SECOND proposed a faster sparse version of the
VoxelNet encoder for a total network runtime of 50 ms.
They did not provide a runtime analysis, but since the rest
of their architecture is similar to ours, it suggests that the
encoder is still signiﬁcantly slower; in their open source implementation1 the encoder requires 48 ms.
Slimmer Design.
We opt for a single PointNet in our
encoder, compared to 2 sequential PointNets suggested
by . This reduced our runtime by 2.5 ms in our PyTorch
runtime. The number of dimensions of the ﬁrst block were
also lowered 64 to match the encoder output size, which reduced the runtime by 4.5 ms. Finally, we saved another
3.9 ms by cutting the output dimensions of the upsampled
feature layers by half to 128. Neither of these changes affected detection performance.
While all our experiments were performed in
PyTorch , the ﬁnal GPU kernels for encoding, backbone
and detection head were built using NVIDIA TensorRT,
which is a library for optimized GPU inference. Switching to TensorRT gave a 45.5% speedup from the PyTorch
pipeline which runs at 42.4 Hz.
The Need for Speed.
As seen in Figure 5, PointPillars
can achieve 105 Hz with limited loss of accuracy. While it
could be argued that such runtime is excessive since a lidar
typically operates at 20 Hz, there are two key things to keep
in mind. First, due to an artifact of the KITTI ground truth
annotations, only lidar points which projected into the front
image are utilized, which is only ∼10% of the entire point
cloud. However, an operational AV needs to view the full
environment and process the complete point cloud, significantly increasing all aspects of the runtime. Second, timing measurements in the literature are typically done on a
high-power desktop GPU. However, an operational AV may
instead use embedded GPUs or embedded compute which
may not have the same throughput.
7. Ablation Studies
In this section we provide ablation studies and discuss
our design choices compared to the recent literature.
7.1. Spatial Resolution
A trade-off between speed and accuracy can be achieved
by varying the size of the spatial binning. Smaller pillars allow ﬁner localization and lead to more features, while larger
pillars are faster due to fewer non-empty pillars (speeding
up the encoder) and a smaller pseudo-image (speeding up
1 
Inference speed (Hz)
mean Average Precision
Frustum PointNet
Complex-YOLO
PointPillars
Figure 5. BEV detection performance (mAP) vs speed (Hz) on the
KITTI val set across pedestrians, bicycles and cars. Blue circles indicate lidar only methods, red squares indicate methods that
use lidar & vision. Different operating points were achieved by using pillar grid sizes in {0.122, 0.162, 0.22, 0.242, 0.282} m2. The
number of max-pillars was varied along with the resolution and set
to 16000, 12000, 12000, 8000, 8000 respectively.
the CNN backbone). To quantify this effect we performed
a sweep across grid sizes. From Figure 5 it is clear that the
larger bin sizes lead to faster networks; at 0.282 we achieve
105 Hz at similar performance to previous methods. The
decrease in performance was mainly due to the pedestrian
and cyclist classes, while car performance was stable across
the bin sizes.
7.2. Per Box Data Augmentation
Both VoxelNet and SECOND recommend extensive per box augmentation.
However, in our experiments, minimal box augmentation worked better. In particular, the detection performance for pedestrians degraded
signiﬁcantly with more box augmentation. Our hypothesis
is that the introduction of ground truth sampling mitigates
the need for extensive per box augmentation.
7.3. Point Decorations
During the lidar point decoration step, we perform the
VoxelNet decorations plus two additional decorations:
xp and yp which are the x and y offset from the pillar x, y
center. These extra decorations added 0.5 mAP to ﬁnal detection performance and provided more reproducible experiments.
7.4. Encoding
To assess the impact of the proposed PointPillar encoding in isolation, we implemented several encoders in the
ofﬁcial codebase of SECOND . For details on each encoding, we refer to the original papers.
As shown in Table 4, learning the feature encoding is
strictly superior to ﬁxed encoders across all resolution. This
is expected as most successful deep learning architectures
are trained end-to-end.
Further, the differences increase
with larger bin sizes where the lack of expressive power
of the ﬁxed encoders are accentuated due to a larger point
C. Yolo 
PIXOR 
VoxelNet 
PointPillars
Table 4. Encoder performance evaluation. To fairly compare encoders, the same network architecture and training procedure was
used and only the encoder and xy resolution were changed between experiments. Performance is measured as BEV mAP on
KITTI val. Learned encoders clearly beat ﬁxed encoders, especially at larger resolutions.
cloud in each pillar. Among the learned encoders Voxel-
Net is marginally stronger than PointPillars. However, this
is not a fair comparison, since the VoxelNet encoder is orders of magnitude slower and has orders of magnitude more
parameters. When the comparison is made for a similar inference time, it is clear that PointPillars offers a better operating point (Figure 5).
There are a few curious aspects of Table 4. First, despite
notes in the original papers that their encoder only works
on cars, we found that the MV3D and PIXOR encoders can learn pedestrians and cyclists quite well. Second,
our implementations beat the respective published results
by a large margin (1 −10 mAP). While this is not an apples to apples comparison since we only used the respective
encoders and not the full network architectures, the performance difference is noteworthy. We see several potential
reasons. For VoxelNet and SECOND we suspect the boost
in performance comes from improved data augmentation
hyperparameters as discussed in Section 7.2. Among the
ﬁxed encoders, roughly half the performance increase can
be explained by the introduction of ground truth database
sampling , which we found to boost the mAP by around
3% mAP. The remaining differences are likely due to a combination of multiple hyperparameters including network design (number of layers, type of layers, whether to use a feature pyramid); anchor box design (or lack thereof ); localization loss with respect to 3D and angle; classiﬁcation
loss; optimizer choices (SGD vs Adam, batch size); and
more. However, a more careful study is needed to isolate
each cause and effect.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce PointPillars, a novel deep
network and encoder that can be trained end-to-end on lidar point clouds. We demonstrate that on the KITTI challenge, PointPillars dominates all existing methods by offering higher detection performance (mAP on both BEV and
3D) at a faster speed. Our results suggests that PointPillars
offers the best architecture so far for 3D object detection
from lidar.