Human Language Technologies: The 2015 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 1006–1011,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics
Normalized Word Embedding and Orthogonal Transform for Bilingual
Word Translation
CSLT, Tsinghua University
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing, P.R. China
CSLT, RIIT, Tsinghua University
CS Department, Tsinghua University
Beijing, P.R. China
Dong Wang*
CSLT, RIIT, Tsinghua University
TNList, China
Beijing, P.R. China
CSLT, RIIT, Tsinghua University
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, P.R. China
Word embedding has been found to be highly powerful to translate words from one language to another by a simple linear transform.
However, we found some inconsistence
among the objective functions of the embedding and the transform learning, as well as
the distance measurement. This paper proposes a solution which normalizes the word vectors on a hypersphere and constrains the linear transform as an orthogonal transform. The
experimental results conﬁrmed that the proposed solution can offer better performance
on a word similarity task and an English-to-
Spanish word translation task.
Introduction
Word embedding has been extensively studied in recent years .
Following the idea that the meaning of a word can be
determined by ‘the company it keeps’ , i.e., the words that it co-occurs
with, word embedding projects discrete words to a
low-dimensional and continuous vector space where
co-occurred words are located close to each other.
Compared to conventional discrete representations
(e.g., the one-hot encoding), word embedding provides more robust representations for words, particulary for those that infrequently appear in the training data. More importantly, the embedding encodes
syntactic and semantic content implicitly, so that relations among words can be simply computed as
the distances among their embeddings, or word vectors. A well-known efﬁcient word embedding approach was recently proposed by , where two log-linear models (CBOW and
skip-gram) are proposed to learn the neighboring relation of words in context. A following work proposed by the same authors introduces some modiﬁcations that largely improve the efﬁciency of model
training .
An interesting property of word vectors learned
by the log-linear model is that the relations among
relevant words seem linear and can be computed by
simple vector addition and substraction . For example, the following relation approximately holds in the word vector space: Paris -
France + Rome = Italy. In ,
the linear relation is extended to the bilingual scenario, where a linear transform is learned to project
semantically identical words from one language to
another. The authors reported a high accuracy on a
bilingual word translation task.
Although promising, we argue that both the word
embedding and the linear transform are ill-posed,
due to the inconsistence among the objective function used to learn the word vectors (maximum likelihood based on inner product), the distance measurement for word vectors (cosine distance), and the
objective function used to learn the linear transform
(mean square error). This inconsistence may lead to
suboptimal estimation for both word vectors and the
bilingual transform, as we will see shortly.
This paper solves the inconsistence by normalizing the word vectors. Speciﬁcally, we enforce the
word vectors to be in a unit length during the learning of the embedding.
By this constraint, all the
word vectors are located on a hypersphere and so the
inner product falls back to the cosine distance. This
hence solves the inconsistence between the embedding and the distance measurement. To respect the
normalization constraint on word vectors, the linear
transform in the bilingual projection has to be constrained as an orthogonal transform. Finally, the cosine distance is used when we train the orthogonal
transform, in order to achieve full consistence.
Related work
This work largely follows the methodology and experimental settings of , while
we normalize the embedding and use an orthogonal
transform to conduct bilingual translation.
Multilingual learning can be categorized into projection-based approaches and regularizationbased approaches.
In the projection-based approaches, the embedding is performed for each language individually with monolingual data, and then
one or several projections are learned using multilingual data to represent the relation between languages.
Our method in this paper and the linear
projection method in both
belong to this category. Another interesting work
proposed by learns linear
transforms that project word vectors of all languages
to a common low-dimensional space, where the correlation of the multilingual word pairs is maximized
with the canonical correlation analysis (CCA).
The regularization-based approaches involve the
multilingual constraint in the objective function for
learning the embedding. For example, adds an extra term that reﬂects the distances
of some pairs of semantically related words from
different languages into the objective funtion.
similar approach is proposed in , which casts multilingual learning as a multitask learning and encodes the multilingual information in the interaction matrix.
All the above methods rely on a multilingual lexicon or a word/pharse alignment, usually from a
machine translation (MT) system. proposed a novel approach based on a joint optimization method for word alignments and the
embedding. A simpliﬁed version of this approach is
proposed in , where
a sentence is represented by the mean vector of the
words involved.
Multilingual learning is then reduced to maximizing the overall distance of the parallel sentences in the training corpus, with the distance computed upon the sentence vectors.
Normalized word vectors
Taking the skip-gram model, the goal is to predict
the context words with a word in the central position.
Mathematically, the training process maximizes the
following likelihood function with a word sequence
w1, w2...wN:
−C≤j≤C,j̸=0
logP(wi+j|wi)
where C is the length of the context in concern, and
the prediction probability is given by:
P(wi+j|wi) =
w exp(cTwcwi)
where w is any word in the vocabulary, and cw denotes the vector of word w. Obviously, the word
vectors learned by this way are not constrained and
disperse in the entire M-dimensional space, where
M is the dimension of the word vectors. An inconsistence with this model is that the distance measurement in the training is the inner product cT
however when word vectors are applied, e.g., to estimate word similarities, the metric is often the cosine
||cw||||cw′||. A way to solve this consistence
is to use the inner product in applications, however
using the cosine distance is a convention in natural
language processing (NLP) and this measure does
show better performance than the inner product in
our experiments.
We therefore perform in an opposite way, i.e., enforcing the word vectors to be unit in length. Theoretically, this changes the learning of the embedding to an optimization problem with a quadratic
constraint. Solving this problem by Lagrange multipliers is possible, but here we simply divide a vector
by its l-2 norm whenever the vector is updated. This
does not involve much code change and is efﬁcient
The consequence of the normalization is that all
the word vectors are located on a hypersphere, as illustrated in Figure 1. In addition, by the normalization, the inner product falls back to the cosine distance, hence solving the inconsistence between the
embedding learning and the distance measurement.
The distributions of unnormalized (left)
and normalized (right) word vectors.
The red circles/stars/diamonds represent three words that are embedded in the two vector spaces respectively.
Orthogonal transform
translation
by learns a linear transform
from the source language to the target language by
the linear regression. The objective function is as
||Wxi −zi||2
1For efﬁciency, this normalization can be conducted every
n mini-batches. The performance is expected to be not much
impacted, given that n is not too large.
where W is the projection matrix to be learned, and
xi and zi are word vectors in the source and target
language respectively. The bilingual pair (xi, zi) indicates that xi and zi are identical in semantic meaning. A high accuracy was reported on a word translation task, where a word projected to the vector space of the target language is expected to be as close
as possible to its translation .
However, we note that the ‘closeness’ of words in
the projection space is measured by the cosine distance, which is fundamentally different from the Euler distance in the objective function (3) and hence
causes inconsistence.
We solve this problem by using the cosine distance in the transform learning, so the optimization
task can be redeﬁned as follows:
(Wxi)T zi.
Note that the word vectors in both the source and target vector spaces are normalized, so the inner product in (4) is equivalent to the cosine distance. A
problem of this change, however, is that the projected vector Wxi has to be normalized, which is not
guaranteed so far.
To solve the problem, we ﬁrst consider the case
where the dimensions of the source and target vector spaces are the same. In this case, the normalization constraint on word vectors can be satisﬁed
by constraining W as an orthogonal matrix, which
turns the unconstrained problem (4) to a constrained
optimization problem. A general solver such as SQP
can be used to solve the problem. However, we seek
a simple approximation in this work. Firstly, solve
(4) by gradient descendant without considering any
constraint. A simple calculation shows that the gradient is as follows:
and the update rule is simply given by:
W = W + α▽W
where α is the learning rate. After the update, W is
orthogonalized by solving the following constrained
quadratic problem:
W ||W −¯W|| s.t. ¯W T ¯W = I.
One can show that this problem can be solved by
taking the singular value decomposition (SVD) of
W and replacing the singular values to ones.
For the case where the dimensions of the source
and target vector spaces are different, the normalization constraint upon the projected vectors is not easy
to satisfy. We choose a pragmatic solution. First, we
extend the low-dimensional vector space by padding
a small tunable constant at the end of the word vectors so that the source and target vector spaces are in
the same dimension. The vectors are then renormalized after the padding to respect the normalization
constraint. Once this is done, the same gradient descendant and orthognalization approaches are ready
to use to learn the orthogonal transform.
Experiment
We ﬁrst present the data proﬁle and conﬁgurations
used to learn monolingual word vectors, and then
examine the learning quality on the word similarity task. Finally, a comparative study is reported on
the bilingual word translation task, with Mikolov’s
linear transform and the orthogonal transform proposed in this paper.
Monolingual word embedding
The monolingual word embedding is conducted
with the data published by the EMNLP 2011 SMT
workshop (WMT11)2. For an easy comparison, we
largely follow Mikolov’s settings in and set English and Spanish as the source
and target language, respectively. The data preparation involves the following steps. Firstly, the text
was tokenized by the standard scripts provided by
WMT113, and then duplicated sentences were removed. The numerical expressions were tokenized
2 
3 
as ’NUM’, and special characters (such as !?,:) were
The word2vector toolkit4 was used to train the
word embedding model. We chose the skip-gram
model and the text window was set to 5. The training resulted in embedding of 169k English tokens
and 116k Spanish tokens.
Monolingual word similarity
The ﬁrst experiment examines the quality of the
learned word vectors in English.
We choose the
word similarity task, which tests to what extent the
word similarity computed based on word vectors agrees with human judgement. The WordSimilarity-
353 Test Collection5 provided by is used. The dataset involves 154 word pairs
whose similarities are measured by 13 people and
the mean values are used as the human judgement.
In the experiment, the correlation between the cosine distances computed based on the word vectors
and the humane-judged similarity is used to measure
the quality of the embedding. The results are shown
in Figure 2, where the dimension of the vector space varies from 300 to 1000. It can be observed
that the normalized word vectors offer a high correlation with human judgement than the unnormalized
counterparts.
Correlation
Unormalized WV
Normalized WV
Figure 2: Results on the word similarity task with the normalized and unnormalized word vectors. A higher correlation indicates better quality.
4 
5 gabr/resources/data/wordsim353/
Bilingual word translation
The second experiment focuses on bilingual word
translation. We select 6000 frequent words in English and employ the online Google’s translation service to translate them to Spanish. The resulting 6000
English-Spanish word pairs are used to train and test
the bilingual transform in the way of cross validation. Speciﬁcally, the 6000 pairs are randomly divided into 10 subsets, and at each time, 9 subsets
are used for training and the rest 1 subset for testing.
The average of the results of the 10 tests is reported
as the ﬁnal result. Note that not all the words translated by Google are in the vocabulary of the target
language; the vocabulary coverage is 99.5% in our
Results with linear transform
We ﬁrst reproduce Mikolov’s work with the linear
transform. A number of dimension settings are experimented with and the results are reported in Table 1. The proportions that the correct translations
are in the top 1 and top 5 candidate list are reported
as P@1 and P@5 respectively. As can be seen, the
best dimension setting is 800 for English and 200
for Spanish, and the corresponding P@1 and P@5
are 35.36% and 53.96%, respectively. These results
are comparable with the results reported in .
Table 1: Performance on word translation with unnormalized embedding and linear transform. ‘D-EN’ and
‘D-ES’ denote the dimensions of the English and Spanish
vector spaces, respectively.
Results with orthogonal transform
The results with the normalized word vectors and
the orthogonal transform are reported in Table 2.
It can be seen that the results with the orthogonal
transform are consistently better than those reported
in Table1 which are based on the linear transform.
This conﬁrms our conjecture that bilingual translation can be largely improved by the normalized embedding and the accompanied orthogonal transform.
Table 2: Performance on word translation with normalized embedding and orthogonal transform. ‘D-EN’ and
‘D-ES’ denote the dimensions of the English and Spanish vector spaces, respectively.
Conclusions
We proposed an orthogonal transform based on normalized word vectors for bilingual word translation.
This approach solves the inherent inconsistence in
the original approach based on unnormalized word
vectors and a linear transform. The experimental results on a monolingual word similarity task and an
English-to-Spanish word translation task show clear
advantage of the proposal. This work, however, is
still preliminary. It is unknown if the normalized
embedding works on other tasks such as relation
prediction, although we expect so. The solution to
the orthogonal transform between vector spaces with
mismatched dimensions is rather ad-hoc. Nevertheless, locating word vectors on a hypersphere opens a
door to study the properties of the word embedding
in a space that is yet less known to us.
Acknowledgement
This work was conducted when CX & YYL were
visiting students in CSLT, Tsinghua University. This
research was supported by the National Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under the project
No. 61371136, and the MESTDC PhD Foundation
Project No. 20130002120011. It was also supported
by Sinovoice and Huilan Ltd.