A Threat in the Air
How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and Performance
Claude M. Steele
Stanford University
A general theory of domain identification is used to de-
scribe achievement barriers still faced by women in ad-
vanced quantitative areas and by African Americans in
school. The theory assumes that sustained school success
requires identification with school and its subdomains;
that societal pressures on these groups (e.g., economic
disadvantage, gender roles) can frustrate this identifica-
tion; and that in school domains where these groups are
negatively stereotyped, those who have become domain
identified face the further barrier of stereotype threat,
the threat that others' judgments or their own actions
will negatively stereotype them in the domain. Research
shows that this threat dramatically depresses the stan-
dardized test performance of women and African Ameri-
cans who are in the academic vanguard of their groups
(offering a new interpretation of group differences in
standardized test performance), that it causes disidenti-
fication with school, and that practices that reduce this
threat can reduce these negative effects.
rom an observer's standpoint, the situations of a
boy and a girl in a math classroom or of a Black
student and a White student in any classroom are
essentially the same. The teacher is the same; the text-
books are the same; and in better classrooms, these stu-
dents are treated the same. Is it possible, then, that they
could still experience the cl~sroom differently, so differ-
ently in fact as to significantly affect their performance
and achievement there? This is the central question of
this article, and in seeking an answer, it has both a practi-
cal and a theoretical focus. The practical focus is on the
perhaps obvious need to better understand the processes
that can hamper a group's school performance and on
what can be done to improve that performance. The theo-
retical focus is on how societal stereotypes about groups
can influence the intellectual functioning and identity de-
velopment of individual group members. To show the
generality of these processes and their relevance to im-
portant outcomes, this theory is applied to two groups:
African Americans, who must contend with negative ste-
reotypes about their abilities in many scholastic domains,
and women, who must do so primarily in math and the
physical sciences. In trying to understand the schooling
outcomes of these two groups, the theory has a distinct
perspective, that of viewing people, in Sartre's words, as "first of all beings in a situation" such
that if one wants to understand them, one "must inquire
first into the situation surrounding [them]" (p. 60).
The theory begins with an assumption: that to sus-
tain school success one must be identified with school
achievement in the sense of its being a part of one's
self-definition, a personal identity to which one is self-
evaluatively accountable. This accountability--that good
self-feelings depend in some part on good achievement--
translates into sustained achievement motivation. For
such an identification to form, this reasoning continues,
one must perceive good prospects in the domain, that is,
that one has the interests, skills, resources, and opportuni-
ties to prosper there, as well as that one belongs there,
in the sense of being accepted and valued in the domain.
If this relationship to schooling does not form or gets
broken, achievement may suffer. Thus, in trying to under-
stand what imperils achievement among women and Afri-
can Americans, this logic points to a basic question: What
in the experience of these groups might frustrate their
identification with all or certain aspects of school
achievement?
One must surely turn first to social structure: limits
on educational access that have been imposed on these
groups by socioeconomic disadvantage, segregating so-
cial practices, and restrictive cultural orientations, limits
of both historical and ongoing effect. By diminishing
one's educational prospects, these limitations (e.g., inad-
equate resources, few role models, preparational disad-
vantages) should make it more difficult to identify with
academic domains. To continue in math, for example, a
woman might have to buck the low expectations of teach-
ers, family, and societal gender roles in which math is
seen as unfeminine as well as anticipate spending her
entire professional life in a male-dominated world. These
Editor's note. Cheryl B. Travis served as action editor for this article.
Author's note. The research reported in this article was supported by
National Institutes of Health Grant MH51977, Russell Sage Foundation
Grant 879.304, and Spencer Foundation and James S. McDonnell Foun-
dation postdoctoral fellowships. Completion of the research was aided
by the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Claude M. Steele, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building
420, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. Electronic mail may be
sent via Internet to .
• American Psychologist
Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/97/$2.00
Vol. 52, No. 6, 613-629
Copyright by L A.
Cicero, Stanford News
realities, imposed on her by societal structure, could so
reduce her sense of good prospects in math as to make
identifying with it difficult.
But this article focuses on a further barrier, one that
has its effect on the already identified, those members of
these groups who, having survived structural obstacles,
have achieved identification with the domain (of the pres-
ent groups, school-identified African Americans and
math-identified women). It is the social-psychological
threat that arises when one is in a situation or doing
something for which a negative stereotype about one's
group applies. This predicament threatens one with being
negatively stereotyped, with being judged or treated ste-
reotypically, or with the prospect of conforming to the
stereotype. Called stereotype threat, it is a situational
threat--a threat in the air--that, in general form, can
affect the members of any group about whom a negative
stereotype exists (e.g., skateboarders, older adults, White
men, gang members). Where bad stereotypes about these
groups apply, members of these groups can fear being
reduced to that stereotype. And for those who identify
with the domain to which the stereotype is relevant, this
predicament can be self-threatening.
Negative stereotypes about women and African
Americans bear on important academic abilities. Thus,
for members of these groups who are identified with
domains in which these stereotypes apply, the threat of
these stereotypes can be sharply felt and, in several ways,
hampers their achievement.
First, if the threat is experienced in the midst of
a domain performance--classroom presentation or test-
taking, for example--the emotional reaction it causes
could directly interfere with performance. My colleagues
and I have tested this possibility with women
taking standardized math tests and African Americans
taking standardized verbal tests. Second, when this threat
becomes chronic in a situation, as for the woman who
spends considerable time in a competitive, male-oriented
math environment, it can pressure disidentification, a re-
conceptualization of the self and of one's values so as
to remove the domain as a self-identity, as a basis of
self-evaluation. Disidentification offers the retreat of not
caring about the domain in relation to the self. But as it
protects in this way, it can undermine sustained motiva-
tion in the domain, an adaptation that can be costly when
the domain is as important as schooling.
Stereotype threat is especially frustrating because,
at each level of schooling, it affects the vanguard of these
groups, those with the skills and self-confidence to have
identified with the domain. Ironically, their susceptibility
to this threat derives not from internal doubts about their
ability (e.g., their internalization of the stereotype) but
from their identification with the domain and the resulting
concern they have about being stereotyped in it. (This
argument has the hopeful implication that to improve the
domain performance of these students, one should focus
on the feasible task of rifting this situational threat rather
than on altering their internal psychology.) Yet, as school-
ing progresses and the obstacles of structure and stereo-
type threat take their cumulative toU, more of this van-
guard will likely be pressured into the ranks of the un-
identified. These students, by not caring about the domain
vis-a-vis the self, are likely to underperform in it regard-
less of whether they are stereotype threatened there. Thus,
although the identified among these groups are likely to
underperform only under stereotype threat, the unidenti-
fied (casualties of sociocultural disadvantage or prior in-
ternalization of stereotype threat) are likely to underper-
form and not persist in the domain even when stereotype
threat has been removed.
In these ways, then, the present analysis sees social
structure and stereotypes as shaping the academic identi-
fies and performance outcomes of large segments of soci-
ety. But first, for the two groups under consideration,
what are these outcomes?
As is much discussed, these outcomes are in a crisis
state for African Americans. Although Black students
begin school with standardized test scores that are not
too far behind those of their White counterparts, almost
immediately a gap begins to appear that, by the sixth grade in most school districts, is
two full grade levels . There have been
encouraging increases in the number of African Ameri-
cans completing high school or its equivalence in recent
years: 77% for Black students versus 83% for White
students .
And there have been modest advances in the number
of African American high school graduates enrolling in
college, although these have not been as substantial as
in other groups . Perhaps most discouraging has been the high drop-
out rate for African American college students: Those
who do not finish college within six years is 62%, corn-
June 1997 • American Psychologist
pared with a national dropout rate of 41% . And there is evi-
dence of lower grade performance among those who do
graduate of, on average, two thirds of a letter grade lower
than those of other graduating students .
On predominantly White campuses, Black students are
also underrepresented in math and the natural sciences.
Although historically Black colleges and universities now
enroll only 17% of the nation's Black college students,
they produce 42% of all Black BS degrees in natural
science . At the graduate level,
although Black women have recently shown modest gains
in PhDs received, the number awarded to Black men has
declined over the past decade more than for any other
subgroup in society .
Women clearly thrive in many areas of schooling.
But in math, engineering, and the physical sciences, they
often endure lesser outcomes than men. In a meta-
analysis involving over 3 million participants, Hyde, Fen-
nema, and Lamon , for example, found that
through elementary and middle school, there are virtually
no differences between boys and girls in performance on
standardized math tests but that a trend toward men doing
better steadily increases from high school (SD = .29)
through college (SD = :41) and into adulthood (SD =
.59). And, as their college careers begin, women leave
these fields at a rate two and a half times that of men
 . Although White women con-
stitute 43% of the U.S. population, they earn only 22%
of the BS degrees and 13% of the PhDs and occupy only
10% of the jobs in physical science, math, and engi-
neering, where they earn only 75% of the salary paid to
men .
These inequities have compelled explanations rang-
ing from the sociocultural to the genetic. In the case
of African Americans, for example, past and ongoing
socioeconomic disadvantage, cultural orientations , and genetic differences have all been proposed as
factors that, through singular and accumulated effect,
could undermine their performance. In the case of wom-
en's performance in math and the physical sciences, there
are parallel arguments: structural and cultural gender role
constraints that shunt women away from these areas;
culturally rooted expectations ; and, again, genetic limitations . But, like crumbs along the
forest floor, several findings lead away from these analy-
ses as fully sufficient.
For one thing, minority student achievement gaps
persist even in the middle and upper socioeconomic
classes. Using data from the Coleman report and a more recent College Board study of
Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) scores, Miller found that the gaps in academic performance
(grades as well as standardized test scores) between
Whites and non-Asian minorities (e.g., African Ameri-
cans, Hispanics, and Native Americans) were as large, or
larger, in the upper and middle classes (as measured by
parental education and occupation) than in the lower
classes. Group differences in socioeconomic status
(SES), then, cannot fully explain group differences in
academic performance.
Another point is that these differences are not even
fully explained by group differences in skills. This is
shown in the well-known overprediction or underperfor-
mance phenomenon of the test bias literature. Overpre-
diction occurs when, at each level of performance on a
test of preparation for some level of schooling (e.g, the
SAT), students from one group wind up achieving less--
getting lower college grades, for example--than other
students with the same beginning scores. In this sense,
the test scores of the low-performing group overpredict
how well they will actually achieve, or, stated another
way, the low-performing group underperforms in relation
to the test's prediction. But the point here is that because
the students at each test-score level have comparable ini-
tial skills, the lower eventual performance of one group
must be due to something other than skill deficits they
brought with them.
In the case of African Americans, overprediction
across the academic spectrum has been so reliably ob-
served as to be almost a lawful phenomenon in American
society . Per-
haps the most extensive single demonstration of it comes
from a recent Educational Testing Service study that examined the
predictiveness of the SAT on 38 representative college
and university campuses. As is typically the case, the
study found that the predictive validity to the SAT--its
correlation with subsequent grades--was as good for
African American, Hispanic, and Native American stu-
dents as for White and Asian students. But for the three
non-Asian minority groups, there was sizable overpre-
diction (underperformance) in virtually all academic
areas. That is, at each level of preparation as measured
by the SAT, something further depressed the grades of
these groups once they arrived on campus.
As important, the same study found evidence of SAT
overprediction for female students (i.e., women per-
forming less well than men at comparable SAT levels)
in technical and physical science courses such as engi-
neering, economics, and computer science but not in non-
technical areas such as English. It is interesting though
that women in this study were not overpredicted in math
per se, a seeming exception to this pattern. The overpre-
diction of women's college math performance has gener-
ally been unreliable, with some studies showing it and
others not . However, a recent study involving over 5,000 stu-
dents at four prestigious northeastern colleges identified a
pattern of effects that suggests why these different results
June 1997 • American Psychologist
Underperformance reliably occurred among
women who were talented in math and science and who,
perhaps for that reason, took courses in these areas that
were intended for majors, whereas it did not occur among
women with less math and science preparation who took
courses in these areas intended for nonmajors. Thus,
women may be reliably overpredicted in math and the
physical sciences, just as Black students are more gener-
ally, but only when the curriculum is more advanced and
only among women who are more identified with the
domain. Among this vanguard, though, something other
than skill deficits depresses their performance. What are
these further processes?
and StemO~rpe Structure as
stacles to Achievement Identification
The proposed answer is that at least one of these pro-
cesses is a set of social psychological phenomena that
obstructs these groups' identification with domains of
schooling. 1 I turn first to school identification.
Academic Identificalion
As noted, this analysis assumes that sustained school
achievement depends, most centrally, on identifying with
school, that is, forming a relationship between oneself
and the domains of schooling such that one's self-regard
significantly depends on achievement in those domains.
Extrinsic rewards such as better career outcomes, per-
sonal security, parental exhortation, and so on, can also
motivate school achievement. But it is presumed that sus-
taining motivation through the ebb and flow of these other
rewards requires school identification. How, then, is this
identification formed?
Not a great deal is known about the process. But
several models share an implicit reasoning,
the first assumption of which is that people need positive
self-regard, a self-perception of " adaptive and moral ade-
quacy" . Then, the argument
goes, identification with a given domain of life depends,
in large part, on the self-evaluative prospects it offers.
James described the development of the self
as a process of picking from the many, often incompati-
ble, possible selves, those "on which to stake one's salva-
tion" (p. 310). This choice and the assessment of pros-
pects that goes into it are, of course, multifaceted: Are
the rewards of the domain attractive or important? Is an
adequate opportunity structure available? Do I have the
requisite skills, talents, and interests? Have others like
me succeeded in the domain? Will I be seen as belonging
in the domain? Will I be prejudiced against in the do-
main? Can I envision wanting what this domain has to
offer? and so on. Some of these assessments undergird
a sense of efficacy in the domain . Others have to do with the rewards, importance,
and attractiveness of the domain itself. And still others
have to do with the feasibility and receptiveness of the
domain. The point here is that students tacitly assess their
prospects in school and its subdomains, and, roughly
speaking, their identifications follow these assessments:
increasing when they are favorable and decreasing when
they are unfavorable. As for the two groups under consid-
eration, then, this analysis suggests that something sys-
tematically downgrades their assessments of, and thus
their identification with, critical domains of schooling.
Threats to Academic IdentificaHon
Structural and cultural threats.
Both groups
have endured and continue to endure sociocultural influ-
ences that could have such effects. Among the most repli-
cable facts in the schooling literature is that SES is
strongly related to school success and cognitive perfor-
mance . And
because African Americans have long been dispropor-
tionately represented in lower socioeconomic classes, this
factor surely contributes to their achievement patterns in
school, both through the material limitations associated
with lower SES (poor schools, lack of resources for
school persistence, etc.) and through the ability of these
limitations, by downgrading school-related prospects, to
undermine identification with school. And beyond socio-
economic structure, there are cultural patterns within
these groups or in the relation between these groups and
the larger society that may also frustrate their identifica-
tion with school or some part of it, for example, Ogbu's
 notion of a lower-class Black culture that is "op-
positional" to school achievement or traditional feminine
gender roles that eschew math-related fields .
$~reo~ fhreat. Beyond these threats, waiting
for those in these groups who have identified with school,
is yet another threat to their identification, more subtle
perhaps but nonetheless profound: that of stereotype
threat. I define it as follows: the event of a negative
stereotype about a group to which one belongs becoming
self-relevant, usually as a plausible interpretation for
something one is doing, for an experience one is having,
or for a situation one is in, that has relevance to one's
self-definition. It happens when one is in the field of
the stereotype, what Cross called a "spotlight
anxiety" (p. 195), such that one can be judged or treated
in terms of a racial stereotype. Many analysts have re-
ferred to this predicament and the pressure it causes . This treatment includes both the "chilly-climate" sins of omis-
sion-the failure to call on them in class or to recognize and encourage
their talents, and so on--and, in the case of low-income minorities,
sins of commission--disproportionate expulsion from school, assign-
ment to special education classes, and administration or corporal pun-
ishment .
June 1997 • American Psychologist
Aronson, 1995; S. Steele, 1990). The present definition
stresses that for a negative stereotype to be threatening,
it must be self-relevant. Then, the situational contingency
it establishes--the possibility of conforming to the ste-
reotype or of being treated and judged in terms of it--
becomes self-threatening. It means that one could be lim-
ited or diminished in a domain that is self-definitional.
For students from groups in which abilities are negatively
stereotyped in all or some school domains and yet who
remain identified with those domains, this threat may be
keenly felt, felt enough, I argue, to become a further
barrier to their identification with the domain.
There is, however, a more standard explanation of
how negative stereotypes affect their targets. Beginning
with Freud in psychology and
Cooley and Mead in sociology, treatises
on the experience of oppression have depicted a fairly
standard sequence of events: Through long exposure to
negative stereotypes about their group, members of preju-
diced-against groups often internalize the stereotypes,
and the resulting sense of inadequacy becomes part of
their personality .
In recent years, the tone of this argument has con-
structively lightened, replacing the notion of a broad self-
hatred with the idea of an inferiority anxiety or low ex-
pectations and suggesting how situational factors contrib-
ute to this experience. S. Steele's essays on racial
vulnerability (i.e., a vulnerability of both Blacks and
Whites that stems, in part, from the situational pressures
of reputations about their groups) offered an example.
This work depicts the workings of this anxiety among
African Americans in an interconnected set of ideas: inte-
gration shock that, like Goffman , points to set-
tings that integrate Blacks and Whites as particularly
anxiety arousing; objective correlatives or race-related
situational cues that can trigger this anxiety; and the in-
herent sense of risk, stemming from an internalized infe-
riority anxiety and from a myth of inferiority pervading
integrated settings, of being judged inferior or of con-
firming one's own feared inferiority. Howard and Ham-
mond earlier made this argument specifically in
relation to the school achievement of Black students.
They argued that once "rumors of inferiority" (stereo-
types; p. 18) about Black students' abilities pervade the
environment--through, for example, national debates
over the genetic basis of racial differences in IQ--they
can intimidate Black students; become internalized by
them; and, in turn, lead to a low sense of self-efficacy,
demotivation, and underperformance in school. Analo-
gous arguments have been applied to women interested
in math-related areas .
These models recognize the situational influence of
negative stereotypes but most often describe
it as a process in which the stereotype, or more precisely
the possibility of being stereotyped, triggers an internal-
ized inferiority doubt or low expectancy. And because
this anxiety is born of a socialization presumed to influ-
ence all members of the stereotyped group, virtually all
members of the group are presumed to have this anxiety,
to one degree or another.
Stereotype threat, in contrast, refers to the strictly
situational threat of negative stereotypes, the threat that
does not depend on cuing an internalized anxiety or ex-
pectancy. It is cued by the mere recognition that a nega-
tive group stereotype could apply to oneself in a given
situation. How threatening this recognition becomes de-
pends on the person's identification with the stereotype-
relevant domain. For the domain identified, the situational
relevance of the stereotype is threatening because it
threatens diminishment in a domain that is self-defini-
tional. For the less domain identified, this recognition is
less threatening or not threatening at all, because it threat-
ens something that is less self-definitional.
Stereotype threat, then, as a situational pressure "in
the air" so to speak, affects only a subportion of the
stereotyped group and, in the area of schooling, probably
affects confident students more than unconfident ones.
Recall that to be identified with schooling in general, or
math in particular, one must have confidence in one's
domain-related abilities, enough to perceive good pros-
pects in the domain. This means that stereotype threat
should have its greatest effect on the better, more confi-
dent students in stereotyped groups, those who have not
internalized the group stereotype to the point of doubting
their own ability and have thus remained identified with
the domain--those who are in the academic vanguard
of their group. 2
Several general features of stereotype threat follow:
1. Stereotype threat is a general threat not tied to
the psychology of particular stigmatized groups. It affects
the members of any group about whom there exists some
generally known negative stereotype (e.g., a grandfather
who fears that any faltering of memory will confirm or
expose him to stereotypes about the aged). Stereotype
threat can be thought of as a subtype of the threat posed
by negative reputations in general.
2. That which turns stereotype threat on and off, the
controlling "mechanism" so to speak, is a particular
concurrence: whether a negative stereotype about one's
group becomes relevant to interpreting oneself or one's
behavior in an identified-with setting. When such a set-
2 The point is not that negative stereotypes are never internalized as
low self-expectancies and self-doubts. It is that in such internalization,
disidentification is the more primary adaptation. That is, once the stereo-
type-relevant domain (e.g., math) is dropped as a self-definition, the
negative stereotype (e.g., that women are limited in math) can be ac-
cepted as more self-descriptive (i.e., internalized) without it much af-
fecting one's self-regard (as for the woman who, not caring about math,
says she is lousy at it). But this internalization is probably resisted
 until disidentification makes it less self-
threatening. Once this has happened, the person is likely to avoid the
domain because of both disinterest and low confidence regardless of
whether stereotype threat is present.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
ting integrates stereotyped and nonstereotyped people, it
may make the stereotype, as a dimension of difference,
more salient and thus more strongly felt . But
such integration is neither necessary nor sufficient for
this threat to occur. It can occur even when the person is
alone, as for a woman taking an important math test
alone in a cubicle but under the threat of confirming a
stereotyped limitation of ability. And, in integrated set-
tings, it need not occur. Reducing the interpretive rele-
vance of a stereotype in the setting, say in a classroom
or on a standardized test, may reduce this threat and its
detrimental effects even when the setting is integrated. 3
3. This mechanism also explains the variabilities of
stereotype threat: the fact that the type and degree of this
threat vary from group to group and, for any group,
across settings. For example, the type and degree of ste-
reotype threat experienced by White men, Black people,
and people who are overweight differ considerably, bear-
ing on sensitivity and fairness in the first group, on school
performance in the second, and on self-control in the
third. Moreover; for any of these groups, this threat will
vary across settings . For example, women may reduce their stereotype
threat substantially by moving across the hall from math
to English class. The explanation of this model is straight-
forward: Different groups experience different forms and
degrees of stereotype threat because the stereotypes about
them differ in content, in scope, and in the situations to
which they apply.
4. To experience stereotype threat, one need not be-
lieve the stereotype nor even be worried that it is true of
oneself. The well-known African American social psy-
chologist James M. Jones wrote,
When I go to the ATM machine and a woman is making a
transaction, I think about whether she will fear I may rob her.
Since I have no such intention, how do I put her at ease? Maybe
I can't . . . and maybe she has no such expectation. But it
goes through my mind. (p. 262)
Jones felt stereotype threat in this situation even though
he did not believe that the stereotype characterized him.
Of course, this made it no less a life-shaping force. One's
daily life can be filled with recurrent situations in which
this threat pressures adaptive responses.
5. The effort to overcome stereotype threat by dis-
proving the stereotype--for example, by outperforming
it in the case of academic workwcan be daunting. Be-
cause these stereotypes are widely disseminated through-
out society, a personal exemption from them earned in
one setting does not generalize to a new setting where
either one's reputation is not known or where it has to
be renegotiated against a new challenge. Thus, even when
the stereotype can be disproven, the need to do so can
seem Sisyphean, everlastingly recurrent. And in some
critical situations, it may not be disprovable. The stereo-
types considered in this work allege group-based limita-
tions of ability that are often reinforced by the structural
reality of increasingly small group representations at
more advanced levels of the schooling domain. Thus, for
group members working at these advanced levels, no
amount of success up to that point can disprove the ste-
reotype's relevance to their next, more advanced perfor-
mance. For the advanced female math student who has
been brilliant up to that point, any frustration she has at
the frontier of her skills could confirm the gender-based
limitation alleged in the stereotype, making this frontier,
because she is so invested in it, a more threatening place
than it is for the nonstereotyped. Thus, the work of dispel-
ling stereotype threat through .performance probably in-
creases with the difficulty of work in the domain, and
whatever exemption is gained has to be rewon at the next
new proving ground.
Empirical Support for a Theory of
Stereotype Threat and Disidentificafion
In testing these ideas, the research of my colleagues and
I has had two foci: The first is on intellectual performance
in the domain in which negative group stereotypes apply.
Here, the analysis has two testable implications. One is
that for domain-identified students, stereotype threat may
interfere with their domain-related intellectual perfor-
mance. Analysts have long argued that behaving in a
situation in which one is at risk of confirming a negative
stereotype about one's group, or of being seen or treated
stereotypically, causes emotional distress and pressure
 . The argument
here is that for those who identify with the domain
enough to experience this threat, the pressure it causes
may undermine their domain performance. Disruptive
pressures such as evaluation apprehension, test anxiety,
choking, and token status have long been shown to disrupt
performance through a variety of mediating mechanisms:
interfering anxiety, reticence to respond, distracting
thoughts, self-consciousness, and so on . The assumption of this model
is that stereotype threat is another such interfering pres-
sure. The other testable implication is that reducing this
threat in the performance setting, by reducing its interfer-
ing pressure, should improve the performance of other-
wise stereotype-threatened students.
The second research focus is the model's implica-
a As a process of social devaluation, stereotype threat is both a
subform of stigmatization and something more general. It is that form
of stigmatization that is mediated by collectively held, devaluing group
stereotypes. This means that it does not include stigmatization that
derives from nonstereotyped features such as a facial disfigurement or,
for example, what Goffman called abominations of the body.
Stereotype threat is a situational predicament. And, in this sense, it is
also more general than stigmatization. It is a threat that can befall
anyone about whom a negative reputation or group stereotype exists.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
tion that stereotype threat, and the anticipation of having
to contend with it unceasingly in school or some domain
of schooling, should deter members of these groups
from identifying with these domains, and, for group
members already identified, it should pressure their
disidentification. 4
Stereotype Threaf and Intellectual Performance
Steven Spencer, Diane Quinn, and I 
first tested the effect of stereotype threat on intellectual
performance by testing its effect on the standardized math
test performance of women who were strong in math.
The stereotype threat of women performing
At base, of course, the stereotype threat that
women experience in math-performance settings derives
from a negative stereotype about their math ability that is
disseminated throughout society. But whether this threat
impaired their performance, we reasoned, would depend
on two things. First, the performance would have to be
construed so that any faltering would imply the limitation
of ability alleged in the stereotype. This means that the
performance would have to be difficult enough so that
faltering at it would imply having reached an ability limit
but not so difficult as to be nondiagnostic of ability. And
second, as has been much emphasized, the women in
question would have to be identified with math, so that
faltering and its stereotype-confirming implication would
threaten something they care about, their belongingness
and acceptance in a domain they identify with. Of course,
men too (at least those of equal skill and identification
with math) could be threatened in this situation; faltering
would reflect on their ability too. But their faltering
would not carry the extra threat of confirming a stereo-
typed limitation in math ability or of causing them to be
seen that way. Thus, the threat that women experience,
through the interfering pressure it causes, should worsen
their performance in comparison to equally qualified
men. Interestingly, though, these otherwise confident
women should perform equally as well as equally quali-
fied men when this situational threat is lessened.
To explore these questions, Spencer, Quinn, and I
 designed a basic research para-
digm: We recruited female and male students, mostly
college sophomores, who were both good at math and
strongly identified with it in the sense of seeing them-
selves as strong math students and seeing math as im-
portant to their self-definition. We then gave them a very
difficult math test one at a time. The items were taken
from the advanced math General Records Examination
(GRE) and we assumed would frustrate the skills of these
students without totally exceeding them. As expected,
and presumably reflecting the impairing effects of stereo-
type threat, women significantly underperformed in rela-
tion to equally qualified men on this difficult math test.
But more important, in another condition of this experi-
ment in which the test was an advanced literature test
rather than a math test and in which participants had
been selected and matched for their strong literature skills
and identification, women performed just as well as
equally qualified men. This happened, we reasoned, be-
cause women are not stereotype threatened in this area.
A second experiment replicated women' s underper-
formance on the difficult math test and showed that it
did not happen when the test was easier, that is when the
items, taken from the regular quantitative section of the
GRE, were more within the skills of these strong math
students. The lack of performance frustration on this eas-
ier test, presumably, reduced women's stereotype threat
by making the stereotype less relevant as an interpretation
of their performance.
Stereolype threat versus genes.
So went our
interpretation. But an alternative was possible: The bio-
logical limits of women's math ability do not emerge
until the material tested is difficult. It is this very pattern
of evidence that Benbow and Stanley used
to suggest a genetic limitation in women's math ability.
Thus, the first two experiments reproduced the gender
effects on math performance reported in the literature:
that women underperform primarily in math and mainly
when the material is difficult. But they fall short of estab-
lishing our interpretation.
To do this, we would need to give women and men
a difficult math test (one capable of producing women's
underperformance) but then experimentally vary stereo-
type threat, that is, vary how much women were at risk
of confirming the stereotype while taking the test. A third
experiment did this by varying how the test (the same
difficult one used in the earlier experiments) was repre-
sented. Participants were told either that the test generally
showed gender differences, implying that the stereotype
of women's limitations in math was relevant to interpre-
ting their own frustration, or that it showed no gender
differences, implying that the gender stereotype was not
relevant to their performance and thus could not be con-
firmed by it on this particular test. The no-gender-differ-
ences representation did not challenge the validity of the
stereotype; it simply eliminated the risk that the stereo-
type could be fulfilled on this test. In the gender-differ-
ences condition, we expected women (still stereotype
threatened) to underperform in relation to equally quali-
fied men, but in the no-gender-differences condition, we
expected women (with stereotype threat reduced) to per-
form equal to such men. The genetic interpretation, of
course, predicts that women will underperform on this
difficult test regardless of how it is represented.
In dramatic support of our reasoning, women per-
formed worse than men when they were told that the test
produced gender differences, which replicated women's
4 Moreover, a protective avoidance of identification can become a
group norm. In reaction to a shared sense of threat in school, for
example, it can become a shared reaction that is transmitted to group
members as the normative relation to school. Both research and the media have documented this reaction in
minority students from inner-city high schools to Harvard University's
campus. Thus, disidentification can be sustained by normative pressure
from the in-group as well as by stereotype threat in the setting.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
Mean Performance on a Difficult Math Test as a
Function of Gender and Test Characterization
No-gender-
difference
difference
Test characterization
underperformance observed in the earlier experiments,
but they performed equal to men when the test was repre-
sented as insensitive to gender differences, even though,
of course, the same difficult "ability" test was used in
both conditions (see Figure 1). Genetic limitation did not
cap the performance of women in these experiments. A
fourth experiment showed that reducing stereotype threat
(through the no-gender-differences treatment) raised
women's performance to that of equally qualified men,
even when participants' specific performance expectan-
cies were set low, that is, when participants were led to
expect poor test performance. Also, a fifth experiment
(that again replicated the treatment effects of the third
experiment) found that participants' posttreatment anxi-
ety, not their expectancies or efficacy, predicted their per-
formance. Thus, the disruptive effect of stereotype threat
was mediated more by the self-evaluative anxiety it
caused than by its lowering of performance expectations
or self-efficacy.
In~rnal or $1~llonal threat.
These findings
make an important theoretical and practical point: The
gender-differences conditions (including those in which
the possibility of gender differences was left to inference
rather than stated directly) did not impair women's per-
formance by triggering doubts they had about their math
ability. For one thing, these women had no special doubts
of this sort; they were selected for being very good at
math and for reporting high confidence in their ability.
Nor was this doubt a factor in their test performance.
Recall that the math test was represented as an ability
test in all conditions of these experiments. This means
that in the no-gender-differences conditions, women were
still at risk of showing their own math ability to be
weak--the same risk that men had in these conditions.
Under this risk (when their own math ability was on
the line), they performed just as well as men. Whatever
performance-impairing anxiety they had, it was no
greater than that of equally qualified men. Thus, the gen-
der-differences conditions (the normal condition under
which people take these tests) could not have impaired
their performance by triggering some greater internalized
anxiety that women have about their own math ability--
an anxiety acquired, for example, through prior socializa-
tion. Rather, this condition had its effect through situa-
tional pressure. It set up an interpretive frame such that
any performance frustration signaled the possible gender-
based ability limitation alleged in the stereotype. For
these women, this signal challenged their belongingness
in a domain they cared about and, as a possibly newly
met limit to their ability, could not be disproven by their
prior achievements, thus its interfering threat.
The stereotype threat of African Amer/cons on
standardized tests.
Joshua Aronson and I examined these processes
among African American students. In these studies, Black
and White Stanford University students took a test com-
posed of the most difficult items on the verbal GRE exam.
Because the participants were students admitted to a
highly selective university, we assumed that they were
identified with the verbal skills represented on standard-
ized tests. The first study varied whether or not the stereo-
type about Black persons' intellectual ability was relevant
to their performance by varying whether the test was
presented as ability-diagnostic, that is, as a test of intel-
lectual ability, or as ability-nondiagnostic, that is, as a
laboratory problem-solving task unrelated to ability and
thus to the stereotype about ability. Analysis of covari-
ance was used to remove the influence of participants'
initial skills, measured by their verbal SAT scores, on
their test performance. This done, the results showed
strong evidence of stereotype threat: Black participants
greatly underperformed White participants in the diag-
nostic condition but equaled them in the nondiagnostic
condition (see Figure 2). A second experiment produced
the same pattern of results with an even more slight ma-
nipulation of stereotype threat: whether or not partici-
pants recorded their race on a demographic questionnaire
just before taking the test (described as nondiagnostic in
all conditions). Salience of the racial stereotype alone
was enough to depress the performance of identified
Black students (see Figure 3).
The ¢ognltive mediation of stereolype threat.
Stereotype threat, then, can impair the standardized test
performance of domain-identified students; this effect
generalizes to several ability-stereotyped groups, and its
mediation seems to involve anxiety more than expectan-
cies. But do these manipulations cause a specific state of
stereotype threat, that is, a sensed threat specifically
about being stereotyped or fitting the stereotype? To ad-
dress this question, Aronson and I tested two things: whether manipulating ste-
reotype threat actually activates the racial stereotype in
June 1997 • American Psychologist
the thinking and information processing of stereotype-
threatened test takers and whether it produces in them a
specific motivation to avoid being seen stereotypically.
Again, Black and White participants were run in either
an ability-diagnostic or ability-nondiagnostic condition,
except that just after the condition instructions and com-
pletion of the sample test items (so that participants could
see how difficult the items were) and just before partici-
pants expected to take the test, they completed measures
of stereotype activation and avoidance. The stereotype-
activation measure asked them to complete 80 word frag-
ments, 10 of which we knew from pretesting could be
completed with, among other words, words symbolic of
African American stereotypes (e,g., _ _ce [race], la__
[lazy], or _ _or [poor]) and 5 of which could be com-
pleted with, among other words, words signifying self-
doubts (e.g., 1o__ _ [loser], du__ [dumb], or sha_ __
[shame]). The measure of participants' motivation to
avoid being seen stereotypically simply asked them how
much they preferred various types of music, activities,
sports, and personality traits, some of which a pretest
sample had rated as stereotypic of African Americans. 5
If expecting to take a difficult ability-diagnostic test
is enough to activate the racial stereotype in the thinking
of Black participants and to motivate them to avoid being
stereotyped, then these participants, more than those in
the other conditions, should show more stereotype and
self-doubt word completions and fewer preferences for
things that are African American. This is precisely what
happened. Black participants in the diagnostic condition
completed more word fragments with stereotype- and
self-doubt-related words and had fewer preferences for
things related to African American experience (e.g., jazz,
basketball, hip-hop) than Black participants in the nondi-
agnostic condition or White participants in either condi-
tion, all of whom were essentially the same (see Figure
4). Also, as a last item before participants expected to
begin the test, they were given the option of recording
their race, a measure we thought might further tap into
an apprehension about being Viewed stere0typicaUy. In-
terestingly, then, all of the Black participants in the nondi-
agnostic condition and all of the White participants in
both conditions listed their race, whereas only 25% of
the Black participants in the diagnostic condition did so.
Selbreie¢iion or selbpre~nto~ ? A troubling
implication of the earlier mentioned internalization mod-
els is that negative stereotypes
about one's group eventually become internalized and
cause rejection of one's own group, even of oneself--
self-hating preferences. The famous finding of Clark and
Clark that Black children preferred White dolls
over Black dolls has been interpreted this way. The pref-
erences of Black participants in the diagnostic condition
fit this pattern; with negative stereotypes about their
group cognitively activated, they valued things that were
African American less than any other group. But the full
set of results suggests a different interpretation. In those
conditions in which Black participants did not have to
worry about tripping a stereotypic perception of them-
selves, they valued things that were African American
more strongly than did other participants. Thus, rather
than reflecting self- or own-group rejection, their devalu-
ing of things that were African American in the diagnostic
s Participants did not actually take the test in this experiment , as
completing these measures would likely have activated the stereotype
in all conditions.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
condition was apparently a strategic self-presentation
aimed at cracking the stereotypic lens through which they
could be seen. So it could be, then, in the general case,
rather than reflecting real self-concepts, behavior that
appears group rejecting or self-rejecting may reflect situ-
ation-bound, self-presentational strategies.
Stereotype threat and domain identification.
Not being identified with a domain, our theory reasons, means that one's experi-
ence of stereotype threat in the domain is less self-threat-
ening. Although we have yet to complete a satisfactory
test of this prediction, partially completed experiments
and pretests show that stereotype threat has very little,
if any, effect on participants not identified with the do-
main of relevance. Most typically, these participants give
up and underperform on the difficult test regardless of
whether they are under stereotype threat. Although not
yet constituting a complete test of this implication of the
theory, these data do emphasize that the above results
generalize only to domain-identified students.
grouSp•ncesthnmt
in slandordized test perfer-
Inherent to the science of quantifying human
intelligence is the unsavory possibility of ranking societal
groups as to their aggregated intelligence. It is from this
comer of psychology that the greatest controversy has
arisen, a controversy that has lasted throughout this cen-
tury and that is less about the fact of these group differ-
ences than about their interpretation . To the set of possible
causes for these group differences, our findings add a new one: the differential
impact of stereotype threat on groups in the testing situa-
tion itself. Thus, stereotype threat may be a possible
source of bias in standardized tests, a bias that arises not
from item content but from group differences in the threat
that societal stereotypes attach to test performance. Of
course, not every member of an ability-stereotyped group
is going to be affected by stereotype threat every time
they take a test. As our research has shown, the experi-
ence of success as one takes the test can dispel the rele-
vance of the stereotype. Nonetheless, among the most
identified test takers in the stereotype-threatened group
those in its academic vanguard who have the greatest
confidence and skills mthis threat can substantially de-
press performance on more difficult parts of the exam.
And this depression could contribute significantly to the
group's underperformance in comparison with nonste-
reotype-threatened groups. 6
Reaction of Disidenlification
Stereotype threat is assumed to have an abiding effect
on school achievement-,an effect beyond its impairment
of immediate performancemby preventing or breaking
a person's identification with school, in particular, those
domains of schooling in which the stereotype applies.
This reasoning has several implications for which empiri-
cal evidence can be brought to bear: the resilience of
self-esteem to stigmatization; the relationship between
stigmatized status and school achievement; and, among
ability-stigmatized people, the relationship between their
school performance and self-esteem.
Seif-esteem's resilience to sligmallzation.
recent review, Croc~r and Major were able to
6 Those who are less domain identified in the stereotype-threatened
group may also underp~orm on standardized tests. Because they care
less about the domain it represents, they may be undermotivated or they
may withdraw effort in the face of frustration. And for all of the reasons
I have discussed, the greater portion of the stereotype-threatened group
may be academically unidentified. This fact too, then, may contribute
to the group's overall weaker performance on these tests in comparison
with nonstereotype-threateneXt groups.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
make a strong case for the lack of something that common
sense suggests should exist: a negative effect of stigmatiza-
tion on self-esteem. Following the logic of the internaliza-
tion models described above and viewing stigmatization
as, among other things, an assault to self-esteem, one might
expect that people who are stigmatized would have lower
self-esteem than people who are not. Yet, as Crocker and
Major reported, when the self-esteem of stigmatized
groups (e.g., Blacks, Chicanos, the facially disfigured,
obese people, etc.) is actually measured, one finds that
their self-esteem is as high as that of the nonstigmatized.
Crocker and Major offered the intriguing ar-
gument that stigma itself offers esteem-protective strate-
gies. For example, the stigmatized can blame their fail-
ures on the prejudice of out-group members, they can
limit their self-evaluative social comparisons to the in-
group of other stigmatized people, and they can devalue
the domains in which they feel devalued. Other models
have also described esteem-saving adaptations to stigma.
For example, models that assume internalization of ste-
reotype-related anxieties often posit compensatory per-
sonality traits (e.g., grandiosity) that protect self-esteem
but leave one poorly adapted to the mainstream . In the present
reasoning, stigmatization stems from stereotype threat
in specific domains. Thus, it adds to the list of stigma
adaptations the possibility of simple domain disidentifi-
cation, the rescuing of self-esteem by rendering as self-
evaluatively irrelevant the domain in which the stereotype
applies. Herein may lie a significant source of the self-
esteem resilience shown in stigmatized groups. This idea
also implies that once domain disidentification is
achieved, the pressure for adaptations of attribution and
personality may be reduced.
A univenml connection befween stlgnm'zatlon
and poor school achievement.
If disidentification
with school, and the resulting underachievement, can be
a reaction to ability-stigmatizing stereotypes in society,
then it might be expected that ability stigmatization
would be associated with poor school performance wher-
ever it occurs in the world. Finding such a relationship
would not definitively prove the present theory; the direc-
tion of causality could be quarreled with, as could the
mediation of such a relationship. Still, it would be sug-
gestive, and, in that respect, Ogbu reported an
interesting fact: Among the caste-like minorities in indus-
trial and nonindustrial nations throughout the world (e.g.,
the Maoris of New Zealand, the Baraku of Japan, the
Harijans of India, the Oriental Jews of Israel, and the
West Indians of Great Britain), there exists the same
15-point IQ gap between them and the nonstigmatized
members of their society as exists between Black and
White Americans. These groups also suffer poorer school
performance, higher dropout rates, and related behavior
problems. Moreover; these gaps appear even when the
stigmatized and nonstigmatized are of the same race, as
in the case of the Baraku and other Japanese. What these
groups share that is capable of explaining their deficits
is a caste-like status that, through stereotypes in their
societies, stigmatizes their intellectual abilities--sowing
the seeds, I suggest, of their school disidentification.
The disassociation of selF-esteem and school
achievement. If the poor school achievement of abil-
ity-stigmatized groups is mediated by disidentification,
then it might be expected that among the ability stigma-
tized, there would be a disassociation between school
outcomes and overall self-esteem. Several kinds of evi-
dence suggest this process among African Americans.
First, there is the persistent finding that although Black
students underperform in relation to White students on
school outcomes from grades to standardized tests , their global self-esteem is as
high or higher than that of White students . For
both of these facts to be true, some portion of Black
students must have acquired an imperviousness to poor
school performance.
Several further studies suggest that this impervi-
ousness is rooted in disidentification. In a study of deseg-
regated schools in Champaign, Illinois, Hare and Costen-
ell measured students' school achievement; over-
all self-esteem; and self-esteem in the specific domains
of home life, school, and peer-group relations. Like oth-
ers, they found that although Black students perfor!ned
less well than White students, they still had comparable
levels of overall self-esteem. Their domain-specific mea-
sures suggested why: Although Black students were
lower than White students in school and home-life self-
esteem, Blacks slightly exceeded Whites in peer-group
self-esteem. Here then, perhaps, was the source of their
overall self-regard: disidentification with domains in
which their evaluative prospects were poor (in this case,
school and home life) and identifcation with domains in
which their prospects were better (i.e., their peers).
A recent study suggests that this may be a not un-
common phenomenon. Analyzing data available from the
National Educational Longitudinal Survey , Osborne
 found that from the 8th through 10th grades,
Black students had lower achievement and somewhat
higher self-esteem than White students, which replicated
the general pattern of findings described above. But more
than this, he found evidence of increasing Black students'
disidentification over this period: The correlation be-
tween their school achievement and self-esteem for this
period decreased significantly more for Black than for
White students. Also, using a scale measure of school
disidentification, Major, Spencer; Schmadei; Wolfe, and
Crocker (in press) found that Black students were more
disidentified than White students in several college sam-
pies and that for disidentified students of both races,
negative feedback about an intellectual task had less ef-
fect on their self-esteem than it did for identified students.
June 1997 • American Psychologist
Major et al. further showed that when racial stereotypes
were primed, neither negative nor positive feedback af-
fected Black students' self-esteem, whereas the self-es-
teem of White students followed the direction of the
feedback. Ability stigmatization of the sort experienced
by African Americans, then, can be associated with a
protective "disconnect" between performance and self-
regard, a disconnect of the sort that is consistent with
disidentification theory.
Can stereotype threat directly cause this disconnect?
To test this question, Kirsten Stoutemeyer and I varied
the strength of stereotype threat that female test takers
(Stanford students) were under by varying whether soci-
etal differences between women and men in math perfor-
mance were attributed to small but stable differences in
innate ability (suggesting an inherent, gender-based limit
in math ability) or to social causes such as sex-role pre-
scriptions and discrimination (suggesting no inherent,
gender-based limit in math ability). We then measured
their identificaion with math and math-related careers,
either before or after they took a difficult math test. Re-
gardless of when identification was measured, women
under stronger stereotype threat disidentified with math
and math-related careers more than women under weaker
stereotype threat. Although domain identification has sev-
eral determinants, these findings suggest that stereotype
threat is an important one of them.
"Wise" Schooling: Practice and Policy
As a different diagnosis, the present analysis comes to a
different prescription: The schooling of stereotype-threat-
ened groups may be improved through situational
changes (analogous to those manipulated in our experi-
ments) that reduce the stereotype threat these students
might otherwise be under. As noted, psychological diag-
noses have more typically ascribed the problems of these
students to internal processes ranging from genes to inter-
nalized stereotypes. On the face of it, at least, internal
states are more difficult to modify than situational factors.
Thus, the hope of the present analysis, encouraged by our
research, is that these problems might be more tractable
through the situational design of schooling, in particular,
design that secures these students in the belief that they
will not be held under the suspicion of negative stereo-
types about their group. Schooling that does this, I have
called wise, a term borrowed from Irving Goffman
 , who borrowed it from gay men and lesbians of
the 1950s. They used it to designate heterosexuals who
understood their full humanity despite the stigma attached
to their sexual orientation: family and friends, usually,
who knew the person beneath the stigma. So it must
be, I argue, for the effective schooling of stereotype-
threatened groups.
Although "wisedom" may be necessary for the ef-
fective schooling of such students, it may not always
be sufficient. The chief distinction made in this analysis
(between those of these groups who are identified with
the relevant school domain and those who are not) raises
a caution. As noted, stereotype threat is not keenly felt by
those who identify little with the stereotype-threatening
domain. Thus, although reducing this threat in the domain
may be necessary to encourage their identification, it may
not be sufficient to build an identification that is not there.
For this to occur, more far-reaching strategies that develop
the building blocks of domain identification may be re-
quired: better skills, greater domain self-efficacy, feelings
of social and cultural comfort in the domain, a lack of
social pressure to disidentify, and so on.
But for the identified of these groups, who are quite
numerous on college campuses, the news may be better
than is typically appreciated. For these students, feasible
changes in the conditions of schooling that make threaten-
ing stereotypes tess applicable to their behavior (i.e., wis-
dom) may be enough. They are already identified with
the relevant domain, they have skills and confidence in
the domain, and they have survived other barriers to iden-
tification. Their remaining problem is stereotype threat.
Reducing that problem, then, may be enough to bring
their performance on par with that of nonstereotyped
persons in the domain.
This distinction raises an important and often over-
looked issue in the design of schooling for stereotype-
threatened students, that of triage, the issue of rendering
onto the right students the right intervention. Mistakes
can easily be made. For example, applying a strategy to
school-identified students (on the basis of their member-
ship in a stereotype-threatened group) that assumes weak
identification, poor skills, and little confidence could
backfire. It could increase stereotype threat and underper-
formance by signaling that their abilities are held under
suspicion because of their group membership. But the
opposite mistake could be made by applying a strategy
that assumes strong identification, skills, and confidence
to those who are actually unidentified with the relevant
domain. Merely reducing stereotype threat may not ac-
complish much when the more primary need of these
students is to gain the interests, resources, skills, confi-
dences, and values that are needed to identify with the
Some wise strategies, then, may work for both iden-
tified and unidentified students from these groups, but
others may have to be appropriately targeted to be effec-
tive. I offer some examples of both types.
For both domain-identified and domain-unidentified
1. Optimistic teacher-student relationships. The
prevailing stereotypes make it plausible for ability-
stigmatized students to worry that people in their school-
ing environment will doubt their abilities. Thus, one wise
strategy, seemingly suitable for all students, is to discredit
this assumption through the authority of potential-
affirming adult relationships. The Comer Schools
Project has used this strategy with great success at the
elementary school level, and Johnides, von Hippel, Ler-
ner, and Nagda have used it in designing a men-
toring program for incoming minority and other students
June 1997 • American Psychologist
at the University of Michigan. In analogous laboratory
experiments, Geoffrey Cohen, Lee Ross, and I found that critical feedback to
African American students was strongly motivating when
it was coupled with optimism about their potential.
2. Challenge over remediation. Giving challenging
work to students conveys respect for their potential and
thus shows them that they are not regarded through the
lens of an ability-demeaning stereotype. Uric Treisman
 used this strategy explicitly in designing his suc-
cessful group-study workshops in math for college-aged
women and minorities. Taking students where they are
skillwise, all students can be given challenging work at
a challenging, not overwhelming, pace, especially in the
context of supportive adult-student relationships. In con-
trast, remedial work reinforces in these students the pos-
sibility that they are being viewed stereotypicaUy. And
this, by increasing stereotype threat in the domain, can
undermine their performance.
3. Stressing the expandability of intelligence. The
threat of negative-ability stereotypes is that one could
confirm or be seen as having a fixed limitation inherent
to one's group. To the extent that schooling can stress
what Carol Dweck called the incremental nature
of human intelligencemits expandability in response to
experience and training--it should help to deflect this
meanest implication of the stereotype. Aronson 
recently found, for example, that having African Ameri-
can college students repeatedly advocate the expandabil-
ity of intelligence to their elementary school tutees sig-
nificantly improved their own grades.
For domain-identified students:
1. Affirming domain belongingness. Negative-ability
stereotypes raise the threat that one does not belong in
the domain. They cast doubt on the extent of one's abili-
ties, on how well one will be accepted, on one's social
compatibility with the domain, and so on. Thus, for stu-
dents whose primary barrier to school identification is
stereotype threat, direct affirmation of their belong-
ingness in the domain may be effective. But it is im-
portant to base this affirmation on the students' intellec-
tual potential. Affirming social belonging alone, for those
under the threat of an ability stereotype, could be taken
as begging the question.
2. Valuing multiple perspectives. This refers to strat-
egies that explicitly value a variety of approaches to both
academic substance and the larger academic culture in
which that substance is considered. Making such a value
public tells stereotype-threatened students that this is an
environment in which the stereotype is less likely to be
3. Role models. People from the stereotype-threat-
ened group who have been successful in the domain carry
the message that stereotype threat is not an insurmount-
able barrier there.
For domain-unidentified students:
1. Nonjudgmental responsiveness. Research by Lep-
per, Woolverton, Mumme, and Gurtner has identi-
fled a distinct strategy that expert tutors use with espe-
cially poor students: little direct praise, Socratic direction
of students' work, and minimal attention to right and
wrong answers. For students weakly identified with the
domain, who are threatened by a poor reputation and
who probably hold internalized doubts about their ability,
this Socratic strategy has the wisedom of securing a safe
teacher-student relationship in which there is little cost
of failure and the gradual building of domain efficacy
from small gains.
2. Building self-efficacy. Based on Bandura's theory of self-efficacy, this strategy attempts to
build the student's sense of competence and self-efficacy
in the schooling domain. Howard and Hammond 
have developed a powerful implementation of this strat-
egy for African American and other minority students,
especially in inner-city public schools.
Existence Proof: A Wise Schooling
Intervention
Providing a definitive test of wise schooling theory will
require, of course, an extensive research program. But
as a first step, something might be learned from what
Urie Treisman called an existence proof, in this
case, a demonstration that an intervention derived from
the theory could stop or reverse a tenacious negative
trajectory in the school performance of stereotype-threat-
ened students. Such an intervention would of necessity
confound things: different wise practices as well as other
practices and structures, peculiar to that setting, that
could also affect academic outcomes. It could not stand
as a test of the psychological theory per se. But if a
particular architecture of wise strategies succeeded, it
would encourage their applicability to the real-world
schooling of these students.
With this rationale, my colleagues and I (Steven
Spencer, Richard Nisbett, Mary Hummel, David Schoem,
Kent Harber, Ken Carter)implemented a freshman-year
program at the University of Michigan aimed at the un-
derachievement and low retention rates of African Ameri-
can students. Each year, the program included approxi-
mately 250 freshmen in the ethnic proportions of the
larger campus but with an oversampling of approximately
20% Black students and 20% non-Black minority stu-
dents (i.e., Asian, Hispanic, and Native American students
as a single group). Program students were randomly se-
lected from the students admitted to Michigan and then
recruited by phone to participate. All program partici-
pants lived together in the wing of a large, 1,200-student
dormitory throughout their freshman year.
In this context, we implemented several wise strate-
gies. The program was presented as a transition program
aimed at helping students maximize the advantages of
university life. We also recruited students honorifically;
they were told that, as Michigan admittees, they had
survived a very competitive selection process and that
our program was designed to help them maximize their
strong potential. These practices represented the program
June 1997 • American Psychologist
as nonremediational and represented the university as
having acknowledged their intellectual potential and as
having high expectations for them--all things that signal
the irrelevance of negative group stereotypes. Once the
students were in the program, these expectations were
reinforced by their being offered a "challenge" work-
shop, modeled on those developed by Treisman 
for calculus, in either freshman calculus, chemistry, phys-
ics, or writing. These were taken on a voluntary basis in
the dormitory. Students also participated in small weekly
discussion groups, centered on brief readings, that al-
lowed discussion of adjustment-relevant social and even
personal issues. This activity has the wisdom of letting
students knowthat they, or other members of their group,
are not the only ones with concerns about adjusting to
university life--an insight that can deflect the relevance
of negative group stereotypes. These formal program
components lasted for the first 10 weeks of the school
year, and, as voluntary activities, approximately half of
the students regularly participated in either one or both
The first-semester grades averaged over the first two
years of this ongoing project give a reliable picture of
the program's initial impact. To show the size of the
program's effect on students at different levels of prepa-
ration, Figure 5 graphs first-semester grades, using re-
gression lines, for the different student groups as a func-
tion of standardized test scores on entry into the univer-
sity (they are presented as standard deviation units in this
figure to provide a common scale for students who took
either the SAT or American College Test exam). The first
thing to notice is the two essentially parallel lines for
White and Black students outside of any program at
Michigan. They replicate the standard overprediction-
underperformance of Black students alluded to earlier,
and it is against this pattern that the effects of the program
can be evaluated. Looking first at the line for White
students in our program, there is a modest tendency for
these students to do better than the White control students
(i.e., those outside the program), but given our accumula-
tion of n throughout these first two years, this difference
is not significant. It is the results for Black students in our
program (but who were not also in the campus minority
program) that are most promising. Their line is consider-
ably above that for Black control students (i.e., Black
students outside any program) and, even with the modest
sample size (n = 27), is significantly higher than this
control line in the top one third of the standardized test
distribution, t = 2.72, p < .05. It is important that this
group of Black students showed almost no underperfor-
mance; in the top two thirds of the test distribution, they
had essentially the same grades as White students. We
also know from follow-up data that their higher grade
performance continued at least through their sophomore
year and that as long as four years later; only one of them
had dropped out.
Theoretically just as important, is the bottom line
in Figure 5, depicting the results for Black students in
a large minority remediation program. Despite getting
considerable attention, they performed worse than the
other groups at nearly every level of preparation. The
difference between Black students in the minority pro-
gram and Black students not in any program becomes
significant at 1.76 standard deviations below the mean
for test performance and is significant from that point
on, ps < .05. Also, by the beginning of their junior year,
First-Semester Grade Point Average {GPA) as a Function of Progrom and Race Controlling For High School GPA
• Black participants in 21st
century and not in remedial
program (n = 27)
---I--Black participants in 21st
century and in remedial
program (n = 35)
--~-Black participants in
In remexmu program
.conte~.. ~
control and not
X Black participants in
contemporary control and in
remedial program (n = 459)
X White participants in 21st
century program (n = 288)
participants in
contemporary control group
(n = 6,515)
Test score in standard deviation units
June 1997 • American Psychologist
25% of these students had failed to register, and among
those who entered with test scores in the top one third of
the test distribution, this figure was 40%. Some selection
factor possibly contributed to this. Despite our having
controlled for test scores and high school grade point
averages in these analyses, some portion of these students
may have been assigned to this program because they
evidenced other risk factors. Still, these results suggest
that the good intentions of the minority-remediation
framework for schooling African American students can
backfire by, in our terms, institutionalizing the racial ste-
reotype by which they are already threatened.
Although these findings are preliminary and we do
not know that they were mediated as our theory claims,
they are a step toward an existence proof; they show that
wise practices can reduce Black students' underachieve-
ment in a real-school context and, as important, that un-
wise practice~ seem to worsen it.
Conclusion
In social psychology, we know that as observers looking
at a person or group, we tend to stress internal, disposi-
tional causes of their behavior, whereas when we take
the perspective of the actor, now facing the circumstances
they face, we stress more situational causes . If there is a system
to the present research, it is that of taking the actor's
perspective in trying to understand the intellectual perfor-
mance of African American and female students. It is this
perspective that brings to light the broadly encompassing
condition of having these groups' identification with do-
mains of schooling threatened by societal stereotypes.
This is a threat that in the short run can depress their
intellectual performance and, over the long run, under-
mine the identity itself, a predicament of serious conse-
quence. But it is a predicament--something in the inter-
action between a group's social identity and its social
psychological context, rather than something essential to
the group itself. Predicaments can be treated, intervened
on, and it is in this respect that I hope the perspective
taken in this analysis and the early evidence offer
encouragement.