Recommenders’ Inﬂuence on Buyers’ Decision Process
Sylvain Castagnos
EPFL - HCI Group
IC IIF Station 14
CH-1015 Lausanne
 
Nicolas Jones
EPFL - HCI Group
IC IIF Station 14
CH-1015 Lausanne
 
EPFL - HCI Group
IC IIF Station 14
CH-1015 Lausanne
 
Online stores offer an increasingly large set of products. Interactive decision aids are becoming indispensable tools assisting users
as they search for an ideal product to purchase. For an e-commerce
website, adopting the correct tools can affect its survival: effective
product recommender tools are increasingly recognized by online
stores as effective means to sell more products; on the other hand,
sites that do not employ intelligent tools will not only see poor purchase volumes but also experience less trafﬁc because consumers
are more likely to return to a site employing recommender systems.
This paper presents ongoing research in understanding the impact of various decision aids on users’ interaction behaviors and
their subjective perceptions of these aids. In the current experiment, we employed an eye tracker in an in-depth user study to understand the inﬂuence of recommenders on how users select items
for the basket set. We collected more than 20,300 ﬁxation data
points in 3,648 areas of interest. Our studies show that while users
still rely on product ﬁltering tools, the use of recommenders is becoming more prominent in helping them construct the basket set
and is monotonically increasing as time goes on.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine Systems—Human
Information Processing; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Evaluation / methodology.
General Terms
Human Factors, Design, Experimentation.
Recommender Systems, Decision Process, Interaction Design, Eye-
Tracker, User Study, User Modeling, Usage Patterns.
INTRODUCTION
The retail e-commerce sector in the US is a 210 billion dollar
industry; Europe and Asia are catching up at an increasingly signiﬁcant speed. A crucial technological element in such sites is an
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
RecSys’09, October 23–25, 2009, New York, New York, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-435-5/09/10 ...$10.00.
effective product search tool to help consumers identify the right
items and provide them with the necessary conﬁdence to purchase.
Consider an average user who is looking to buy a digital camera
through an online product comparison site. She is unlikely to have
an exact idea of the manufacturer’s name, the model or other technical speciﬁcations of the eventual camera and thus perform a keyword search. With a catalog containing more than 1,000 items, she
will not sift through the list one by one either. Instead, she is more
likely to interact with an online catalog of products with the help of
a decision aid.
Haubl and Trifts maintain that there are two main steps during the decision process in an online product search environment.
In the ﬁrst step, the active user identiﬁes a subset of products she
wants to compare (called the consideration set or the basket). We
will refer to this step as product brokering to be consistent with
concepts used in . During the second step, the user compares the
different features and details of these products in order to make a
decision. We will refer to this step as product comparison. In their
work, two interaction decision aides were investigated for their
roles in helping users make better decisions. The ﬁrst tool, a recommender agent, assists users in the initial screening of the alternatives and establishing the basket set. The second one, a comparison
matrix, helps users make an in-depth feature-by-feature comparison of the items in the basket. Their empirical studies showed that
the use of a recommender agent leads to a signiﬁcant reduction in
the number of alternatives seriously considered for purchase, and
increases the quality of consumers’ decisions. The constructive
inﬂuence of recommenders was consequently established. However, we observed one major outdated ﬁnding in their experiment.
Even though a recommender was conceptualized in their setup, its
actual implementation, thus the tool that their users experienced,
was provided by personalogic1. In the more current literature of
recommenders, personalogic is considered more as a multi-criteria
product ﬁltering tool rather than a recommender. The main difference is that in the former, users obtain a set of items after they have
actively speciﬁed their preferences, whereas in the latter, users get
recommended items without asking for them.
In our present work, we seek to understand users’ decision behaviors under the inﬂuence of both multi-criteria ﬁltering tool (MCF)
and recommender system (RS), thus continuing along the line of
research initiated by Haubl and Trifts and our own previous
work . Ho pioneered a study to measure the impact of RS on
users’ clicks at different decision making stages . Nevertheless,
the absence of selection does not mean that the RS does not play a
role. We thus chose to focus on users’ behavior such as task time
spent on browsing, ﬁltering the catalog, looking up product details,
and taking recommendations from the system. At the same time,
1www.personalogic.com does not exist anymore
we measure users’ subjective perception of the decision aids, such
as satisfaction with the interface and their intention to buy and to
return to the site. We report new ﬁndings based on an in-depth user
study which collected on average one hour of eye movements as
well as action logs from each of the 7 subjects using the Tobii eye
tracking system. This data set comprised of more than 20,300 ﬁxation points and 3,648 areas of interest traces. The results of our
current work constitute a ﬁrst major step towards the formalization
of the product brokering process involving recommender systems
within the purchase decision model.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the
experiment setup in detail and present the participant’s background
information. The paper continues by presenting our main research
goal before reporting the results of the study. We then discuss the
results and their implications. Finally, we present our conclusions
and ideas for future work.
THE EYE TRACKING EXPERIMENT
The Material
The eye tracker used in our experiment was a Tobii 1750
device consisting of a computer screen with embedded cameras and
a software capable of capturing a person’s point of gaze. After an
initial calibration, the setup allows users to look at the screen in a
natural way without any need for a head mount.
The two interactive decision tools being investigated are the multicriteria ﬁltering tool (MCF) and the critiquing-based recommender
system (CRS). The product catalog in consideration is a collection
of 3,500 popular perfumes of usual brands for men and women.
Most users recruited in our study had a consistent level of understanding of the product domain.
The MCF tool consists of a search panel M and a list view L of
all products in multiple pages. The display of the ﬁrst few items
is illustrated in Figure 1. Users can review all of the products in
the catalog by choosing a sorting criterion, such as brand or price,
and examine the entire catalog page by page. To view a subset of
the products, which most users will do, a user has to select a speciﬁc item under the multi-criteria search box, such as a price range.
A MCF tool allows users to apply a mixture of several criteria to
narrow the product list by ﬁltering out the undesirable products.
However, users can also delete any ﬁltering criterion, thus enlarging the available product space. When the user becomes interested
in a product, she can visit the product’s detailed description page D
(Figure 1). This page also presents a column of recommendations
R computed by the CRS on the right hand side. Most e-commerces
such as www.amazon.com use a single category of recommendations, such as “Users who bought this also bought”. In critiquing
based recommenders, this recommendation set is further categorized into groups of products, each of which provides explicit improvements of the current product. The comparison of a single category of recommended items (thus the list view approach) versus an
organized view has been extensively studied in our previous work
(see for example ). Our research showed that users found the organized view to be more user friendly, and they perceived that less
effort was expended when comparing products. Even though such
organized views are not readily used in mainstream e-commerce
sites, we consider them to be superior to the list view. The CRS
used in our experiment organizes the recommendation set into ﬁve
categories: “more popular and cheaper”, or if this former category
does not contain any products we use “more popular but more expensive”, “same brand and cheaper” or “same brand but more expensive”, “just as popular and cheaper”, “same price range and just
as popular”, and “people who like this also like”.
Experiment Procedure
Each participant in our study went through the following steps.
Step 1. The experiment’s administrator (hereafter admin) ﬁrst
debriefs each participant on the nature of the experiment. Background information on the user is collected (age, sex, etc.).
Step 2. The admin calibrates the eye tracker based on the location
of the user’s pupils. He then launches the tracking session and
encourages the user to explore the system before fully launching
into her ﬁrst task.
Step 3. The user’s ﬁrst task is to ﬁnd and put up to three perfumes
that she has never heard of or used before into the shopping list.
She was informed that she could ultimately select more than three
items and delete some at the end, but that she must be prepared to
purchase one of them for herself. We refer to this task as Session 1.
Step 4. Once this task is ﬁnished, the admin launches a new
tracking session with a modiﬁed task. The user is now asked to
search for one perfume she would like to offer to someone, preferably of the opposite sex (reducing the potential bias as a result of
product familiarity). This will be called Session 2.
Step 5. To conclude the study, fourteen preference questions are
asked in order to assess the user’s overall perception of the system.
The preference questions are statements to which a user can indicate her level of agreement on a ﬁve-point Likert scale, ranging
from −2 to +2, where −2 means “strongly disagree” and +2 is
“strongly agree”. The post-stage questions’ results are shown in
Figure 4. The questions were asked in random order, in order to
eliminate ordering bias.
Participants’ Background
The study was carried out over a period of one week and proposed an incentive to ensure that users behaved candidly. A 100
Swiss franc voucher was given out in a lottery to the winning user.
to purchase one of her chosen perfumes. A total of 7 volunteers
were recruited as participants. They were from 4 different countries
(France, Germany, Serbia and Switzerland), with different professions (student, worker, Ph.D. student) and educational backgrounds
(high school, graduate school).
For all of them, fragrance was an important feature when describing a perfume. Other important aspects include price, brand,
quantity and design. All users had strong web experience, although
their online shopping experience remained limited to standard items
such as books, music or travel.
Background questions surveyed users’ predisposition towards perfumes. Five participants said they bought perfumes about once a
year, one a few times a year and one nearly monthly. When questioned about how they discovered new perfumes, 57% of users admitted that they encountered problems, mainly because they are
not able to explicitly describe their perfume-preferences (lack of
knowledge and difﬁculty of describing a fragrance). 70% said that
they preferred to just test perfumes alone in a shop. 40% of them
would also accept suggestions from friends. Most users also told
us that they were prepared to reveal information such as previously
liked & disliked perfumes, and price, in order to obtain recommendations. Interestingly, all users were prepared to reveal information
about smells that they like, but explained that it is difﬁcult to describe smells and hence relied on other aspects.
EXPERIMENT OBJECTIVES
We expect that the CRS will have an impact on two general
aspects of consumer decision making in an online shopping environment: (1) choice strategies and (2) consideration sets. Choice
strategies can be thought of as methods (sequences of operations)
for searching through the decision problem space . As explained
R: recommender
M: multi-criteria
L: list-view
D: description
search page
detail page
heatmaps on detail page
Figure 1: Snapshots of the main interfaces (including AOIs) and an example of resulting heatmap.
in Section 1, other research shows that these strategies can be broken down into two steps: discovery of their needs and comparison of products which ﬁt to their criteria. Consideration sets are
conceptualized as sets of alternatives (one for each user) that consumers seriously consider for purchase . In this paper, since our
framework does not include a comparative tool of items’ features,
we will suppose that an item is in the consideration set as soon as
the user focuses attention on a possible selection by intently looking at it.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS.
What is the inﬂuence of the recommender system? Is this
inﬂuence continuously increasing over time at the product
brokering stage?
We expect that the inﬂuence of the recommender system will
help avoid dividing choice strategies into two steps, since it helps
users to both: (1) reﬁne criteria to use with lexicographic ordering
and (2) ﬁnd valuable alternatives to a product in the consideration
set. Moreover, this inﬂuence should last from one product search
to another made consecutively by a user.
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
We collected gaze plots and heat maps, but strongly relied on Areas Of Interest (hereafter AOIs) as they are an objective data about
users’ actions on the website.
Using the eye tracking system, we aimed at measuring how users’
interest for the different parts of the website evolves over time. We
recorded an average of 1,450 ﬁxations per user. We deﬁned areas
of interest (AOIs) spread in two separate types of pages: the search
pages, and the detail pages (cf. Figure 1). Table 1 synthesizes the
average number of pages seen and the average session times.
Table 1: Statistics of sessions for the overall set of users
Average Number of Search Pages
Average Number of Detail Pages
Average Session Time (Minutes)
Then, we computed the total ﬁxation durations for each user ∈U
on the different AOIs over time t. We paid attention to durations
for four variables: the MCF tool M, the lexicographic ordered list
L (list-view), the description of perfumes D and the CRS agent R.
Usages of the MCF tool and CRS agent over time for the overall set
of users U are made explicit in Figure 2. We summed the cumulative ﬁxation durations of these two AOIs. Consequently, the curves
ﬂatten when the users stop looking at the corresponding AOIs.
We deﬁned the variables Mu(t) and Ru(t) as the ﬁxation durations of user u respectively on M and R in (t−1; t]. These have been
Duration (seconds)
Time (% session)
Cumulative usage of AOIs over time (All users, Session 1)
Duration (seconds)
Time (% session)
Cumulative usage of AOIs over time (All users, Session 2)
Multi-criteria (MCF)
Recommender (CRS)
Multi-criteria (MCF)
Recommender (CRS)
Figure 2: Evolution of MCF and CRS over time.
Usage of Recommendations vs. Multi-Criteria
Time (% session)
User no.2, session no.1
1st sight of a product, added later to the basket
Add to basket
Only Multi-criteria
Only Recommendations
Figure 3: Usage of Recommendations vs. Multi-Criteria.
normalized, as AOIs have different sizes. Then, we measured the
usage of recommendations in comparison with the multi-criteria
box for each user u and each session s, by computing:
Mu(t) + Ru(t)
We also analyzed the users’ actions from the implicit access logs
to determine the time at which users added products in the basket. Thus, we were able to cross data from the eye tracking system
and the access logs. A representative example of the function f
is displayed in Figure 3 (User 2, Session 1). Vertical dashed lines
correspond to times at which the user added a product to the basket.
The results show that in 85.71% of the sessions, the user adds
the product to the basket in the neighborhood of the intersection
point with a horizontal tangent, when the use of the recommender
Preference Questions
Attractive
Educational
Inﬂuenced my
Inﬂuenced my
Future Selections
Satisfactory
Easy to Use
Intention to Buy
Future Usage
Agreement on 5-point Likert scale
Figure 4: Answers of the Assessment Questionnaire.
is maximal. This means a decision is imminent at time tx, when:
dt (tx) = 0 and dfu,s
dt (t < tx) > 0 and dfu,s
dt (t > tx) < 0
After the experiment, we asked users to ﬁll out an assessment
questionnaire. The responses of this post-study survey are summarized in Figure 4.
DISCUSSION
The results show that for all users tested the use of the recommender system (CRS) progressively replaces the use of multicriteria search (MCF) over time according to ﬁxations (cf. Figure 2). We successfully reproduced hypotheses of about the purchase decision making process’ division into two steps. Thereby,
we noticed that each participant started the experiment by identifying adequate search criteria. Thanks to users’ access logs we know
that in 85% of the sessions this step required several search cycles
of choosing some criteria, reading examples of corresponding perfumes’ detail pages, and going back to the search page to reﬁne the
search criteria. In the other 15%, users proceeded to a decision with
only one attempt at deﬁning some adequate search criteria. The
results reﬂect the fact that users spend less time looking at choices
provided in lexicographic order (list-view) by the MCF box in favor
of detailed pages. Then, all interviewees used the selected search
criteria in order to consider alternatives, before making a decision.
Despite this notable division within the decision process, the impact of the recommender can be observed in both steps of 93% of
the sessions, according to eye tracking data. Only one session of
one user does not follow this scheme. We believe that this case
is not meaningful, since the user did not notice the recommender
system and consequently did not use it during this session.
Even when the inﬂuence of the recommender is noticeable within
both decision making steps, our experiment highlights that this effect is greater at the end of the decision process (see Figure 2).
In nearly all product searches we can see that the function fu,s is
continuously increasing, from the beginning of the search to the
moment he added it to the basket. Only two sessions of two different users are exceptions to this rule: in the ﬁrst case, the user
has not noticed the recommender. In the second case, the product
search aimed at ﬁnding a perfume for a gift (Session 2). After the
experiment, this user mentioned his incapability to come to a decision because he did not know the preferences of the person he had
in mind for the gift. Consequently, he chose a product based on a
brand that he liked. At the same time, we also noticed that the usage of recommendations in comparison with multi-criteria search,
was increasing faster for the second and third perfumes added to
the basket during Session 1, as expected in Section 3.
In order to ensure the veracity of decisions to add products in the
basket, we asked users if they would buy the chosen perfumes given
the opportunity - keeping in mind that one of the participants was
going to win a 100 Swiss franc voucher to buy one of the perfumes
he/she had added to the basket - or at least go in a perfume shop
to smell them and learn more about them (P10 in Figure 4). Four
users agreed to buy given the opportunity; two were not sure, but
agreed to smell them before making a ﬁnal decision. One user had
a neutral opinion. This data supports the idea that participants took
the decision seriously, and that the inﬂuence of the recommender
constantly increases over time to reach a ﬁnal decision.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we examined the impact of a recommender system
on customers’ decision process. We followed the two-steps model
of Haubl et al. with the aim of discovering new usage patterns
and decision subprocesses, thanks to an eye tracking system. In
particular, we paid attention to how the inﬂuence of recommender
systems integrates into the purchase decision making model. We
based our experiment on our group’s e-commerce simulation website selling perfume and other fashion goods. We collected more
than 20,300 ﬁxation data points. The analysis of this data, crosschecked with the users’ actions and assessment questions, leads to
the major conclusion that the recommender system is involved in
the two steps of the purchase process: it both helps the users to
reﬁne criteria search (to sort items in a lexicographic order) and to
choose alternatives to consider for purchase. We showed that the
inﬂuence of the recommender increases over time. The closer the
purchase decision is to being made, the more users turn towards the
recommender to assist them in their decision process.
The study constitutes a ﬁrst major step towards the formalization
of subprocesses involving recommender systems within the purchase decision model. The perspectives will also consist of measuring the impact of recommendation categories and how they offer
opportunities to discover new and interesting alternatives by providing diversity.