Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
The Perceptions of Primary School Teachers of Online Learning during the
COVID-19 Pandemic Period: A Case Study in Indonesia
Rasmitadila 1
Universitas Djuanda, Jawa Barat, Indonesia
Rusi Rusmiati Aliyyah
Universitas Djuanda, Jawa Barat, Indonesia
Reza Rachmadtullah
Universitas PGRI Adi Buana, Jawa Timur, Indonesia
Achmad Samsudin
Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia, Jawa Barat, Indonesia
Ernawulan Syaodih
Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia, Jawa Barat, Indonesia
Muhammad Nurtanto
Universitas Sultan Ageng Tirtayasa, Banten, Indonesia
Anna Riana Suryanti Tambunan
Universitas Negeri Medan, Medan, Indonesia
Abstract: This study explores the perceptions of primary school
teachers of online learning in a program developed in Indonesia called
School from Home during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Data were
collected through surveys and semi-structured interviews with 67 class
teachers in primary schools. Data analysis used thematic analysis of
qualitative data. The analysis results found four main themes, namely,
instructional strategies, challenges, support, and motivation of teachers.
This research contributes to the literature of online collaborative
learning between teachers, parents, and schools that impact student
success. Broadly, the success of online learning in Indonesia during the
COVID-19 Pandemic was determined by the readiness of technology
in line with the national humanist curriculum, support and collaboration
from all stakeholders, including government, schools, teachers, parents
and the community.
Keywords: COVID-19, Indonesia, online learning, primary school,
school from home.
Introduction
The outbreak of COVID-19 Pandemic across the world has profoundly altered almost all
aspects of life, including education, and Indonesia has not been an exception to these changes. The
1Correspondent Author E-Mail: 
Rasmitadila
difficulty of handling the outbreak from spreading more widely has made world leaders develop
super-strict rules so that the chain of the spread of COVID-19 can be broken. Some standards that
the World Health Organization has recommended, such as social distancing and physical
distancing, have created difficult choices for each country to implement. In Indonesia, “large-scale
social restrictions” were adopted in March 2020 due to the increasing number of people infected
with COVID-19. These were followed by other regulations in the form of working from home for
workers, praying from home, and homeschooling for students ranging from the early childhood
education level to higher education .
According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization , as many
as 1,186,127,211 learners were affected across the globe, or about 67.7% of the total enrolled
learners from 144 country-wide closures, and nations had to change their learning systems due to
Changes in learning systems force schools to implement distance education or online
learning, e-learning, distance education, correspondence education, external studies, flexible
learning, and massive open online courses (MOOCs). The same conditions and rules apply in the
United States. According to the Centers for Desease Control and Prevention , e-learning
plans have been implemented, including digital and distance learning options, as feasible and
appropriate to ensure the continuity of education for students during the COVID-19 pandemic. A
report from The World Bank stated that several countries had implemented different
learning systems as physical schools were closed due to COVID-19. For example, in early February
2020, China implemented an online learning system by holding simultaneous online learning
exercises to ensure that learning for students was not interrupted. In Bulgaria, in early April 2020,
the Ministry of Education and Science launched an e-learning system. In Finland, on account of
school closures, instruction and guidance for students have been implemented by distance learning,
digital learning environments and solutions and, where necessary, independent learning. Several
ways to support e-learning have been found that including creating an e-Content Repository, which
publishes materials of pedagogical specialists for working in e-learning environments.
The Indonesian government's implementation of large-scale social restrictions has impacted
the routines of the community and students in the learning system. Distance learning or using online
systems have provided solutions for schools that are starting to implement the School from Home
(SFH) system. SFH is a program that migrates the learning process from school to home. Based on
the instructions of the Ministry of Education and Culture, schools are to organize online learning
to provide a meaningful learning experience for students without being burdened with the demands
of achieving all curriculum requirements. In this, SFH considers the health and safety of students,
educators, education staff, and the community.
Online learning emphasizes Internet-based courses offered synchronously and
asynchronously. Synchronous learning is a form of learning with direct interactions between
students and teachers while simultaneously using online forms such as conferences and online chat.
Meanwhile, asynchronous learning is a form of learning indirectly (not at the same time) using an
independent learning approach. Some subject matter is designed and displayed on LMS on Moodle,
or email systems, blogs, online discussions, Wikipedia, videos, articles, and other platforms . Students have access to the teacher synchronously, asynchronously, or both .
During the SFH implementation period , stakeholders faced
many obstacles, especially schools that suddenly had to apply SFH. The application of SFH has
presented challenges in implementing online learning systems, especially in the use of facilities
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
and the availability of infrastructure, which has been minimal so far. Additionally, the transition of
instructional methods that traditionally have been through face-to-face to more indirect methods
has forced schools to engage in a learning flow that has complexities and limitations.
Various problems have included the provision of school infrastructure ,
such as an Internet network that all schools have not enjoyed previously, especially in villages, as
well as the cost of purchasing expensive data packages. Although the Indonesian government
recently issued a regulation that school operational funds could be allocated to buy data packages,
schools still could not fully enjoy SFH learning. In addition to data packages, bad signals are
obstacles in the implementation of learning. Often students are late in collecting and completing
assignments, and even understanding the material has become a significant problem for students.
Another change is that the involvement of parents with children has become more intense in SFH
than in pre-SFH learning. Parents can assist children in understanding subject matter that is not
understood or conveyed well by a teacher. Collaboration between teachers and parents in
elementary schools is necessary for the implementation of online learning because parent mostly
own support hardware such as cellular phones or laptops.
Teachers, as the spearhead of the implementation of online learning, must be able to
condition all instructional components. These include instructional methods, media that will be
used in learning, use of instructional time related to the time of application use, and psychological
and social factors that significantly affect teachers' motivation when teaching. Teachers have tasks
and responsibilities that are not easily transferrable when they must change from the face-to-face
learning system in the classroom to an online system coupled with online learning experiences that
have never been implemented before. A teacher must overcome all the problems that occur in
online learning responsively so that the learning continues to achieve the targets set.
This study explores the perceptions of primary school teachers of online learning as an
impact of school from home during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Indonesia.
Methodology
Research Design
The research used a case study. The purpose of the case study is to allow researchers to
obtain and examine data in a context or phenomenon. The selected cases can be people, students,
or staff schools who are members of a school community . Case study data is used
to describe a case in-depth in real-life comprehensively . In this study, the impact of
online learning as an impact of SFH on primary classroom teachers was explored in-depth during
the COVID-19 Pandemic in Indonesia.
A literature search was carried out to determine the conceptual and operational definitions
of the research focus, namely data relating to online learning during the COVID-19 Pandemic. The
creation of the instruments for data collection was based on operational definitions, and the
instruction was divided into three main parts that included instruction, psychological and social
issues. Data collections were done in stages, through online surveys and then semi-structured
interviews to obtain in-depth data. Data analysis was conducted following established procedures
for analyzing observation items and indicators .
Rasmitadila
Participants
Participants in this study were 67 class teachers in primary schools in 5 provinces, namely,
Jakarta, West Java, East Java, Central Java, and West Kalimantan, Indonesia. A purposive
sampling technique was used by distributing questionnaires online using Google Form to
representatives of research colleagues who had access to primary schools in the five provinces. The
selection of the five provinces was based on COVID-19 distribution data obtained from the
Indonesian COVID-19 Task Force as a special body handling the COVID-19 Pandemic in
Indonesia. Descriptive data of demographic characteristics, including gender, length of teaching
experience, and level of education of the teachers, are presented in Table 1.
Profile of Participants
Working years as a teacher
5 -10 years
10-15 years
15-20 years
Level of education
Bachelor's
Data Collection
Data collection was conducted in two stages. The first step was carried out using a survey
of classroom teachers in primary schools in five provinces in Indonesia who used online learning
during SFH as respondents. The survey comprised 10 questions in the form of short answers, using
Google Form. The questions were arranged based on the literature relevant to the purpose of the
research, which covers the instruction, psychological and social aspects of the classroom teacher.
The survey data were collected from May 15, 2020, to May 23, 2020, and 67 respondents
participated. After the survey data were collected, a transcript of the results of each respondent was
made, and initial codes were created. The second stage of the collection was conducted using semistructured open-ended questions with 10 of the 67 elementary school teachers who responded to
the survey. Researchers made interview guides based on the initial code from first stage data. The
purpose of the interviews was to get more meaningful data. Interviews were conducted online for
1.5 - 2 hours per respondent via the WhatsApp application from May 26, 2020, to May 29, 2020.
Every day researchers interviewed 3-4 respondents. Each teacher was assured of confidentiality
and assigned a pseudonym.
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using inductive and thematic analytics to identify, evaluate, and make
a theme expressed by participants . The responses of each participant,
especially in the first stage, were coded using keywords so as not to overlap. The NVivo 12 program
was used to facilitate the coding and categorization of researchers. Data from surveys and
interviews were entered into Nodes and Cases to be grouped into data with specific codes. Thematic
maps show the organization of concepts according to various levels, and potential interactions
between concepts were then developed. The analysis team then discussed all codes and
categorizations, as well as the possibility of integration between codes so that the codes could be
streamlined. This inductive technique allowed the identification of themes that participants gave in
response to the research questions . See Figure 1 below.
Figure 1. Results of Data Analysis of Classroom Teacher Perceptions of the Impact of SFH
During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Credibility and dependability were considered during this research. Starting from data
collection instruments were used based on a review of relevant literature. This instrument was also
designed using expert opinions for e-learning experts, experts in social studies, as well as experts
Rasmitadila
in educational psychology. After the data were collected, member-checking 
was used to check credibility, in which participants (especially in interviews with 10 class teachers)
were asked to clarify that their contributions were accurately reflected in previous data. The use of
investigator triangulation involving all seven researchers in all stages of research with regular
conferences added to dependency . Triangulation of investigators also helps
researchers to reduce bias because triangulation facilitates the cross-checking of the integrity of
participant responses . Furthermore, the involvement of seven researchers to
investigate the same problem brought different points of view to the investigation, thus, supporting
the integrity of the findings.
Instructional Strategy
Instructional strategies are a set of instructional components used in instructional activities
to achieve instructional objectives . The instructional strategies found
in this study included objectives, learning steps, methods, media, time, and learning assessments.
See Figure 2.
Figure 2. The Instructional Strategy on Online Learning Used by Teachers in SFH
The use of instructional media aims to make it easier for students to understand the subject
matter by providing a different learning experiences that
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
are expected to stimulate the interest of students and their motivation to learn . The instructional media that teachers most often used were learning videos,
which were either downloaded from YouTube and or learning videos that teachers had created
before the COVID-19 Pandemic. Some teachers said that instructional videos were one of the most
accessible media to use because the teacher already had time, and students could easily understand
the subject matter. Several class teachers shared this opinion:
I use videos that I have downloaded from YouTube and some videos
that I had before COVID-19 so that students more easily understand
the subject matter. (Teacher 6)
I find it challenging to use other instructional media besides videos
because pandemic conditions limit me [from being] more creative in
making other media. (Teacher 12)
Besides video, WhatsApp, Google Forms, Worksheets, YouTube, and Zoom also served as
media in delivering learning material. Teachers sent lesson material using WhatsApp, Google
Forms, and Worksheets to students' parents, which was subsequently given to the students. The use
of this instructional media was related to the media that most parents also use.
The most commonly used instructional methods were the question and answer (Q&A)
format and lectures. The use of the Q&A method was the easiest way for teachers
to measure students' understanding of the subject matter being taught and the discussion method
that allows for two-way interaction between teachers and students. Teachers carried out the Q&A
method and discussion using Zoom, Google Classroom, and PowToon. Teachers also used the
lecture method due to time constraints and other problems such as poor Internet signals, and the
condition of virtual classrooms that are less conducive to learning. SFH forces teachers to use quick
and easy instructional methods. Teachers used alternatives such as offline assignments and quizzes
with a predetermined time limit to determine the level of student understanding. Of this, teacher 10
I have difficulty using instructional methods that are more attractive to
students like in the classroom because the conditions are not possible.
Everything is limited, including quota availability, sometimes bad
signals, and students are not ready. So, I use the question and answer
method to find out whether students are familiar with the material that
I submit. (Teacher 10)
In SFH, teachers must be able to use limited time, which automatically influences the pace
of learning, instructional objectives, and learning assessment. The instructional time that teachers
usually used in one meeting before SFH was 1.5-2 hours, but during SFH, the time was shorter
because of the intervention of parents, as well as the limited use of application time. When students
work on assignments or do questions and answers with the teacher, parents help them by giving
answers so they can quickly answer questions. So, the use of online applications causes teachers to
convey only important points of subject matter that must be delivered to students. The use of the
instructional time that changes in each meeting also affects the instructional steps, including the
discipline of students in the following learning. Discipline involves turning in assignments on time
and not delaying the completion of the task at hand, so students must study the materials to not
Rasmitadila
experience delays in instructional time. Of course, the availability of learning facilities such as
mobile phones/laptops and Internet data quotas from parents is crucial in the implementation of
learning. Changes in instructional objectives and steps will also automatically affect the way and
forms of learning assessment for students.
A teacher cannot fairly conduct assessments, which include cognitive, affective, and
psychomotor aspects in an online environment. Indeed, teachers often felt that proper assessment
of the cognitive aspect was challenging to do fairly because of the intervention of parents who
helped provide answers to the assignments/tests given by a teacher. Assessment of psychomotor
aspects is often better. Assignments such as singing or practicing specific movements can be
assessed better by a teacher because these are based on student abilities without parental
intervention when recording.
Meanwhile, teachers also find it challenging to judge affective aspects that refer to students'
attitudes because of differences in attitudes shown at school and home. This condition tends to be
due to parental intervention that does not reflect the actual circumstances of students, which might
be seen in school before SFH. Teacher's perceptions of the impact of learning time, goals, steps,
and student assessment can be seen in the opinions of two teachers.
The instructional time during SFH tends to be shorter, because of the
limited time I use applications such as Zoom so that my learning steps
are adjusted to the existing conditions. Besides, I also change
instructional objectives by reducing the amount of material, as well as
fewer goals from face-to-face. (Teacher 11)
I find it difficult to assess cognitive aspects because of the intervention
of parents to provide answers to their children, so the assessment is not
fair enough to describe the understanding of students. (Teacher 21)
Instructional strategies implemented by teachers during SFH have had impacts that have
degraded the quality of learning. Changes in instructional time lead to changes in instructional
objectives, instructional steps, instructional methods, media, and students' assessment. The
involvement of all members of the school community in the quality of learning during the SFH
period lies not only in the role of the teacher. Parents are also involved in providing support for
their children’s progress, acting as providers of learning facilities, and providing opportunities for
children to obtain competencies. A teacher must be creative and innovative in designing methods
of instruction so that learning objectives can be achieved.
The Challenge to Online Teaching
The challenges that teachers face in an online environment during SFH include four subthemes, namely, technical obstacles, student conditioning, the participation of students, and online
teaching experience. Figure 3 below illustrates the challenges that teachers face.
Teachers faced several challenges related to the emergence of obstacles associated with
technical issues. Not all parents have cell phones/laptops, and Internet signals are poor, especially
in the suburbs. The challenges that these obstacles present determine the instructional activities
that can take place. Problems can arise if these technical obstacles cannot be overcome and mean
that student participation in learning is not optimal. As a result, some students cannot follow the
lessons and experience delays in completing an assignment that the teacher gives. These technical
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
obstacles often occur for students with a low economic level. This condition is explained by the
teachers below:
Difficulties in setting up online systems that are too complex or because
of poor networks. Some students don't have cell phones or laptops.
(Teacher 16)
My difficulty in online learning is that to be able to take part in students'
lessons, it requires a lot of quota, and signals are good, let alone a lot
of material that must be delivered. (Teacher 4)
Figure 3. Teachers’ Challenges in Teaching Online During SFH
In the implementation of online learning during SFH, the availability of data packages and
Internet networks, and ownership of cellular phones or laptops is an absolute must. Students must
have these so that all instructional activities can be followed smoothly. Although some teachers
end up doing offline learning or visiting students at home because of these factors, the risk of
spreading COVID-19 is significant, so teachers rarely do these. A teacher must be able to consider
extending the completion time so that the needs of all students can be accommodated. Through the
Ministry of Education and Culture, the Government of Indonesia has helped in the form of school
operational assistance funds; the expectation is that this support will boost the sustainability of
learning related to technical obstacles that can be overcome properly.
Rasmitadila
Other challenges, such as conditioning students to participate in online learning, is difficult
for teachers. Factors that create these barriers may be divided into internal and external factors.
Internal factors are difficulties arising from the student's home environment, such as interference
from family members (younger and older siblings). These factors cause students who are learning
not to be focused on learning. One factor is a less conducive home learning environment in which
the activities of family members students cause distractions that reduce the concentration necessary
to understand the subject matter. External factors that arise are the disturbances from other students
when implementing learning using an online application in a virtual classroom. Students talk to
other students with topics that are unrelated to the subject matter being studied. As a result, virtual
classes become crowded and less conducive. Teachers 8 and 34 remarked on this.
When lessons are taking place, sometimes the situation of the student's
home is less conducive, for example, interference from younger siblings
or students who are disturbing). (Teacher 8)
I have to reprimand students often because they sometimes talk when
learning takes place, which reduces learning time, and I cannot
measure student understanding. (Teacher 34)
Conditioning students by teachers remains difficult during SFH, and a teacher must carry
out conditioning activities in the virtual classroom so that learning can run smoothly. This
dramatically determines the enthusiasm and motivation of students to learn. For this reason, a
teacher must be able to ensure that all students are ready to learn and look for creative ways to
engage them.
conditioning
participation/activeness of students in learning activities. Student participation in instructional
activities is faced with problems of data packages and ownership of cellular phones or laptops, as
well as the enthusiasm of students to learn. Like the conditioning of students, the teacher must also
seek ways to maintain student enthusiasm. During SFH, several teachers stated that it was not easy
to maintain student enthusiasm for learning. At the beginning of SFH and online learning, students
were enthusiastic about implementing learning, but after two months, students began to feel bored
and less eager to learn. Teachers 1 and 17 explained this.
If the beginning of SFH, students are still enthusiastic, but after two
months, students often feel bored. (Teacher 1)
I try to make students not get bored using online learning because I see
after 1-month students feel bored, and some complain that they want to
study in class as usual. (Teacher 17)
The technological experience of teachers in an online environment is also one of the
challenges that determines the smoothness of instructional activities . The emphasis on the duties and obligations of teachers in
teaching during SFH, and the ability of teachers to understand ICT have impacted the success of
online learning during SFH. Teachers who do not have online teaching experience or have
difficulty running technology and information tools will usually find it challenging to carry out
online learning because SFH forces teachers to master a variety of applications. Even teachers who
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
have teaching experience or senior teachers can find it difficult to run applications. This condition
becomes a burden for teachers in implementing instruction, so learning is not optimal. For teachers
who master applications, technology tools, and computers, online learning can be an effective
instructional method to use during SFH. Teachers 22 and 14 talked about this condition:
So far, I have never taught online, but because I have to learn online, I
find it challenging to implement it because I lack knowledge of
technology. (Teacher 22)
Sometimes it becomes a burden for me when I cannot teach online
because I have never taught online. (Teacher 14)
The challenges that teachers faced impacted students learning. All technical barriers,
conditioning, and student involvement, and online teacher teaching experience negatively impacted
the achievement of instructional objectives and high-quality learning
Instruction during SFH will not run smoothly if support from colleagues, headmasters, and
schools is not provided. Without proper support, a teacher who must design instruction might lose
confidence and enthusiasm. Implementing online learning has changed instructional strategy, so
support from colleagues, parents, headmasters, and schools is vital to continue the implementation
of instruction in an orderly manner.
Figure 4. Support for Teachers in Online Learning During SFH
Support from peers includes encouragement to continue teaching online, helping each other
if there are fellow teachers who cannot use other computer applications or programs, as well as
coordination of classroom material between classes conducted online. Teachers 10 and 32 made
the following comments.
Rasmitadila
[We must be] very supportive and motivating to one another because if
a teacher does not have the motivation to teach how students will learn.
(Teacher 10)
Peers encourage one another, that teaching is not a burden, even
though it has to teach with an online system. (Teacher 32)
Support from parents contributes quite significantly. Parents feel that online learning has
changed the quality of their children's learning. At the beginning of online learning, parents were
very enthusiastic that the school was using an online learning system. After more than a month,
parental support decreased. The low Internet literacy of some parents is an issue, as is the largescale social restrictions program that has caused many offices to lay off employees, causing
economic problems. For families whose parents have lost their jobs, loss of income has meant the
reduction of expenses like Internet services. Some students do not have cell phones or laptops that
are commonly used in interacting with teachers in virtual classrooms. Below are the comments of
teachers 11 and 32.
Not all students and parents are Internet literate. (Teacher 11)
To do online, it needs support from various factors; one of them is
economic. (Teacher 32)
Headmasters play an essential role in determining and implementing policies that are
appropriate during SFH. Support from headmasters in SFH conditions can be in the form of
motivation to teachers, coordinating all school equipment, teacher readiness, funding, and other
supporting aspects such as the availability of learning facilities and infrastructure. Motivation or
enthusiasm from the headmaster provides comfort to a teacher so that learning can take place
smoothly . The headmaster determines the funds to support online
instructional activities such as data packages, which are essential for implementing online learning.
School funds allocated to support all school activities during the SFH, guided by the Ministry of
Education regulations, provide the flexibility for school principals to determine the appropriate
allocation of funds, which may be may be made to the operational funds of teachers and the school
as a whole. Teachers 16 and 33 commented on this.
I think headmasters and colleagues motivate each other for
instructional activities during the COVID-19 Pandemic; the reason is
that we all support each other for mutual progress and help each other
if we have difficulties. (Teacher 16)
Headmasters and peers motivate each other to teach during the
COVID-19 Pandemic, including funds for the purchase of pulses and
internet quota. (Teacher 33)
So, the support of headmasters and schools helps to determine the implementation of online
learning during SFH. Headmasters must ensure that all teachers can carry out instructions with
enthusiasm so that all students can learn despite physical distancing and social distancing during
the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
Teacher Motivation
The implementation of SFH has experienced ups and downs in teacher motivation related
to conditions that changed during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Changes in the environment with an
increase in the number of people affected by the COVID-19 virus have altered not only lifestyles
but also the enthusiasm to carry out work-related activities. High motivation is essential for
teachers to have during the SFH because the complexity of instruction requires teachers to
overcome problems in virtual classrooms quickly. Three things have influenced teacher motivation
during SFH: a teacher's spirit in carrying out online learning, a teacher's enthusiasm, and the duties
and obligations of a teacher. These three things are interconnected and determine the success of
learning being carried out with students.
Figure 5. Teacher Motivation to Teach Online Learning During SFH
Teaching motivation during the SFH period must be kept stable because of the dynamic
learning environment due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. Teacher enthusiasm is directed at achieving
high teacher performance . However, teachers are less enthusiastic with SFH
than with face-to-face learning. Teachers cannot interact directly (face-to-face) physically with
students, so teachers cannot gauge the understanding of students when learning online. This lack
of physical interaction, in turn, has led to a decline in the enthusiasm to teach . Teacher 27 said:
I am more enthusiastic about teaching face to face because I can
interact directly with children, share their joy with them, and carry out
the learning process more optimally. (Teacher 27)
Teacher 18 added:
[I am] Less enthusiastic because I cannot teach directly. (Teacher 18)
Thus, after three months of conducting SFH, the spirit and enthusiasm of teachers had
decreased, causing teachers to go through the motions to complete teaching obligations until the
end of the semester.
Rasmitadila
Discussion
School from home during the COVID-19 Pandemic has significantly impacted all countries
in the world. Within a few months after the COVID-19 Pandemic began, almost all countries ad
implemented online learning systems, both online (using online applications, TV, radio) and offline
(printed books, modules). In Indonesia, changes in the instructional system during the SFH period
because of the COVID-19 Pandemic have impacted learning activities for teachers, students, and
parents . These included impacts on instructional strategies and techniques. In the
context of Indonesia, these included changes in instructional strategies, technology readiness to
teachers in implementing online learning, support, and the motivation of teachers, parents, schools,
and government involvement. Thus, SFH must be well established so that learning objectives can
be achieved .
The impact of the changes in the teaching and learning process brought about by SFH has
affected teacher performance and the quality of education, especially in Indonesia. In this current
study, the participating teachers believed that instructional strategy needed change and that all
stakeholders, including governments, schools, social organizations, school committees, parents
must sit together to determine and formulate online learning goals that are in line with a national
curriculum based on humanism. Concerning instructional strategies, they stressed that
technological readiness including technology capacity, whether online use (TV learning, radio,
online applications) or offline (printed teaching materials, modules, textbooks) was necessary to
support the success of online learning
Another aspect is teaching material adapted to the conditions and needs of students
 . The development of these materials requires
time, effort and focus from a teacher because the teaching of the subject matter before SFH and
using SFH is radically different. A teacher must align the instructional objectives with the context
of teaching in a new learning environment . Parents must understand the material
because parents help students to understand the subject matter in the SFH process. The situation
becomes even more complicated if parents do not understand the subject matter, and the
instructional process does not go according to the instructional strategies that a teacher has set.
Teachers can modify instruction using a pedagogical approach that suits their interests and abilities
cognitive, including using group discussion methods, peer assistance, and peer assessment . The emphasis
of instruction should be more on how well students understand a lesson, without being burdened
by the national curriculum before SFH.
Student involvement and participation in online learning must be boosted because they
seem to have lost interest over time. The use of varied instructional methods will encourage more
enthusiastic participation in online learning. In this respect, the government should develop online
educational resources that align with the national curriculum and help teachers in the process.
 . Such free materials would reduce the burdens on the teacher to create
learning materials and reduce costs to parents and students. Besides online educational resources,
video conferencing applications, media applications, social media or other social features can help
parents cope with the availability of student teaching materials at home . To help address this issue, the Indonesian government created an Education TV
program called "learning from home" through the government TV network (TVRI) to help children
learn from home for school level from education early childhood to secondary school.
Unfortunately, many of these methods require money for hardware and software
applications and for expanded data plans to use the materials. Lack of money to acquire these
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies
2020, Vol. 7, No. 2, 90-109
 
Copyright 2020
ISSN: 2149-1291
resources remains an issue in Indonesia. Indeed, according to Sikirit , the most significant
obstacle that students face when studying at home is the lack of Internet access and electronic
The support of parents, teachers, and government (central and regional) is urgently needed
in the SFH process . This support has several elements. One is
the continuous support for the training of teachers in using technology and designing and
monitoring online learning . A second necessary source of support is the
involvement of parents, teachers, and the school is a collaborative effort, which can be achieved
by creating a community of knowledge to understand online learning practices. Learning materials
developed by this community can be created collaboratively so that home-based online learning
can be appropriately synergized. Third, peer support or collaboration is also essential to successful
online learning . Such collaboration among teachers will help find
solutions to adjusting subject matter to help teachers, and teachers can share ways in which they
motivate students and overcome student boredom during instruction by sharing online learning
experiences.
Thus, if the School from Home program is to continue successfully, several factors must be
considered. First is changing in the national curriculum to ensure flexibility and harmonization
with all learning components. Second, technology readiness must be accelerated via easier and
more widespread access to the Internet and the provision of Internet networks. Third, teacher
training on the use of technology applications should be accelerated . Fourth, providing open education resources would reduce the operational costs
of online learning . Fifth,
collaboration among teachers, parents, schools should be boosted to improve the process and
morale .
Implications
This study explored the perceptions of primary school teachers of Indonesia’s SFH program
during the COVID-19 Pandemic. The findings of this study indicate that teachers, as well as
learning designers, should design online learning frameworks that consider student backgrounds,
especially family economic backgrounds, as well as students' learning experiences and needs in
implementing the national curriculum during the COVID-19 Pandemic. This research shows that
designing online learning with varied learning strategies in harmony with a more flexible national
curriculum, technological readiness, and collaboration is critical to successful online learning. Such
flexibility is essential because Indonesia has a vast geographic spread stretching 1,000 miles from
north to south and more than 3,100 miles from east to west, with more than 14,000 UN registered
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
This study used a qualitative research design encompassing surveys and interviews to
explore perceptions of classroom teachers in primary schools about the impact of SFH during the
COVID-19 Pandemic for 3-4 months in 2020. As does all research, this study has limitations. This
research was a small representation of elementary school class teachers who teach online
throughout Indonesia. For this reason, future research to be more comprehensive and requires
quantitative studies or mixed-methods studies. Future research could address the perceptions of
students and parents about the implementation of online learning during SFH. The research could
Rasmitadila
be expanded to other provinces in Indonesia. Last, the research could examine the development of
online learning curriculum models for students of diverse backgrounds
Conclusion
School from Home during the COVID-19 Pandemic has impacted the educational systems
of all countries across the globe significantly. In response to this crisis, countries have applied
different rules and methods for dealing with changes in the learning system. Within a few months,
national educational systems turned to solutions like online methods (using online applications,
TV, radio and offline methods including printed books and modules. Along with these changes,
alterations have been necessary for instructional strategies, technological readiness to implement
online learning and providing support and motivation to all concerned parties. While the great hope
is that the situation soon returns to normal, in the meantime, changes in national curricula must be
made to increase flexibility, and technological readiness must be accelerated. Lastly, education
must be viewed as collaborative community effort among government, teachers, parents, and
schools to increase the efficacy of teaching-and-learning methods that have been adversely affected
and ensure that students do not fall behind.