rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Opinion piece
Cite this article: Ainley V, Apps MAJ,
Fotopoulou A, Tsakiris M. 2016 ‘Bodily
precision’: a predictive coding account of
individual differences in interoceptive accuracy.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003.
 
Accepted: 26 July 2016
One contribution of 16 to a theme issue
‘Interoception beyond homeostasis: affect,
cognition and mental health’.
Subject Areas:
behaviour, cognition, health and disease
and epidemiology, neuroscience
interoception, interoceptive accuracy, heartbeat
perception, free energy, predictive coding
Author for correspondence:
Vivien Ainley
e-mail: 
‘Bodily precision’: a predictive coding
account of individual differences
in interoceptive accuracy
Vivien Ainley1, Matthew A. J. Apps2, Aikaterini Fotopoulou3
and Manos Tsakiris1
1Laboratory of Action and Body, Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London,
Egham TW20 0EX, UK
2Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK
3Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6B, UK
VA, 0000-0003-0373-0079
Individuals differ in their awareness of afferent information from within
their bodies, which is typically assessed by a heartbeat perception measure
of ‘interoceptive accuracy’ (IAcc). Neural and behavioural correlates of this
trait have been investigated, but a theoretical explanation has yet to be presented. Building on recent models that describe interoception within the free
energy/predictive coding framework, this paper applies similar principles to
IAcc, proposing that individual differences in IAcc depend on ‘precision’ in
interoceptive systems, i.e. the relative weight accorded to ‘prior’ representations and ‘prediction errors’ (that part of incoming interoceptive sensation
not accounted for by priors), at various levels within the cortical hierarchy
and between modalities. Attention has the effect of optimizing precision
both within and between sensory modalities. Our central assumption is that
people with high IAcc are able, with attention, to prioritize interoception
over other sensory modalities and can thus adjust the relative precision of
their interoceptive priors and prediction errors, where appropriate, given
their personal history. This characterization explains key findings within the
interoception literature; links results previously seen as unrelated or contradictory; and may have important implications for understanding cognitive,
behavioural and psychopathological consequences of both high and low
interoceptive awareness.
This article is part of the themed issue ‘Interoception beyond homeostasis:
affect, cognition and mental health’.
1. Introduction
The free energy principle proposes that living systems are driven to minimize the
sum of differences between the sensory sensations they encounter and the sensory
inputs predicted by internal models of the world . Perception, action, attention
and learning have all been described within this account . It is timely that interoception—defined as afferent information arising from within the body —has
recently been placed at the heart of free energy minimization, with the recognition
that interoceptive signals provide the organism with the vital maps of its internal
states that underpin homeostasis . However, recent theoretical models 
have typically not discussed one of the most prominent topics within the interoception literature—namely the considerable variability that individuals display in
their ability to call interoceptive signals into awareness and the influence that this
variability has on behaviour. The purpose of this paper is to apply the free energy
framework to explain ‘interoceptive accuracy’ (IAcc) which is assumed to reflect
trait awareness of interoceptive sensations.
The free energy framework is operationalized under the principles of predictive coding and Bayesian inference . It is assumed that the brain builds
& 2016 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
internal ‘generative models’, within which ‘prior’ predictions/
beliefs about what accounts for the incoming sensory data are
updated by ‘prediction errors’ (PEs), which are that part of the
data that is not compatible with the prior. These probabilistic
predictions are passed, top-down, through hierarchical brain
pathways, whereas PEs are passed, bottom-up, for resolution
at a higher level, such that the ‘posterior’ prediction at any
one level (after updating to accommodate PEs) becomes the
prior for the level below (figure 1) . Technically, these
priors are known as empirical priors. Empirical priors are posterior beliefs that arise within the hierarchies of the (sensory)
data and are therefore prior beliefs that are informed by sensory evidence. For the sake of simplicity, we refer to these as
priors. The interoceptive hierarchy in the brain has been
described, extending from spinal visceral afferents to subcortical structures and projecting to the amygdala, insula, anterior
cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices . Although interoceptive predictions and prediction errors must be reconciled
at each level of this hierarchy, the insula is assumed to be the
principal cortical region in the interoceptive pathway, being
activated by all interoceptive and affective stimuli ( , but
see also ). Diffusion tensor and functional imaging data indicate that the anterior insula is a hub between brain networks
involved in externally directed attention to stimuli in the
environment and internally directed attention to one’s body
 . Thus, it is potentially the key region that mediates variability in the influence of interoceptive signals on behaviour
 , which is the trait that IAcc seeks to capture.
Much of interoceptive signalling supports homeostasis
without awareness but people are also capable of being aware
of interoceptive sensations—either through top-down-directed
attention, as in a heartbeat counting task, or as a result of
bottom-up salience, such as when perceiving the racing heart
accompanies
Psychological
interoceptive awareness has focused mainly on objective
measures of the accuracy with which we become aware of our
heartbeats because of the known role that heart–brain interactions (and concomitant balance between the sympathetic
and parasympathetic systems) plays in emotion processing .
IAcc is generally measured byone of two types of heartbeat perception tasks. IAcc is assumed to reflect the individual’s trait
awareness of, and tendency to be influenced by, their
interoceptive sensations. Of the two principal heartbeat perception tasks, ‘mental tracking’ involves counting one’s heartbeat
 , whereas ‘heartbeat discrimination’ requires judging
whether an external signal is synchronous with one’s heartbeat
 . Although it has been suggested that heartbeat counting
tasks are confounded by the use of particular strategies and
do not reflect awareness of the heartbeat per se , there is an
extensive research literature linking both types of heartbeat perception measures to a variety of behavioural outcomes .
This suggests that IAcc does reflect trait awareness of interoceptive sensation and consequent behaviour. Moreover, scores on
the two types of heartbeat perception test correlate in individuals with above average IAcc , and both measures are
related to awareness of gastric cues . Except where otherwise stated, this paper cites studies that have measured IAcc
using heartbeat counting. The purpose of our model is to contribute to the understanding of mechanisms that potentially
underlie variability in IAcc, which may, in turn, clarify its behavioural effects. Here we present a model of IAcc according
to the free energy framework, in order to provide a better
understanding of the mechanisms that underlie variability in
IAcc and, in turn, clarify its behavioural effects. We first outline
how the free energy and predictive coding principles provide
an account of interoceptive signalling, followed by a discussion
of how this can be applied to IAcc. We subsequently link this
account with other variables and with behaviour. Finally, we
forward: prediction error
backward: prediction
backward: precision
at level 1 the
reciprocal dashed
red and black
arrows represent
an autonomic
level 1 (lower)
level 3 (higher)
Figure 1. Schematic overview of the hierarchical message passing in the brain that is assumed to underlie predictive coding. Predictions (priors) are illustrated as
black lines that project down the levels of the hierarchy, from prediction units (deep pyramidal cells) shown as black triangles. Forward projecting prediction errors
are represented by red lines, passing up the hierarchy from prediction error units (superficial pyramidal cells), which are represented by red triangles. Importantly,
PEs and predictions occur at every level. The dashed red and black arrows indicate local processing within a level. At level 1, they thus represent an autonomic reflex.
Precision, which plays the crucial role of determining the relative weight of the PEs versus the priors, at every level of the hierarchy, passes down the hierarchy and is
indicated by the blue arrows. A percept is formed when PE is minimized at all levels within the hierarchy. Adapted from Edwards et al. .
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
indicate how this model may provide a novel perspective
on mental health problems in which IAcc is putatively an
underlying cause.
2. ‘Perceptual inference’, ‘precision’ and ‘active
inference’ within predictive coding
IAcc depends on forming percepts for heartbeats, although
awareness may be at the very borders of conscious perception
 . Within predictive coding it is assumed that perception is
achieved by ‘perceptual inference’, which requires minimization of free energy (equivalent to the sum total of PEs) at
every level in the hierarchy, so that the sensory data has
been accounted for as fully as possible and a precept is
formed . This process applies equally well to interoceptive
percepts (by ‘interoceptive inference’) and to percepts
that do not reach conscious awareness .
Within predictive coding, empirical priors, predictions and
associated PEs are all represented in terms of expectations
and precisions. (Expectations and precisions correspond to
first- and second-order moments of the probabilistic beliefs.)
‘Precision’ refers to the inverse variance associated with each
probability distribution and is thus a measure of their relative
salience and reliability . Precision operates both within and
between modalities. Within any modality, at each level of the
hierarchy and taking account of the given context, the brain
weighs the relative precision of PEs that inform or revise expectations at higher levels of the hierarchy .
Figure 2 illustrates this relationship schematically. If PEs
are precise relative to a prior (as in figure 2a), this implies
that they carry more reliable information than the prior and
the likely effect is that they will update the prior, i.e. that
the posterior will shift in the direction of the PEs, with
increased precision. For example, jumping into a swimming
pool on a hot day produces precise PEs that will update the
priors for body temperature. The (updated) posterior at any
given level becomes a prior for the level below in the hierarchy. A relatively precise prior, by contrast may be impervious
to imprecise PEs from the level below. Examples are various
visual illusions that depend on precise (overlearned) priors
that do not update to incoming sensory data . This is represented by figure 2b.
Given that precision is always relative and that precepts
are usually multimodal, precision plays a similarly crucial
role in weighting the available information that arises from
various modalities and converges on multimodal association
areas in the sensory hierarchy. For example, at night when the
precision of vision declines, the relative precision of PEs in
other modalities rises, which accounts for our tendency to
rely on touch and audition in the dark. The relative precision
of interoceptive signals may also increase, which one author
has suggested might explain humanity’s common fear of
‘bogeymen’ . Importantly, for our model, the relative
precision of PEs and priors within and between modalities
is constantly being updated .
Precise PEs can also lead to ‘active inference’ whereby the
organism moves in order to acquire more sensory information with which to confirm or update its priors. It does
this by forming a prediction of the proprioceptive consequences of the intended/desired movement. This prediction
gives rise to precise proprioceptive PEs that descend through
the hierarchy providing motor control, fulfilled at the
lowest level by peripheral motor reflexes . Mechanisms
equivalent to active inference exist in interoception . If
there are deviations from the desired (prior) inner state of
the body (e.g. there is a fall in body temperature because
one jumps into a swimming pool) then the consequent interoceptive PEs may be resolved by updating interoceptive
priors (the water soon feels less cold). However, interoceptive
PEs can also resolve themselves by engaging peripheral autonomic reflexes (e.g. closing capillaries) in the same way that
precise prediction errors enslave classical motor reflex arcs
to elicit movement . In other words, interoceptive and
proprioceptive prediction errors can either ascend into the
brain to revise prior beliefs or descend to the periphery to
make those prior beliefs come true by engaging reflexes.
The relative precision of ascending and descending prediction
determines
precise PEs update the prior
posterior distribution
prior distribution
probability
PE distribution
imprecise PEs have little effect on the prior
probability
posterior distribution
prior distribution
value of some hidden state
PE distribution
Figure 2. The graphs show Gaussian probability distributions representing, at
one particular level in the hierarchy, the descending prior and posterior and
the ascending PEs (which arises from the incoming sensory data). These distributions refer to some hidden state of the organism (e.g. some aspect of its
interoceptive state) that has to be inferred. The widths of the various
distributions correspond to their variance. Precision is the inverse of variance.
The relative precision of PEs and prior is crucial in determining the updating
of the prior to the posterior. (a) A context in which the precision of the PEs is
precise (relative to the prior), so that the posterior is shifted towards the PEs
(arrow). (b) By contrast, imprecise PEs have little impact on the prior. The
posterior then descends to the level below this in the hierarchy where it
becomes, in turn, the empirical prior. Adapted from Adams et al. .
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
engaged. If interoceptive prediction errors are sufficiently
precise they may be resolved through motor action 
(such as moving to a warmer place) or directly (e.g. by shivering). Thus, perception, action and autonomic response are
united within one powerful overarching framework .
3. A model of heartbeat perception with a
predictive coding framework
Healthy people do not generally perceive their heartbeats in
day-to-day experience, despite the strength and pervasiveness
of the signal . This potentially surprising phenomenon
can readily be explained within predictive coding. When a
stimulus is fully predicted, the prior will match the incoming
sensory data, there will be no PEs, no updating of priors and
consequently no percept. The strength, rhythm and variability
of one’s heartbeat are constantly present. This implies that the
heartbeat is fully predicted by the brain in contexts that have
been regularly experienced. Contexts that elicit unexpected
changes in heart functioning, on the other hand, may require
a response from the organism and are likely to reach awareness. It follows that during a heartbeat perception test,
whenever an individual is temporarily able to perceive a heartbeat, sensory information about the heartbeat is not, in that
particular moment, being fully predicted by one’s priors. The
reason for this must lie in the nature of the task, which requires
focused top-down attention to the heartbeat, whereas other
variables that might affect the heartbeat itself (such as arousal)
are held constant.
Crucially for our model, the effect of attention within predictive coding is to optimize the precision of sensory signals,
by assigning the best possible relative precision (for that particular individual) between modalities and also between
priors and PEs within modalities . It is important to note
that the role of attention in the free energy framework is not
to promote salience but to optimize precision, i.e. to regulate
whether, at a given moment, in any given context or modality,
PEs or priors have more weight in determining the percept.
Attention optimizes precision by continually fine-tuning the
precisions of all priors and all PEs, both in the very shortterm as well as over longer time frames. The priors themselves
will tend to become more precise, through the updating
involved in learning, but this is always subject to change if precise contradictory information (PEs) emerges. Thus, attention
does not so much promote salience as optimize salience. This
optimization of precision therefore serves the overall goal of
reducing PEs and free energy over time .
It follows that the ability of individuals to be aware of their
heartbeats must depend on their ability to enhance the precision of their interoceptive signals by attending to them. The
ability to increase precision in interoceptive systems will be dictated at a higher level in the brain hierarchy (figure 1), where a
further prior (not necessarily conscious), about the importance
of interoceptive sensation relative to other modalities, will
govern the overall precision of interoceptive information.
Thus, if the individual uses attention to increase the relative
precision of interoception as a modality, then this will have
the effect of raising the precision of PEs versus priors within
interoceptive systems.
Amuch-discussedissuewithin theinteroception literature is
the extent to which objective measures of IAcc measure the tendency to be influenced by interoceptive signals . Our model
assumes that if an individual is able to perceive heartbeats by
directed top-down attention during a heartbeat perception
task, then the same optimization principles are more likely to
apply in daily life, as regards both top-down and bottom-up
attention to interoceptive sensations. We assume that the interoceptive experience of people with high IAcc is therefore
characterized by the continuous, Bayes optimal, updating of
interoceptive priors, at the borders of conscious awareness,
which can account for the behaviour associated with trait
interoceptive awareness, as discussed below.
We propose that people with lower IAcc, by contrast,
are those who are unable to enhance the precision of their interoceptive
during heartbeat
perception tasks. This implies that interoception is, for them,
a sensory modality with less habitual salience, leading to less
frequent updating of priors and hence less flexible adjusting
of precision throughout the interoceptive hierarchy. As we
review below, this may make them more liable to illusory percepts and/or aberrant beliefs (priors) . It is consistent with
our account that although people with low IAcc cannot easily
increase the precision of heartbeat with endogenous attention,
when their attention to interoception is driven by external
stress, for example during physical exercise or emotional
arousal, the effect is generally to raise IAcc, regardless of the
person’s baseline IAcc .
Our model assumes that during a heartbeat perception task
the increased precision of PEs (relative to priors for the heartbeat) causes these PEs to be projected up through the cortical
hierarchy where, at some level, the heartbeat can be detected,
potentially in the anterior insula . Our model is therefore consistent with the greater cortical activity in the anterior insula
that has been observed during both types of heartbeat perception tasks in better (compared with less good) heartbeat
perceivers , as peoplewith higher IAcc experience greater
updating of their interoceptive priors—thus over time being
able to adjust more easily to any changes to habitual heart parameters. By contrast, we assume that people with lower IAcc
are not able to adjust the precision of their interoceptive signals
with attention and are thus not as good at perceiving their own
heartbeats, at will, during IAcc tests.
Such mechanisms would explain why, during tests of
interoception, ‘the threshold level of consciousness reportability constantly fluctuates’ [2, p. 81]. Analogously to the
process of binocular rivalry , we suggest that, as the prediction updates, the heartbeat is temporarily available to
awareness until it is once again fully predicted and becomes
unavailable to perception, before attention starts the cycle of
updating again.
4. Influences on precision
Why the precision accorded to interoceptive signals might
differ between individuals has not yet been fully elucidated.
Precision depends on the post-synaptic gain of superficial pyramidal cells (the cells that signal PEs) . Acetylcholine and
dopamine are thought to determine precision in perception
and action, respectively , and oxytocin may perform this
function in interoception . IAcc, which our model assumes
depends on the precision of interoceptive signals, correlates
with concentrations of both GABA and glutamate in the
insula . Crucially, however, precision is refined by learning
 . In order to minimize free energy (and thus PEs), the
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
brain must continually optimize the relative precisions of PEs
and priors, over time and across all sensory modalities and
contexts, for the particular individual . Our model implies
that in people with higher IAcc this optimization involves the
prioritizing of interoceptive sensations such that they can be
called into awareness, with attention. Potentially high IAcc
may, at least in part, result from learned attention to internal
bodily changes (interoceptive PEs), relative to other sensory
modalities, presumably owing to various neurophysiological
and psychosocial parameters in development and during
the lifespan.
5. Application of the model to prominent
aspects of the literature on interoceptive
(a) Heartbeat-evoked potentials
Heartbeat perception tasks tap a continuum between dayto-day pre-consciousness and conscious awareness of the
heartbeat under focused attention. This suggests that IAcc
will be related to the amplitude of heartbeat-evoked potentials
(HEPs), which are characteristic waves of cortical activity that
accompany the rhythmic activity of the heart, whether or not
the heartbeat is consciously perceived. HEPs can be observed
with electroencephalography (EEG) as a positive potential
shift over right frontocentral electrodes, 200–600 ms after the
R-wave of the heartbeat . They have been source localized
to the insula and anterior cingulate cortex and are considered to be an index of cortical interoceptive processing, for
example being modulated by affective tasks . As our
model would expect, high IAcc is associated with greater
amplitude of HEPs . Moreover, when that amplitude is
enhanced by attention, this effect is stronger in people with
higher IAcc . It is generally thought that PEs are encoded
by superficial pyramidal cells that are the major contributor
to neurophysiological responses recorded empirically. This is
potentially important, because the amplitude of evoked
responses will therefore reflect their precision and the degree
to which PEs are afforded more weight or confidence.
(b) Attention to interoception
Several studies have used heartbeat counting to experimentally
enhance attention to interoception. For example, a preliminary
period of attention to heartbeats enhances blood-oxygen-level
dependent (BOLD) activity in the anterior insula during later
judgements about emotional faces . Our model assumes
that attention increases the precision of PEs associated with
the heartbeat, which are then cascaded up through the hierarchy causing activity visible in the anterior insula under fMRI
 . These results potentially imply that enhanced precision
persists for a short period, i.e. that the precision of the prior
is down-weighted in this instance for an extended period of
time. Interestingly, while people with high IAcc show an
increase in BOLD activity in the anterior insula during heartbeat counting, functional connectivity analysis has revealed
that, in good heartbeat perceivers only, attention to heartbeats
also decreases connectivity between lower and higher levels of
the interoceptive hierarchy from the right posterior to the
right anterior insula . The authors of this study suggest
that ‘an increase in salience may be achieved by decreasing
the amount of noise that is transported along this axis’ [43,
p. 12]. Our model would suggest that as attention increases
the salience of the heartbeat, in people with high IAcc, it
diminishes the relative precision of other interoceptive signals
within the insula, thus ‘decreasing the amount of noise’.
As attention increases the salience of the heartbeat in people
with high IAcc, it increases the precision of ascending
interoceptive PEs. This would correspond to an increased
sensitivity to ascending PEs and high gain on autonomic
reflexes. It is important to note that there is no neuronal
‘noise’ in predictive coding; the noise is actually estimated as
part of the inference and encoded in terms of expected
precision, by synaptic gain.
People with high IAcc (measured by heartbeat discrimination) perform above chance on tests of masked fear
conditioning . Our interpretation is that these individuals
experience precise PEs associated with the fear-provoking
stimuli, so that the interoceptive changes that occur when they
orienttothefearcuesarelikelytoupdatetheirpriorsfortheheartbeat and facilitate the detection of the fear-provoking trials.
Assuming that attention to heartbeat enhances the precision
of PEs arising from the heart , we would expect masked
fear conditioning to be stronger after practice on a heartbeat
discrimination task, which has also been reported .
(c) Autonomic reactivity
As explained above, our model implies that precise interoceptive PEs can either ascend into the brain to revise prior beliefs
(and thus give rise to emotion, as discussed below) or they
may descend to the periphery to make those prior beliefs
come true by engaging autonomic reflexes. A major implication of our model is therefore that individuals with high
IAcc, who experience more updating of interoceptive priors
by PEs, will also experience greater autonomic reactivity to
emotional stimuli, whenever the effect on the heartbeat of
those stimuli is not fully predicted so that they give rise to
interoceptive PEs. These PEs will pass down through the cortical levels with the potential to be ultimately resolved by
interoceptive active inference in the form of autonomic
reflexes . In support of this interpretation, a number of
studies have demonstrated greater autonomic reactivity in
individuals with higher IAcc. They show (i) greater amplitude of respiratory sinus arrhythmia in response to a hand
encroaching into peripersonal space ; (ii) greater heart
rate deceleration when viewing emotional stimuli ; and
(iii) greater amplitudes of the P300 and slow wave under
EEG in response to emotionally arousing pictures 
(where the P300 is thought to indicate the updating of representations of the current environment). All of these results
can be explained if precise interoceptive PEs boost interoceptive processing in people with higher IAcc. Conversely,
(iv) individuals with higher IAcc are able to use appraisal
to reduce the amplitude of their P300 response to affective
stimuli , which we would interpret in terms of their precise PEs enabling them to more readily update interoceptive
priors associated with these emotional stimuli.
(d) Emotion
The seminal model that first placed interoception within the
free energy and predictive coding framework, proposes that
emotion results from the brain’s interpretation of interoceptive precepts (by ‘interoceptive inference’) . A related
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
definition accounts for emotional valence by suggesting that
emotion is the result of changes in free energy, with falling
free energy producing positive emotion and vice versa .
Our model complements these formulations and extends the
latter by suggesting that emotional arousal is dependent on interoceptive precision. A fundamental assumption of our model is
that the interoceptive PEs of people with higher IAcc may be
cascaded up the interoceptive hierarchy, rather than being suppressed by low-level priors. Given that these interoceptive PEs
indicate changes in free energy, we conclude that they will consequently give rise to feelings of generalized physiological
arousal and ultimately to specific learned emotions . As a
result, we expect people with higher IAcc to report stronger
emotional arousal for identical objective changes in physiological arousal. This has been reported in a range of studies, using
both types of heartbeat perception task . Assuming
that the interoceptive changes associated with any memory is
greater for people with high IAcc, similar mechanisms would
account for their enhanced capacity to remember stimuli that
alter interoceptive signals, such as heart rate .
Our account can also explain why people with higher IAcc
are more averse to making errors, given the assumption that the
affective significance of making a mistake is recorded as interoceptive PE. Forexample, IAcc correlates with post-error slowing
on the Simon task and with the amplitude of the error-positivity
component shown by EEG . This aversion may, in turn,
explain why people with high IAcc have greater difficulty inhibiting the tendency to imitate observed task-irrelevant actions
 , presumably the affective significance of the near-errors
involved are stronger for them and thus tend to slow their
reaction times. Furthermore, a failure to attenuate sensory precision (the context of sensory attenuation) may also result in
autonomic forms of echopraxia and emotional contagion .
(e) Enhanced self-focus
Attending to self-relevant information temporarily enhances
IAcc, but only in those people for whom IAcc is originally
low . Our model proposes that such people have difficulty
enhancing precision in interoceptive systems by attending
to interoceptive cues per se. However, we assume that the
self is a multilevel, multimodal construct, continually updated
in the brain from all available interacting cues including
interoception . Precision necessarily varies along this
hierarchy . If self-focus enhances the precision of a highlevel (conscious) prior for the multimodal self, this will affect
the precision of priors and PEs at lower levels of the selfhierarchy (including those for the heartbeat itself). In people
with high IAcc, this would be unlikely to have any additional
effect on heartbeat perception. However, for people with low
IAcc, the effect could be to enhance the precision of all selfrelevant and self-specifying signals, including interoceptive
PEs, thus enabling updating of priors in interoceptive systems
and consequent perception of heartbeats.
(f) Body ownership
Individuals with high IAcc are less susceptible to illusory body
ownership . In the rubber hand illusion, the participant’s
hidden hand is stroked synchronously with a fake hand, onto
which visual attention is focused. To experience the illusion,
participants must form the percept that the prosthetic hand is
their own, by minimizing PEs across all available sensory modalities according to their relative precision . The final
(illusory) precept depends on the normally high precision of
visual and somatosensory PEs (enhanced by attention). However, neither vision nor touch is self-specific. Interoceptive
cues, by contrast, provide uniquely self-specifying sensory
input. Their importance is indicated by the way the immune
system starts to disown the real hand as the illusion takes
hold . We suggest that people with high IAcc resist the illusion because they are able to attend to, and thus enhance the
precision of, their interoceptive cues during multisensory integration. The fake hand does not have the interoceptive feelings
(priors) attached to the true hand. In people with high IAcc,
this will set up interoceptive PEs which will serve to update
these priors and give rise to interoceptive percepts for the
true hand, thus anchoring the sense of body ownership.
A contrasting paradigm dispenses with a prosthetic hand
by filming the subject’s true hand and replaying this to them,
in real time . An ‘interoceptive rubber hand illusion’ is
achieved by causing the virtual hand to flush in synchrony
with the participant’s heartbeat. In this paradigm, it is now
the people with high IAcc who experience the greater illusion. This illustrates the crucial effect of context, whereby
the interoceptive priors now indicate that the virtual hand
is one’s own. People with high IAcc (measured by heartbeat
discrimination), whom our model assumes are able to raise
the precision of interoceptive cues by attention, are now
more likely to claim ownership of this virtual hand .
(g) Neuroeconomic decision-making and motivation
People vary considerably in their decisions about whether to
take risks and also about whether to exert effort . Potentially, decision-making and bodily signals are linked and this is
reflected in information processing in the insula. It has been
shown, for example, that the insula is activated both by predictions (priors) about the risk involved in any decision and also
by risk PEs that update these priors . Signals in the insula
are seen to gradually increase during both effortful exertion
and during subsequent rests , suggesting that the insula
is encoding changes in bodily state—perhaps reflecting the
precision of PEs, which may continuously rise until a threshold
is reached that updates the prior and triggers a change in behaviour. Thus, variability in behaviour and insula activity
during neuroeconomic decision-making tasks may potentially
reflect individual differences in IAcc and thus the influence of
interoception on behaviour.
Evidence in support of this is that individuals with higher
IAcc work less hard during self-paced exercise . Likewise,
for identical objective changes in bodily signals, the choices
they make when evaluating risks tend to reflect their bodily
changes . Our model explains this in terms of changes in
the state of the body, including heart rate and cardiac output,
that result from risky behaviours and physical exertion .
Assuming that these interoceptive changes have the effect of
increasing the precision of PEs relative to priors, our model
would predict that when the individual must make a decision
the more accumulation there is of precise PEs the greater
change there will be in the ‘value’ associated with any given
choice. People with high IAcc who (in contrast to those with
low IAcc) can raise the precision of their PEs with attention,
will more readily accumulate sufficient precision in PEs to
update their priors and thus affect their choice behaviour.
Thus, we would expect to see greater influence of interoceptive
PEs on behaviour in people with higher IAcc and that also
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
such individuals would be less willing to expend physical effort,
as borne out by the empirical evidence .
6. Interoceptive accuracy in clinical disorders
High IAcc is common in panic disorder and anxiety .
Conversely, inaccuracy in heartbeat counting has been linked
to alexithymia, eating disorders, depression, functional disorders and depersonalization/derealization (see for a
review and also ). Our model suggests that an individual’s
ability (IAcc) and tendency (trait interoceptive awareness) to
use focused attention to adjust precision in interoceptive
systems potentially plays a role in the aetiology of these
disorders and may be relevant to their remediation.
The interoceptive priors of healthy people update over
time, as the brain seeks to optimize precision . However,
what is Bayes optimal for a given individual may give rise
to aberrant behaviour if generative models include highly
precise priors, at some level of the hierarchy, that are unable
to update appropriately to incoming sensory signals .
A number of clinical disorders have been characterized in
this fashion including schizophrenia , somatization ,
depression and autism .
Attention and learning play a crucial role in assigning and
optimizing precision. Our model proposes that people with
high IAcc can increase precision in interoceptive systems
with attention because they have higher-level (unconscious)
prior beliefs that prioritise interoception and hence allow
them to increase precision in interoceptive systems generally
and hence raise the precision of interoceptive PEs relative to
priors . In some (but not necessarily all such people), this
may reflect habits of attention to their internal bodily changes.
This could explain why certain individuals are more vulnerable to some disorders but less prone to others. For example,
alexithymia, a condition characterized by difficulties in identifying and describing emotion, may be accompanied by low
IAcc . Our model implies that sufferers may have highly
precise interoceptive priors that do not update appropriately
to interoceptive PEs, making it difficult for them to gain
awareness of the interoceptive changes that signal affect.
Habits of excessive attention to harmless bodily cues have,
however, been proposed as the basis of both panic disorder,
which has been linked to higher IAcc , and functional disorders, which are associated with lower IAcc . It has
accordingly been argued that disorders associated with IAcc
may depend fundamentally on cognitive interpretation of the
relevance of these sensations, rather than on the availability
of the interoceptive sensations per se . These interpretations
take the form of stable, precise, high-level cognitive priors
(beliefs) that do not update appropriately with learning but
instead inappropriately bias attention, resulting in interoceptive
generative models in which precise priors, at some level, fail to
update. High-level beliefs about future threat to the self, for
example, may underpin all anxiety disorders , which are
more common amongst people with high IAcc . Sufferers
(e.g. phobics) typically avoid the anxiety-provoking stimuli,
which suggest that their precise but inaccurate beliefs are maintained by avoidance of disconfirming evidence. Our model
adds to this explanation by proposing that because people
with high IAcc are able to direct their attention to interoceptive
cues their internal bodily changes are more likely to reach
awareness, predisposing them to anxiety by enhancing the
perception of threat. However, although people with high
IAcc have the ability to be aware of interoceptive cues under
focused attention, this does not necessarily imply that all such
individuals habitually misinterpret the significance of such
sensation or suffer from anxiety disorders.
There is currently much research interest in therapeutic
interventions based on enhanced bodyawareness that typically
ask patients to practice attending to interoceptive sensations
 . Our model implies that consideration should crucially
be paid to whether the patient’s IAcc is high or low. For
example, the many people with panic disorder who have
high IAcc may benefit from paying less attention to the
body and more to reducing the precision of high-level beliefs
about the danger of real but harmless interoceptive sensations,
which other individuals with high IAcc recognize as normal for
themselves . However, if an individual with panic disorder
has low IAcc , their interoceptive sensations are likely to be
illusory and for them it may consequently be therapeutic to
find ways to improve their ability to adjust precision in lowlevel interoceptive systems. Likewise, functional disorders are
assumed to involve an over-precise prior at some undetermined level of the hierarchy . We suggest that where such
patients have low IAcc this potentially indicates that the fault
lies with highly precise (but inaccurate) precision in low-level
interoceptive sensation, whereas high IAcc would imply that
a precise high-level belief may be the cause.
7. Future directions
Our characterization of IAcc in terms of precision in interoceptive systems raises a number of potential research questions. If
the precision of interoception PEs can be experimentally
enhanced (e.g. by attention to interoception), then we predict
that this will result in diminished experience of body illusions.
Conversely, if synchronous multisensory stimulation raises the
precision of all incoming self-relevant sensory data, changes in
body-ownership while experiencing the rubber hand illusion
should result in increases in IAcc. Potentially, autonomic
reflexes (observable under ECG) are engaged by people with
higher IAcc while they resist the rubber hand illusion, as they
update interoceptive priors that anchor them to the true hand.
Given the involvement of the anterior insula in IAcc and the
mid-posterior insula in body-ownership, our model predicts
that fMRI during the rubber hand illusion will reveal changes
in functional connectivity within the insula during synchronous
versus asynchronous visuotactile stimulation and that this will
be modulated by the precision of PEs, i.e. by IAcc. We predict
that other processes dependent on sensorimotor integration,
such as feelings of agency, will be modulated by IAcc. Actions
not only produce exteroceptive effects in the world, but they
also have crucial interoceptive consequences that support
homeostasis. The amplitude of the HEP may also be used to
probe interoceptive precision, for example, we expect that this
will be modulated by attention to exteroceptive self-relevant
cues. Finally, we propose that therapeutic interventions in conditions such as anxiety, somatization and alexithymia will be
more effective when tailored to the patient’s IAcc.
8. Conclusion
Predictive
interoceptive
processing
have recently been proposed to account for phenomenal
rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371: 20160003
consciousness and mental illness . We go beyond these
models to propose a novel predictive coding account of interoceptive awareness whereby individual differences can be
explained in terms of variations in the ‘precision’ with which
interoceptive signals from within the body are represented.
Our model characterizes individual differences in ‘IAcc’
(as measured by heartbeat perception) by hypothesizing that
higher (versus lower) IAcc arises when the individual is able
to use attention to call interoceptive sensation into awareness
when needed. This implies the presence of a prior at a higher
level that can, when appropriate, prioritize interoceptive sensation over other sensory modalities. The established but
sometimes contradictory literature linking IAcc with such variables as autonomic reactivity, emotional experience and body
ownership can be readily explained within our model, which
may also have implications for clinical conditions associated
with both high and low IAcc.
Competing interests. We declare we have no competing interests.
Funding. The preparation of this paper was supported by ERC-2010-
STG-262853 to M.T.
Acknowledgements. M.A.J.A. is supported by an Anniversary Future
Leader fellowship from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BB/M013596/1). A.F. is supported by a European
Investigator
 . M.T. is supported bya European Research Council Starting
Investigator grant no. . We thank two anonymous reviewers for their generous contributions to the manuscript.