BivL/fD/ L?+b%?o
PSI-13 manuscript: revisedhubmitted
Erosion/redeposition
analysis: status of modeling and code
validation for semi-detached edge plasmas
J.N.Brooks*,J).Alman,G. Federici,
D.N. Ruzk, ~.G.
*Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439 USA
To be presented at the 13th International Conference on Plasma Surface Interactions in
Controlled Fusion Devices, San Diego, California, May 18-22,1998.
Revised 11/30/98
DISCLAIMER
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored
by an agency of the United States Government.
Neither the
United States Government
nor any agency thereof,
of their employees,
make any warranty,
express or implied,
responsibility
completeness,
or usefulness of any information,
apparatus,
product, or process disclosed, or represents that
its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
commercial
trademark,
manufacturer,
necessarily
constitute
endorsement,
recommendation,
or favoring
by the United
States Government
or any agency thereof.
of authors
herein do not necessarily
state or reflect those of the United States
Government
any agency thereof.
..—.- -?ym
-F,mTrx-F.mT.m;
-T—-z,—-.—--—
DISCLAIMER
of this document
may be illegible
in electronic
best available
Erosion/redeposition
status of modeling
and code validation
for semi-detached
edge plasmas*
J.N. Brooksa, D. Almanb, G. FedericiC, D.N. Ruzicb, D.G. Whyted
‘Argonne National Laborato~, 9700 S. Cass Ave, Argonne IL 60439, USA;
bUniv. of Illinois at UrbandChampaign; CITERJoint Work Site; ‘Univ. of Calijomia at San Diego
We are analyzing erosion and tritium codeposition for ITER, DIII-D, and other
devices with a focus on carbon divertor and metallic wall sputtering, for detached and
semi-detached
edge plasmas.
chemical-sputteringhydrocarbon-transport
computed in detail using upgraded models for sputtering yields, species, and atomic and
molecular processes.
For the DID-D analysis this includes proton impact and dissociative
recombination
for the full methane
and higher hydrocarbon
Several mixed
material (Si-C doping and Be/C) effects on erosion are examined.
A semi-detached
reactor plasma regime yieIds peak net wdl
erosion rates of -1.0
(Be), -0.3 (Fe), and
-0.01 (W) cndburn-yr,
and -50 cm/burn-yr for a carbon divertor.
Net carbon erosion is
by chemical
sputtering
in the -1-3
eV detached
codeposition
in divertor-sputtered
redeposited
carbon is high (-10-20
Silicon and beryllium
mixing tends to reduce
carbon erosion.
hydrocarbon
transport calculations
for the DIII-D DiMES-73
detached plasma experiment
broad spectrum of redeposited molecules with -90% redeposition fraction.
1. Introduction
Sputtering
erosionhedeposition
components
remains a critical issue for fusion reactor development.
Key issues are: (1) net sputtering
erosion rates and resulting diverter/limiter/wall
lifetime, (2) codeposited tritium rates and
locations,
(3) core plasma contamination.
To analyze this subject we are using and
improving coupled codes/models
for sputtered
particle yields, impurity transport, and
sheath-particle
interactions— these are used with inputs from plasma fluid and neutral
edge codes.
Refs. discussed
E/R calculations
for a variety
edge geometries,
and coating
materials.
We are currently
performance of PFCS for detached and semi-detached edge plasma regimes.
Such plasma
regimes—”Identified by plasma fluid code studies and also found experimentally—may
GU.S.worksupportedby the U.S. Departmentof Energy,Officeof FusionEnergy
give reasonable
heat loads
(S5 MW/m2)
and adequate
Unfortunately,
when combined
with carbon, there are exceptional
difficultiesinE/R
modeling due to complex hydrocarbon transport andthelack
oflow-energy
sputtering,
reflection, and atomic and molecular process data. For example, for detached condhions
about half of carbon chemical emission is in the form of non- methane hydrocarbons,
unlike higher energies
where methane
dominates.
To improve
the models
conducting code validation using carbon erosion data from the DIII-D-DiMES probe and
have begun analyzing other experiments (JET, PISCES).
As a major modeling upgrade
we have developed rate coefficient estimates for chemically sputtered hydrocarbons and
fragments, for detached conditions, and have implemented the full hydrocarbon transport
in the codes. This paper will present the status of these studies.
1.1 Tokamakreactor anaIysis
The ITER PFC design illustrates numerous erosionhedeposition
generic interest to fision development.
11’ERis a low duty-factor experimental reactor in
which frequent expected plasma disruptions dictate the choice of surface material.
ITER boundary
is show in Figure 1.
Carbon is chosen as the main divertor
material due to its good disruption performance.
The first wall is beryllium coated.
portion of the divertor and the “baffle” regions are tungsten coated.
For this study we
primarily use the typical ITER “Case 98”, 0.7% neon, semi-detached
solution . As
described in we apply the DEGAS+ code to the basic 2-D solution to give high
spatial resolution
neutral flux information
needed for the erosion analysis.
parameters and fluxes along the outer divertor plate for this solution are shown in Figure
2. There is a rough division between an attached plasma zone of width -70 cm with
temperatures -3-30
eV, and a -20 cm detached zone of S3 eV with high density near the
separatrix.
Due to the high density, particle fluxes-including
the non-thermal (“fast”)
molectilar flux-are
high in the detached portion. Plasma parameters along the wall ( not
shown) are of order Ti = 30 eV, Ni = 5x1017 m-3.
2. First wall erosion
2.1 Method
The tokamak first wall will be eroded by three classes of particles: (1) D-T ions
diffusing to the wall, (2) D-T neutrals arising from ion recycling (at both divertor and
wall), (3) D-T neutrals
arising from gas puffing.
dependent on uncertain wall boundary conditions (e.g. wall
erosion by ions is highly
sheath if any)
and is only
-— ------,-. -,: 577-7
crudely estimated for this study.
Wall erosion by neutrals is computed in detail.
compute wall neutral flux from ion recycling a DEGAS+ simulation was performed on
the ITER Case 98 target plasma by launching
atoms/molecules
divertor (with ion source shown in Figure 2) and the wall.
A wall ion flux of Ni/d, is
used where Ni is the density at the computational boundary (3 cm from the wall), and d =
0.03 s/m, corresponding to diffusive estimates . For gas-puffing, puffing is done from
one toroidal and poloidal location-near
the outer midplane— at a distance of 8 cm from
the plasma boundary and the results scaled for the -1.5 mz area of the gas puff design.
All neutral-neutral
and neutral-ion
elastic collisions
are incIuded which spreads the
incoming gas cloud. Charge exchange is the dominant mechanism once the ITER plasma
boundary is reached.
The average energy of D/’I’atoms returning from the plasma and
striking the gas puffing point ranges from 60 to 70 eV over a poloidal extent of 30 cm.
Their energy quickly rises to the 200-300 eV range at firther poloidal distances from the
injection point, but the flux is down by one or more orders of magnitude.
The returned
molecular flux is more peaked and has an average energy of about 4 eV— in equilibrium
with the local ion flow velocity.
Wall erosion is computed using the DEGAS+ neutral flux results as input to the
WBC~ Monte Carlo code to compute sputtering and impurity transport. The latter is an
extension of WBC which traces the transport of sputtered materkd in and around the
Three materials
are examined-beryllium
(ITER reference),
representing a bare wall, and tungsten coating,
2,2 Results
Gas puffig
is the dominant source of peak wall erosion whereas total erosion is
due about equally to ion impingement,
gas puffing and ion recycling.
In general, wall
erosion is lower for the semi-detached regime than for a fully detached regime , in part
because there is less “transparency”
of divertor recycled neutrals to the wall regions.
Gas-puffiig erosion results are shown in Figure 3. These profiles are highly peaked. The
beryllium peak, at -1 crn/bum-yr is acceptable for Iow duty-factor operation only, e.g.
The iron (bare wall) results are disappointing
in not being much better than
beryllium.
This is due to the high energy D-T neutrals arising from charge exchange with
the hot plasma edge. Tungsten erosion is two orders of magnitude lower.
The WBC+ results for wall-sputtered beryllium atoms show that: 55% go to the
core plasma, 38!Z0go the divertor plates, 7% go elsewhere (dome and plenum).
return to the wall but this is partly because diffusion is not fully modeled.
Wall material
entering the core plasma will subsequently flow primarily to the divertor.
We conclude,
therefore, that wall sputtered beryllium will be mostly deposited on the divertor plates.
(SOL transport of the other materials has not been computed).
Subsequent sputtering of
the divertor will tend to transport beryllium to the bottom of the plates and to the plenum
The tritium codeposition
in wall-sputtered
redeposited
is estimated
based on a total sputtered beryllium current of -2x1OZ1 S-l, about half of which is
deposited in high surface temperature (>500°C) divertor target regions with little or no
codeposition, and about half of which builds up in lower temperature areas (bottom of
divertor targets and plenum region).
Using coldest deposition surface temperatures for
the latter of -230°C
we can estimate approximate worst-case codeposition rates. These
linearly-scaled
low-oxygen-content
Experiment (TPE) trapping data (H/Ee = 0.05) or -0.6 g-T/1000 s using “carboncorrected”
Mayer et al. data (H/Be = 0.23) . In either case the wall-derived T/Be
codeposition is much less than codeposition from carbon divertor sputtering.
3. Divertor erosion
3.1 Method
The coupled REDEP /WBC impurity transport codes are used to compute
sputtering,
carbon/hydrocarbon
transport,
redeposition/codeposition
for the inner
Alternative materials are also examined.
For simplicity in the analysis, the entire target
regions are assumed to be carbon coated—the small tungsten coated target region has
only a small effect on overall results . Carbon sputtering is by D,T ions atoms and fast
molecules,
and self-ions.
Codeposition
is computed
on surface
temperature profdes and H7C temperature-dependent
trapping ratios . For the ITER
computations methane-only chemical emission was employed as the new model (Section
5) was not yet available.
Carbon chemical sputtering yields for detached conditions (D,T
eV impingement
energy, -500-800 K surface temperatures) are uncertain.
work uses a compilation of best-estimate yields, assembled by an ITER expert group, and
known as the “subcommittee” model . These model yields, are in the range -l-2%.
Finally, a nominal reference value of 0.001 is used for the highly uncertain fast-molecule
chemical sputtering yield.
3.2 Results
Figures 4-5 show gross and net erosion of the outer plate for physical sputtering
and chemical sputtering respectively.
These are shown separately to illustrate trends.
-.7,-7?z:.r
The inner plate results (not-shown) are similar. For physical sputtering, carbon atoms are
ionized primarily near the surface due to the high electron temperature
and redeposit
primarily on the target.
Only a small fraction (1.5x10~ ) leave the near-surface region,
implying a Iow potential for core plasma contamination.
For chemical sputtering the
codes predict nearly 100LZOredeposition on the attached portion of the plates, and about -
80-90% redeposition on the detached portion. Thus, the detached portion is critical to net
erosion and codeposition.
The reason for the --10-20% carbon loss is non-ionization (toocold plasma) and escape of a fraction of the end-chain carbon atoms formed by the
hydrocarbon transport process—as discussed Iiwther in .
The combined (physical and chemical) erosion analysis shows that carbon builds
up mostly on the bottom of the target and dump plates (-75%), and in the plenum region
are relatively
cold (-230
‘C) which contributes
codeposition.
Table 1 summarizes peak net erosion rates and total tritium codeposition rates for
the reference
divertor case and various
other cases.
The codeposition
rate for the
reference condhions is 14 g-T for the 1000s ITER pulse. This varies with assumed fastmolecule yield (Cases 2-3), but Iess so than for a filly-detached
regime due to less
fast-molecule
generation.
Physical sputtering contributes about 20% to codeposition.
Be/C mixing (Case 5), to be described, reduces codeposition
A beryllium
coated divertor, like carbon, shows high net erosion (due to physical sputtering) but much
less codeposition.
Tungsten shows Iow erosion (precise amount needing more detailed
analysis) and essentially
no codeposition.
Finally, for a somewhat
different plasma
solution (“Case 133-shallow detached” involving a wider detached zone), the results
are qualitatively
similar with tritium codeposition
about 20% higher.
In contrast to
codeposition, an integral quantity, peak erosion depends on numerous profile effects, and
is highest for the reference case
4. Mixed material
We analyzed divertor erosion for two cases of mixed materials: (1) silicon doped
carbon fiber composite material, “NS-31” nominalIy containing 870 Si which has been
proposed as an alternative divertor coating in order to reduce chemical sputtering ,
and (2) wall-sputtered
beryllium effect on a carbon divertor.
Both analysis are for the
Case 98 plasma solution.
The model used for time-evolution of surface composition is
based on simple particle counting and perfect mixing in an interaction zone of fixed depth
(10 rim). For Be/C the chemical yield is assumed to be reduced based linearly on the
Be/C fraction . The beryllium ion flux to the divertor is computed based on the total
wall sputtering
and assuming
proportional to the D-T ion flux.
For the NS-31 material
that the plasma-transported
Be flux is everywhere
Details of the model will be published elsewhere.
both net erosion
and corresponding
growth rates at
equilibrium surface conditions (reached at -1 minute) are somewhat lower (-25~o) than
for pure carbon.
This is due to the more favorable redeposition
characteristics
silicon compared to carbon.
For Be/C we find low beryllium surface fractions on the attached portions of the
plates due to very low Be/D-T and Be/C flux ratios, and also high physical sputtering.
Beryllium does build up on the detached portion where the physical sputtering is very
low or zero (cold plasma).
The surface fraction of beryllium varies from -0 on the
attached portions, to -4Y0 at the separatrix, and to 100% at the bottom.
Figure 6 shows
the net erosion rate of Be-mixed carbon compared to pure carbon in the detached portion
along the outer plate. The beryllium mixture/overlayer
suppresses carbon erosion in this
region leading to the --25% reduction in tritium codeposition (Table 1). Since this is a
significant effect, a more sophisticated
incorporating
for example non-linear
mixing effects, is warranted.
5. DIII-D73 experiment
and improved hydrocarbon
The D-73 detached
plasma experiment
was conducted
1998, and is
described in . This involved impingement of -5-10 eV D+ (Te = 1-2 ev) on a carbon
DiMES (Diverter Material Evaluation Studies) probe in the DIII-D lower divertor with
diagnostic
data and post-exposure
probe erosion
measurements
obtained. We have begun analysis of this experiment using WBC. A major code update
is the addition
of essentially
the full sputtered
hydrocarbon
hydrocarbon launch fractions from UTIAS data . For 10 eV D these values, in terms
of “c*bon fractions” are: CH4 (0.42), C2H2 ( 0.036), C2H4 (0.24), C2H6 (0.11), C3H6
(O.16), C3H8 (0.035).
We treat all of these except propane (C3H8) , this being only a
effect as shown.
must be included
it is formed
hydrocarbon breakup processes)
The appendix describes the hydrocarbon chemistry model. This was implemented
in WBC along the lines described in with various modifications to the Monte Cado
techniques, e.g. to follow multi-particle breakup.
No particle reflection is included now
pending development
of a complete reflection
Such reflection can be highly
important to overall redeposition fractions . Preliminary D-73 analysis is made for
in the near-surface
(O-5 cm) where the plasma
parameters
approximately constant.
For the D-73 analysis particles are launched per the above carbon fractions.
particle history terminates
upon hitting the surface or leaving the near-surface
Figure 7 shows the code results for 10,000 particles launched. The redeposition spectrum
is complex,
with overall
carbon redeposition
of 88Y0, again not including
reflection effects.
Most non-redeposited material is in the form of --5-10 eV (end-stage
product) carbon atoms heading away from the surface. This and related code output will
be used to check against erosion, photon emission, and other data . The analysis will
be extended to include the attached/detached transition region.
6. Conclusions
This work has analyzed erosion/redeposition/codeposition
of carbon, beryllium,
and tungsten, divertor and wall materials, for detached/semi-detached
regimes of current
interest to reactor designs and major operating tokamaks.
For ITER the predicted net
erosion rates are marginally acceptable.
Tritium codeposition in carbon is conditionally
acceptable for ITER, based on demonstration of suitable cleanup techniques, but not for
fiture high-duty factor devices.
Likewise, a beryllium wall should work for ITER but
does not extrapolate
to future reactors.
Tungsten performs well from the standpoints
Based on the approximate analysis used here mixed material effects are likely
to be significant and, therefore, need further detailed amdysis.
Due to numerous
model uncertainties,
not the least of which are the plasma
solutions themselves, the present results should properly be viewed as identi~ing
and not used for precise predictive purposes.
This contrasts to fully attached regimes
where we have at least partial validation
of the codes.
Key uncertainties
for carbon
include chemical sputtering yield of fast molecules and low energy particles in general,
flux effects on sputtering, and atomic and molecular process rates.
A major update to the erosionhedeposition
codes is the full hydrocarbon reaction
set for chemical sputtering.
This should be useful for full analysis of carbon erosion in
DHI-D and other devices.
Hydrocarbon
plasma chemistry
Four categories of reactions were investigated: electron impact ionization
(including dissociative ionization), electron impact dissociation, proton impact ionization,
and dissociative recombination.
For the 1-3 eV regime that we are interested in, the latter
two categories are the most important and will be discussed here. The compIete model
will be published elsewhere .
Proton Impact Ionization
Gioumousis and Stevenson found that the rate constant for an ion-molecule
collision process is related to the cross section, ~, by
where v is the velocity of the ion. If a reaction is assumed to take place at every
collision, the cross section is given by
where e is the ion charge, a is the moIecular polarizability of the reactant molecule, and
ikfr is the reduced mass of the reacting system. By substituting this expression for the
cross section into (1) we get a useful formula for calculating reaction rates for ion-
molecule collisions.
Unfortunately, molecular polarizability data is not often available. To make
matters worse, the relationship between polarizability and reaction rates means that most
molecules that have unknown reaction rates also have unknown polarizabilities.
However, the unknown molecular polarizabilities can be calculated from the molar
refraction according to the Lorentz-Lorenz relation
where N~ is Avogadro’s number, and R is the molar refraction.
For many compounds,
the molar refraction is approximately proportional to the number of each type of atom
present. A least squares fit was done using known values, and the resulting relationship
R = 3.939 (# C atoms)+ 0.5452 (# H atoms)
These values can be used in (4) to calculate polarizabilities, which can in turn be
used in (3) to calculate the total proton impact reaction rate for every hydrocarbon
molecule of interest at thermal energy. These are shown in Table 2. There is very little
energy dependence fkom thermal energies up to a few eV, so that the rate constants at 300
K are acceptable for our model and have been investigated here.
The branching ratio, however, does not remain constant up to a few eV. At
thernxd energies where the experimental measurements in Table 2 were taken, one
channel tends to dominate over the others. However, some temperature dependent results
indicate that the product distribution becomes more evenly distributed as temperature
increases . At the temperatures that we are interested in (-l-3
ev), we have assumed
that all reactions produce and even distribution of products.
Dissociative Recombination
The rate coeff. for dissociative recombination is known to be inversely
proportional to temperature.
The model used for these reactions is
where A and B are parameters to be determined.
The reaction rate as a function of
temperature is known for the methane famiIy . In these lighter hydrocarbons, there is
a noticeable bend in the < cw > vs. T plot, so the reaction rate has been split up into two
sections, each with their own A and B, covering the temperature ranges T <1 and
T >1 eV. For the heavier ions, the rate can be approximated by just one function for all
energies. Of the twelve heavier hydrocarbons of importance, there are values of the
reaction rate at one energy (usually 300 K) in the literature for six of them. The energy
dependence was known for several of these ions to be B = -1/2
 . Using this energy
dependence, together with the one data point, allows us to solve for the remaining
parameter, A, forsixof
Theremaining
sixhydroctibons
present moreofachdlenge.
Bates hadproposed
that the dissociative recombination rate is proportional to the number of bonds that can be
broken. There is some disagreement about whether or not this is true , and since the
reaction rates that we know so far do not seem to follow this type of a trend, another
method of estimation must be employed. If we assume that the rate of dissociative
recombination again depends on the polarizability of the ion and we use the same value
of B= -1/ 2, then it becomes rather easy to find these remaining reaction rates. A graph
was constructed of the known values of the parameter A vs. the molecular polarizability
of the corresponding molecule.
This is shown in Fig. 8. The value of A is found for five
of the remaining hydrocarbons by interpolating from this graph, and by extrapolation for
the other.
The branching ratios for the methane family are known or estimated . The
data available on branching ratios for some of the heavier hydrocarbons indicates that the
product distributions are split evenly among the possible channels . In our model, we
use an even branching ratio for the dissociative recombination of these heavier
molecules.
The reaction rates are summarized in Table 3.