[kIIH,-i 
and Muthen and :tvluthen . All analyses are performed using the T\Iplus
program and Mplus input, output. and data for
these examples are available at www.statmodel.com/ mplus/examples/ penn.html.
One aim of the article is to inspire a b etter integration of psychometric modeling ideas into mainstream statistics and a better use of statistical analysis ideas
in latent variable modeling. Psychometrics and statistics have for too long been
Key Words and Phrases: \Iaximum-likelihood estimation. factor analvsis. structural equation modeling, growt h curve modeling, multilevel m odeling, finite mixture modeling, random
effects. missing data, latent classes.
* University o f California, Los Angeles. Graduate School of Education &: Information
Studies. Moore Hall. Box 9.51521 , Los Angeles CA 90095-1.521, U.S.A.
Email: hmuthen©:ucla.edu
© The Author(s) 2002, corrected publication 2021
Bengt O. I\Iuthen
developed too separately and both fields can benefit from input from the ot.her.
Traditionally, psychometric models have been concerned with measurement error
and latent variable constructs measured with multiple indicators as in factor analysis. Structural equation modeling (SE1\,1) took factor analysis one step further
by relating the con8truct8 to each other and to covariates in a system of linear
regressions thereby purging the "structural regressions" of biasing effects of measurement error. The idea of using systems of linear regressions emanated from
supply and demand modeling in econometrics and path analysis in biology. In
this way. SEl'd consists of two ideas: latent variables and joint analysis of systems
of equations. It is argued here that it is the latent variable idea that is more
powerful and more generalizable. Despite its widespread use among applied researchers. SEl\I has still not been fully accepted in mainstream statistics. Part
of this is perhaps due to poor applications claiming the establishment of causal
models and part is perhaps also due to strong reliance on latent variables that
arc only indirectly defined. The skepticism about latent variables is unfortunate
given that, as shown in this article, latent variables are widely used in statistics.
although under different names and different forms.
This article argues that by emphasizing the vehicle of latent variables. psychometric modeling such as SEM can be brought into mainstream statistics. To
accomplish this, it is necessary to dearly show how many statistical analyses
implicitly utilize the idea of latent variables in the form of random effects. components of variation. missing data. mixture components, and clusters. To this aim.
a general model is discussed which integrates psychometric latent variable models
with latent variable models presented in the statistical literature. The generality
of the model is achieved by considering not only continuous latent variables but
also categorical latent variables. This makes it possible to unify and to extend a
\vide variety of common types of analyses, including SEM. growth curve modeling,
multilevel modeling, missing data modeling. finite mixture modeling, latent class
modeling. and survival modeling. The general model is shown schematically in
Figure 1. The general framework (D) is represented by the square. while special
cases (A. B. C) to be discussed in the article are shown in ellipses. The generaJ framework is drawn from ]\Iuthen and l'vIuthen as
implemented in the Mplus computer program (www.statmodel.com). It should
be noted that Figure 1 is a simplification. For example. the general framework
includes direct effects from c to u. from c to y. and allows c to also influence
regression and variance parameters in the u and y parts of the model. It is hoped
that the use of a single modeling and software framework makes latent variable
modeling more accessible to both statisticians and substantive researchers. Statisticians can more easily see connections between latent variable uses that they are
accustomed to and psychometric uses. Substantive researchers can more easily
focus on the research problem at hand rather than learning a multitude of model
specification systems and software languages.
The article is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses framework A of the
BEYOI\D SEM:
Figure 1: A general latent variable modeling framework
general model. This framework corresponds to the more well-known case of continuous latent variables. Sub-sections discuss the modeling of measurement error
and measurement invariance in convcntional SEM, random effects in growth modeling, and variance components in multilevel modeling. Section 3 discusses framework B introducing categorical latent variables, including latent class analysis and
latent class growth analysis. A latent class analysis example is presented where
individuals are classified based OIl their antisocial behavior. Section 4 discusses
framework C, including latent profilc models and models that combine continuous
and categorical latent variables such as growth mixture models. A growth mixture example is presented where children are classified into a problematic class
based on their reading development in Kindergarten and second grade. Section
5 discusses the general framework D, presenting new types of models, including
modeling with missing data on a categorical latent variable in randomized trials.
Section 6 concludes.
Modeling Framework A: Continuous Latent Variables
Consider the special case A of the general modeling framework shown in Figure
1. Framework A is characterized by using continuous latent variables, denoted by
the vector 77, shown as a circle in ellipse A in Figure 1. Here, latent variables are
used to represent constructs that have fundamental substantive importance but
are only measured indirectly through multiple indicators that capture different
Bengt O. Muthen
aspects of the constructs.
As a first step, a general SEM formulation of framework A is presented, followed by the key analysis areas of random effects modeling and variance component modeling. 1)
The measurement part of the model is defined in terms of the p-dimensional
continuous outcome vector y.
Yi = 1/ + A "1i + K Xi + ci·
where "1 is an m-dimensional vector of latent variables, x is a q-dimensional vector
of covariates. f. is a p-dimensional vector of residuals or measurement errors which
are uncorrelated with other variables, 1/ is a p-dimensional paramet.er vector of
measurement intercepts, A is a p x Tn parameter matrix of measurement slopes or
factor loadings, and K is a p x q parameter matrix of regression slopes. Usually,
only a few of the elements of K have nonzero elements, where a non-zero row
corresponds to a y variable that is directly influenced by one or more x variables.
The covariance matrix of f. is denoted e. The structural part of the model
is defined in terms of the latent variables regressed on each other and the qdimensional vector x of independent variables,
Here, a is an Tn-dimensional parameter vector, B is an Tn x Tn parameter matrix
of slopes for regressions of latent variables on other latent variables. B has zero
diagonal elements and it is assumed that I - B is non-singular. Furthermore,
r is an Tn x q slope parameter matrix for regressions of the latent variables on
the independent variables. and ( is an m-dimensional vector of residuals. The
covariance matrix of ( i s denoted q,.. In line with regression analysis, the marginal
distribution of x is not modelled bllt is left unrestricted. This leads to the mean
and covariance structures conditional on x.
1/ + A (I - B)-1 a + A (I - B)-1 r x + K x.
A (I - B )-1 q,. (I - B),-1 A' + e.
\Vith the customary normality assumption of y given x , the parameters of the
model are estimated by fitting (3) and (4) to the corresponding sample quantities.
This is the same as fitting the mean vector and covariance matrix for the vector
(y,x), to the sample means, variances, and covariances for (y, x), . Here, the ma..ximum-likelihood estimates of J..Lx and :En are
the corresponding sample quantities.
examples of framework A models are given at
www.statmodel.com/mplus/examples/ continuous.html.
BEYOND SKTl.l: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE MODELING
Joint analysis of independent samples from multiple groups is also possible,
a,.'lsuming different degrees of parameter invariance across groups. In particular,
full or partial invariance of the measurement parameters of v and A is of interest
in order to study group differences with respect to 0: and \[I.
From an application point of view, the modeling in (1), (2) is useful for purging
regression relationships of detrimental effects of measurement error when multiple
indicators of a construct are available. I\Ieasurement errors among the predictors
are well-known to have particularly serious effects. but the modeling is also useful
in examining a factor model where the measurement errors are among the outcome
(indicator) variables as when using a factor analysis with covariates C'I\HI\IIC"
modeling). In this special case, B = 0 in (2). A baseline MIMIC analysis assumes
K = 0 in (1) and a sufficient number of restrictions on A and \[I to make the model
identified (in an exploratory analysis, this amounts to using rn 2 restrictions in line
with exploratory factor analysis). The covariates strengthen the factor analysis in
two ways . First, by making the test of dimensionality stronger
by using associations not only among the y variables but also between y and x.
Second, by making it possible to examine the extent of measurement invariance
across groups defined by different values on x. Measurement non-invariance across
groups defined by Xk (e.g. Xki = 0/1 for individual i) with respect to an outcome
Yj is captured by Kjk -I- 0, reflecting a group-varying intercept. Vj + Kjk Xk.
The model of (1) - (4) is typically estimated by maximum-likelihood (ML) under the assumption of multivariate normality. Browne and Arminger give
an excellent summary of modeling and estimation issues for this model. This is
the analysis framework used for the last 20 years by conventional SEM computer
programs such as A1\10S, EQS, and LISREL. More recently, ML estimation assuming missing at random (MAR) in the sense of Little and Rubin has
been introduced in SEM software.
Browne and Arminger also discuss the case where some or all of the
y outcomes are categorical. The case of categorical outcomes has been further
treated in Muthen with an emphasis on weighted least-squares estimation, including a new approach presented in Muthen, DuToit. Spisic .
Mplus includes modeling with both continuous and categorical outcomes y.2)
Drawing on I\Iuthen and Muthen and Christofferson . I\Iplus provides a lIlore flexible parameterization than conventional SEM software in terms of
its categorical outcome modeling for longitudinal data and multiple-group analysis
using threshold measurement parameters that allow for partial invariance across
time and group. For connections ''lith item response theory, sec. e.g .. I\Iuthen
 . IvIuthen. Kao and Burstein . and Takane and DeLeeuw .
For an overview of conventional SEM with continuous outcollles, see, e.g.
Bollen . For examples of SEI\I analysis in behavioral research. see. e.g ..
examples are given at www.statmodel.com/mplus/examples/categorical.html.
Bengt O . .\Iuthen
.MacCallum and Austin .
Random effects growth modeling
The use of random effects is another example of modeling with continuous
latent variables. In mainstream statistics, random effects are used to capture
unobserved heterogeneity among subjects. That is, individuals differ in systematic
ways that cannot be. or at least have not been. measured. Unlike the case of
psychometric latent variable contexts. however. the random effects are typically
not thought of as constructs of primary interest. and there is typically not an
attempt at directly measuring the random effects.
A growth modeling example
Growth modeling is an interesting example of random effect modeling where
the heterogeneity concerns individual differences in trajectories. Consider an example from reading research. The data are from a cohort-sequential reading study
of 945 children in a sample of Texas schools, following them from Kindergarten
through second grade. In Kindergarten a phonemic awareness score was measured as a reading precursor skill. In grades 1 and 2, word recognition scores were
collected. All measures were collected at four times during the school year. At
the end of grade 2, standardized reading and spelling scores were also recorded.
These data will also be used to illustrate growth mixture modeling in framework
C. Figure 2 shows observed individual trajectories on a phonemic awareness score
for Kindergarten children divided into the upper and lower decile on the grade
2 spelling score. The individual variation in the trajectories is clearly seen with
those in the lower spelling decile showing a lower initial and ending status 1Il
Kindergarten and a lower growth rate than those in the upper spelling decile.
Alodel,tng issnes
A modeling example shows the latent variable connections. Let the random
variables 7)0, 7)1. and 7)2 represent an intercept, a linear. and a quadratic slope.
respectively. These are coefficients in the regression of the outcome on time and
the fact that they vary across individuals gives rise to the term random coefficients or random effects. The random effects capture the individual differences in
development over time using the Laird and \Vare type of model
Yit = Tloi + T)l; (a/ - a) + T)'2i (at - a)2 + ""t :rit + fit,
Tloi = eto +
XiO + , (5) is referred to as the level 1 equation, while (6) - (8) are
referred to as level 2 equations. In mixed linear modeling , the model is expressed
in terms of Yt related to at, X t , and :z:o, inserting (6) - (8) into (5) .
It is clear that (5) - (8) can be expressed in SEM terms using ( 1) and (2) by lett.ing Yi = (Yil ,Yi2, ... , YiT )', 'lJi = (r}Ol , l]li,T}2i)' , and X i = (xil, :ri.2: . . . :XiT,l:iO)' .
'While multilevel modeling views the analysis as a two-level analysis of a univariate
outcome ;tI, the SEM approach is a single-level analysis of the multivariate vector
y. This issue will be discussed further in Section 2.2. Furthermore, v = 0 while
0: contains three free parameters. Alternatively, the equivalent parameterization
VI = v2 = ... = VT with Q = (0.0:1,0'2)' may be used. Also.
(aj - aJ' )
(at - 0,)2
showing that growth modeling with random effects is a form of factor analysis with
covariates. Time-invariant covariates have effects on the factors and time-varying
covariates have direct effects on the outcomes. \Vhile not typically thought of as
such. the repeated measures of YI , Y2 ,' .. ,YT can be seen as multiple indicators o f
t he random effects, or growth factors as they are referred to in the latent variable
literature. One may wonder why a latent variable model with such a restricted
A matrix as in (9) , with no free parameters. would ever be realistic. But it has
been found that this model often captures the essential features of growth. In
the latent variable framework however. it is easy to allow deviations from the
functional growth form by estimating some of the loadings.
Multilevel and mixed linear modeling traditions consider a more general form
Yit = 170i + 17li (ail - a) + 172i (ait - a) + ".j Xi I + f il ,
where ail indicat.es the possibility of individually-varying times of observation
and the slope Ki is yet another random effect. These traditions treat (ait - a) as
data, whereas conventional SEM software treats (at - a) as parameters. This is
the only way that random slopes can be handled in conventional SE:t'vI. In (10),
17li . 172i' and Ki are random slopes for individually-varying variables a and x. As
pointed out in Raudenbush such modeling cannot be summarized in terms
of mean and covariance structures. Unlike (4), the variance of y conditional on
the a and x: variables varies as a function of these variables. In principle, however.
this points to a shortcoming of conventional SEM software, not a shortcoming
of latent variable modeling. Drawing on Asparouhov and 1Iuthen , Mplus
incorporates individuallY'-varying times of observations and random slopes for
time-varying covariates as in (10) .:3)
rvlainstream statistics also takes an interest in 'what psychometricians call factor scores, i.e. estimates of 'rJi values to be used for estimation of individual growth
curves. Both fields favor empirical Bayes estimates. referred to as the regression
method in psychometrics.
It follows that there are several advantages of placing the growth model in a
latent variable context. For example. t.he psychometric idea of a latent variable
construct is not ut.ilized in the growth model of (5) - (8). Although the y outcomes are manifestations o f growth. a psychometric approach could in principle
3)These features are included in Version 2.1 to be released Spring 2002 as a free upgrade for
Version 2 users.
BEYOND SEk1: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE MODELING
seek specific indicators of the growth factors, for instance measuring indicators
of growth potential at the outset of the study. all approach that does not seem
to have been pursued. A more common situation is that a researcher wants to
study grO\\Tth in a latent variable construct measured with multiple indicators.
The model specification is as follows, for simplicity shown for a linear model with
a single latent variable construct 1}it.
Let Yijt denote the outcome for individual i. indicator j. and timepoint t, and
let Tht denote a latent variable construct,
Level-1 a (measurement part):
Yijt = Vj t + Aj t 1}it + fijt ,
Level-1 b : llit = 1}Oi + 1]1; at + (it,
Level-2a : 1]0; = no + :0 Xi + (Oi,
Level-2b : 'IIi = 0:1 + {I Xi + (Ii·
In line with the second parameterization given above for a single outcome,
measurement invariance is specified by using time-invariant indicator intercepts
and slopes:
Vjl = Vj2 = ... =
VjT = Vj ,
AJ 1 = Aj2 = ... = AjT = A]'
setting the metric of the latent variable construct by Al = 1. The intercept of the
level-2a equation is fixed at zero, 0:0 = O. V(Eijd and V'((it) may vary over time.
Structural differences are captured by letting E(1]id and V(rJit ) vary over time.
\Vith more than one population. across-population measurement invariance would
be imposed and 0:0 fixed to zero only in the first population. Multiple-indicator
growth modeling has the advantage t hat changes ill measurements can be made
over time, assuming measurement invariance for a subset of indicators that are
maintained between adjacent time points.
Other advantages of growth modeling in a latent variable framework includes
the ease with which to carry out analysis of multiple processes, both parallel in
time and sequential, as well as multiple groups. Growth factors may b e regressed
on each other using the B matrix in (2), for example studying growth while
controlling for not only observed c:ovariates but also initial status. 110re generally,
the growth model may be only a part of a larger modeL including for instance a
factor analysis measurement part for covariates measured with errors. or including
a m ediational path analysis part for variable influencing the growth factors, or
includiug a set of variable that are influenced b y the grmvth process.
For examples of growth modeling in a latent variable framework, see, c.g.,
Muthen and Khoo and Muthen and Curran . The recent Collins and
Sayer book gives applied contributions from several different traditions.
Hengt O. l\[ut.hen
Component8 of variation in hierarchical data
Latent continuous variables are frequently used in statistical modeling of hierarchical data. Here. latent variables are used to correctly reflect the sampling
procedure with latent variables representing sources of variation at different levels
of the hierarchy.
It is instructive to consider a simple ANOVA model because it clearly shows relationships between factor analysis. growth modeling. and more general multilevel
latent variable models.
Consider the nested. randolll-effects ANOVA,
Yij = V + 'Ii + fij :i = L 2 ..... n : j = L 2 .... , J.
Here. i is the mode of variation for which an independent sample is obtained.
while j is clustered within i. Typical examples are individuals observed \vithin
households and students observed within classrooms. The different sources of
variation are captured by the latent variables 1] and f. If instead j = 1,2, ... , ni,
there is missing data on some of the J measures.
Consider the covariance and variances for j = k and j = l,
COV(Yik: Yil) = 1'(1]).
V(Yik) = v(Yid = V(17) + VeE),
resulting in the intraclass correlation
The intraclass correlation is frequently considered in the context of cluster sampling. The intraclass correlation increases for increasing between-cluster variation
VC'I) relative to total variation. Or. using equivalent homogeneity reasoning, the
intraclass correlation increases when the within-cluster variation V(E) is small.
In cluster samples. the intradass correlation is used to describe the lack of independence among observations and llsed when computing design effects. The
simple model of (17) summarizes some key latent variable modeling issues in a
nutshelL showing that factor analysis, growth modeling, and multilevel modeling
are variations on the same theme.
I t is clear that (17) can be seen as a special case of factor analysis in the
SEl\I framework of (1). (2) with a single factor and A = (L 1. ... , I)'. Instead
of thinking of the J units within each cluster as individuals as in (17), the J Y
variables are now multiple indicators measured on the same individuaL Carrying
this idea back to (17). this means that the individuals within a cluster can be seen
as indicators measuring cluster characteristics.
\Vhen Yj are repeated measures over time, j = t. (17) represents a growth
model with random intercepts. The repeated measures take the role of multiple
indicators measuring the random intercept growth factor. For example, t.he model
BEYOND SEAl: GE:\EHAL LATE:'\[T VARIABLE
may represent blood pressure measurements on individuals where in a short time
span there is no increasing or decreasing trend. The focus is on the construct of
"long-term blood pressure level", e.g. for predicting later health outcomes. The
E residuals represent measurement error as well &'3 time-specific variation, both of
which may bc irrelevant for the prediction.
It was noted earlier that growth modeling in the SEM framework leads to
single-level analysis because a multivariate analysis of y is carried out. The nonindependence among repeated measures within an individual indicated by the
intraclass correlations is modeled by the growth factors influencing the outcome
at difl'erent time points. This i::; analogous to factor analy::;is. The same multivariate analysis approach may be used for more general multilevel modeling with
latent variables, for example multilevel factor analysis and multilevel growth modeling, referred to as 3-levelmodeling in the multilevel literature. The multivariate
approach is suitable for situations where there are relatively few cluster members,
such as with analysis of spouses. siblings. or analysis of twins in behavioral genetics. For a recent application to growth modeling of alcohol use among siblings,
see Khoo and Muthen . The multivariate approach provides very flexible
modeling where the relationships among units within a cluster can be modeled.
In Khoo and t..Iuthen the growth factors of a younger sibling are regressed
on those of an older sibling. The cluster units can also have different regressions
on covariates. Different numbers of cluster units for different clusters can be handled via missing data. although different models may be relevant for clusters of
different size (i.e. two-sibling homes may have a different dynamics than homes
with many siblings). With more than a couple of cluster units, however, the
multivariate approach becomes computationally cumbersome. For instance with
10 measures per student with 15 students per cla.ssrooms, a multivariate vector
of length 150 would have to be analyzed. As an alternative, multilevel modeling
makes a simplifying assumption of cluster units being statistically equivalent as
shown below.
Assume c = L 2 ..... C independently observed clusters with i = L 2, ... , rlc individual observations within duster c. Let z and y represent group- and individuallevel variables. Arrange the data vector for which independent observations are
obtained as
Zc, Y cl , Y c2 , ... , Yen e
where we note that the length of de varies across clusters. The mean vector and
covariance matrix are
[JLz', Inc' g JLy']
The covariance matrix
shows that the usual i.i.d assumption of simple random
sampling is modified to allow for non-independent observations within clusters and
that this non-independence is modeled by the
matrix in line with the nested
Bengt O. ]'viuthen
ANOVA model of (17). In (21) and (22) the sizes of the arrays arc determined by
the product nc x p where p is the number of observed variables. l\IcDonald and
Goldstein pointed out that a great reduction in size is obtainable, reducing
the ML expression
I + (de - J.LdJ'
-1 (de - J.LdJ}
D L Cd {In I
-1 (SBd + nd (Vd - J.L)(Vd - J.L)')]}
where d sums over clusters with distinct cluster sizes showed how SEM soft\'.rare can be used for analyzing
models of this type. This is referred to ili'i 2-level modeling in a latent variable
framework. Here, J.L,
are structured in terms of SEM parameter
arrays based on (1) and (2). The analysis can be carried out using the Mplus
In multilevel terms. this type of model may be viewed as a random intercept
model ill line with (17) because of the additivity
As mentioned
earlier, the inclusion of random slopes leads to models that cannot be summarized
in terms of mean and covariance structures as done above .
Nevertheless, random slopes can be incorporated into 2-levellatent variable modeling .
3-level modeling is also included in the framework of (21) and (22) when one
of the levels can be handled by a multivariate representation. as in the case of
growth modeling in line with Section 2.1. Latent variable growth modeling in
cluster samples is discussed in MutMn .
For examples. see, e.g., Muthen with an application of multilevel factor
analysis and MutMn with an application to SEl\1. Further examples are
given in Hecht (20(H) and Kaplan and Elliott .
Modeling Framework B
Consider next the special case B of the general modeling framework shown
in Figure 1. Framework B is characterized h;v using categorical latent variables.
denoted by the circle c in Figure 1 (the circle denoted TJu will be discussed later
on). The choice of using a categorical latent variable instead of a continuous
latent variable is lllore fundamental than the corresponding choice of proper scale
type for observed outcomes. The addition of categorical latent variables to the
general framework in Figure 1 opens up a whole new set of modeling capabilities.
BEYOND SEJ\I: GENERAL LAT ENT VARIABLE MODELING
In mainstream statistics, this type of modeling is referred to as finite mixture
modeling. In the current article, the terms latent class and mixture modeling will
be uoed interchangeably. As with continuouo latent variables, categorical latent
variables are used for a variety of reasons as will now be shown.
As a first step, a general modeling representation of framework B as used
in I'vlplus is presented. This is followed by a
discussion of four special cases: latent cli::1SS analysis. latent class analysis with
covariates, latent class growth analysis, latent transition analysis. and logistic regression mixture analysis. :'Iethodological contributions to these areas have been
made in separate fields often without sufficient connections and without sufficient
connections to modeling in other frameworks. For example, until recently, modeling developments for continuous latent variables in framework A and categorical
latent variables in framework B have been kept almost completely separate.4)
Let C denote a latent categorical variable with K classes, Ci = (Cd, Cn , ... , ciK )'.
where Cik = 1 if individual i belongs to class k and zero otherwise. Framework
B has two parts: C related to x and u related to C and x. c is related to x by
multinomial logistic regression using the K - I-dimensional parameter vector of
logit intercepts etc and the (K - 1) x q parameter matrix of logit slopes r c : where
for k = 1, 2, ... , K
P (Cik = llxi) = -----,-:""7,
eQc) +/c] Xi '
where the last class is a reference class with coefficients standardized to zero,
O:CK = 0, /
For u , conditional independence is assumed given Ci and Xi,
The categorical variable Uij (j = 1, 2, . .. , r) with Sj ordered categories follows
an ordered polytomous logistic regression (proport.ional odds model), where for
categories s = O. L 2, ... ,Sj - 1 and T),k,O = -00, Tj ,k,Sj = X
Uij = s, i f
Tj,k, s < uij :S Tj,k.s+ l ,
P(UiJ = SICi,xd = Fs+1('uTj ) - Fs(uij ),
F (u*) - __
1,..-----c::7
1 + e-(Ts-U*)'
where for ui = (uil,ui2,··· ,uir)', T7ui = C'/Ul i ,''lU2,, ···,T/Uj,)'' and conditional on
u; = A Uk T7ui + KUk X i,
T7ui = Q Uk + r Uk X i,
4) Mplus examples of framework B m odels are given at
www.statmodel.com/mplus/examples/mixture.html.
Bengt O. :'I'luthen
where A'uk is an l' x f logit parameter matrix varying across the K classes, K
is an r x q logit parameter matrix y-arying across the K classes, au,. is an f x 1
vector logit parameter vector varying across the J( classes, and r Uk is an f x q logit
parameter matrix varying across the K classes. The thresholds may be stacked
in the LJ=l (5j - 1) x 1 vectors Tk varying across the K classes.
It should he noted that (28) does not include intercept terms given the presence
of T parameters. Furthermore. T parameters haye opposite signs thanu* in (28)
because of their interpretation as thresholds or cut points that a latent continuous
response variable u' exceeds or falls below leads to
P(u.=llc.x) =l-
1 + e-\T- U'
For example. the higher the T the higher 1.[* needs to be to exceed it, and the
lower the probability of n = 1.
Mixture modeling can involve Ilumerical and statistical problems. Mixture
modeling is known to sometimes generate a likelihood function with several local
maxima. The occurrence of this depends on the model and the data. It is therefore
recommended that for a given dataset and a given model different optimizations
are carried out using different sets of starting values.
The numerical and statistical performance of mixture modeling benefits from
confirmatory analysis. T he same kind of confirmatory a n alysis as in regular modeling is possible. using a priori restrictions on the parameters. \Vith mixture modeling, however, there is also a second type of confirmatory analysis. A researcher
may \'lant to incorporate the hypothesis that certain individuals are known to
represent certain latent classes. Individuals with known class membership are
referred to a!'; training data (see also ).Ic:Lachlan & Basford. 1988: Hosmer,
IVIultiple-grouJ> modeling corresponds to the case of all sample units contributing
training data so that c is in effect an observed categorical variable.
In l\lplus. the training data can consists of 0 and 1 class membership values for
all individuals. where 1 denotes which classes an individual may belong to. Known
class membership for an individual corresponds to having training data value of
1 for the known class and 0 for all other classes. Unknown class membership for
an individual is specified by the value 1 for all classes. \Vith class membership
training data. the cla..<;s probabilities are renormed for each individual to add to
one over the admissible set of classes. Fractional training data is also allO\ved,
corresponding to class probabilities adding to unity for each individual. \Vith
fractional training data. the class probabilities are taken to be fixed quantities,
which reduces the sampling variabilit:,,' accounted for in the standard error calculations. Fractional training data where each individual has a probability of 1
for one class and ()'s for the other classes is equivalent to training data with cla..ss
membership value 1 for only one class for each individual. Using training data
BEYOND SET\£: GEKERAL LATENT VARIABLE MODELl KG
with a value of 1 for one class and (rs for the other classes makes it possible to
perform multinomial logistic regression with an unordered, polytomous observed
dependent variable using the l\lplus model part where c is related to x.
Latent class analysis
In latent class analysis the categorical latent variable is used to represent unobserved heterogeneity. Here. the particular aim is to find clusters (latent classes) of
individuals who are similar. It is assumed that a sufficient number of latent classes
for the categorical latent variable results in conditional independence among the
observed outcomes. This may be viewed as heterogeneity among subjects such
that the dependence among the outcomes is obtained in a spuriolls fashion by
mixing the heterogeneous groups. Because the latent class variable is the only
cause of dependence among the outcomes, the latent class model is similar in
spirit to factor analysis with uncorrelated residuals.
Latent class analysis typically considers categorical indicators u of the latent
class variable c, using only a subset of modeling framework B. The variables of u
are binary, ordered polytornous. or unordered polytomous. Due to the conditional
independence specification, the joint probability of all u's is
P(UI,U2, ... ,Ur) =
K L P(c = k) P(ullc = k) P(ll2lc = k) ... P(urlc = k).
The model has two types of parameters. The distribution of the categorical latent
variable is represented by P( c = k) expressed in terms of the logit parameters O:q
in (23). The conditional u probabilities are expressed via logit parameters in line
with (31) where for a binary U logit = -Tk for class k, i.e. the u* part of (28) is
not needed. Similar to factor analysis, the conditional U probabilities provide an
interpretation of the latent cla.<;ses such that some activities represented by the
different u's are more or less likely in some classes than others.
The latent class counterpart of factor scores is obtained by posterior probabilities for each individual belonging to all classes as computed by Bayes' formula
P(c= klul,lL2 ..... Ur) =
P(c = k) P(ullc = k) P(ll2lc = k) ... P(urlc = k)
PCllI, U2.···, ur)
For an overview of latent class analysis. see Bartholomew , Goodman
 and Clogg .
For examples. see, e.g., Muthen , Nestadt,
Hanfelt. Liang, Lamacz, Wolyniec and Pulver , Rindskopf and Rindskopf
 , and Uebersax and Grove .
Bengl. O. lvIuthen
3. 1.1 A latent class analysis example of antisocial behavior
The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLS) collected data on antisocial
behavior among 16 - 23 year olds. The NLSY administers an instrument with 17
binary items. l\Iaximum-likelihood estimation by l\lplus was used. Preliminary
latent class analysis of the 17 items pointed to 9 items that captured 4 different latent classes of antisocial behavior. Class 4 is a normative class (no high
probability of endorsing any item). Class
is a drug involvement class (pot and
drug items). Class 2 is a persona.] offense class (fight. threat items). Class 1 is a
property offense class (shoplift, stealing less than 50. conning someone. stealing
goods, breaking into property). The profile plot of Figure 3 shows the est.imated
item probabilities for each of the 4 classes. It should be noted that the classes
are not ordered in the sense of increasing item probabilities, but involves different
kinds of antisocial activities.
Class 1. 11%
Class 2. 27%
Class 3, 20%
Cia •• 4, 41%
Figure 3: Profiles of antisocial behavior
Table 1 illustrates the use of t.he estimated posterior probabilities for each
individual in each class. The rows correspond to individuals who have t.he highest
probability for that class and the entries are the average probabilities in each class.
High diagonal and low off-diagonal values are desirable for good classification. It
is seen that class 2 and cla<;s 3 are the hardest to distinguish between with a
relatively high average class 2 probability of 0.13 for those who have their highest
probability in class 3. Class 2 is the person offense class (fight, threat) and class 3
BEYOND SEM: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE
is the drug class (pot, drug). While Figure 3 shows that the two classes have rather
different item probabilities on these 4 items. they arc similar on the remaining 5
items. This suggests that more items are needed to more clearly distinguish these
two classes.
Table 1: Classification table for antisocial behavior latent class analysis
Most Likely
Mean Posterior Probabilities
3.2 Latent class analysis with covariates
Similar to factor analysis with covariates, it is useful to include covariates
in the latent class analysis. The aim of the latent variable modeling is still to
find homogeneous groups of individuals (latent classes), but now covariates x are
included in order to both describe the formation of the latent classes and how
they may be differently measured by the indicators u.
The prediction of latent class membership is obtained by the multinomial regression of c on x in (23). This gives information on the composition of the latent
classes. It avoids biases in the commOll ad hoc 3-step procedure: (1) latent class
analysis: (2) cla'lsification of individuals based on posterior probabilities: and (:3)
logistic regression analysis relating classes to covariates.
The variables of x may also have a direct influence on the variables of u. beyond
the influence mediated by c. This is accommodated by estimating elements of KUk
in (28). For example, with a binary u. the model forms the logistic regression of
u on x for cla'>s k.
oglt = -Tie + ""Ie X.
so that the direct influence of x is allowed to vary across classes.
It lllay be noted that all features of multiple-group analysis are included in the
latent class analysis with covariates. with dUlllmy variable covariates representing
the groups. Here. T parameters are the measurement parameters. (34) shows
that conditional on class these can vary across the groups, representing for example gender non-invariance. The multiple-group examples of Clogg and Goodman
 can all be analyzed in this way.
For examples of latent class analysis with covariates, see, e.g., Bandeen-Roche,
l\IigliorettL Zeger and Rathouz . Fonnann . Heijden. Dressens and
Bockenholt , fvIuthen and l'vIuthen , and f..Iuthen .
A latent class analysis e:rample continued
Continuing the antisocial behavior latent class analysis example above, three
covariatcs from the NLS are added: age, gender, and ethnicity. This example
is drawn from Muthen and I\Iuthen . These covariatcs are specified to
influence the probability of class membership using the multinomial regression
part (23). I\ieasurement nOllinvariancc with respect to the three covariates can
be studied by including a direct effect. from a covariate to an item but was not
studied here. Maximum-likelihood estimation b.y Mplus was used. The estimates
from the multinomial regression predicting class membership can be translated
into the curves of Figure 4. The estimated item profiles remain approximately
the same m; in Figure 3 and the class interpretation is t herefore the same. For a
given age, gender. and ethnicity. F igure 4 shows the probability of membership
in each class (note that this is not a longitudinal study but the x axis correspond
to ages represented in this cross-sectional sample). For example, it is seen that
the normative class 4 is the most likely class for all ages among white women,
whereas this is not true for the other three groups.
White Males
Black Males
. ' ....... .
........... " ...
··· x . ....
...----.... -----
,.. ... .. ..
... . . . . - ." . .. .. -
White Females
--c .... , I
--'- ------------
····· x ..
_ _ _ .o - - - - -o---__ o _ __ __ o _ _
Black Females
-------.---
.... ... .. •
........... ...------• ....-i
. ,..........--- .
... ... .. .
... .... ::.,-.
" • •. • It 1
____ o _ _ ___ o---- -0--- __ 0 j
Figure 4: Influence of covariates on antisocial behavior classes
BEYOND SEl\I: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE l\IODELINC
Table 2 shows the resulting c:lassification table based on estimated posterior
probabilities. It is seen that the use of covariate information improves the c:lass
2, class ;) distinction relative to Table 1.
Table 2: Classification table for antisocial behavior latent c:lass analysis
with covariates
Most Likely
Mean Posterior Probabilities
Latent class gTOwth analysis
Latent c:lass growth analysis again uses a categorical latent variable to represent unobserved heterogeneity, but this time in a form that connects the growth
modeling discussed in Section 2.1 and the latent c:lass modeling just discussed.
Here, latent c:lasses are sought that are homogeneous with respect to development over time. The latent class growth analysis introduces the continuous latent
variable 1711 of Figure 1.
In latent class growth analysis the multiple indicators of the latent classes
correspond to repeated measures over time. Individuals belong to different latent
c:lasses characterized by different types of trajectories. Assume for simplicity a
single outcome at each timepoinL ui = (ltil. lti2 . .... Uit, ... ,ltiT)" and the simple
growth model corresponding to (28),
LCl'el - 1 :uTt =
T]Oi + T]li at,
where at are fixed time scores represented in A l1 ,
where T is the number of time periods. Here. 1711 in (28). (29) contains an intercept
and a slope growth factor \vith differences across classes captured in a llk and
r 11k Xi of (29). The effects of time-varying covariates can be captured in Kllk of
It may be noted that the modeling does not incorporate continuous latent
variables in the form of random effects. but that 17l! is non-stochastic conditional
Bengt O. Muthen
on x. This implies that conditional on x there is zero within-class variation across
individuals. This limitation can be relaxed in line with the growth modeling of
Section 2.1.
With an ordered categorical outcome variable Uit, let Tt.k.s be the sth threshold
in class k at timepoint t, s = 0, L 2 .... ,St - 1, where Tt.k.O = -x, Tt.k.St = ()O.
Across-time and across-class measurement invariance is imposed by the threshold
specification
Tl.l.s = T2,1,s = ... = TT.l,s = ... = Tl.K,s = ... = TT.K.s,
for each s value. In the level-2 equation corresponding to (29), the Q mean of
the intercept growth factorl]oi is fixed at zero in the first class for identification
purposes. The mean of the intercept growth factor is free to be estimated in the
remaining classes.
Latent class growth analysis has been proposed by Nagin and Land ; see
also articles in the special issue of Land . For further examples, see, e.g.,
Nagin , Nagin and Tremblay , and Muthen .
Latent transition analysis
Latent transition analysis is a form of latent class analysis where the multiple measures of the latent classes are repeated over time and where across-time
transitions between classes are of particular interest. Here. latent categorical variables are used to capture fundamental latent variable constructs in a system of
regression relations akin to SEJ\L
The latent transition model is an example of the use of multiple latent class
variables c and is therefore not directly incorporated in the framework specified
above. Muthen showed how multiple latent class variables can be analyzed using a confirmatory latent class analysis with a single latent class variable
including all the possible latent class combinations. applying equality restrictions
among the measurement parameters. Nevertheless. this does not handle multiple
time points with parameter restrictions such as first-order Markov modeling for
the latent class variables. Latent transition analysis incorporated in the general
is a topic for future research.
An overview of latent transition modeling issues is given in Collins and \Vugalter and Rehoussin, Reboussin, Liang and Anthony . For examples.
see. e.g., Collins, Graham, Rousculp and Hansen . Graham. Collins, \VugaIter, Chung and Hansen . and Kandel, Yamaguchi and Chen .
Logistic regression mixture analysis
Logistic regression analysis with latent classes is interesting to consider as a
special case of latent class analysis \vith c:ovariates. The model was proposed by
Follman and Lambert and considers a single binary u. It may be expressed
BEYOND SEM: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE MODELING
for cla.'.;;s k as
loyit = -Tk + "'u x,
which is a special case of (28) where the logit intercept, i.e. the negative of the
threshold T, varies across cla..<;s but the slopes do not.
In (23), , q
= 0 so that the covariates are assumed to not influence the class
membership. Follman and Lambert considered an application where two
types of blood parasites were killed with various doses of poison. In this application, the assumption of , q
= 0 is natural because class membership existed
before the poison was administered and was not influenced by it. Follman and
Lambert discuss the identification status of the model.
Even in this simple form. however, logistic regression mixture analysis is difficult to apply in practice, probably because of the limited information available
with only a single binary 11 in addition to the covariates x. This is most likely why
the analysis has not caught on in practice. In contrast. latent class analysis with
covariates using multiple n variables is typically a well-behaved analysis method.
Modeling Framework C
Consider next the special case C of the general modeling framework shown in
Figure l. Framework C is characterized by adding categorical latent variables,
denoted by the circle c in Figure 1, to framework A. Particular models include a
variety of mainstream statistical and psychometric topics. To be discussed here
are finite mixture modeling, latent profile analysis, growth mixture modeling, and
mixture SEM.
It is interesting to compare framework C with framework B. Framework B can
be seen as containing models that use latent classes to explain relationships among
observed variables. A more fundamental idea can. however. be extracted from
latent class approaches. Different classes can have different parameter values and,
unlike the latent cla..'is model. even different model types. In other words, the idea
of unobserved heterogeneity can be taken a step further using categorical latent
variables. This further step is taken in framework C, and also in the subsequent
general framework D.5)
In framework C, the SEl"I parameterization is generalized to multiple latent
classes. adding a subscript k. This is analogous to the multiple-group situation,
except that group is unobserved. In what follows, this generalization of (1) and
(2) will be understood. Here, multivariate normality of y conditional on x and
class is assumed. This implies that the resulting mixture distribution. not conditioning on class, is allowed to be strongly non-normal. In the :rvIplus framework
of l\luthen and Muthen , the mixture modeling allows
.olrvIplus examples of framework C models are given at
www.statmodel.com/rnplus/examples/mixture.html.
every parameter of framework A to vary across the latent classes.
Finite rnixtuT'e rnodehng of multivariate normals
A straightforward case of framework C is finite mixture modeling of multivariate distributions. Here, the continuous latent variables of 'r/ in Figure 1 are
not used. It is assumed that for class k, y is distributed as N(llk,
is a special case of the latent class generalization of (]) where there are no factors. Ilk = VI",
= e/.;. There are two different reasons why such a mixture
model ,vould be of interest. (i) to fit a non-normal distribution and (ii) to study
substantively meaningful mixture components (latent classes).
The flexibility of the normal mixture model to fit highly skewed data was
recognized already by Pearson (1895); for a review. see l'vIcLachlan and Peel . For example. a lognormal univariate distribution is very well
fit by a 2-class mixture with equal variances. Figure 5 shows a 2-class example.
At the top is shmvn the mixture distribution, that is the skewed distribution that
would be seen in data. At the bottom are shown two normal mixture component
distributions that when mixed together by the class probabilities r. and (1 - r.)
perfectly describe the distribution at the top. If the interest is in fitting a model
to data from the distribution at the top, the 2-class mixture model can be used
to produce mixed mct..ximum-likelihood estimates,
iLm = r. p] + (1 - 7r) ih,
am = r. (Pi + (1) + (1 - i.)
using the subscript Tn to denote the mixed estimates for the distribution at the
top. The delta method can be used to compute standard errors. The idea of using
mixed estimates has for example been discussed in missing data modeling using
the pattern-mixture approach, see, e.g. Little and 'Wang . Hogan and Laird
 , and Hedeker and Rose (20()()).
In many cases, however. the mixture components have a fundamental substantive meaning, ,,,,here there are theoretical rea.;;;ons for individuals to behave
differently and have different antecedents and consequences. Here, mixed estimates such as (38), (:19) are not of interest. but the focus is on the parameters
of the different mixture component distributions. There may for example be biological/genetic reasons for the existence of different mixture components. such as
,,,,ith the two kinds of trypanosomes in Section 3.5.
11ixture modeling in applications where there are substantive reasons to investigate different latent classes relates to cluster analysis. Cluster analysis using
finite mixture modeling has been proposed a.;;; a strong alternative to conventional
clustering techniques. see, e.g .. McLachlan and Peel . A classic example
is the Fisher's iris data analyzed in Everitt and Hand . Four measures
corresponding to sepal and petal lengths and widths were used to classify 150
iris flowers. Here. there ,,,,'ere three known species of iris present and the interest
BEYOKO SElII GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE !vIODELIKG
Mixture Distribution
Component 1: NO ,
prcpotion .75
Component 2: N(2, .a"'2), propotion .25
Mixture Components
....................
... " ......
Figure 5: A mixture of two components
was in how well the classification could be recovered. This particular example
also illustrates the possible difficulty ill fitting mixture models with class-varying
variances, with multiple maxima and possible non-convergence or convergence to
singular covariance matrices depending on starting values.
An excellent overview of finite mixture modeling is given in McLachlan and
Peel . This source abo gives a multitude of examples. The iris data example
is available at the j,Iplus 'Areb site given above.
4.2 Latent profile analysis
In contrast to the analysis of the iris example above, latent profile analysis
applies a structure to the covariance matrices, assuming llllcorrelated outcomes
Bengt O. Muthen
conditional on class.
\Vith class-varying means ILk' latent profile analysis is therefore analogous to latent class analysis. In actual analyses. models with class-invariant variances in
(40) are better behaved in terms of convergence. It is interesting to note that the
latent class analysis does not face this choice given that means and variances of the
categorical variables of u are not represented by separate parameters. Relationships among latent class, latent profile. and factor analysis models are described
in Bartholomew , Gibson , and Lazarsfeld and Henry .
Growth mixture modeling
The growth modeling of Section 2.1 uses continuous latent variables in the
form of random effects. The continuous latent variables capture unobserved heterogeneity in terms of individual differences in growth over time. In many applications. however. there are more fundamental forms of unobserved heterogeneity
that cannot be well captured by continuous latent variables but require categorical latent variables. The classes of the categorical latent variable can represent
latent trajectory classes. Substantive theories motivating latent trajectory classes
are common in many different fields, such as with normative and non-normative
development in behavioral research and disease processes in medicine.
As for latent profile analysis, growth mixture modeling imposes a structure
on the covariance matrix for each class. Unlike latent profile analysis, however.
growth mixture modeling does not assume uncorrelated outcomes given class.
Instead, further heterogeneity within class is represented by random effects that
influence the outcomes at all time points. causing them to be correlated.
Assume for example the following quadratic growth model for individual 1 111
class Ie: (Ie: = L 2, ... ,K).
Yit = 170; +1]li 0kt +1]2i 0kt + fit·
where Yit (i = L 2 .... . 71: t = L 2 ..... T) are outcomes influenced by the random
effects r/Oi. 1/1i, and ']2i. In line with Section 2.L the time scores of ° enter into the
Ak matrix. The residuals fit have a TxT covariance matrix e k . possibly varying
across the trajectory cla.'ises (k = L 2 ..... K). The random effects are related to
the covariates x,
170i = (Yak +
171i = Glk +
7]2i = G2k + ';k x; + (2i'
BEYOND SEAl: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE tvlODELI:\G
The residuals (i have a 3 x 3 covariance matrix'll b possibly varying across classes
k (k = L 2, ... . K). It is dear that thit; model fits into framework C in line with
how the growth model fit into framework A.
The growth mixture model offers great flexibility in across-class parameter
differences. The different shapes of the latent trajectory classes are typically
characterized by the class-varying ctk parameters holding Ak class-invariant. Certain classes may require class-specific variances'll k and e k. In addition, different
cla.<;ses may have different relationt; to x corresponding to cla.'ls-varying 'Y k coefficients.
A special case of the growth mixture model is obtained as a continuous-outcome
version of the latent class growth analysis presented in Section 3.3. This type of
modeling, proposed by Nagin and introduced into PROC TRAJ in SAS specifies
'11k = 0, ek = e I. In contrast, growth mixture modeling allows for individual
variation within each class through'll k. The latent cla.<;s growth analysis typically
requires many more classes to fit the same data and often several of the classes
represent only minor variations in trajectories and not fundamentally different
growth forms.
Muthen et al. (in pres..,) present a growth mixture model suitable for randomized trials. In conventional growth modeling the treatment effects can be modeled
as affecting the trajectories after the treatment has started. The Muthen et al.
generalization addresses the common situation that treatment effects are often
different for different kinds of individuals. It allows treatment effects to vary
across latent trajectory classes for the repeated measures.
For a technical description of growth mixture modeling, see Muthen and Shedden and :tvluthen and Muthen . For examples, sec,
e.g. IvIuthen and Shedden , Muthen and :t-.luthen . Muthen , Muthen. Brown. Masyn . .10, Khoo. Yallg. Wang. Kellam, Carlin and Liao (in
press). and Li, Duncan, Duncan and Acock .
A growth mixture modeling example of reading fa'iiure
An example clarifies the analysis opportunities presented by growth mixture
modeling. Section 2.1.1 introduced a r eading data example with phonemic awareness development in Kindergarten related to end of grade 2 spelling performance.
Figure 2 suggests heterogeneity in the phonemic awareness development. with a
group of children having a close to zero growth rate in Kindergarten, Reading
research points to a subgroup of children who experience reading failure by third
grade, It is therefore of interest to see if
signs of a failing group can be
found earlier. and perhaps as early as end of Kindergarten. Two analyses are
presented here as illustration (see also :t-.lutlien. Khoo. Francis, & Boscardin. in
press). First, a growth mixture analysis with 1 to 5 classes was lnade of the four
phonemic awareness outcomes. Second, this growth mixture model was extended
to include in the same analysis the spelling test outcome from the end of sec-
Bengt O. Muthen
ond grade. l etting the mean and variance of this out.come vary as a function of
the lat.ent trajectory classes. Both models clearly fit in framework C. IVla...ximumlikelihood estimat.ion by l\.Iplus was used.
A conventional linear, single-dass random effects growth model fits well in this
case (X2(5) = 7.49, n = .582) and shows significant variation in the intercept and
slope growth factors. Such a good mean and covariance structure fit can. however,
he obtained even when the true model is a growth mixture model with more than
one class . Fitting linear models with 2.3.4, and 5 latent
cla<;ses pointed to a steady improvement of the Baye::;iall information criterion
that rewaros a high log likelihood and a low number of parameters. Given the
particular int.erest in a low. failing class, a choice does not have to be made between
the 3-, 4 -. and 5-class solutions since they all re::;ulted in the same formation of a
lowest cla::;::; of 56'/(. of the children. Figure 6 shows t he est.imated growth (solid
line) and the corresponding o bserved trajectories, where the latter are obtained
by using" pseudo-classes", i.e. the selection of individuals are obtained by random
draws from their estimated posterior probabilities a<; suggested in Bandeen-Roche
et a!. andl\Jutlu§n et a!. (in press).
Adding the second-grade spelling test to the growth mixture model shows the
predictive pO'wer of the Kindergarten informatiO'n from two years earlier. The
extended grO'wth mixture model analysis showed that the means of the spelling
test were significantly different across the 3 classes. Box plots of the spelling test
::;cores based on pseudo-class a'SSignments into the 3 classes are given in Figure 7.
4.4 Mixture SEM
l\lixture SEM will be mentioned only briefly III this article. It follows from
the discussion in Section 2 that mixture SEM and growth mixture modeling fit
into the same modeling framework. l\1ixture SEM includes mixture linear regression. mixtnre path analysis. factor mixture analysis, and general mixture SEM.
Consider as an example factor mixture analysis. where for class k
E (y tJ = Vk + Ak O k,
V(yd = Ak 'ltl,:
AnalogO'us to multiple-group analysis. a major interest is in across-cla<;s variatiO'n
in the factor means. variances. and covariances of Ok , 'It k. The model is similar
to growth mixture analysis in that continuous latent variables, i.e. the factors,
are llsed to describe correlations among the outcomes conditional O'n class as in
(46) . Lubke. Muthen and Larsen studied the identifiability of the factor
mixture mO'dei. The special case of measurement invariance fO'r all the O'utcomes,
no class variation in v. A. is of particular interest becanse it places the
factors in the same metric so that Ok: 'It k comparisons a re meaningful. However,
Lubke, l-.luti1en and Larsen point to analysis difficulties with near-singular
information matrix estimates when fitting such full invariance models. These
BEYOJ\D SEM: GENERAL LATENT VARIABLE MODELING
difficulties are not shared by the growth mixture model, which typically imposes
equality of v parameters across time and across class and has few if any free
parameters in A.
For overvie\vs and examples of fa.ctor mixture analysis and mixture SEl\L see,
e.g., Arminger and Stein , Arminger, Stein and Wittenberg , Blafield
 , Dolan and van der l\laas , Hoshino , Jedidi, Jagpal and De-
Sarbo , Jedidi, Ramaswamy, DeSarbo and Wedel , McLachlan and
Peel , and Yung .
Class 3, 9%
Class 2, 34%
Clas. 1, 56%
Figure 6: 3-class growth mixture model for phonemic awareness
Bengt O. Muthen
Figure 7: Box plots for second-grade spelling scores
in three phonemic awareness classes
Framework D
Consider next the most general case D of the modeling framework shown in
Figure 1. Framework D is characterized by adding categorical latent variable indicators u to framework C. Framework D clearly shows the modeling generality
achieved by a combination of continuous and categorical latent variables. This
unified framework is an example of the whole being more than the sum of its
parts. It is powerful not only because it contains many special cases. but also
because it suggests many new modeling combinations. Particular models include
a wide variety of statistical and psychometric topics. To be discussed here are
complier-average causal effect modeling, combined latent class and growth mixture modeling, prediction of distal outcomes from growth shapes, discrete-time
survival mixture analysis, non-ignorable missing data modeling, and modeling of
semicontinuous outcomes.5)
Complier-average causal effect modeling
Complier-average causal effect (CACE) modeling is used in randomized trials where a portion of the individuals randomized to the treatment group choose
filMplus examples of framework D models are given at
www.statmodel.com/mplus/examples/mixture.htmlas well as at
www.statmodel.com/mplus/examples/penn.html
BEYOND SEM: GE,,-"ERAL LATENT VARIABLE l\lODELING
to not participate ("noncom pliers"). Although developed for this specialized application, CACE modeling involves interesting general lat.ent variable modeling
issues. In particular, CACE modeling illustrates how latent variables are used in
mainstream statistics to capture missing data on categorical variables. Here, the
mixture modeling focuses on estimating parameters for substanti vely meaningful
mixture components. where these mixture components are inferred not only from
the out.comes but also from auxiliary information. CACE modeling represents a
transition from framework C to framework D . where in addition to the framework C observed dat.a information, a minimal amount of information 011 cla.;;;s
membership is added in the form of a single 1l variable observed for part of the
In a randomized trial, it is common to have noncom pliers a mong those invited
to treatment: t.hat is, some individuals do not show up for treatment or do not take
the medication. Because of randomization, a equal-sized group of noncom pliers
is also present among control group individuals. although the non-compliance
status does not manifest itself. The noncomplier and complier groups are typically
not similar, but may differ with respect to several characteristics such as age,
education, motivation, etc. The a.<;sessment of treatment effects with respect to
say the mean of an outcome is t herefore complicated. Four main approaches are
common. First, "intent-ta-treat" analysis makes a straightforward comparison of
the treatment group to the control group. This may lead to a diluted treatment
effect given that not everyone in this group has received treatment. Second, one
may compare compliers in the treatment group with the controls. Third, compliers
in the treatment group may be compared to the combined group of noncom pliers
in the treatment group and everyone in the control group. Fourth, compliers in
the treatment group may be compared to compliers in the control group. Only the
last approach compares the same subset of people in the treatment and control
groups, but presents the problem that this subset is not observed in the control
group. This problem is solved by CACE mixture modeling.
CACE modeling can b e expressed by t he framework D combination of (1), (2)
generalized to include the lat.ent. cla.ss addition of (n) - (29). The probability of
membership in the two latent classes as a function of covariates may be expressed
by the logistic regression (23), while the outcome y is expressed by the mixed
linear regretlsion.
where I denotes the 0/1 treatment/control dummy variable. Here, Ok captures
the different y means for individuals in the absence of treatment. CACE modeling
typically taketl rk = 0 for the noncomplier class.
In statistical analysis this situation is v iewed as a missing data problem. Data
are missing o n the binary compliance variable for individuals in the control group.
while data on this variable are present for the treatment group. The framework D conceptualization is that non-compliance status is a latent class variable,
where this latent class variable becomes observed for treatment group individu-
Bengt O. l\luthen
also Hence. the latent class variable captures missing data on a categorical variable. Although the choice between the two conceptualizations may seem as only
a matter of semantics. as described below the lat.ent variable approach suggests
extensions of CACE modeling using connections with psychometric modeling that
have potential value in randomized trials.
The fact that latent class status is knmvn for treatment group individuals can
be handled in hvo equivalent \\lays in the Mplus analysis. First, training data may
be used to indicate that membership in the non-compliance da.'is is impossible
for complying individuals in the treatment group and that rnembership in the
compliance class is impossible for uon-complying individuals in the treatment
group. Second. a binary latent class indicator 1t defined to be identical to the
latent class variable Illay be introduced in line with the latent class analysis of
framework B. \\'itb 0 r epresenting noncompliance and 1 representing compliance,
the v. variable has fixed parameter values, P(n = 11compliance dass) = 1. P(n =
1lnon-compliance class) = O.
The variable 71. is observed for treatment group
individuals and missing for control group individuals. This second approach shows
that CACE modeling belongs in framework D and also suggests a generalization.
In psychometrics. the typical approach is to seek observed indicators for latent
variables.
An attempt could be made to measure the variable u also among
controls. for example by asking individuals before randomization how likely they
are to participate in the treatment if chosen. Several different measures u could
be designed and llsed as latent class analysis indicators in line with framework B
For background on CACE modeling. see, e.g., AngrisL Imbens and Hubin
 and Frangakis and Baker . For examples, see, e.g" Little and Yau
 , Jo , and Jo and Muthen .7)
Combined lalent class and growth m.ixture analysis
Figure 1 shows clearly that framework D can combine the framework B latent
class aualysis with the framework C growth mixture modeling. As an example,
Tvluthen and I\luthen analy:t;ecl the NLSY data discussed in Section 3,
where it was of interest to relate latent classes of individuals with respect to
antisocial behavior at age 17 to latent trajectory clal:ises for heavy drinking ages
IS-30. Here. a latent class variable was used for each of the two sets of variables,
the latellt class measurement instrument for antisocial behavior and the repeated
measures of heavy drinking. Csing the confirmatory latent class analysis t.echnique
described in Muthen , these two latent class variables can be analyzed
together. This gives estimates of the relationships between the t.\vo classifications.
To the extent that the two classifications are highly correlated, a latent class
7lDat.a and 'Ilplus input for the Little and Yao example is available on the I\1plus
BEYOND SEA!: GENERAL LATEKT VARIABLE MODELING
analysis measurement instrument can improve the classification into the latent
trajectory classes. This approach i s of potential importance, e.g. using the latent
class measurement instrument as a screening device in a treatment study, where
different treatments are matched to different kinds of trajectory classes.
5. 3 Prediction from growth shapes
11uthen and Shedden used the latent trajectory classes in a growth
mixture model of heavy drinking as predictors of distal outcomes ill the form
of binary 7L variables, such as indicators of alcohol dependence. Predicting from
the heavy drinking growth factors faces the potential problem of a highly nonlinear r elationship given that a growth factor aquires its meaning in conjunction
\vith other growth factors. For example, in a study of problematic behavior such
as heavy drinking. a low slope growth factor value has a different meaning if
the intercept factor value is high ("chronic" development) than when it is low
("normal" development). Given that the latent trajectory classes can represent
different shapes of development, prediction from the latent classes is a powerful
Specia.l uses of u indicators
The framework D addition of u to framework C not only adds latent class
analysis type features but also provides several unexpected additional modeling
possibilities. Muthen and IvIasyn show how u can be used as event history
indicators in discrete-time survival analysis. This model corresponds to a singlecla.'is latent class analysis. but Il/luthen and 11asyn also explore different
types of mixture survival models. Muthen and Brown show how u can be
used as missing data indicators for missingness on y. This leads to an approach
to study non-ignorable missing data in mixture modeling, for example where
missingness is related to latent trajectory classes. Muthen shows how u
can be used to indicate zero or "floor" values for y, that is values that represent
absence of an activity. Such data are frequently seen in behavioral research given
that time of onset varies across individuals. It is the strength of frame\vork D that
these seemingly disparate models can be integrated and used in new combinations
to provide answers to more probing research questions.
Conclusions
This article has provided an overview of statistical analysis with latent variables. In psychometrics it is typical to use latent variables to represent theoretical
constructs. The constructs themselves are of key int.erest and a focus is on measuring different aspects of the constructs. In statistics, latent variables are more
typically used to represent unobserved heterogeneity. sources of variation, and
missing data. The latent variables are often not of key interest but are included
Bengt O. Muthen
to more correctly model the data. Unobserved heterogeneity is typically represented by random effects, i.e. continuolls latent variables. a common example
being growth modeling in the form of the mixed linear m odeling (multilevel modeling) to capt.ure individual differences in growth. Continuous latent variables are
also used to represent sources of variation in hierarchical cross-sectional data, to
let the model properly reflect a cluster sampling scheme and to estimate variance
components. Cluster analysis considers ullobserved heterogeneity in the form
of categorical latent variables. i.e. latent cla..'3ses. in order t o find homogeneous
of individuals. Finite m ixture modeling with categorical l atent variables is
a rigorow; approach to such cluster analysis. :Missing data corresponds to latent
variables that are either continuous or categorical.
T he article discussed a general l atent variable modeling framework that uses
a combination of continuous ann categorical latent variables to give a unifying
view of psychometric and statistical latent variable applications. This framework
shows connections between different modeling tradit ions and suggests interesting
extensions. It is the hope that this general latent variable modeling framework
stimulates a better integration of p sychometric and st atistical d evelopment. Also,
it is hoped that this framework provides substantive researchers with an analysis
tool that is both powerful and easy to uuderstand in order t o more readily respond
to t he complexit.y of their research questions. Ongoing research b y t.he author aims
at further extensions o f the modeling framework.
Acknowledgements
The research wa..<; supported by grant K02 AA 00230-01 from NIAAA, by grant
40859 from
and by a g rant from NIDA. The author thanks Tihomir Asparouhov for valuable discussions and computational a..'isistance. Katherine Masyn
provided helpful assistance with displaying the results. The work has also benefitted from discussions in Bengt Muthen's Research Apprenticeship Course and
Hendricks Brown's Prevention Science l\Iet.hodology group.