Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 198–202,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Data Augmentation for Visual Question Answering
Kushal Kaﬂe, Mohammed Yousefhussien, and Christopher Kanan∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
{kk6055, mxy7332, kanan}@rit.edu
Data augmentation is widely used to train
deep neural networks for image classiﬁcation tasks. Simply ﬂipping images can
help learning by increasing the number
of training images by a factor of two.
However, data augmentation in natural
language processing is much less studied.
Here, we describe two methods
for data augmentation for Visual Question
Answering (VQA). The ﬁrst uses existing semantic annotations to generate new
questions. The second method is a generative approach using recurrent neural networks.
Experiments show the proposed
schemes improve performance of baseline
and state-of-the-art VQA algorithms.
Introduction
In recent years, both computer vision and natural
language processing (NLP) have made enormous
progress on many problems using deep learning.
Visual question answering (VQA) is a problem
that fuses computer vision and NLP to build upon
these successes. In VQA, an algorithm is given an
image and a question about the image, and it predicts the answer to the question . Although progress
has been rapid, there is still a signiﬁcant gap between the performance of the best VQA systems
and humans.
For example, on the open-ended
‘The VQA Dataset’ that uses real images, the best
systems in 2016 are at around 65% accuracy ) compared to 83% for humans . Analysis of VQA algorithm performance as a function of the amount of
training data show that existing algorithms would
beneﬁt greatly from more training data (Kaﬂe and
∗Corresponding author.
Figure 1: We explore two methods for data augmentation
for VQA. The Template method uses semantic image annotations. The LSTM method is a generative approach. For this
image, the original questions are: 1) ‘Where are the people
sitting at?’ 2) ‘How many orange cups are there?’ and 3)
‘What is the coffee table made of?’ The Template augmentation method generates the questions (4 of 13 total): 1) ‘Is
there a person in the picture?’ 2) ‘Is there a couch?’ 3) ‘How
many people are there?’ and 4) ‘What room is this?’ The
LSTM method generates the questions: 1) ‘How many people are there?’ 2) ‘How many people are in the picture?’ and
3) ‘Are they playing a video game?’
Kanan, 2017). One way to address this would be
to annotate additional questions about images, but
this is time-consuming and expensive. Data augmentation is a much cheaper alternative.
Data augmentation is generating new training
data from existing examples. In this paper, we explore two data augmentation methods for generating new question-answer (QA) pairs for images.
The ﬁrst method uses existing semantic annotations and templates to generate QA pairs, similar
to the method in Kaﬂe and Kanan . The
second method is a generative approach using a recurrent neural network (RNN). Fig. 1 shows an example image from ‘The VQA Dataset’ along with
the original questions and the questions generated
using our methods. Our methods improve the variety and the number of questions for the image.
We evaluate how well each augmentation method
performs on two VQA datasets. Our results show
that augmentation increases performance for both
Related Work
For supervised computer vision problems, e.g.,
image recognition, labels are scarcer than images.
This is especially a problem with deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that have millions
of parameters. Although more human labeled data
would be ideal, it is easier to exploit the training dataset to generate new examples.
For image classiﬁcation, common ways to exploit training images to create more labeled examples include mirror reﬂection, random crops etc. Many
of these methods were used in training the seminal AlexNet , which increased the training data by more than ten folds
and produced relative improvement of over 4% for
image classiﬁcation.
Compared to vision, where augmentation is
common, little work has been done on augmenting text for classiﬁcation problems. A notable exception is Zhang et al. , where a thesaurus
was used to replace synonymous words to create
more training data for text classiﬁcation. However, this augmentation produced little improvement and sometimes even hurt performance. The
authors’ argued that because large quantities of
real data are available, models generalize properly
without augmentation.
Although training using
augmented text data is rare, generating new questions about images has been studied. The COCO-
QA dataset for VQA was created
by parsing COCO captions with a syntactic parser,
and then used this to create QA pairs for four kinds
of questions using hand-crafted rules. However,
due to inability of the algorithm to cope with complex sentence structures, a signiﬁcant portion of
COCO-QA questions have grammatical errors or
are oddly phrased. Visual question generation was
also studied in , with
an emphasis on generating questions about images
that are beyond the literal visual content of the image. They endeavored to avoid simple questions
such as counting and color, which were emphasized in COCO-QA. Unlike our work, their objective was not data augmentation and they did not
try to answer the generated questions.
Datasets and Algorithms for VQA
We conduct experiments on two of the most popular VQA datasets: ‘The VQA Dataset’ and COCO-QA .
‘The VQA Dataset’ is currently the most popular VQA dataset and it contains both synthetic
and real-world images. The real-world images are
from the COCO dataset .
questions were generated by human annotators.
We refer to this portion as COCO-VQA, and use it
for our experiments. COCO-QA 
also uses images from COCO, with the questions
generated by an NLP algorithm that uses COCO’s
captions. All questions belong to four categories:
object, number, color, and location.
Many algorithms have been proposed for VQA.
Some notable formulations include attention based
methods , Bayesian frameworks , and compositional approaches . Detailed reviews of existing
methods can be found in Kaﬂe and Kanan 
and Wu et al. .
However, simpler models such as linear classiﬁers and multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) perform only slightly worse on
many VQA datasets. These baseline methods predict the answer using a vector of image features
concatenated to a vector of question features .
Methods for Data Augmentation
The impact of using data augmentation to improve
VQA has not been studied. We propose two methods for generating QA pairs about images: 1) a
template based generation method that uses image annotations and 2) a long short term memory
(LSTM) based language model. The number of
questions generated using both methods are shown
in Table 1.
Template Augmentation Method
The template data augmentation method uses the
semantic segmentation annotations in COCO to
generate new QA pairs. COCO contains detailed
segmentation annotations with labels for 80 objects typically found in the images. We synthesize
four kinds of questions from the COCO annotations: yes/no, counting, object recognition, scene,
activity and sport recognition.
Yes/No Questions: First, we make a list of the
Table 1: Number of questions in COCO-VQA compared to the number generated using the LSTM and
template methods.
COCO-VQA 
Total Augmentation
140,780 (38.0%)
31,595 (29.2%)
1,023,594 (86.2%)
1,055,189 (81.5%)
45,813 (12.4%)
2,727 (2.52%)
60,547 (5.1%)
63,274 (4.8%)
183,286 (49.6%)
73,617 (68.2%)
102,617 (8.6%)
176,234 (13.6%)
COCO objects present in an image. If the object
has an area greater than 2000 pixels, we can generate an object presence question, e.g., ‘Is there
a OBJECT in the picture?’ with ‘yes’ as the answer. We use 10 templates to allow some variation in phrasing. For example, ‘Is there a person
in the image?’ and ‘Are there any people in the
photo?’ are variations of the same question. To
avoid question imbalance, we ask equal number
of ‘no’ questions about the objects that are absent
from the image.
Counting Questions: To make counting questions, we count the number of separate annotations
of all the objects of a particular category that have
an area greater than 2000 pixels, and ask 12 variations of a counting question template.
Object Recognition Questions: Object recognition questions such as ’What is in the picture?’
can be ambiguous because multiple objects may
be present.
So, we ask questions about COCO
‘super-categories’ (e.g., ‘food,’ ‘furniture,’ ‘vehicle,’ etc.)
to specify the type of object in the
question. However, ambiguity may persist if there
are multiple objects belonging to same supercategory. For example, ‘What vehicles are shown in
the photo?’ becomes ambiguous if both ‘cars’ and
‘trucks’ are present. So, we ensure only a single
object of a supercategory is present before asking
a recognition question. We use 12 variations of
‘What SUPERCATEGORY is in the image?’
Scene and Activity Questions: If a object in an
image belongs to the COCO supercategory indoor
or outdoor, we generate questions such as ‘Is this
indoor or outdoors?’ Similarly, we ask about different rooms in the house by identifying the common objects in the room. For example, if there are
least two common kitchen appliances in the picture(e.g., toaster, microwave, etc.), then we infer
the room is a kitchen and ask ‘What room is this?’
with ‘kitchen’ as the answer. We employ similar
strategies for ‘living room’ and ‘bathroom.’ We
used six variations for ‘indoor/outdoor’ questions
and four variations for room classiﬁcation questions. For sports, we check if any sports equipment is present in the image and generate a question about the type of sport being depicted in the
image. We use four variations of questions to ask
about each of the six common sports activities.
LSTM Augmentation Method
One major issues with our template-based augmentation method is that the questions are rigid
and may not closely resemble the way questions
are typically posed in the VQA dataset. To address this, we train a stacked LSTM that generates questions about images. The network consists
of two LSTM layers each with 1000 hidden units
followed by two fully connected layers, with 7000
units each, which is the size of our vocabulary constructed by tokening training questions into individual words. The ﬁrst fully connected layer has a
ReLU activation function, while the second layer
has the 7000-way softmax. The output question
is produced one word at a time until the ¡end-ofquestion¿ token. The network is trained using the
COCO-VQA training data. During the generation
process, we start by passing the ¡start-question¿
token concatenated with the image features. To
predict the next word, we sample from a multinomial distribution characterized by the prediction
probabilities. Sometimes such sampling generates
questions unrelated to image content.
To compensate for this, we repeat the sampling for every word multiple times and pick the word occurring most frequently. We then generate 30 initial
questions per image, and only retain the 3 most
frequent questions. Any generated question that
already exists in the original dataset is removed.
We use the MLP VQA method described in
Sec. 3 to create answers for the generated questions, but it is trained without augmented data.
Used alone, this can produce many incorrect answers. To mitigate this problem, we tried to identify the kinds of questions the MLP VQA algo-
COCO-VQA: What instrument does the person who
lives here play? A: Guitar
COCO-QA: What is in front
of a computer looking at the
screen as if browsing? A: Cat
Figure 2: Examples of questions and predicted answers from COCO-VQA and COCO-QA datasets.
The results are from model trained jointly on original and temple based QA pairs.
rithm tends to get correct. To do this, we use kmeans to cluster the training question features concatenated to a one-hot vector with the answer for
each question type (k = 25). We assign each validation QA pair to one of these clusters and compute each cluster’s accuracy. QA pairs assigned
to clusters that have a validation accuracy of less
than 70% are removed from the dataset.
Experiments And Results
First, we use the simple MLP baseline model used
in Kaﬂe and Kanan to assess the two data
augmentation methods. Kaﬂe and Kanan 
showed that MLP worked well across multiple
datasets despite its simplicity. The MLP model
treats VQA as a classiﬁcation problem with concatenated image and question features given to the
model as features and answers as categories. CNN
features from ResNet-152 and
the skip-thought vectors are
used as image and question features respectively.
We evaluate the MLP model on COCO-VQA and
COCO-QA datasets. For COCO-QA, we excluded
all the augmented QA pairs derived from COCO’s
validation images during training, as the test portion of COCO-QA contains questions for these
images. Table 2 shows the results for the MLP
model when trained with and without augmentation. Some examples for the model trained with
augmentation are are shown in Fig. 2.
Next, to demonstrate that the data augmentation
scheme also helps improve more complex models, we train the state-of-the-art MCB model with
attention (MCB+Att.+GloVe) 
with the template augmentation and compare the
accuracy when the same model trained only on the
COCO-VQA dataset (Table 3).
Table 2: Results on COCO-VQA (test-dev) and
COCO-QA datasets for the MLP model trained
with and without augmentation.
MLP (Our Baseline)
MLP (LSTM Augmentation)
MLP (Template Augmentation)
MLP (Joint Augmentation)
Table 3: Results on COCO-VQA (test-dev) for the
MCB+Att.+GloVe model trained with and without
template augmentation.
MCB+Att.+GloVe
MCB+Att.+GloVe (Template Aug.)
Discussion and Conclusion
Referring to Table 2, we can see that both forms
of augmentation improved accuracy on COCO-
QA compared to the baseline, and the templatebased approach worked better than LSTM. For
COCO-VQA, the template-based augmentation
helped considerably, producing a relative increase
of 1.6% compared to when it was not used. We did
not observe an improvement from using the LSTM
method, perhaps due to label noise. While we tried
to mitigate label noise by rejecting QA pairs that
were likely to be wrong, this was not sufﬁcient.
We are exploring alternative training methods that
are robust to label noise )
to help improve results using LSTM.
Additionally, we also evaluated which types of
questions beneﬁt the most from data augmentation. For the MLP model trained on COCO-VQA
with the template augmentation, counting category answer is improved the most (1.74%), followed by others (1.01%), and yes/no (0.7%).
The results are promising and demonstrate that
VQA algorithms can beneﬁt from data augmentation, even for hard question types like counting.
Furthermore, there is a lot of room for expansion
in both the LSTM and the template based methods
to produce a larger number and variety of questions. Template augmentation worked best in our
experiments, but if we can control for label noise,
the LSTM method can be more ﬂexible than the
template method, and could be used to generate
virtually unlimited amount of training data using
images from the Internet.