METHODS ARTICLE
published: 20 August 2014
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00229
Deep learning for neuroimaging: a validation study
Sergey M. Plis 1*, Devon R. Hjelm 2, Ruslan Salakhutdinov 3, Elena A. Allen 1,4, Henry J. Bockholt 5,
Jeffrey D. Long 6,7, Hans J. Johnson 6,8, Jane S. Paulsen 6,9,10, Jessica A. Turner 11 and
Vince D. Calhoun 1,2,12
1 The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA
2 Department of Computer Science, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
3 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
4 Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
5 Advanced Biomedical Informatics Group, LLC, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
6 Department of Psychiatry, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
7 Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
8 Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
9 Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
10 Department of Neurology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
11 Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA
12 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
Edited by:
Jean-Baptiste Poline, University of
California Berkeley, USA
Reviewed by:
Xi-Nian Zuo, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, China
BT Thomas Yeo, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore
*Correspondence:
Sergey M. Plis, The Mind Research
Network, 1101 Yale Blvd. NE,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87106,
e-mail: 
Deep learning methods have recently made notable advances in the tasks of classiﬁcation
and representation learning. These tasks are important for brain imaging and neuroscience
discovery, making the methods attractive for porting to a neuroimager’s toolbox. Success
of these methods is, in part, explained by the ﬂexibility of deep learning models. However,
this ﬂexibility makes the process of porting to new areas a difﬁcult parameter optimization
problem. In this work we demonstrate our results (and feasible parameter ranges) in
application of deep learning methods to structural and functional brain imaging data.
These methods include deep belief networks and their building block the restricted
Boltzmann machine. We also describe a novel constraint-based approach to visualizing
high dimensional data. We use it to analyze the effect of parameter choices on
data transformations. Our results show that deep learning methods are able to learn
physiologically important representations and detect latent relations in neuroimaging data.
Keywords: MRI, fMRI, intrinsic networks, classiﬁcation, unsupervised learning
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the main goals of brain imaging and neuroscience—and,
possibly, of most natural sciences—is to improve understanding of the investigated system based on data. In our case, this
amounts to inference of descriptive features of brain structure
and function from non-invasive measurements. Brain imaging
ﬁeld has come a long way from anatomical maps and atlases
toward data driven feature learning methods, such as seedbased correlation , canonical correlation
analysis , and independent component analysis (ICA) .
These methods are highly successful in revealing known brain
features with new details (supporting their
credibility), in recovering features that differentiate patients and
controls (assisting diagnosis and
disease understanding), and starting a “resting state” revolution after revealing consistent patterns in data from uncontrolled
resting experiments . Classiﬁcation of human brain data is typically
used merely as a way to evaluate the performance of a proposed feature (e.g., percent signal change of an activation map
within a set of ROIs, identiﬁcation of a subset of voxels, or
a speciﬁc network of interest such as default mode) relative
to previously proposed features. Features (and feature selection
approaches) are used since classiﬁcation methods—including the
most accurate ones—do not often perform well on raw data and,
when they do, the reasons for their accuracy are rarely intuitive
or informative. Commonly, if that answer’s accuracy improves
when a new discriminative feature (biomarker) is proposed, this
biomarker is considered an improvement. While a perfect classiﬁcation approach would be of use, the process of suggesting
biomarker candidates would still be a subjective and difﬁcult
Typical approaches to classiﬁcation (including the current
multi-voxel classiﬁcation approaches which are popular in brain
imaging) must be preceded by a feature selection step which
is not needed for deep learning methods. Deep learning methods are breaking records in the areas of speech, signal, image,
video and text mining and recognition and improving state of
the art classiﬁcation accuracy by, sometimes, more than 30%
where the prior decade struggled to obtain a 1–2% improvements . What differentiates
them from other classiﬁers, however, is the automatic feature
learning from data which largely contributes to improvements in
accuracy. This represents an important advantage and removes
a level of subjectivity from existing approaches. With
deep learning this subjective step is avoided.
Another distinguishing feature of deep learning is the depth
of the models. Based on already acceptable feature learning
results obtained by shallow models—currently dominating neuroimaging ﬁeld—it is not immediately clear what beneﬁts would
depth have. Considering the state of multimodal learning, where
models are either assumed to be the same for analyzed modalities or cross-modal relations are sought
at the (shallow) level of mixture coefﬁcients , deeper models better ﬁt the intuitive notion of crossmodality relations, as, for example, relations between genetics and
phenotypes should be indirect, happening at a deeper conceptual
In this work we present our recent advances in application of
deep learning methods to functional and structural magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI and sMRI). Each consists of brain volumes
but for sMRI these are static volumes—one per subject/session,—
while for fMRI a single subject dataset is comprised of multiple
volumes capturing the changes during an experimental session.
Our goal is to validate feasibility of this application by (a) investigating if a building block of deep generative models—a restricted
Boltzmann machine (RBM) —is competitive with
ICA (a representative model of its class) (Section 2); (b) examining the effect of the depth in deep learning analysis of structural
MRI data (Section 3.3); and (c) determining the value of the
methods for discovery of latent structure of a large-scale (by
neuroimaging standards) dataset (Section 3.4). The measure of
feature learning performance in a shallow model (a) is comparable with existing methods and known brain physiology. However,
this measure cannot be used when deeper models are investigated. As we further demonstrate, classiﬁcation accuracy does
not provide the complete picture either. To be able to visualize
the effect of depth and gain an insight into the learning process, we introduce a ﬂexible constraint satisfaction embedding
method that allows us to control the complexity of the constraints (Section 3.2). Deliberately choosing local constraints we
are able to reﬂect the transformations that the deep belief network
(DBN) learns and applies to
the data and gain additional insight.
2. A SHALLOW BELIEF NETWORK FOR FEATURE LEARNING
Prior to investigating the beneﬁts of depth of a DBN in learning
representations from fMRI and sMRI data, we would like to ﬁnd
out if a shallow (single hidden layer) model–which is the RBM—
from this family meets the ﬁeld’s expectations. As mentioned in
the introduction, a number of methods are used for feature learning from neuroimaging data: most of them belong to the single
matrix factorization (SMF) class. We do a quick comparison to
a small subset of SMF methods on simulated data; and continue
with a more extensive comparison against ICA as an approach
trusted in the neuroimaging ﬁeld. Similarly to RBM, ICA relies
on the bipartite graph structure, or even is an artiﬁcial neural
network with sigmoid hidden units as is in the case of Infomax
ICA that we compare against. Note
the difference with RBM: ICA applies its weight matrix to the
(shorter) temporal dimension of the data imposing independence
on the spatial dimension while RBM applies its weight matrix
(hidden units “receptive ﬁelds”) to the high dimensional spatial
dimension instead (Figure 1). Each row of the weight matrix of
an RBM [as expressed in (1)] is a receptive ﬁeld of a hidden unit:
it has the dimensions of space (volume) and the magnitude of
the values indicates regions the unit is tuned to (when trained).
These weights are our features uniquely assigned to a hidden
unit. Reﬂecting this we interchangeably call the rows of W and
corresponding hidden units “features” always meaning “receptive
2.1. A RESTRICTED BOLTZMANN MACHINE
A restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) is a Markov random ﬁeld
that models data distribution parameterizing it with the Gibbs
distribution over a bipartite graph between visible v and hidden variables h : p(v) = 
h p(v, h) =
h 1/Z exp ( −E(v, h)), where Z = 
h e−E(v,h) is the normalization term (the partition function) and E(v, h) is the energy
of the system. Each visible variable in the case of fMRI data
represents a voxel of an fMRI scan with a real-valued and approximately Gaussian distribution. In this case, the energy is deﬁned as:
E(v, h) = −
σj Wjihi −
where aj and bi are biases and σj is the standard deviation of a
parabolic containment function for each visible variable vj centered on the bias aj. In general, the parameters σj need to be
learned along with the other parameters. However, in practice
normalizing the distribution of each voxel to have zero mean
and unit variance is faster and yet effective . A number of choices affect the quality of interpretation of
the representations learned from fMRI by an RBM. Encouraging
sparse features via the L1-regularization: λ∥W∥1 (λ = 0.1 gave
best results) and using hyperbolic tangent for hidden units nonlinearity are essential settings that respectively facilitate spatial
and temporal interpretation of the result.
L1 regularization is a useful tool in automated feature learning
as it can reduce overﬁtting. It adds an additional gradient term
which forces most of the weights to be zero while allowing a few
of the weights to grow large . The update rule
at a data point xn becomes:
Wij →Wij + ϵ
log p(v = xn) −λ · sgn (Wij)
where ϵ is the learning rate.
In the case of fMRI, spatial features have similar interpretation
whether their activity is below or above the baseline at a given
time. However, the more common logistic hidden units are
unable to adequately represent a feature with activity that crosses
the baseline boundary. To model these features with non-negative
hidden units, RBM divides the work among two units, one with
a positive and another with—often slightly different due to
differences in the exhibitory and excitatory behaviors—negative
receptive ﬁelds. This is not entirely desirable, as splitting intrinsic spatial networks along a distribution mean hinders the
interpretive power of the model. The hyperbolic tangent is an
alternative function in the exponential family, which has some
similar properties to the logistic function when used to model
Frontiers in Neuroscience | Brain Imaging Methods
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 2
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
the conditional probabilities of hidden units. However, a key
difference is the output is sampled from {−1, 1}. Sign of the
receptive ﬁelds then is completely symmetric with respect to
hidden variable sign: positive receptive ﬁelds will generate with
positive hidden variables, while negative receptive ﬁelds will generate with negative receptive ﬁelds. An additional consequence
of this is that a single hidden unit can generate samples over the
normal distribution solving the problem of learning duplicate
features of opposite signs.
To estimate parameters W, a, and b we need to maximize their
log likelihood. In the case of RBM the gradient of the log likelihood with respect to the parameters has a closed form. However,
it involves an intractable expectation over the joint distribution
of visible and hidden units that appear because of the partition
function Z. To deal with this an approximation to the gradient is usually employed. We use the truncated Gibbs sampling
method called contrastive divergence (CD) with a single sampling
step (CD-1). Further information on RBM model can be found
in Hinton ; Hinton et al. .
Note, that all of the parameter choices and modiﬁcations to the original RBM algorithm (e.g., the regularization) employed in this work are already conveniently implemented in a freely available package deepnet: https://
github.com/nitishsrivastava/deepnet. All parameters can be set as part of the model speciﬁcation. We believe,
for neuroimaging research it is more productive to use this
(or other available) package rather than engaging into an
implementation.
The way RBM is applied to the data is consistent across this
paper: visible units “see” voxels. Figure 1 illustrates the process of
RBM application to the data (in training and in the feed-forward
mode of Section 3) and clariﬁes what we treat as features both for
simulated and fMRI datasets. Although in Section 3 we use structural data and time dimension of the ﬁgure is the subjects, the
manner of RBM application (in pre-training) is identical. Note,
expression (1) addresses visible and hidden units with different
subscript (j and i respectively). For each hidden unit i and visible
unit j there is a weight parameter Wij. There are as many visible
units as there are voxels and each hidden unit has as many weight
values. These weights are our features. They are sometimes called
receptive ﬁelds or ﬁlters.
2.2. SYNTHETIC DATA
In this section we summarize our comparisons of RBM with SMF
models—including Infomax ICA ,
PCA , sparse PCA (sPCA) ,
and sparse NMF (sNMF) —on synthetic data with
known spatial maps generated to simulate fMRI. The SimTB toolbox was used to generate synthetic 3D (x,
y, and t) fMRI-like data from linear combinations of 27 distinct
spatial sources with 2D Gaussian spatial proﬁles. Rician noise was
added to the combined data to achieve a contrast-to-noise ratio
between 0.65 and 1. Data for 20 artiﬁcial “subjects" consisting of
128 volumes were generated from the auditory oddball (AOD)
example experiment from the toolbox, in which a subset of
sources are modulated by “standard,” “target,” and “novel” events
with different weights. Additionally, two sources are modulated
by nearly identical noise (spike) events. Thus, source activations
are temporally correlated to some degree, though each has its own
unique behavior.
RBMs were constructed with 16936 Gaussian visible units (one
for each voxel in the 128 × 128 image), and a variable number
of hyperbolic tangent hidden units. The L1 decay rate λ was set
to 0.1 based on performance over multiple experiments, and the
learning rate ϵ was set to 0.08. The RBMs were then trained with
a batch size of 5 for approximately 75 epochs to allow for full
convergence of the parameters.
We found that for simulated data, RBM captures the features
better with the number of hidden units higher that the true
model order. We use terms “model rank” and “model order”
interchangeably to mean the number of hidden units in RBM
or number of independent components for ICA. For this dataset
RBM’s performance in spatial map estimation has stabilized near
model order 60. We set the model order to 64 as the GPU implementation of RBM favors model orders of powers of 2. After
investigating performance of ICA (as well as sNMF and PCA)
under various model orders we did not observe a performance
decrease for these approaches (with respect to their best performing model order) at the value of 64. Figure 2 presents result where
the model order for all models was set to this value.
Figure 2A shows the correlation of spatial maps (SM) and
time course (TC) estimates to the ground truth for RBM, ICA,
PCA, sPCA, and sNMF. Allowing model orders to differ from
FIGURE 1 | (A) An illustration of how an RBM is applied to the data as well as
a graphical representation of RBM’s structure. (B) Demonstrates the way we
produce time courses from the data and learned features, which is simply a
projection of data into the feature space. Note, for time course computation in
Section 2 we do not apply the hidden units’ non-linearity after this projection,
while in Section 3 the complete feed-forward processing is realized.
www.frontiersin.org
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 3
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
Correlation
Spatial Maps
Time Courses
FIGURE 2 | Comparison of RBM estimation accuracy of features and
their time courses with SMFs. (A) Average spatial map (SM) and time
course (TC) correlations to ground truth for RBM and SMF models (gray box).
(B) Ground truth (GT) SMs and estimates obtained by RBM and ICA
(thresholded at 0.4 height). Colors are consistent across the methods. Gray
indicates background or areas without SMs above threshold. (C) Spatial,
temporal, and cross correlation (FNC) accuracy for ICA (red) and RBM (blue),
as a function of spatial overlap of the true sources from (B). Lines indicate
the average correlation to GT, and the color-ﬁll indicates ±2 standard errors
around the mean.
the ground truth, features were matched to the ground truth
by solving the assignment problem using the Hungarian algorithm based on maximizing absolute positive correlation of SMs to the ground truth. Correlations are averaged
across all sources and datasets. RBM and ICA showed the best
overall performance. While sNMF also estimated SMs well, it
showed inferior performance on TC estimation, likely due to the
non-negativity constraint. Based on these results and the broad
adoption of ICA in the ﬁeld, we focus on comparing Infomax ICA
Figure 2B shows the full set of ground truth sources along with
RBM and ICA estimates for a single representative dataset. SMs
are thresholded and represented as contours for visualization.
For Figure 2C twelve sets of SimTB data were produced by
varying a SimTB source “spread” parameter, which changes the
relative spatial standard deviation of each source. Increase in
spread increases the percentage of overlap between features; we
deﬁne the total overlap of a set of sources as the percentage
of voxels in which more than one source contributes over 0.5
standard deviations. We constructed datasets with overlap ranging from 0.3 (minimal spatial overlap between sources) and
0.88 (very high overlap). Results showed similar performance for
RBM and ICA (Figure 2C), with a slight advantage for ICA with
regard to SM estimation, and a slight advantage for RBM with
regards to TC estimation. RBM and ICA also showed comparable
performance estimating cross correlations also called functional
network connectivity (FNC). FNC is a measure of interaction
between intrinsic networks of the brain . In
our case this amounts to cross-correlations of subject speciﬁc
time courses of each of the hidden unit expressed in a correlation
2.3. AN fMRI DATA APPLICATION
Data used in this work comprised of task-related scans from
28 (ﬁve females) healthy participants, all of whom gave written,
informed, IRB-approved consent at Hartford Hospital and were
compensated for participation1. All participants were scanned
during an auditory oddball task (AOD) involving the detection of
1More detailed information regarding participant demographics is provided
in Swanson et al. .
an infrequent target sound within a series of standard and novel
Scans were acquired at the Olin Neuropsychiatry Research
Center at the Institute of Living/Hartford Hospital on a Siemens
Allegra 3T dedicated head scanner equipped with 40 mT/m gradients and a standard quadrature head coil . The AOD consisted of two 8-min runs,
and 249 scans (volumes) at 2 s TR (0.5 Hz sampling rate) were
used for the ﬁnal dataset. Data were post-processed using the
SPM5 software package , motion corrected
using INRIalign , and subsampled to 53 ×
63 × 46 voxels. The complete fMRI dataset was masked below
mean and the mean image across the dataset was removed, giving a complete dataset of size 70969 voxels by 6972 volumes. Each
voxel was then normalized to have zero mean and unit variance.
The RBM was constructed using 70969 Gaussian visible units
and 64 hyperbolic tangent hidden units. The hyper parameters ϵ
(0.08 from the searched [1 × 10−4, 1 × 10−1] range) for learning
rate and λ (0.1 from the searched range [1 × 10−4, 1 × 10−1]) for
L1 weight decay were selected as those that showed a reduction
of reconstruction error over training and a signiﬁcant reduction
in span of the receptive ﬁelds respectively. Parameter value outside the ranges either resulted in unstable or slow learning (ϵ)
or uninterpretable features (λ). The RBM was then trained with
a batch size of 5 for approximately 100 epochs to allow for full
convergence of the parameters.
After ﬂipping the sign of negative receptive ﬁelds, we then
identiﬁed and labeled spatially distinct features as corresponding to brain regions with the aid of AFNI excluding
features which had a high probability of corresponding to white
matter, ventricles, or artifacts (e.g., motion, edges). Note, the sign
ﬂipping is strictly parallel to what is done to ICA results in order
to address the “sign ambiguity,” where both signs of the spatial
map and the time course are ﬂipped. In the RBM case, only spatial
maps are ﬂipped explicitly (i.e., multiplied by −1) but the time
courses get the correct sign automatically.
We normalized the fMRI volume time series to mean zero and
used the trained RBM in feed-forward mode to compute time
2The task is described in more detail in Calhoun et al. and Swanson et
al. .
Frontiers in Neuroscience | Brain Imaging Methods
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 4
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
FIGURE 3 | Intrinsic brain networks estimated by ICA and RBM.
series for each fMRI feature. This was done to better compare to
ICA, where the mean is removed in PCA preprocessing.
The work-ﬂow is outlined in Figure 1, while Figure 3
shows comparison of resulting features with those obtained by
Infomax ICA. In general, RBM performs competitively with ICA,
while providing–perhaps, not surprisingly due to the used L1
regularization—sharper and more localized features. While we
recognize that this is a subjective measure we list more features in
Figure S2 of Section 5 and note that RBM features lack negative
parts for corresponding features. Note, that in the case of L1
regularized weights RBM algorithms starts to resemble some
of the ICA approaches , which may explain the similar performance. However, the
differences and possible advantages are the generative nature of
the RBM and no enforcement of component orthogonality (not
explicit at the least). Moreover, the block structure of the correlation matrix (see below the Supplementary material section)
of feature time courses provide a grouping that is more physiologically supported than that provided by ICA. For example, see
Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material section below. Perhaps,
because ICA working hard to enforce spatial independence subtly
affects the time courses and their cross-correlations in turn. We
have observed comparable running times of the (non GPU) ICA
( and a GPU implementation
of the RBM ( This,
however, is not an exhaustive comparison as there are other
important metrics such as stability of the learned features
 that may better differentiate RBM from the
popular models. Some of alternative comparison metrics for
evaluating RBM against the state of the art were considered by
Hjelm et al. .
3. VALIDATING THE DEPTH EFFECT
Since the RBM results demonstrate a feature-learning performance competitive with the state of the art (or better), we proceed
to investigating the effects of the model depth. To do that we turn
from fMRI to sMRI data. As it is commonly assumed in the deep
learning literature the depth is often
improving classiﬁcation accuracy. We investigate if that is indeed
true in the sMRI case. Structural data is convenient for the purpose as each subject/session is represented only by a single volume
that has a label: control or patient in our case. Compare to 4D data
where hundreds of volumes belong to the same subject with the
same disease state.
3.1. A DEEP BELIEF NETWORK
A DBN is a sigmoidal belief network (although other activation
functions may be used) with an RBM as the top level prior. The
joint probability distribution of its visible and hidden units is
parametrized as follows:
P(v, h1, h2, . . . , hl) = P(v|h1)P(h1|h2) · · · P(hl −2, hl −1)
P(hl −1, hl),
where l is the number of hidden layers, P(hl −1, hl) is an RBM,
and P(hi|hi + 1) factor into individual conditionals:
P(hi|hi + 1) =
The important property of DBN for our goals of feature learning
to facilitate discovery is its ability to operate in generative mode
with ﬁxed values on chosen hidden units thus allowing one to
investigate the features that the model have learned and/or weighs
as important in discriminative decisions. We, however, are not
going to use this property in this section, focusing instead on
validating the claim that a network’s depth provides beneﬁts for
neuroimaging data analysis. And we will do this using discriminative mode of DBN’s operation as it provides an objective measure
of the depth effect.
DBN training splits into two stages: pre-training and discriminative ﬁne tuning. A DBN can be pre-trained by treating each
of its layers as an RBM—trained in an unsupervised way on
inputs from the previous layer—and later ﬁne-tuned by treating
it as a feed-forward neural network. The latter allows supervised training via the error back propagation algorithm. We use
this schema in the following by augmenting each DBN with a
soft-max layer at the ﬁne-tuning stage. The overall approach is
outlined in Figure 4. Although, we only show there how we construct and train DBN’s of depth 1 and 2, the process can be
continued and DBNs of larger depth can be built. We do so when
we build the third layer of the DBN employed in the experiments
of this section.
While fMRI data of Section 2.3 was not too similar to the natural images—the traditional domain of DBN application—the
structural MRI resembles the images to a large extent. In particular, in this section we use gray matter concentration maps: a
point in this map (a voxel) contains intensity values much like in
a monochrome image. This similarity allows us to import some
of the parameters traditionally used in image processing DBNs:
logistic hidden unit non-linearity and the dropout trick .
3.2. NON-LINEAR EMBEDDING AS A CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION
A DBN and an RBM operate on data samples, which are brain
volumes in the fMRI and sMRI case. A 5 min fMRI experiment
www.frontiersin.org
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 5
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
FIGURE 4 | A pre-train/ﬁne-tune sequence for training a DBN. The
pre-training stage uses the data from the previous layer, which for our
3-level DBN amounts to raw data (for layer 1), and outputs of the
feed-forward mode of the ﬁne-tuned RBMs. The ﬁne-tuning and
feed-forward stages always start from the raw data. The ﬁne-tuning stage
initializes RBM weights with those learned at the pre-training.
with 2 s sampling rate yields 150 of these volumes per subject.
For sMRI studies number of participating subjects varies but in
this paper we operate with a 300 and a 3500 subject-volumes
datasets. Transformations learned by deep learning methods do
not look intuitive in the hidden node space and generative sampling of the trained model does not provide a sense if a model
have learned anything useful in the case of MRI data: in contrast to natural images, fMRI and sMRI images do not look very
intuitive. Instead, we use a non-linear embedding method to control whether a model learned useful information and to assist in
investigation of what have it, in fact, learned.
One of the purposes of an embedding is to display a complex
high dimensional dataset in a way that is (i) intuitive, and (ii)
representative of the data sample. The ﬁrst requirement usually
leads to displaying data samples as points in a 2-dimensional map,
while the second is more elusive and each approach addresses it
differently. Embedding approaches include relatively simple random linear projections—provably preserving some neighbor relations —and a more complex class of nonlinear embedding approaches .
In an attempt to organize the properties of this diverse family we
have aimed at representing non-linear embedding methods under
a single constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) framework (see
below). We hypothesize that each method places the samples in
a map to satisfy a speciﬁc set of constraints. Although this work is
not yet complete, it proven useful in our current study. We brieﬂy
outline the ideas in this section to provide enough intuition of the
method that we further use in Section 3.
Since we can control the constraints in the CSP framework,
to study the effect of deep learning we choose them to do the
least amount of work—while still being useful—letting the DBN
do (or not) the hard part. A more complicated method such as
t-SNE already does complex
processing to preserve the structure of a dataset in a 2D map – it
is hard to infer if the quality of the map is determined by a deep
learning method or the embedding. While some of the existing
method may have provided the “least amount of work” solutions as well we chose to go with the CSP framework. It explicitly
states the constraints that are being satisﬁed and thus lets us reason about deep learning effects within the constraints, while with
other methods—where the constraints are implicit—this would
have been harder.
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) is one requiring a
solution that satisﬁes a set of constraints. One of the well known
examples is the boolean satisﬁability problem (SAT). There are
multiple other important CSPs such as the packing, molecular
conformations, and, recently, error correcting codes . Freedom to setup per-point constraints without controlling for their global interactions makes a CSP formulation an
attractive representation of the non-linear embedding problem.
Pursuing this property we use the iterative “divide and concur”
(DC) algorithm as the solver for our representation. In DC algorithm we treat each point on the solution
map as a variable and assign a set of constraints that this variable needs to satisfy (more on these later). Then each points gets
a “replica” for each constraint it is involved into. In our case, this
means that for n points each point will have n replicas as we have a
constraint per point. Then DC algorithm alternates the divide and
concur projections. The divide projection moves each “replica”
points to the nearest locations in the 2D map that satisfy the constraint they participate in. More speciﬁcally, k-neighbors of the
point in the d-dimensional space are moved in the direction of
the point in the 2D map by a step proportional to their distance
to this point in the data space (in our case, this is DBN representation space). This is a soft constraint as opposed to just forcing
the k-neighbors to be the nearest neighbors in the 2D map. The
concur projection concurs locations of all “replicas” of a point by
placing them at the average location on the map. The key idea is to
avoid local traps by combining the divide and concur steps within
the difference map . A single location update is
represented by:
xc = Pc((1 + 1/β) ∗Pd(x) −1/β ∗x)
xd = Pd((1 −1/β) ∗Pc(x) + 1/β ∗x)
x = x + β ∗(xc −xd),
Frontiers in Neuroscience | Brain Imaging Methods
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 6
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
where Pd( · ) and Pc( · ) denote the divide and concur projections
and β is a user-deﬁned parameter.
The concur projection Pc( · ) that we use throughout the paper
simply averages locations of all replicas of the point in the 2D
map and assigns all of the replicas to this new location. While the
concur projection will only differ by subsets of “replicas” across
different methods representable in DC framework, the divide
projection Pd( · ) is unique and deﬁnes the algorithm behavior.
In this paper, we choose a divide projection that keeps k nearest neighbors of each point in the higher dimensional space also
its neighbors in the 2D map. This is a simple local neighborhood constraint that allows us to assess effects of deep learning
transformation leaving most of the mapping decisions to the deep
learning. Each point in the 2D map is pulling it’s k-neighbors into
its neighborhood until an equilibrium is reached and the points
stop regrouping (much). With this we strive for the best nearest neighbor representation of the d-dimensional map in the 2D
space. The changes to the nearest neighborhood are performed by
the DBN, since our algorithm does not affect this information.
We found that hard constraints often do not lead to a solution
getting on a widely oscillating path from initial iterations. We have
observed this while investigating (a)placing all of the neighbors
of a replica in 2D at the same distance as they are in the source
space and (b)ensuring that k-neighbors of a replica are the same
as in the source space. The approach that converges to most interpretable results (with respect to the non-neuroimaging data we
tuned it on) simply pulls the source space neighbors at each iteration toward the replica in 2D. Choice of k, as we have found, does
not determine separation of data clusters as much as their shape.
Smaller values of k lead to more elongated groups which turn into
rays in the extreme case, while larger k leads to more spherical
maps. In Figure 6 and in Figure 8 we use k = 160, which for the
larger dataset of Section 3.4 leads to more elongated groups.
Note, that for a general dataset we may not be able to satisfy
this constraint: each point has exactly the same neighbors in 2D as
in the original space (and this is what we indeed observe). The DC
algorithm, however, is only guaranteed to ﬁnd the solution if it
exists and oscillates otherwise. Oscillating behavior is interesting,
as it is detectable and could be used to stop the algorithm. Letting
the algorithm run while observing real time changes to the 2D
map may provide additional information about the structure of
the data. Another practically important feature of the algorithm:
it is deterministic. Given the same parameters [β and the parameters of Pd( · )] it converges to the same solution regardless of the
initial point. If each of the points participates in each constraint
then complexity of the algorithm is quadratic. With our simple k
neighborhood constraints it is O(kn), for n samples/points.
3.3. A SCHIZOPHRENIA STRUCTURAL MRI DATASET
We use a combined data from four separate schizophrenia studies conducted at Johns Hopkins University (JHU), the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center (MPRC), the Institute of Psychiatry,
London, UK (IOP), and the Western Psychiatric Institute and
Clinic at the University of Pittsburgh (WPIC) . The combined sample comprised 198
schizophrenia patients and 191 matched healthy controls and
contained both ﬁrst episode and chronic patients (Meda et al.,
FIGURE 5 | A smoothed gray matter segmentation of a training
sample of (A) a patient and (B) a healthy control.
2008). At all sites, whole brain MRIs were obtained on a
1.5T Signa GE scanner using identical parameters and software.
Original structural MRI images were segmented in native space
and the resulting gray and white matter images then spatially normalized to gray and white matter templates respectively to derive
the optimized normalization parameters. These parameters were
then applied to the whole brain structural images in native space
prior to a new segmentation. The obtained 60465 voxel gray
matter images were used in this study. Figure 5 shows example
orthogonal slice views of the gray matter data samples of a patient
and a healthy control.
The main question of this section is to evaluate the effect of the
depth of a DBN on sMRI. To answer this question, we investigate
if classiﬁcation rates improve with the depth. For that we sequentially investigate DBNs of 3 depth. From RBM experiments we
have learned that even with a larger number of hidden units (72,
128, and 512) RBM tends to only keep around 50 features driving the rest to zero. Classiﬁcation rate and reconstruction error
still slightly improves, however, when the number of hidden units
increases. These observations affected our choice of 50 hidden
units of the ﬁrst two layers and 100 for the third. Each hidden
unit is connected to all units in the previous layer which results in
an all to all connectivity structure between the layers, which is a
more common and conventional approach to constructing these
models. Note, larger networks (up to double the number of units)
lead to similar results. We pre-train each layer via an unsupervised
RBM and discriminatively ﬁne-tune models of depth 1 (50 hidden
units in the top layer), 2 (50-50 hidden units in the ﬁrst and the
top layer respectively), and 3 (50-50-100 hidden units in the ﬁrst,
second and the top layer respectively) by adding a softmax layer
on top of each of these models and training via the back propagation (see Figure 4). Table 1 summarizes parameter values used in
the training.
We estimate the accuracy of classiﬁcation via 10-fold cross validation splitting the 389 subject dataset into 10 approximately
class-balanced folds. At each step using 9 of the ten folds for
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning a DBN of a given depth, we use
the same data to optimize parameters of the classiﬁers and only
www.frontiersin.org
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 7
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
Table 1 | Parameter settings for training RBMs at the pre-training and for the feed forward networks at the discriminative ﬁne-tuning.
Pre-training
Fine tuning
Dropout probability
L1 Regularization
Learning rate
Table 2 | Classiﬁcation on ﬁne-tuned models (test data).
SVM F-score
0.68 ± 0.01
0.66 ± 0.09
0.62 ± 0.12
0.90 ± 0.14
LR .F-score
0.63 ± 0.09
0.65 ± 0.11
0.61 ± 0.12
0.91 ± 0.14
KNN F-score
0.61 ± 0.11
0.55 ± 0.15
0.58 ± 0.16
0.90 ± 0.16
then perform evaluation on the left out fold. The process is
repeated 10 times. We train the rbf-kernel SVM, logistic regression and a k-nearest neighbors (knn) classiﬁer using activations
of the top-most hidden layers in ﬁne-tuned models to the training data of each fold as their input. The testing is performed
likewise but on the test data. We also perform the same 10fold cross validation on the raw data. Table 2 summarizes the
precision and recall values in the F-scores and their standard
deviations.
All models demonstrate a similar trend when the accuracy
only slightly increases from depth-1 to depth-2 DBN and then
improves signiﬁcantly. Table 2 supports the general claim of deep
learning community about improvement of classiﬁcation rate
with the depth even for sMRI data. Improvement in classiﬁcation even for the simple knn classiﬁer indicates the character
of the transformation that the DBN learns and applies to the
data: it may be changing the data manifold to organize classes
by neighborhoods. Ideally, to make general conclusion about
this transformation we need to analyze several representative
datasets. However, even working with the same data we can have
a closer view of the depth effect using the method introduced
in Section 3.2. Although it may seem that the DBN does not
provide signiﬁcant improvements in sMRI classiﬁcation from
depth-1 to depth-2 in this model, it keeps on learning potentially
useful transformaions of the data. We can see that using our simple local neighborhood-based embedding. Figure 6 displays 2D
maps of the raw data, as well as the depth 1, 2, and 3 activations (of a network trained on 335 subjects): the deeper networks
place patients and control groups further apart. Additionally,
Figure 6 displays the 54 subjects that the DBN was not train
on. These hold out subjects are also getting increased separation with depth. This DBN’s behavior is potentially useful
for generalization, when larger and more diverse data become
available.
Our new mapping method has two essential properties to
facilitate the conclusion and provide conﬁdence in the result: its
already mentioned local properties and the deterministic nature
of the algorithm. The latter leads to independence of the resulting maps from the starting point. The map only depends on
the models parameter k—the size of the neighborhood—and
3.4. A LARGE-SCALE HUNTINGTON DISEASE DATA
In this section we focus on sMRI data collected from healthy
controls and Huntington disease (HD) patients as part of the
PREDICT-HD project (www.predict-hd.net). Huntington disease
is a genetic neurodegenerative disease that results in degeneration
of neurons in certain areas of the brain. The project is focused on
identifying the earliest detectable changes in thinking skills, emotions and brain structure as a person begins the transition from
health to being diagnosed with Huntington disease. We would
like to know if deep learning methods can assist in answering that
For this study T1-weighted scans were collected at multiple
sites (32 international sites), representing multiple ﬁeld strengths
(1.5T and 3.0T) and multiple manufactures (Siemens, Phillips,
and GE). The 1.5T T1 weighted scans were an axial 3D volumetric spoiled-gradient echo series (≈1 × 1 × 1.5 mm voxels), and
the 3.0T T1 weighted scans were a 3D Volumetric MPRAGE series
(≈1 × 1 × 1 mm voxels).
The images were segmented in the native space and the normalized to a common template. After correlating the normalized
gray matter segmentation with the template and eliminating
poorly correlating scans we obtain a dataset of 3500 scans, where
2641 were from patients and 859 from healthy controls. We are
not studying the depth effect on performance in this section. Our
goal with this imbalanced dataset is to evaluate if DBNs could facilitate discovery. For that, we have used all of the 3500 scans in this
imbalanced sample to pre-train and ﬁne tune the same model
architecture (50-50-100) as in Section 3.3. Here, however, we only
used the complete depth 3 model.
To further investigate utility of the deep learning approach
for scientiﬁc discovery we again augment it with the embedding method of Section 3.2. Figure 8 shows the map of 3500
scans of HD patients and healthy controls build on using 100
dimensional representations learned by our depth 3 model. Each
point on the map is an sMRI volume, shown in Figures 7, 8.
Although we have used the complete data (all 3500 scans) to train
the DBN, discriminative ﬁne-tuning had access only to binary
label: control or patient. In addition to that, we have information about severity of the disease from low to high. We have
color coded this information in Figure 8 from bright yellow (low)
Frontiers in Neuroscience | Brain Imaging Methods
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 8
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
FIGURE 6 | Effect of a DBN’s depth on neighborhood relations. Each map
is shown at the same iteration of the algorithm with the same k = 50. The
color differentiates the classes (patients and controls) and the training (335
subjects) from validation (54 subjects) data. Although the data becomes
separable at depth 1 and more so at depth 2, the DBN continues distilling
details that pull the classes further apart.
FIGURE 7 | A gray matter of MRI scans of an HD patient (A) and a
healthy control (B).
through orange (medium) to red (high). The network3 discriminates the patients by disease severity which results in a spectrum
on the map. Note, that neither t-SNE (not shown), nor our new
embedding see the spectrum or even the patient groups in the raw
data. This is a important property of the method that may help
support its future use in discovery of new information about the
4. CONCLUSIONS
Our investigations show that deep learning has a high potential
in neuroimaging applications. Even the shallow RBM is already
competitive with the model routinely used in the ﬁeld: it produces
physiologically meaningful features which are (desirably) highly
focal and have time course cross correlations that connect them
into meaningful functional groups (Section 5). The depth of the
DBN does indeed help classiﬁcation and increases group separation. This is apparent on two sMRI datasets collected under
3Note, the embedding algorithm does not have access to any label
information.
FIGURE 8 | Patients and controls group separation map with
additional unsupervised spectral decomposition of sMRI scans by
disease severity. The map represents 3500 scans.
varying conditions, at multiple sites each, from different disease
groups, and pre-processed differently. This is a strong evidence of
DBNs robustness. Furthermore, our study shows a high potential
of DBNs for exploratory analysis. As Figure 8 demonstrates, DBN
in conjunction with our new mapping method can reveal hidden
relations in data. We did ﬁnd it difﬁcult initially to ﬁnd workable
parameter regions, but we hope that other researchers won’t have
this difﬁculty starting from the baseline that we provide in this
www.frontiersin.org
August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 229 | 9
Plis et al.
Deep learning for neuroimaging
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by grants 2R01EB005846,
COBRE: P20GM103472 and NS0040068. We thank Dr. van der
Maaten for insightful comments on the initial drafts of this paper.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
 
2014.00229/abstract