Edinburgh Research Explorer
An intelligent interactive system for delivering individualized
information to patients
Citation for published version:
Buchanan, BG, Moore, JD, Forsythe, DE, Carenini, G, Ohlsson, S & Banks, G 1995, 'An intelligent
interactive system for delivering individualized information to patients', Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol.
7, no. 2, pp. 117-154. 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1016/0933-3657(94)00029-R
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
 
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
Artificial
Intelligence
in Medicine
7 117-154
Artificial
Intelligence
in Medicine
An intelligent interactive system for delivering
individualized information to patients
Bruce G. Buchanan a, *, Johanna D. Moore a, Diana E. Forsythe a,
Giuseppe Carenini b, Stellan Ohlsson ‘, Gordon Banks d
a Department of Computer Science, Mineral Industries Bldg. 206, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA
b Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
’ Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
d Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
April 1994; revised October
This paper is a report on the first phase of a long-term, interdisciplinary
project whose
goal is to increase the overall effectiveness of physicians’ time, and thus the quality of health
care, by improving the information
exchange between physicians and patients
in clinical
settings. We are focusing on patients with long-term
and chronic conditions,
initially on
who require
interaction
with their physicians
for effective
management
of their condition. We are using medical informatics to focus on the informa-
tion needs of patients,
as well as of physicians, and to address problems of information
exchange. This requires understanding
patients’ concerns to design an appropriate
and using state-of-the-art
artificial intelligence
techniques
to build an interactive
tion system. In contrast to many other knowledge-based
systems, our system’s design is
based on empirical data on actual information
needs. We used ethnographic
techniques to
explanations
given in clinic settings,
and to conduct
interviews
and physicians.
Our system has an extensive
contains both general medical terminology and specific knowledge about migraine, such as
common trigger factors and symptoms of migraine, the common therapies,
and the most
effects and side effects of those therapies.
The system consists of two main
components:
(a) an interactive history-taking module that collects information
from patients
prior to each visit, builds a patient model, and summarizes
the patients’ status for their
physicians; and (b) an intelligent
explanation
module that produces an interactive informa-
tion sheet containing
explanations
in everyday language
that are tailored
to individual
* Corresponding
Fax (+ 1-412) 624-9189.
0933-3657/95/$09.50
0 1995 Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved
SSDI 0933-3657(94)00029-8
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
and responds
intelligently
to follow-up questions
about topics covered in the
information
Keywords: Medical informatics;
Explanation;
Patient education;
Natural language genera-
tion; Patient information
needs; System evaluation
A major goal of medical informatics is to improve the quality of health care by
managing information
that is relevant to clinical decisions. In contrast to most
medical informatics systems, the system described here is designed to facilitate the
exchange of information
between patients and physicians and to provide patients
with information
they do not seek from their physicians or do not fully compre-
hend when it is provided. We are focusing on patients with long-term and chronic
disorders,
initially on patients with migraine headaches ‘, who require periodic
interaction with their physicians for effective management of their condition. Also
in contrast to many other medical computer
systems, the design of the system
described here is based on empirical data of actual information
needs. We are
using ethnographic
observation
of explanations
actually given in clinical settings
and interviews with migraine sufferers and physicians.
Successful information
exchange between physicians and patients is important
for many reasons. Patients’ attitudes
about their ailments and their therapies
a number of factors related to clinical success. For example, patient
satisfaction has been found to correlate with compliance , and communication
between doctor and patient is an important factor in patient satisfaction [3,10,281.
In the treatment
of diabetes, improved information
exchange [23,241 has been
shown to increase patients’ ability to take more responsibility for their own care.
Given the current
of the health
care system in the United
increasing the amount of time that physicians spend communicating with patients
is not a viable option. We need, therefore, to consider other ways of improving the
information
exchange between doctors and patients.
1. Introduction: towards improved information exchange
One means of facilitating information exchange between patients and physicians
in the near future is to use advanced computer technology to make the reading of
informative
more like face-to-face
communication.
We have imple-
mented a prototype interactive information
system for migraine patients who, like
other patients with long-term conditions,
require periodic interaction
with their
physicians for effective
management
of their condition.
While other medical
informatics
programs have been designed for use by health-care
providers, and
term ‘migraine’ is used to refer to the general disease or condition
causing migraine
headaches. As with current usage, the plural form, ‘migraines’, is used to refer to instances of migraine
headaches.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 I1 7-154
Fig. 1. System Architecture: Information flow between patient and doctor. Information flow is shown by
the arrows. Numbered arrows involve the computer system directly. A patient-user
interacts with the
history-taker (#l), and the record of the interaction is summarized for the doctor (#2.1) and recorded
in the system’s model of this patient (#2.2). The diagnosis and prescription(s)
are entered into the
system’s patient model by the physician or nurse (#3). The explanation module accesses the patient
model (#4) in order to answer the patient’s questions (#5). Tailored information about migraine and
the prescribed therapy are provided on the screen and then printed out for the patient to take home
thus require time from them, the system described below is designed for use by
patients and is intended to save health-care
providers’ time.
1.1. System overview
As shown in Fig. 1, the prototype system consists of two major components: the
history-taking
and the explanation component,
plus knowledge struc-
tures for medical knowledge and a patient model. 2
The history-taking
module collects information
from patients at the time of
their initial and subsequent visits to the Neurology Clinic, and summarizes this
information
for the physician. This component
serves two important purposes in
our system. First, it gathers information
about the patient’s
medical history,
allergies, past medications,
and experiences
since the last visit, and translates it
into the patient model, which can be used by the explanation component to tailor
its explanations
to individual patients. Second, it produces a printed summary of
the patient’s history, which is presented
to the physician before the consultation
with the patient and is added to the patient’s chart after the visit.
’ All parts of the program are written in Lucid Common Lisp. At the present time the history taker is
running on a different computer (an Apple LS-III) than the other parts I1 7-154
Once a patient’s history has been gathered and the patient has been seen by the
physician, the patient can interact with the explanation module to receive informa-
tion relevant to the doctor’s diagnosis and prescribed treatment.
Note that before
the patient uses the explanation module, the physician or other clinical personnel
must provide the system with information
about the diagnosis and the prescribed
therapy. To expedite this process, we built an interactive
interface that prompts
the physician for the needed information,
and provides warnings such as interac-
tions between drugs being prescribed for migraine and other drugs the patient is
The explanation
module generates
an initial interactive
information
well as subsequent
explanations
in response to the user’s request for additional
information.
The content
and organization
used in the information
subsequent explanations
are based on three sources of information:
(i) results of
the ethnographic
research described in Section 3, (ii> sample information
written by the physician on our research team, and (iii) sample information sheets
being given out in local hospitals and clinics. For example, because of ethnographic
findings, the information sheet deals with global concerns (e.g., alleviating patients’
fears that they are suffering from a life-threatening
condition) before going on to
instruct patients about how to follow their therapy regimen.
This computer
system is designed to increase the effectiveness
of physicians’
time in managing adult patients with migraines by collecting data from patients
and summarizing
status before
each visit, and explaining
physicians’
instructions
to and answering questions by patients before, after, and between
office visits. The information is provided to patients and their families by interact-
ing in simple English and tailoring the information
to each patient’s context and
Our goal is not to replace
but to supplement
the doctor-patient
relationship;
we believe that a computer
system can amplify the information
provided by physicians, nurses, and printed literature,
elaborating, clarifying and
re-explaining it as many times as needed.
2. Background
2.1. The information gap in doctor-patient discourse
Empirical research
on medical discourse (e.g., ) demonstrates
that an information
gap exists between physicians and patients. There is substan-
tial evidence that doctors and patients use somewhat different
language .
Therefore,
even when physicians are able to take the time to give patients detailed
explanations
concerning diagnosis or treatment,
patients may not understand
terms or concepts used. Furthermore,
there is a striking asymmetry in information
exchange between physicians and patients: in medical discourse, physicians ask the
questions and patients provide the answers . In one study, of a total of 771
questions recorded in 21 medical dialogues, 91% were initiated by physicians while
only 9% were initiated by patients . Similar results were found by Frankel, who
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
found “a dispreference
for patient-initiated
questions in physician-patient
 . When patients
do make direct information
the answers they receive tend to be brief. Wallen et al. found that
physicians spent less than 1% of total talking time in providing explanation
patients ( , quoted in [ , p. 1081). In short, interaction between physicians and
patients tends to be structured in such a way that information flows from patient to
doctor but not vice versa.
This asymmetry reduces the quality and quantity of information
physicians and patients, which may contribute
to reduced compliance
 . Indeed, of the various determinants
of patient satisfaction, communication
physician and patient
is one of the few factors strong enough to be
predictive of compliance . The restricted flow of information from doctor
to patient in normal doctor-patient
discourse suggests that this contact alone may
not be sufficient to satisfy all of the information
needs that patients experience.
For this reason, we believe that there is a role for an intelligent interactive system
that provides patients with clear and extensive explanation of their diagnosis and
plans, and that can respond to patient queries.
2.2. Explanation in medical informatics
Much of the research on explanation in medical informatics has been done in
the context of systems that were designed to be used by health care providers
 . The term ‘explanation’
typically refers to a program’s justification
recommended
action, i.e., automatically
providing the set of reasons and infer-
ences underneath
a conclusion suggested by a program. Explaining material to
patients places very different demands on a computer system. First, patients have
types of concerns about their disease than health care providers. For
example, health care personnel
are primarily concerned
with checking how the
system arrived
at its diagnosis or therapy
recommendation
 . In contrast,
patients are likely to be more concerned with understanding
how the diagnosis will
affect their lifestyle, what their treatments
options are, and how to follow the
prescribed.
Part of our ethnographic
work has been directed
determining
the information
needs of migraine patients (see below). We have
concentrated
on representing
the knowledge needed to support responses to some
of the types of questions we have identified, and have devised generation strategies
to produce natural language explanations from these knowledge sources.
Second, we expect patients’ concerns to vary widely. Therefore,
the system must
be able to tailor its explanations
to the concerns of individual patients. This is
consistent with the claims of Jimison et al. who argued that explanations of
therapy decisions must be tailored to patients’ preferences
regarding the quality of
life associated with potential
of therapy. Third, while clinician-users
typically understand
the medical concepts used in explanations, we cannot assume
that this will be true of all patients who use the system. A system intended
explanations
for patients must be able to either explain the medical
terminology and concepts it uses, or else avoid such terminology.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 I1 7-154
Finally, because it is impossible to have an accurate model of what each patient
knows and does not know, it is crucial that a patient-education
system be able to
respond to follow-up questions and requests for elaboration
or clarification
previous explanatory
material. Thus, the system should have alternative ways of
responding to a given type of question.
The previous work that is most relevant to ours is that of Jimison et al. , who
used a patient model to tailor a generic Bayesian decision network to an individual
medical history and preferences
(sedentary
vs. active lifestyle). This
tailored network is then used to individualize patient education materials explain-
ing the therapy decision in terms of the patient’s condition, medical history and
lifestyle preferences.
Because the number of features that they use for tailoring is
relatively small, and the explanations are of limited scope, Jimison et al. were able
to handcraft separate cards for each combination of therapy explanation options.
Their program then uses the tailored decision network to select the correct card
for inclusion in the patient education materials. However, Jimison et al. do not
provide facilities that allow the user to ask follow-up questions about the system’s
prior explanations.
As we discuss in detail in Section 4, our system uses sophisticated
techniques
devised by computational
linguists to automatically produce texts that are sensitive
to the patient model as well as the content of previous explanations that have been
presented to the user. We draw on results from computational
linguistics showing
how to tailor explanations
to a user’s knowledge and goals (e.g., [9,33,42,511X In
addition, we have extended work by Moore and Paris , who developed a
computational
text planner that constructs
a representation
of its explanations,
and thereby enables a system to respond to follow-up questions and to provide
elaborations of its previous explanations.
2.3. Migraine headache
The domain of this project is migraine therapy for adult patients. Migraine
affects approximately
20% of the population
 , afflicting about three times as
many women as men ( , p. 93). Although rarely fatal, it causes considerable
discomfort and loss of work time, reducing the quality of life of migraine sufferers.
Saper et al. estimate that the cost to employers of employees’ migraines is $5256 to
$6864 per year for each male and $3168 to $3600 per year for each female ([461, p.
1). From the standpoint
of physicians, this condition
is sometimes difficult to
diagnose and can be time-consuming
and awkward to treat. Sacks notes that some
forms of migraine headache “present formidable challenges in differential diagno-
sis; indeed, there is probably no field in medicine so strewn with the debris of
misdiagnosis and mistreatment,
and of well-intentioned
but wholly mistaken medi-
cal and surgical interventions”
( , p. 85).
In the diagnosis and treatment
of migraine headaches,
effective information
exchange between physician and patient is critical. Diagnosis of headache depends
primarily on a thorough history of symptoms. There are no laboratory tests which
B. G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
differentiate
from cluster headache,
muscle tension
headache, or the somatic complaints of depression. Since the physical examination
is usually normal in headache patients, one reason why diagnosis of migraine is
difficult may be that many primary care practitioners
lack the time to elicit the
details of the patient history that would allow proper diagnostic classification.
Often patients are referred
to a neurologist
only when they fail to respond to
therapy or become analgesic abusers. Effective treatment
of migraine is compli-
cated by the fact that about half of the patients do not get sufficient relief from the
regimen initially prescribed. Finding the proper medicine and dosage may require
a long series of visits to the clinic. Those who become impatient may bounce from
doctor to doctor without finding a successful program. With migraine patients,
then, information
exchange is a major issue: patients must be motivated to return
for further visits even when their treatment
to date appears to have been unsuc-
3. Basing system design on ethnographic data
In order to be useful, an intelligent system must offer information
that users
want and present it in ways that make sense in terms of the users’ own experience.
Although these conditions may seem to be “just common sense”, they are not in
fact commonly followed. Few computer
programs for medicine are based on a
systematic investigation of the information
needs and perspectives
of prospective
users. Instead, programs have frequently been constructed
on the basis of design-
ers’ tacit assumptions concerning the kinds of information needed by system users
 , and systems present this material in terms that make sense to the system-
builders but not necessarily to users. Both features of this approach may contribute
to the well-known problem of low user acceptance
 . As described below, we
have based the design of the system on ethnographic
field work. We have also
investigated cognitive obstacles to a person’s assimilation of technical information
through cognitive studies (see [l]).
To design our system, we sought detailed knowledge of the nature and scope of
the information
needs experienced
by clinicians and migraine sufferers. Then, in
order to understand
how to respond to these needs most effectively, we tried to
identify the explanatory
material that best meets the needs of particular types of
users. To gather this information,
we used ethnographic
field research, a set of
research methods developed
by anthropologists
to gather descriptive qualitative
information
in complex real-world settings . These methods have proven to be
useful in the design and evaluation
of knowledge-based
systems .
Fieldwork for the present project involved a combination
of two ethnographic
techniques, participant observation and interviewing.
First, to investigate the information
needs of migraine patients and to identify
explanations that would satisfy these information needs, we have observed interac-
tion between neurologists and their patients. To date we have carried out a total of
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
70 hours of field observations of doctor-patient
visits in 7 neurology-related
in the Pittsburgh
area. We have observed 78 neurology
patients, of whom 29
suffered from headaches. The providers observed include 7 attending neurologists,
6 residents, 5 medical students and 4 other health care providers. Of the doctor-
patient encounters,
36 were tape recorded. The tapes have been transcribed and
are being subjected to content analysis.
Second, in order to supplement
data gained from observations
and to investi-
gate information
needs that patients might not be expressing to their physicians,
we undertook
a series of semi-directed
interviews with migraine sufferers outside
the clinical setting. These interviews averaged a little over an hour in length, and
have provided detailed data on matters that seldom arose during our observations
of patient visits. To date we have interviewed 4 men and 8 women, producing 12
l/2 hours of tape-recorded
material. Again, we are undertaking
content analysis
of the transcribed tapes.
The transcribed
texts produced
from observations
and interviews are a rich
source of data. Content analysis of these transcripts identifies information
expressed by patients and physicians, explanations offered by physicians, and data
about how these explanations are received. It also provides insight into the types of
knowledge physicians and patients have about migraine and its treatment,
as what each takes for granted in discussing the topic. Following an analysis of
individual texts, we compare them, seeking patterns and common features within
and between them. This process provides insights for the content and wording of
explanatory material to be offered by the system.
Several design considerations
have emerged from analysis of the field data,
including the five below. These are especially valuable in considering what prob-
lems to address and what kind of system to build, but also in the details of how to
word questions and answers.
(1) Particularly
in the early stages of the project, field observations
become aware of and to reevaluate some of our tacit assumptions about the nature
of the design task. As discussed in , the fieldwork revealed that some of these
initial design assumptions were inappropriate.
For example, we expected (and
neurologists
told us) that the explanatory
material most required
by migraine
sufferers would be textbook-type
information
on the physiology of migraine and
the nature and side-effects of the drugs used to treat it. However, this is not what
migraine sufferers describe as their most important information need (see below).
To take a second example, we expected (and neurologists confirmed) that migraine
sufferers would know relatively little about their condition. On the basis of this
assumption, we initially expected to build a conventional tutoring system. However,
this assumption also turned out to be false. Our interviews show that migraine
patients typically know a great deal about migraine -
but have a different type of
knowledge than neurologists. To draw upon a knowledge typology we proposed in
 , through experience
migraine sufferers accumulate informal, specific knowl-
edge about their condition, which contrasts with the formal, universal knowledge
in which physicians are trained.
Thus, our educational
task is less to provide
information
to those who completely
lack it, than to support the exchange of
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
information between physicians and migraine sufferers. Of particular importance is
helping individual patients to translate formal medical knowledge about migraine
and its treatment
into information
that they can apply in their own lives, a factor
that seems to promote patient compliance .
(2) People with migraines often do not receive the information
they need; the
ethnographic
data provide considerable
information
about the nature of these
needs. The transcript analysis underway will produce descriptive statistics on all
information-seeking
messages expressed by either patients or physicians during the
patient visits observed. To provide more immediate design input, we have com-
piled a list of 166 information needs that migraine sufferers have expressed during
patient visits or interviews. These questions are organized in the following cate-
gories: (i) What is a migraine headache, (ii) General causes of migraines, (iii) How
lifestyle can affect migraine, (iv) Triggers of migraines, (v) Physiology, experience,
and medical implications of migraine, (vi) Drug treatment
for migraines, and (vii)
Other questions about treatment. (Sample questions are given in Section 6.) Since
both fieldwork and analysis continue,
the list is still growing. Because sponta-
neously-expressed
information
needs are not always verbalized as syntactic ques-
tions , some of the questions
on the list are verbatim,
while others are
reformulations
of utterances
that conveyed an explicit desire for information.
are grounded
in documented
expressions
of information-seeking
by migraine
sufferers. While this list is not exhaustive, it serves as a useful resource to help the
project team understand
what potential users of our system are likely to want to
(3) Migraine sufferers have information
needs that they tend not to bring up
directly with their physicians. For example, migraineurs often mentioned
that their condition
may be fatal, a reasonable
given the frightening
nature of some migraine symptoms and their perceived similarity to symptoms of
brain tumor or stroke. (A similar concern is noted in , p. 62). Due to the
worrisome nature of this concern, as well as our observation that it often remains
unexpressed,
we designed our system to present explanatory material addressing
such fears to all users of the system.
(4) The fieldwork
has also yielded information
on the relative urgency of
different types of information needs expressed by migraine sufferers. On the basis
of both observations and interviews, we have postulated the following hierarchy of
patients’ concerns (see ):
Is this something major (e.g., a stroke or brain tumor)?
How does this make sense in terms of what I know about my body and my
life (e.g., my eating habits or menstrual cycle)?
What will I need to do about this? How will it affect my everyday life (e.g.,
my work schedule or my ability to drive)?
(IV) Why is this happening to me (allergy? inheritance?)
This list reflects a hierarchy of concerns, with (I) clearly perceived as the most
important. At the bottom of this list come concerns such as the following:
(V) What is a migraine headache anyway, and how does my migraine drug work?
The top-level question for migraine patients is, “What will happen to me?”
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
Since migraine patients often fear that they have a brain tumor or have had a
stroke, this is understood
as a question of life or death significance 3. Lower down
in the hierarchy are questions about the triggers, treatments,
and causes of the
condition. Useful responses to these questions may make use of textbook informa-
tion, but will need to focus upon helping patients to translate this information into
implications appropriate
to their own particular
circumstances.
We hypothesize
that every migraine sufferer has a similar hierarchy of concerns. We do not yet
know how long it takes people to move through the hierarchy or the extent to
which individuals vary in this progress. However, we do know that such progress is
not necessarily unidirectional.
For example, several interviewees commented
while they obviously had survived each migraine attack to date, the pain of a severe
attack was such as to lead them to fear that this one might kill them. In other
words, despite their general knowledge about migraine, they experienced
rent specific fear that this time that knowledge might not apply. In terms of the
hierarchy, such migraine sufferers may be said to return temporarily
to Level I
with each severe attack. Each step of the above hierarchy is associated with a
particular set of information
needs. In offering information
to migraine patients,
we need to provide explanations
that meet the information
needs they currently
experience. We have tried to design this hierarchy into the system to help structure
information
in ways that are most likely to be heeded and understood.
(5) The doctor-patient
dialogues recorded
in our transcripts
of patient visits
contain numerous instances of both initial and follow-up questions. These help to
reveal not only migraine sufferers’ information
needs, but also the language and
concepts they use in expressing such needs. For example, although neurologists
routinely classify medications for migraines as prophylactic,
abortive, or analgesic
in nature, migraine patients do not generally use these terms. Knowledge of the
language they do use is directly applicable to the design of explanatory material
and menus to facilitate query construction by users.
4. System modules: a more detailed view
4.1. The history-taking module
The history-taker is an interactive means of getting information from patients in
order to save time for physicians and obtain information
about patients for the
system. Although physicians may be reluctant
to use devices that require extra
time, patients have a clear motive to spend additional time to address their own
problems. We believe that we can increase the chances of a successful encounter
It also has economic significance for our health-care system since it is usual for American patients
with headaches to receive one or more expensive imaging procedures during the diagnostic process.
Such procedures are often considered unnecessary from a medical perspective but are often done to
reassure the patients.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artijkial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 1X7-154
between headache patients and the health care system by providing a computer-
based assistant to give patients more time, attention, and information. The idea of
using computer technology for this purpose was pioneered by Kleinmutz , Slack
 , and others over 20 years ago. Bana et al. [21 developed
a computer-based
headache interview that patients used successfully and that produced summaries
that physicians found useful. We have brought
this approach
into a modern
environment
and added some novel features.
The design of our system is modular, and therefore
individual physicians have
some flexibility to tailor the length and content of the computerized
interview.
There are currently 26 modules, with l-5 screens presented
in each, each screen
requesting related pieces of information.
The overall set of questions that can be
asked is currently
104; on the average about 50 questions are displayed. (The
average is less than the full set because some questions are asked only in the
context of specific answers to previous questions.) We envision allowing individual
physicians to adapt this interview to their own preferences.
However, note that
whenever a physician eliminates questions from the history-gathering
session, the
system loses potential information
for the patient model and therefore
limits the
types of tailoring that can be performed
by the explanation module. For example,
if the system does not ask about gender and age, the explainer cannot avoid
presenting information relevant to women of child-bearing age, such as contraindi-
cations during pregnancy.
A mouse-based interface allows patients to use check-boxes for answers. Some
questions allow just one box to be checked for mutually exclusive choices, while
others allow multiple answers. Fig. 2 shows a simple example. A more complex
example is shown in Fig. 3, in which the choices to the right of a drug name are not
available until the drug is checked. We use pictures
in some questions
substitute
for text and a long list of multiple-choice
answers. For example, in
asking where the head pain occurs, we show front and side views of a head and ask
patients to point and click on those areas where the pain is worst. This is shown in
A summary of the patients’
answers (both the positives and the pertinent
negatives) is provided for the physician to examine immediately before and during
the patient’s visit. Our working hypothesis is that the program can summarize a
large number of answers into a form that is easily scanned and that can indicate
topics of diagnostic relevance
for the physician to pursuemore
deeply with the
patient. The summary will be placed in the patient’s chart, along with a complete
record of his or her answers to all questions asked (reformatted
for legibility). An
example is shown in Fig. 5.
4.2. The explanation module
of the richness of human language,
expressing
an answer or an
explanation in natural language is complex. Most computer systems are limited to
printing out “canned”
text, which is stored in the computer
beforehand
retrieved verbatim, or they fill in some blanks of a schema with names 117-154
Things that might cause your headache to start.
Consult your headache diary, if
you haue one.
00 any of the following factors in your surroundings or enuironment
trigger this
kind of headache?
Choose all the items
that apply to you.
0 Sunlight, glare, bright lights
0 Strong smells
Cl Uapors or fumes
Cl Flickering lights
Cl Changes in the weather
0 Riding in a car, bus or other uehicle
0 Being in a stuffy or poorly uentilated room
0 Being in an air-conditioned
q Wearing tight clothing, such ?s, a hat or necktie
Cl Reading
(<<ctoBecL)
Fig. 2. A simple screen from the history-taking module asking about headache triggers. Each screen
begins with general text meant to provide context. The questions are shown in the body of the screen,
with standard navigating boxes at the bottom. The actual screen uses color as well as location to
separate these different hinds of information.
patient or of drugs a patient is taking). In contrast, the system we are building
generates the text dynamically by reasoning about and recording not only what the
system says to the user, but also why (i.e., the communicative
goal(s) of the
explanation) and how (i.e., via what explanation strategies the system conveys that
information).
There are several advantages to using intelligent text generation
in a system
such as ours. The system can produce explanations that are tailored to aspects of
the current context, including the patient model and the history of the questions
and answers that have been exchanged
thus far. Our fieldwork indicates that
patients are much more interested in information that is directly relevant to them
than they are in general information the relevance of which is unclear. In addition,
our prior work indicates
that users often do not fully understand
explanations as they are first given. Therefore
to be effective a system must be able
B. G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-l 54
Medicines you are taking or might haue taken in the past
One kind of drug that is used to stop attacks after they haue started is based on
ergotamine which is often called ergot for short. It comes under several different
brand names and in different forms. Haue you taken any of these?
Ergostat, Ergomar or Uligrettes
Cafergot or tltigraine
Medihaler ergotamine
BelIergaLS
OHE-45 Oihydroergotamine nasal spray
I might haue taken an ergot, but I don’t
recognize any of these.
‘<< Gotlack
Fig. 3. A screen from the history-taking module combining “check-all” and “check-one”
choices, where the “check-one”
choices (indicated by radio buttons) do not become visible until the
corresponding box is checked.
to respond to user’s follow-up questions and requests for elaboration
sponding to follow-up questions requires that the system keep a record of the prior
communicative goals it has achieved as well as the strategies used to achieve those
goals; see for details.
Our system is interactive and allows patients to continue asking questions until
they are satisfied. Thus the system can begin the interaction
by generating
relatively short explanation (l-2 screens). If patients want more information
may ask further questions, and the system will generate further explanations.
our system, phrases
and topics about which the system can answer further
questions are indicated using highlighting and color on the screen display. Users
initiate queries using a mouse to point at portions of the system’s explanations that
they would like further
information
about. The length of the dialogue (and
of the printout
that the patient will receive) is thus controlled
patient. Since the patient controls the duration and content of the dialogue, any
information
beyond that presented
in the initial information
sheet is directly
B. G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
Ulhere does the pain of your headache tend to be?
On the pictures below, uarious regions where a headache might start are outlined.
Please click in each region where your headache
tends to start.
You can choose
more than one if your headache tends to start in different
places at different
If you change your mind about a region you haue chosen, click inside it
Your right side
Your right
Your left side
Fig. 4. A screen from the history-taking module in which patients click on appropriate mouse-sensitive
regions of a picture. It is easier to see areas on the screen because regions separated by lines in this line
drawing are separated by colors on the screen.
relevant to the patient’s concerns. This differs from preprinted
materials, which
inevitably present
some information
that is not relevant to individual readers.
Moreover, because the interface suggests topics that the patient can explore, we
believe that it will encourage patients to take a more active role in learning about
their disease and therapy. Printed material cannot actively engage the reader in
the same way.
The information presented by our system is context-sensitive
in two ways. First,
by employing the information gathered by the system’s history-taking module, both
the initial information
sheet and subsequently
explanations
tailored to features and concerns of individual patients. This allows our system to
generate information
that is directly relevant to individual patients, a feature that
our fieldwork indicates is important.
Second, by employing techniques
planning which record
the internal
of the explanations
the system
B.C. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
DEMOGRAPHICS:
36 year-old female.
COMPLAINT:
The patient complains
of headaches.
They are sharp and
accompanied by nausea.
DESCRIPTION
The headaches began more than 10 years ago. The patient was in her
Very severe, patient is forced to stop normal activities.
Aching, sharp, and
LOCALIZATION:
All over her head.
ONSET: Headaches usually start when patient is working. Headaches develop fully in
less than a half hour but more than 1 minute.
FREOUENCY: Headaches occur very infrequently.
Without treatment the headaches last on an average some hours, and at
most a day or more.
TERMINATION:
The headache terminates gradually and the patient feels completely
recovered some hours after the pain is gone.
TRIGGERING
FACTORS: Emotional stress.
ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS: Possible fever.
Always present: dizziness, weakness, and ataxia.
Sometimes present: fatigue and confusion.
Does not lose consciousness.
No neck stiffness.
PRODROMATA:
Occur several minutes before the headache: always light spots,
always nausea, sometimes upset stomach, always dizziness, and sometimes lacrimation
on both sides.
AGGRAVATING
FACTORS: None.
RELIEVING FACTORS: Applying heat, relaxing, and sleeping or trying to sleep.
DESCRIPTION
KIND OF HEADACHE:
Moderate, patient has difficulty continuing with normal activities. Aching.
OUENCY: Headaches occur several times per month.
LOCALIZATION:
All over the head.
BACKGROUND
INFORMATION:
The patient is pre-menopausal.
not smoke.
Does not take medication
for asthma.
Does not take medication
MEDICATION:
- Occasionally non-prescription
pain relievers.
- Pamelor.
PAST: none.
Brother(s), father, and daughter have or had severe headaches.
Fig. 5. Summary for patient Camphor.
 , the system
can interpret
and respond
to patient
of the ongoing
 .
In implementing
the explanation
on previous
experience
and implementing
a similar facility for an advice-giving
system in another
B.C. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
Communicative Goal
REALIZATION
English Text
Fig. 6. Architecture of the explanation module.
domain [371. An overview of the architecture
of the explanation
shown in Fig. 6. Its two major parts are described below.
The text planner. The explanation planning process begins when a communica-
tiue goal (e.g., “make the hearer believe that the diagnosis is migraine”, “make the
hearer know about the side effects of Inderal”)
is posted to the text planner. A
communicative
goal represents
the effect(s) that the explanation
is intended
have on the patient’s knowledge or goals. Posting a goal leads to the retrieval of
knowledge units (facts, operators)
which are useful in attaining that goal; the
attempt to apply those knowledge units may result in the posting of further goals.
Planning continues until all communicative
goals have been refined to speech acts
(e.g., INFORM and RECOMMEND)
that can be “executed”
to produce the actual
English text.
In our system, there are two ways that a communicative
goal may be posed to
the text planner. First, when the interaction
begins, an interaction
manager (see
next section) posts the goal to generate
the information
sheet for the current
patient-user.
Second, after the information
sheet has been generated,
the user is
free to ask further questions about topics covered there, or to ask about other
topics given in question menus. The interaction manager processes the user’s query
and posts a communicative
goal to the text planner to produce a response. The
text planner decides how to construct natural and informative
text, taking into
account what the system knows about the particular patient (as indicated in the
patient model) and the previous dialogue with that patient (as recorded
dialogue history).
To produce an explanation that achieves the communicative goal(s), the planner
its library of explanation
operators,
looking for candidates
achieve the goal(s). These operators were derived by studying naturally occurring
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
(define-text-plan-operator
:NAME EVIDENCE-DIAGNOSIS-M
:EFFECT (EVIDENCE
(DIAGNOSIS ?doctor ?disease ?patient))
:CONSTRAINTS
(MIGRAINE ?disease)
(DIRECT-SUBCS
MIGRAINE-CHARACTERISTIC-FINDING
?char-findings)
(HAS-FINDING
?pat-headache-episode
?pat-char-findings)
(MIGRAINE-CHARACTERISTIC-FINDING
?pat-char-findings)
(HAS-FINDING
?pat-headache-episode
?pat-other-findings)
(MIGRAINE-OTHER-FINDING
?pat-other-finding))
(((FORALL ?char-findings
(BEL ?patient
(CHAR-FINDING
?char-finding))))
((FORALL ?pat-char-findings
(BEL ?patient
(HAS-FINDING
?patient ?pat-char-findings))))
((FORALL ?pat-other-finding
(BEL ?patient
(HAS-FINDING ?patient ?pat-other-finding))
(BEL ?patient
(OTHER-FINDING
?pat-other-finding))))
((BEL ?patient
(IS-HEREDITARY
?disease)))))
7. Sample explanation
explanations from our fieldwork on doctor-patient
interactions, books that explain
migraine concepts to a lay audience (e.g., ), explanations constructed by our
physician experts, and explanations constructed
by the field workers. An example
explanation operator is shown in Fig. 7.
Explanation
sources of knowledge.
First, they
encode standard ways that communicative
goals are achieved by rhetorical means,
thus allowing our system to produce
explanations.
For example,
operator in Fig. 7 shows a strategy that gives the patient evidence for the doctor’s
diagnosis of migraine by posting the following subgoals for the planner to refine:
l informing the patient about characteristic
findings associated with this disease;
l citing the characteristic
symptoms reported by the patient (as indicated in the
patient model);
0 for all other findings associated with migraine that the patient reported, remind-
ing the patient she has this symptom and that it is typical of migraine sufferers;
l letting the patient know that migraine is often hereditary.
Second, each operator contains applicability constraints that specify the knowl-
edge that must be available if the operator is to be used. These criteria can refer to
the system’s medical knowledge base, the patient model, or the dialogue history.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
For example, the operator shown in Fig. 7 has six constraints. The first constraint
checks to see that the diagnosed disease is migraine. The second constraint causes
the system to search for the findings that are characteristic
of migraine and to
store them in a variable called ? c h a r - f i nd i ng s. The third and fourth con-
straints set the variable ? pa t - c h a r - f i n d i n g s to those findings characteristic
of migraine that the patient has indicated during the history taking. The fifth and
sixth constraints
set the variable
? p a t - o t h e r - f i nd i n g s to those non-char-
acteristic findings that the patient has reported. (The variable ? pa t - he ad a c h e -
ep i sode is globally bound to the description representing
the current patient’s
stereotypical
headache attack, which has been created in the patient model using
information
gathered by the history-taking module.)
In general, there may be many strategies capable of achieving a given goal, so
the planner
employs a set of selection heuristics to determine
which of the
candidate strategies is most appropriate
in the current situation. These selection
heuristics take into account information about the patient’s knowledge and prefer-
ences (as recorded in the patient model), and the conversation that has occurred
so far (as recorded in the dialogue history). Once a strategy is selected, it may in
turn post subgoals for the planner to refine. For example, the operator shown in
Fig. 7 posts several subgoals depending on the number of bindings for each of the
variables in the FORALL constructs. Planning continues by refining subgoals in this
fashion until the entire plan is refined into primitive actions that can be directly
executed. In our system, these are speech acts such as INFORM
and RECOMMEND.
Once a text plan is completed, it is recorded in the dialogue history, and passed to
the realization component to generate the English text.
The realization
component. This component
translates the text plan generated
by the planner into English sentences that are printed on the screen for the patient
to read and interact with. In the current system, we generate English text using
templates. A template may express a single speech act or a sequence of similar
speech acts. During the planning process, when a speech act is encountered,
(define-text-plan-operator
:NAME diagnosis
:EFFECT (INFORM ?patient (DIAGNOSIS ?doctor ?disease))
:PRIMITIVE T
:CONSTRAINTS NIL
:STEPS (DIAGNOSIS-TEMP ?doctor ?disease))
“Today you were seen by Dr.
Washington
and diagnosed
as suffering
Fig.8.Sample
and resulting text.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
primitive plan operator associates an appropriate
template with the text plan node
for that speech act (see Fig. 8). If there are many primitive operators whose effect
field matches the speech act, the planner chooses the most specific match. For
if the speech
act is (INFORM
(has-side-
e f f e c t MOTRIN
VOMITING)), and there are two operators,
one whose effect is
(has-side-effect
VOMITING))
one whose effect
is (INFORM
?patient-1
(has-side-effect
? s i de- e f f e c t ) >, the system will select the former operator.
way, the most specific template available for expressing the propositional
of a speech act is selected. When the planning process is complete, the realization
traverses the text plan, executing templates as they are encountered.
When a template is executed, it returns a sequence of objects that will then be
on the screen by the interaction
manager. It is important to note that
the sequence of objects returned
by a template is not simply a sequence of text
strings. Rather, each object in the set has an associated set of display properties,
e.g., font, color, inverse video, and whether or not the displayed object should be
mouse sensitive when it is displayed.
In Fig. 8, we show the text that would be generated by executing the statement:
(DIAGNOSIS-TEMP
? do c to r ? d i s ease). In this example, the parts of the text that
are computed
dynamically are underlined.
Thus, the name of the doctor (“Dr.
Washington”
is a pseudonym) and the diagnosis (migraine) are computed by the
DIAGNOSIS-TEMP.
In this case, these values are computed simply by filling
in the values of the variables ?do c to r and ?d i agno s i s. However, there are
other methods that perform complex reasoning about the patient model and/or
the medical knowledge base to generate
some text objects. In Fig. 8, the term
“migraine”
appears in bold, indicating that it is mouse sensitive. The user can
select this term and receive a menu of follow-up questions that can be
asked about it.
4.3. The interaction manager
The patient’s
interaction
with both the history-taking
and the explanation
modules is through a direct manipulation,
mouse-based,
hypertext-like
interface.
The patient can ask further
questions about topics covered in the information
sheet by selecting highlighted text that is on the screen, or can ask questions about
other topics by constructing queries with the menu interface. It is neither feasible
nor desirable to provide the system with a general capacity to analyze any question
expressed in English. First, the natural language understanding
technology to do
this does not exist. Second, even if we could analyze any question the user posed,
there would be many questions that the system would not be able to answer. Thus,
we must have a way of constraining the range of questions users ask to those that
the system is capable
of providing
answers for. Providing
a restricted
language for this purpose
is problematic
because users find restricted
languages difficult to learn and frustrating
to use [4,25&l]. In previous work on
advice-giving systems and on tutorial systems for young children , and in
B.C. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
our early experience
with migraine patients running the history-taker,
found that direct manipulation
interfaces that use the mouse as a pointing device
are easy to use, even for people who cannot type or who have little knowledge of
computers. Moreover, this technique allows a convenient way of circumscribing the
set of questions the patient can ask.
Using our interface,
the patient constructs
questions using the mouse. The
patient can build a question in two different ways. In the first case, the patient
selects the question type (e.g., Describe) from a main menu and is then guided by
the system through dynamically generated menus for the selection of the appropri-
ate arguments (e.g., drug). In the second case, the patient selects a portion of text
that the system has presented
on the screen and that is indicated
sensitive. In the current interface,
mouse-sensitive
text strings appear in inverse
video on the screen. Whenever
the patient
clicks on a text segment that is
mouse-sensitive,
the system presents
her with a menu that contains only the
question types that are applicable to the selected topic. These menus are not fixed
in advance, but are generated in the context of the current patient model and the
previous discourse. For example, if the patient clicks on the text string “trigger
factors”, one of the entries that will appear in the menu is “How to identify what
triggers your migraine”.
If the user selects this entry, the system will put up
menu containing
categories
of factors the patient can ask about, e.g.,
dietary factors, factors related to particular activities, factors related to particular
natural phenomena,
etc. This menu may or may not include an entry for trigger
factors related to hormones, depending on the gender of the patient. If the patient
selects a question that requires other arguments, the system presents a dynamically
menu containing the appropriate
types of additional
arguments.
if the patient
clicks on “Inderal”
on the screen, and then selects
from the menu of follow-up questions, the system puts up a second
menu that includes entries for all of the drugs in the knowledge base. The user
scrolls through the entries on this menu and selects the one she wishes to have
compared to Inderal. As soon as the patient has constructed
a complete question,
it is translated into a communicative
goal for the text planner to achieve. In this
way, the system aids the user in formulating
a question, while at the same time
constraining the user to ask questions that the system can answer. For example, it
constrains
users to request comparison
of one drug with another
drug in the
system’s knowledge base.
In order to support this direct manipulation interface, where users may point to
portions of text on the screen and receive menus of possible follow-up questions,
the system must maintain
links between
the displayed
text and the system’s
knowledge sources. In particular it has to store back-pointers to the part of the text
plan that generated
the text, and to the entities in the knowledge base that are
referred to in the text. Without these links, the interaction manager would not be
able to interpret
and answer patients’ follow-up questions in a context-sensitive
fashion, taking into account both the reasons why that segment has been generated
as a part of that particular paragraph and what knowledge it expresses.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
5. System knowledge sources
5.1. Medical knowledge base
To generate
the interactive
information
sheet and answer further
questions, our system has an extensive knowledge base (KB) that contains both
general medical terminology and specific knowledge about migraine. Examples of
the latter include common trigger factors and symptoms for migraine, the common
therapies,
and the most common effects and side effects of those therapies.
building the part of the KB that represents
general medical terminology
exploited an already existing knowledge source: the UMLS Semantic Network .
(To construct this portion of the knowledge base we used a semi-automatic process
of knowledge acquisition. Interested
readers are referred to for details of this
process.) To construct the portion of our KB that contains specific knowledge
about migraine, we used traditional
knowledge acquisition techniques
from our medical expert,
medical textbooks,
and patient-oriented
literature on migraine. We are currently working on links to on-line pharmaceuti-
cal databases, which will help ensure that the drug information used by the system
is current and complete.
The KB is implemented
in Loom, a knowledge representation
language .
Loom’s modeling language is a hybrid consisting of two sublanguages. The defni-
tion language provides the knowledge engineer with a principled means to repre-
sent knowledge about the defining characteristics
of domain concepts and rela-
tions. Using the definition language, the knowledge engineer specifies the termino-
logical component
of a knowledge base (referred
to as the t-box). The assertion
language allows the knowledge engineer to specify a set of contingent facts about
specific instances (referred to as the a-box).
The t-box of our knowledge
base contains
definitions
of general
such as PHARMACOLOGIC-SUBSTANCE,
DISEASE-OR-SYNDROME,
(defconcept MIGRAINE-EPISODE
:annotations ((has-min-duration Several-hours)
(has-max-duration 3-Days)
(has-min-frequency l-in-Year)
(has-max-frequency 4-in-week)
(has-class-average-frequency
3-in-Month))
:is (:and NON-ORGANIC-HEADACHE-EPISODE
(:a11 has-characteristic-finding
MIGRAINE-CHARACTERISTIC-FINDING)
(:a11 has-other-finding
MIGRAINE-EPISODE-OTHER-FINDING)
(:a11 has-trigger MIGRAINE-TRIGGER)))
B.C. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
THERAPEUTIC-PROCEDURE,
etc., definitions
of more specific concepts
MIGRAINE-ANALGESIC-THERAPEUTIC-PROCEDURE,
GRAINE-TRIGGER-RELATED-TO-HORMONAL-CHANGES,
etc., and definitions
tions between
has-side-effect,
has-therapeutic-
suitability,
has-characteristic-finding,
etc.Forexample,the
nition of the concept
MIGRAINE-EPISODE
in our t-box is as shown in Scheme 1:
definition
MIGRAINE-EPISODE
NON-ORGANIC-HEADACHE-EPISODE.
Thus it inherits all of the attributes associated
with NON-ORGANIC-HEADACHE-EPISODE.
Moreover, the filler of the attributes
characteristic-finding,
has-other-finding
and has-trigger
specialized. The
: an not a t i on s keyword is used to specify values for
relations that hold only for the concept itself and not for its instances, such as the
maximum recorded duration of a migraine episode.
The a-box of our knowledge base contains two conceptually distinct sets of facts.
The first set, about drugs, diseases, etc., does not change during routine use of the
system. No new facts are added unless explicitly asserted
by the knowledge
engineer when the system is not in use. An example of the type of facts associated
with a particular
drug (Nortriptyline)
in the static portion
of our a-box is as
(tellm (Nortriptyline TRICYCLIC-ANTIDEPRESSANT))
(tellm (Nortriptyline PROPHYLACTIC-DRUG-FOR-MIGRAINE))
(tellm (has-chemical-composition
Nortriptyline-Hydrochloride)
(tell (:about Nortriptyline
(:a11 has-common-side-effect
NORTRIPTYLINE-COMMON-SIDE-EFFECT)
The first two facts assert that Nortriptyline
is both a TRICYCLIC-ANTIDEPRESSANT
and a PROPHYLACTIC-DRUG-FOR-MIGRAINE.
The third fact asserts that the chemical
composition of Nortriptyline
is the chemical substance called Nortriptyline-Hydro-
chloride, and the last fact asserts a restriction
on the possible fillers of the role
has-common-side-effect
ofNortriptyline.
The second set of facts in our a-box encodes
about particular
patients, their disease-episodes,
their symptoms, and so forth, in much the same
fashion as the facts about drugs are stored. This component
of the a-box corre-
sponds to the patient model and is dynamic. New facts are asserted about entities
in this set every time a patient interacts with the system.
We chose Loom for our knowledge representation
tool because our system
needs to reason about its knowledge, and about the structure of its knowledge, in
order to generate
explanations
automatically
from the knowledge base. Loom
supports such types of reasoning
in an integrated
environment.
Specifically, it
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
provides inheritance,
production
rules augmented
with terminological
classifica-
tion, and a full first order query language that allows the use of metapredicates,
i.e., predicates about the structure of the knowledge. Moreover, Loom infers and
a complete
and accurate
lattice of logical subsumption
relations between concepts and relations.
5.2. Patient model
In order to adapt explanations
to a particular patient, the explanation facility
must have access to a stored description of that patient, i.e., the patient model. As
described above, information
about patients’ symptoms, past treatments,
habits (e.g., a strenuous exercise program), and other current medical treatments is
gathered by the history-taking
module. Information
about the patient’s diagnosis
and prescribed
therapy is provided by the physician or other clinical personnel
immediately after the visit with the physician. Both the patient’s answers and the
physician’s inputs are expressed as Loom assertions and are loaded into the a-box
of the KB.
The patient model is centered on an instance of the concept
PATIENT. A partial,
simplified network-like description of the concept
PATIENT is shown in Fig. 9. Each
time a new patient
with the system, new instances of the concepts
VISIT, HISTORY,
HEADACHE-HISTORY,
etc. are created and facts about them
are appropriately
stored. When a patient comes back for a follow-up visit, the
system executes the following steps. First, it loads the model for the current
patient in the knowledge base, and it creates and stores a new instance of the
VISIT. Then, the history-taking module checks whether the facts stored in
the patient model still hold and asks the patient about outcomes and possible side
effects of the therapies that were previously prescribed to the patient. Finally, after
the patient has been seen by the doctor, the patient model is updated if either the
diagnosis or the prescription
has been changed.
5.3. Discourse history
In order to produce a natural dialogue, the system must generate the current
explanation in the context of explanations given earlier in the current interaction.
For example, a system that keeps repeating the same message over and over again
is likely to try a user’s patience. In our system, the discourse history is a record of
the text plan that generated
the information
sheet, the questions the user has
asked, and the text plans that led to the system’s responses to these questions.
Whenever a question is asked, the system checks the dialogue history to determine
whether this question has been answered previously. If so, the text planner selects
a different strategy for answering it than has been chosen before. Even when the
user does not literally ask the same question again, the system’s responses must
take the dialogue context into account. Computer-generated
discourse that does
not draw on the previous discourse seems awkward and unnatural, and may even
B. G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 (I 995) 117-l 54
has-prescription-step
HEALTH-CARE-ACTIVITY
LABORATORY-DIAGNOSTIC-PROCEDURE
THERAPEUTIC-PROCEDURE
HISTORY-TAKING-PROCEDURE
has-result
has-episode-description-
HEADACHE-EPISOD
HEADACHE-HISTORY
Ais-taking-medication
B (the Concept
a specialization Of Concept B)
(r is a relation between concept A and concept B)
Fig. 9. Partial description of the concept patient.
be incoherent.
An example illustrating
how our system takes account of the
previous discourse is given below.
6. An example session
Here we work through
an example based on information
about a woman
(pseudonym
“Camphor”)
who was seen by a neurologist and whose interview was
observed in our field work. The summary of Camphor’s history generated by the
system is shown in Fig. 5. 4 From the transcript
of Camphor’s visit with the
physician, we also extracted
the information
that the doctor or other clinical
personnel would have input into the system after the visit (see Fig. 10). Fig. 11
We ran the history-taker ourselves using data from the transcript of her visit with a neurologist
because she did not use the history-taker herself.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
EXAMINATION
PRESCRIPTION:
-Pamelor lOmg, each morning
Information
by the doctor
clinical personnel right after Camphor's
shows the first two paragraphs of the interactive information
sheet generated by
our system for Camphor. The complete information sheet for this patient appears
in Appendix A. Portions of the text that were tailored are underlined
in Fig. 11,
and portions of the text that are mouse sensitive are depicted in bold. (Note: the
Today you were seen by Dr. Washington and diagnosed as suffering
migraine. The most camon symptan of migraine is a moderate to severe
throbbing or pulsating headache. Migraine patients also frequently
experience visual symptoms, nausea, sensitivity to noise and light,
and cmfusion. You report that your vision is affected. which ti a re
You also reoort nausea and v?
some headaches. B feelina of confusion is also ccrrmonlv
reoorted bv neo~le
durina miaraine attacks. Migraine is also strongly hereditary. YOU reooti
f&her. brother and dauahter all have had severe he.a&&es that are
to vours. Your familv historv is a further indication that YOU suffer
While migraines can produce very intense and painful headaches, they are wzq
rarely life threatening. Sometimes patients worry that their migraine
symptoms mean that they have a bzain t-r
or have suffered a stroke. Do
not worry. You were diagnosed as suffering from migraine. Your Dhvsical
examination was normal. which indicates that more serious causes of headache
often mts better as ww
aae. esoeciallv after menooause.
hormones olav a role in makina the attacks more severe.
of computer-generated
information
(Underlining
and bold type are added to
illustrate points made in the text.)
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
underlining is for illustrative purposes only. Tailored text does not appear under-
lined when printed on the screen for the patient.) The first paragraph begins by
stating the physician’s diagnosis, and provides a general description of migraine.
This is followed by an explanation of how the diagnosis accounts for Camphor’s
symptoms. We provide this information
in order to assure the patient that the
diagnosis is correct and to alleviate the patient’s worries about other, more serious,
or even life-threatening
conditions.
In this first paragraph,
the mouse sensitive
entities are: migraine, headache, visual symptoms, sensitivity to noise and light,
and confusion.
Suppose that after reading the information
sheet, Camphor selects the mouse-
sensitive term visual symptoms. In response to her mouse click, the system puts up
a menu containing the following questions. (The questions illustrated
below are information needs actually expressed by migraine sufferers in the course
of our fieldwork; see Section 3 above.)
Questions about visual symptoms
What visual symptoms can accompany migraine?
What causes visual symptoms?
Do visual symptoms always occur before a migraine attack?
Suppose now that Camphor
selects the second option, “What causes visual
symptoms” (Camphor’s interest in the causes of her visual symptoms is evident in
the transcript; see Appendix A). At this point, the system answers with the
following text:
The visual
symptoms of migraine
the ones vou
are produced
by a temporary
disturbance
of the back part
of the brain
that interprets
information.
Note the phrase “like the ones you reported”.
This phrase is generated because
the patient reported
symptoms of this type when responding to the questions of
the history-taker. These responses are encoded into our knowledge representation
language and entered into the patient model, thus allowing the system to personal-
ize its explanation
in ways like this. After reading the answer provided by the
system, should Camphor decide to find out more information
about migraine in
general, she can click on the mouse-sensitive
term migraine. In response,
system would put up a menu containing the questions:
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
Questions about migraine
What is migraine?
What causes migraine?
Are everyone’s migraines the same?
Will I have migraine my whole life?
Will my migraines always feel the same?
Suppose Camphor now selects the fourth question, “Will I have migraine my
whole life?” The communicative
goal that the interaction
manager poses to the
explanation
for answering such a question is (ALLEVIATE-FEARS ? pa-
t ient (FOREVER/CHRONIC
? d i se a se)). At this point, the system notices that
this communicative
goal has already been achieved in the text plan for the
(define-text-plan-operator
:NAME Operator1
:EFFECT (ALLEVIATE-FEARS
(FOREVER/CHRONIC
?disease))
:CONSTRAINTS
(FEMALE ?patient)
(had-past-clinically-relevant-p-or-p
?headache history ?p-or-p)
(NOT (= ?p-or-p Menopause)))
:STEPS (BEL ?patient
(IMPROVE ?disease
(AFTER Menopause))))
(define-text-plan-operator
:NAME Operator2
(ALLEVIATE-FEARS
(FOREVER/CHRONIC
?disease))
:CONSTRAINTS
(FEMALE ?patient)
(had-past-clinically-relevant-p-or-p
?headache-history
(NOT (= ?p-or-p Menopause)))
:STEPS ((BEL ?patient
(IMPROVE ?disease
(AFTER Menopause)))
(BEL ?patient
(IMPROVE ?disease Aging))))
Fig. 12. Operators
that achieve
the same communicative
(ALLEVIATE-FEARS ?patient
(FOREVER/CHRONIC
?disease))
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
information
sheet, and therefore
it must choose an alternative strategy for achiev-
ing this goal the second time.
In general, in planning the information
sheet, whenever multiple operators are
applicable for achieving a goal, the text planner selects the least verbose (i.e., the
one that posts the fewest subgoals) in order to limit the length of the information
sheet. In this case, when constructing the information
sheet for Camphor, the text
(see Fig. 12) to achieve the communicative
(ALLEVIATE-FEARS
(FOREVER/CHRONIC
? disease)).
The text result-
ing from executing Operator1 (the last two lines in Fig. 11) is:
often gets better as women age, especially after menopause,
since hormones play a role in makinq the attacks more severe.
When answering the follow-up question, the planner must select an alternative
strategy and its heuristics direct it to choose a more verbose operator,
(see Fig. 12). This operator
causes the system to generate
the following, more
elaborated
Not necessarily. As I said before, they may stop or alter with
menopause. In general, for both men and women, migraine attacks
often become less frequent as the sufferer qrows older.
Note that this text contains
a reference
to a prior explanation,
“As I said
before...“.
This reference
is generated because the system recognizes that the goal
(BEL ?patient
Menopause)))
had already been
achieved in the plan for the information
sheet, and the system contains strategies
for determining when to generate such references
back to the previous discussion
of a topic. This example shows how the context created by a prior explanation
affects the generation of subsequent explanations. See 161 for additional examples
and more discussion of this aspect of our explanation component.
7. Preliminary
evaluation
of usability and utility
We have periodically brought in outsiders to use the system and have performed
.pilot tests of the history-taker
in a neurology clinic. Feedback
and subsequent
improvements
gave us confidence that the system was usable by headache patients,
so we undertook
a formative evaluation of the entire system working together in
the context of patients’ initial visits to a neurologist, as well as separate evaluations
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
of the major parts of the system in a laboratory environment.
Two of our studies
are described below 5. While we recognize that this is an evaluation of patients’
perceptions,
and not a study of outcomes, we tentatively conclude that:
the-design of the system is sound -
the information we provide and the format
we use to present it do not need major revision;
the system is usable -
no one had difficulty using the mouse to select answers
to questions or to request more information about a topic; an automated history
can be obtained in 30 minutes or less, but more time will be required for more
complete histories;
the implementation
of the system is robust and user-friendly -
patients with no
prior training were able to use the programs for hours at a time with almost no
problems; no one crashed the system;
the information
provided is beneficial -
some patients expressed unqualified
gratitude for the information; no one said their time was wasted.
..I. Methods
Study #I: Overall system in context. The history-taker
and explanation component
were designed to work together as an integrated system, but we had not demon-
strated, prior to this study, that the individual parts of the system work together
smoothly. In study #l, we used the context of a visit to a neurologist
information about coupling all parts of the system for use by patients at the time of
From responses to an advertisement,
we selected three persons with symptoms
of migraine (all female) to be seen by a neurologist and interact with the computer
system. An interviewer scheduled an appointment for the patient to see a neurolo-
gist and asked each person to arrive 45 minutes prior to the examination time. The
interviewer gathered demographic information from the patient, and then sat with
her while she interacted with the history-taker in a room adjacent to the examina-
tion room. If questions arose, the interviewer provided just enough information to
let the patient proceed. The interviewer recorded any problems the patient seemed
to have. After each subject used the history-taker, she was interviewed with a fixed
set of questions and then engaged in a dialogue to gather additional comments.
The computer record of the history (the patient model) was transferred
explanation system in electronic form. A one-page summary of the patient’s history
was generated
from the computer
record and given to the neurologist.
situation, the neurologist
did not look at the summary until after examining the
so we could look for differences
the medical histories taken
manually and by the history-taker. After the patient was examined by the neurolo-
gist, the interviewer escorted the patient to the explanation system in an adjacent
a survey of physicians’
perceptions
of the adequacy
of the form and content
of the summary
the history-taker,
and cognitive
of subjects’
understanding
in different
Responses on the history-taker follow-up interview
Positive “Yes”/Negative
“No” answers
Answer category
Don’t know/N/A
1. Did the program ask for more information than doctors you have talked to about your headaches?
2. Would you recommend this program to a friend?
3. Would you like to use the program again if your doctor asked you to?
4. Did you understand most of the questions that were asked in the computer program?
5. In most cases, were you able to find responses that applied to you?
6. Do you feel comfortable about having a computer collect this information?
Negative “Yes”/Positive
“No” responses
Answer category
Don’t know/N/A
7. Is there anything else that your doctor needs to know about your headaches that the computer did not ask?
8. Did you have any trouble using the computer system?
9. Did you find any of the formats for the questions or answers confusing?
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 (195)
room and sat with her while she used this system. As before, if questions arose, the
interviewer provided minimal information
to allow the patient to proceed. After-
wards, the interviewer asked additional questions of the patient.
Study #2: History-taker and explanation system. We had performed
several forma-
tive evaluations
of the history-taker
and explanation
module, with considerable
amounts of useful feedback into subsequent redesigns. In study #2, we wished to
determine (a) whether there are major barriers to the use of the system, and what
they are, and (b) how useful the system is perceived to be.
A broad call for participants
resulted in scheduling 13 persons with headache
and one or more symptoms of migraine. We followed the same protocol
questions as for study #l, the only difference being that these subjects did not see
the neurologist.
For simplicity here, we group the responses
from the three
patients in study #l with the thirteen in study #2.
7.2. Results: studies #1 and #2
Overall system. The three patients who used both systems in the context of seeing a
neurologist were very positive about the system. Subject #l said that she did not
know that her headaches could be treated. She received enough information from
the system and the physician to convince her to schedule a follow-up appointment.
Subject #2 said that the information
she received from the explanation program
“changed my life”. She had been unsuccessful in the past getting enough informa-
tion about her headaches to understand
how they could be managed, but now felt
hope that they could be treated.
Computer use. For the 16 patients, the average time spent using the history-taker
was 33 minutes, answering, on average, 44 questions. Some questions may have
multiple answers, e.g., prior drugs. The average time spent per question-screen
45 seconds. We scheduled one hour for patients to interact with the explanation
program; several wanted to stay longer.
Information exchange. Table 1 shows subjects’ responses to the interview about the
history-taker. Looking first at the information exchange 117-154
Responses on the explanation follow-up interview
Positive “Yes”/Negative
“No” answers
Answer category
1. Did you like using the program?
2. Did all of the information it presented make sense?
3. Was the software easy to use?
4. Did you feel comfortable about using a computer to get this kind of information?
5. Was the computer itself easy to use?
6. Did the program tell you anything you didn’t already know?
7. Was the information in the program useful to you?
8. Do you think this information will help you manage your headaches better?
9. Did you learn anything that you would not have asked your doctor?
10. Would you recommend this program to a friend?
11. All in all, was the computer program worth the trouble it took to use?
16 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
13 (0.81) 3 (0.19)
16 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
16 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
14 (0.88) 2 (0.13)
15 (0.94) 1 (0.06)
15 (0.94) 1 (0.06)
12 (0.75) 4 CO.251
16 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
16 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
Negative “Yes”/Positive
“No” responses
Answer category
12. Was anything presented that seemed confusing or inappropriate to you?
Finally, we were interested
in the subjects’ attitudes towards the computer
(question 2,3, and 6). When asked whether they felt comfortable with a computer
collecting the information,
88% answered
“yes”. An equally high percentage,
81%, would recommend
the program to a friend, and all of them would agree to
use it again if their doctor asked them to.
Table 2 shows the results from interviews
about the explanation
Looking first at the information exchange (questions 6, 7, 8, and 9), 94% of the
subjects thought that the program told them something they did not already know
(#6), and 75% thought they had learned something that they would not have asked
their doctor (#9). When asked whether they thought the information was useful to
them, 94% also answered
“yes”, but when asked whether
they thought
information
would be useful in managing their condition,
only 56% answered
“yes”; reasons for the difference will be the subject of further research.
Looking next at usability, 81% of the subjects thought that the information
made sense. However, when asked if any piece of information
confusing or inappropriate,
50% also answered “yes”, which we are now following
up on. These are mostly wording changes. All the subjects found the software easy
to use, and only 13% felt the hardware was less than easy to use.
Finally, looking at the subjects’ attitudes towards the system I1 7-1.54
7.3. Discussion: studies #1 and #2
Patients were mostly enthusiastic about the quality and quantity of information
they received
from the program
and felt that the information
exchange was
improved. The history-taker
asks relevant questions that subjects feel would not
have been asked in a regular session with their doctor and they all thought they
learned something from the explanation module. The main criticism was that the
program did not have information
specifically about the drugs they were taking, a
problem we anticipated because the knowledge base is incomplete. However, there
is considerable
information available to be read: one subject spent 3 hours reading
all the information the program could generate, and would have spent more. Many
volunteered
that the program was more informative than physicians they had seen.
No major problems
were encountered
by patients.
The only major system
problem occurred
when the campus network failed. We identified
some places
where the questions or the information presented were confusing to some subjects
(which we will change). Patients reported no hesitance to interact with a computer.
They also expressed a willingness to use the program again and to recommend it to
8. Conclusions
On the basis of both published literature and our own observations, we believe
that better informed patients will be able to take better care of themselves and
have more satisfactory encounters with the health care system. Our work builds on
empirical data collected from ethnographic
fieldwork with physicians and migraine
sufferers,
and cognitive science studies. Our observations
have shown that the
questions patients ask are not limited to, and often do not even include, those that
physicians told us they would ask. Similarly, the kinds of explanations we have
observed physicians to give do not always successfully address patients’ concerns.
The design of the system has been adjusted to accommodate
this broader range of
questions and to provide explanatory
material on topics that physicians do not
necessarily address.
The explanation system we have built is intended to supplement the time that
physicians and nurses spend explaining material to patients with chronic disorders
and thus help to meet more of the information
needs of patients. The ability to
tailor the presentation
of information
to the needs of individual patients is one of
the primary strengths of this approach. Such a system can remind patients of their
physicians’ instructions and can re-explain in different terms what they have been
told in the office, without requiring additional investment of physicians’ time. We
are not attempting
to change the behavior of health-care
providers, nor do we
require them to interact directly with computers. 6 Rather, we have shifted our
6 We are still experimenting
with means
for recording
and prescribed
therapies.
Eventually,
this information
will be available
nearly everywhere.
At the moment,
the system can
it through
a brief interaction
with the physician,
with a nurse,
or with a fieldworker.
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
focus to providing information to the consumers in the health care process -
We have shown, so far, that ethnography
can effectively inform the design of a
medical informatics system by providing data on actual information needs and by
challenging
implicit as well as explicit assumptions
of the designers. We have
shown that we can address many of the concerns of patients by incorporating
into a knowledge-based
system that interactively
answers a patient’s questions in
the context of specific knowledge about that patient. We have also shown that
computer-mediated
information
exchange is possible and favorably perceived by
patients, although we have yet to demonstrate
that it results in improved out-
comes. If computers do prove to be effective in this role, medical informatics will
have a broader role in managing information for patients as well as for physicians
and nurses.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support for this research from the National
Library of Medicine (Grant No. LM05299). The contents of this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Library of Medicine. We thank Ms. Myra Brostoff for contributing
to the fieldwork and text analysis, Mr. Ted Rees for implementing the history-taker,
Dr. Benoit Desjardins
for prototype
versions of the history-taker,
Ms. Claudia
Tapia for reimplementing
Moore’s text planner and coding the initial knowledge
base, Ms. Dimitra Kefallonitou for extending Tapia’s work to other question types,
and Ms. Nancy Bee for coordinating
text transcription
and contributing
analysis. Dr. Christian Juge has brought many insights about patient education to
our discussions, and Dr. Vibhu Mittal contributed
many helpful comments on the
manuscript. We are grateful also for the cooperation
of physicians in the Depart-
ment of Neurology
who have spent time with the fieldworkers
and graciously
allowed themselves and their patients to be observed. Some of the material in this
paper appeared earlier in [Sl.
Appendix A
Information sheet for a patient with migraine (fictitious names used.) This is first
generated interactively on the computer screen and then printed for the patient to take
home. Italic and bold type have been added to illustrate points made in the text
Today you were seen by Dr. Washington and diagnosed
as suffering from
of migraine
is a moderate
or pulsating
Migraine patients
also frequently
experience
visual symptoms,
nausea, sensitivity to noise and light, and confusion. You report
that your vision k affected, which is a rather common manifestation of migraines.
You also report nausea and vomiting with some headaches. A feeling of confusion is
B.G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 I 17-154
also commonly reported by people during migraine attacks. Migraine is also strongly
hereditary. You report that your father, brother and daughter all have had severe
headaches that are similar to yours. Your family history is a further indication that
you suffer from migraine.
While migraines can produce very intense and painful headaches, they are very
rarely life threatening. Sometimes patients worry that their migraine symptoms
mean that they have a brain tumor or have suffered a stroke. Do not worry. You
were diagnosed as suffering from migraine. Your physical examination was normal,
which indicates that more serious causes of headache such as bleeding or tumors are
very unlikely.
Migraine often gets better as women age, especially after menopause, since hor-
mones play a role in making the attacks more severe.
Many everyday things can trigger migraine. These include emotional
hormonal changes associated with menstruation, pregnancy, menopause, certain foods,
alcohol, certain odors, and irregularities in your sleeping or eating patterns. You
did not mention any trigger factors, except possibly stress (hard to avoid) and sleeping
late on weekends. It would be a good idea to keep track of your sleep patterns to find
out if you tend to get more headaches on days when you sleep in (or perhaps don’t
sleep enough). If that is the case, then you may wish to try to make your sleeping
hours the same every day. Also, when you have a migraine, record whether you ate or
drank anything unusual in the hours before it began.
Prescription
Dr. Washington has prescribed the following medications for you:
You are already taking pamelor (nortrip@lene) for another medical problem in a
dose of 10 mg before bed. It is suggested that you try taking an additional 10 mg
capsule each morning. If you find that this makes you too sleepy, take both capsules
at bedtime. The purpose of this medicine is not to relieve the pain, but to try to
attacks from even getting started.
The most common side effects of
pamelor are dry mouth and drowsiness. If you have dry mouth, sugar-free candies
(especially sour ones) may help. If you are drowsy, don’t drive or operate machin-
ery. The drowsiness may wear off in a few days once you get used to the increased
dose. Be sure to call if you are uncertain whether some new symptom is a side
effect of pamelor.
Take the ergostat if you start to develop the symptoms of a migraine attack. The
minute you feel the migraine
(the onset of the visual symptoms you
reported) take one 2 mg lozenge and let it dissolve under your tongue. Zn 30 minutes,
if you feel the migraine is still coming on, repeat this procedure with another 2 mg
lozenge. Thirty minutes later, if the migraine is still coming on, do the same thing
again. Do not take more than 3 lozenges in one day or 6 in one week. The ergot
may prevent
dilation of the head arteries, which helps to prevent pain. Some
patients experience
side effects from ergostat. You may get nausea and vomiting.
If this persists or is severe call Dr. Washington who may prescribe anti-nausea
B. G. Buchanan et al. /Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7 117-154
medicine. If you feel numbness or coldness in your fingertips or notice that your
fingertips are white, this may indicate that you have taken too much ergostat. Call
the doctor immediately if you have these side effects. In addition if you experience
any chest pain contact Dr. Washington immediately.
Zf you get a headache even after taking your ergostat, take 800 mg of Motrin up to
3 times per day. Moth
(ibuprofen) helps to relieve the pain in most patients. The
main side effect is upset stomach. If you can take food without vomiting, this may
help you tolerate the Motrin better. If the stomach discomfort persists, check with
Dr. Washington before taking any more motrin. If you have dizziness, nervousness,
ringing in the ears, or black stools, report these to your doctor immediately if these
effects persist or are severe.
Finding an effective treatment
for migraine usually involves a process of trial
and error. You and your doctor will need to work together to find the treatment
that works for you. This may involve taking medications, making changes in your
life style, or both. Fortunately,
there are many treatments available for migraine,
and the mqjority of patients are able to find one that is effective. The first
medication the doctor prescribes may not be completely successful. Nevertheless, it
is important for you to be patient and take each one as prescribed in order to give
it a chance to work. Try not to be discouraged and give up: it is important to come
back and try again until an effective treatment