Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 8342–8360
July 5 - 10, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
Don’t Stop Pretraining: Adapt Language Models to Domains and Tasks
Suchin Gururangan†
Ana Marasovi´c†♦
Swabha Swayamdipta†
Iz Beltagy†
Doug Downey†
Noah A. Smith†♦
†Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
♦Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
{suching,anam,swabhas,kylel,beltagy,dougd,noah}@allenai.org
Language models pretrained on text from a
wide variety of sources form the foundation
of today’s NLP. In light of the success of
these broad-coverage models, we investigate
whether it is still helpful to tailor a pretrained
model to the domain of a target task.
present a study across four domains (biomedical and computer science publications, news,
and reviews) and eight classiﬁcation tasks,
showing that a second phase of pretraining indomain (domain-adaptive pretraining) leads
to performance gains, under both high- and
low-resource settings.
Moreover, adapting
to the task’s unlabeled data (task-adaptive
pretraining) improves performance even after
domain-adaptive pretraining. Finally, we show
that adapting to a task corpus augmented using simple data selection strategies is an effective alternative, especially when resources for
domain-adaptive pretraining might be unavailable. Overall, we consistently ﬁnd that multiphase adaptive pretraining offers large gains in
task performance.
Introduction
Today’s pretrained language models are trained on
massive, heterogeneous corpora . For instance, ROBERTA was trained on over 160GB of uncompressed text, with sources ranging from Englishlanguage encyclopedic and news articles, to literary
works and web content. Representations learned
by such models achieve strong performance across
many tasks with datasets of varying sizes drawn
from a variety of sources . This leads us to ask whether a task’s textual
domain—a term typically used to denote a distribution over language characterizing a given topic or
genre (such as “science” or “mystery novels”)—is
still relevant. Do the latest large pretrained models work universally or is it still helpful to build
Figure 1: An illustration of data distributions. Task
data is comprised of an observable task distribution,
usually non-randomly sampled from a wider distribution (light grey ellipsis) within an even larger target domain, which is not necessarily one of the domains included in the original LM pretraining domain – though
overlap is possible. We explore the beneﬁts of continued pretraining on data from the task distribution and
the domain distribution.
separate pretrained models for speciﬁc domains?
While some studies have shown the beneﬁt of
continued pretraining on domain-speciﬁc unlabeled
data , these studies only consider a single domain at a time and use a language
model that is pretrained on a smaller and less diverse corpus than the most recent language models. Moreover, it is not known how the beneﬁt of
continued pretraining may vary with factors like
the amount of available labeled task data, or the
proximity of the target domain to the original pretraining corpus (see Figure 1).
We address this question for one such highperforming model, ROBERTA 
(§2). We consider four domains (biomedical and
computer science publications, news, and reviews;
§3) and eight classiﬁcation tasks (two in each domain). For targets that are not already in-domain
for ROBERTA, our experiments show that contin-
ued pretraining on the domain (which we refer to as
domain-adaptive pretraining or DAPT) consistently
improves performance on tasks from the target domain, in both high- and low-resource settings.
Above, we consider domains deﬁned around genres and forums, but it is also possible to induce a
domain from a given corpus used for a task, such
as the one used in supervised training of a model.
This raises the question of whether pretraining on
a corpus more directly tied to the task can further improve performance. We study how domainadaptive pretraining compares to task-adaptive pretraining, or TAPT, on a smaller but directly taskrelevant corpus: the unlabeled task dataset (§4),
drawn from the task distribution. Task-adaptive
pretraining has been shown effective , but is not typically used with the
most recent models. We ﬁnd that TAPT provides
a large performance boost for ROBERTA, with or
without domain-adaptive pretraining.
Finally, we show that the beneﬁts from taskadaptive pretraining increase when we have additional unlabeled data from the task distribution that
has been manually curated by task designers or annotators. Inspired by this success, we propose ways
to automatically select additional task-relevant unlabeled text, and show how this improves performance in certain low-resource cases (§5). On all
tasks, our results using adaptive pretraining techniques are competitive with the state of the art.
In summary, our contributions include:
• a thorough analysis of domain- and taskadaptive pretraining across four domains and
eight tasks, spanning low- and high-resource
• an investigation into the transferability of
adapted LMs across domains and tasks; and
• a study highlighting the importance of pretraining on human-curated datasets, and a simple data selection strategy to automatically
approach this performance.
Our code as well as pretrained models for multiple
domains and tasks are publicly available.1
Background: Pretraining
Learning for most NLP research systems since
2018 consists of training in two stages. First, a
neural language model (LM), often with millions
of parameters, is trained on large unlabeled cor-
1 
dont-stop-pretraining
pora. The word 
representations learned in the pretrained model are
then reused in supervised training for a downstream
task, with optional updates (ﬁne-tuning) of the representations and network from the ﬁrst stage.
One such pretrained LM is ROBERTA , which uses the same transformerbased architecture as its
predecessor, BERT .
trained with a masked language modeling objective (i.e., cross-entropy loss on predicting randomly
masked tokens). The unlabeled pretraining corpus
for ROBERTA contains over 160 GB of uncompressed raw text from different English-language
corpora (see Appendix §A.1). ROBERTA attains
better performance on an assortment of tasks than
its predecessors, making it our baseline of choice.
Although ROBERTA’s pretraining corpus is derived from multiple sources, it has not yet been
established if these sources are diverse enough to
generalize to most of the variation in the English
language. In other words, we would like to understand what is out of ROBERTA’s domain. Towards this end, we explore further adaptation by
continued pretraining of this large LM into two
categories of unlabeled data: (i) large corpora of
domain-speciﬁc text (§3), and (ii) available unlabeled data associated with a given task (§4).
Domain-Adaptive Pretraining
Our approach to domain-adaptive pretraining
(DAPT) is straightforward—we continue pretraining ROBERTA on a large corpus of unlabeled
domain-speciﬁc text. The four domains we focus
on are biomedical (BIOMED) papers, computer science (CS) papers, newstext from REALNEWS, and
AMAZON reviews. We choose these domains because they have been popular in previous work, and
datasets for text classiﬁcation are available in each.
Table 1 lists the speciﬁcs of the unlabeled datasets
in all four domains, as well as ROBERTA’s training
Analyzing Domain Similarity
Before performing DAPT, we attempt to quantify
the similarity of the target domain to ROBERTA’s
pretraining domain. We consider domain vocabularies containing the top 10K most frequent unigrams (excluding stopwords) in comparably sized
1For BIOMED and CS, we used an internal version of
S2ORC that contains papers that cannot be released due to
copyright restrictions.
Pretraining Corpus
2.68M full-text papers from S2ORC 
2.22M full-text papers from S2ORC 
11.90M articles from REALNEWS 
24.75M AMAZON reviews 
ROBERTA (baseline)
see Appendix §A.1
Table 1: List of the domain-speciﬁc unlabeled datasets. In columns 5 and 6, we report ROBERTA’s masked LM
loss on 50K randomly sampled held-out documents from each domain before (LROB.) and after (LDAPT) DAPT
(lower implies a better ﬁt on the sample). ‡ indicates that the masked LM loss is estimated on data sampled from
sources similar to ROBERTA’s pretraining corpus.
Vocabulary overlap (%) between domains. PT denotes a sample from sources similar to
ROBERTA’s pretraining corpus. Vocabularies for each
domain are created by considering the top 10K most
frequent words (excluding stopwords) in documents
sampled from each domain.
random samples of held-out documents in each domain’s corpus. We use 50K held-out documents
for each domain other than REVIEWS, and 150K
held-out documents in REVIEWS, since they are
much shorter. We also sample 50K documents from
sources similar to ROBERTA’s pretraining corpus
(i.e., BOOKCORPUS, STORIES, WIKIPEDIA, and
REALNEWS) to construct the pretraining domain
vocabulary, since the original pretraining corpus
is not released. Figure 2 shows the vocabulary
overlap across these samples. We observe that
ROBERTA’s pretraining domain has strong vocabulary overlap with NEWS and REVIEWS, while
CS and BIOMED are far more dissimilar to the
other domains. This simple analysis suggests the
degree of beneﬁt to be expected by adaptation of
ROBERTA to different domains—the more dissimilar the domain, the higher the potential for DAPT.
Experiments
Our LM adaptation follows the settings prescribed
for training ROBERTA. We train ROBERTA on
each domain for 12.5K steps, which amounts to
single pass on each domain dataset, on a v3-8 TPU;
see other details in Appendix B. This second phase
of pretraining results in four domain-adapted LMs,
one for each domain. We present the masked LM
loss of ROBERTA on each domain before and after
DAPT in Table 1. We observe that masked LM loss
decreases in all domains except NEWS after DAPT,
where we observe a marginal increase. We discuss
cross-domain masked LM loss in Appendix §E.
Under each domain, we consider two text classiﬁcation tasks, as shown in Table 2. Our tasks
represent both high- and low-resource (≤5K labeled training examples, and no additional unlabeled data) settings. For HYPERPARTISAN, we use
the data splits from Beltagy et al. . For RCT,
we represent all sentences in one long sequence for
simultaneous prediction.
As our baseline, we use an off-the-shelf
ROBERTA-base model and perform supervised
ﬁne-tuning of its parameters for each classiﬁcation
task. On average, ROBERTA is not drastically behind the state of the art (details in Appendix §A.2),
and serves as a good baseline since it provides a
single LM to adapt to different domains.
Classiﬁcation Architecture
Following standard
practice we pass the ﬁnal layer
[CLS] token representation to a task-speciﬁc feedforward layer for prediction (see Table 14 in Appendix for more hyperparameter details).
Test results are shown under the DAPT
column of Table 3 (see Appendix §C for validation results).
We observe that DAPT improves
over ROBERTA in all domains. For BIOMED,
CS, and REVIEWS, we see consistent improve-
Label Type
Train (Lab.)
Train (Unl.)
relation classiﬁcation
abstract sent. roles
citation intent
relation classiﬁcation
HYPERPARTISAN
partisanship
†HELPFULNESS
review helpfulness
review sentiment
Table 2: Speciﬁcations of the various target task datasets. † indicates high-resource settings. Sources: CHEMPROT
 , RCT , ACL-ARC , SCIERC , HYPERPARTISAN , AGNEWS , HELPFULNESS , IMDB .
CHEMPROT 81.91.0
†HELPFUL. 65.13.4
Table 3: Comparison of ROBERTA (ROBA.)
DAPT to adaptation to an irrelevant domain (¬
DAPT). Reported results are test macro-F1, except for
CHEMPROT and RCT, for which we report micro-F1,
following Beltagy et al. . We report averages
across ﬁve random seeds, with standard deviations as
subscripts. † indicates high-resource settings. Best task
performance is boldfaced. See §3.3 for our choice of
irrelevant domains.
ments over ROBERTA, demonstrating the beneﬁt
of DAPT when the target domain is more distant
from ROBERTA’s source domain. The pattern is
consistent across high- and low- resource settings.
Although DAPT does not increase performance on
AGNEWS, the beneﬁt we observe in HYPERPAR-
TISAN suggests that DAPT may be useful even for
tasks that align more closely with ROBERTA’s
source domain.
Domain Relevance for DAPT
Additionally, we compare DAPT against a setting
where for each task, we adapt the LM to a domain
outside the domain of interest. This controls for the
case in which the improvements over ROBERTA
might be attributed simply to exposure to more data,
regardless of the domain. In this setting, for NEWS,
we use a CS LM; for REVIEWS, a BIOMED LM;
for CS, a NEWS LM; for BIOMED, a REVIEWS
LM. We use the vocabulary overlap statistics in
Figure 2 to guide these choices.
Our results are shown in Table 3, where the last
column (¬DAPT) corresponds to this setting. For
each task, DAPT signiﬁcantly outperforms adapting
to an irrelevant domain, suggesting the importance
of pretraining on domain-relevant data. Furthermore, we generally observe that ¬DAPT results
in worse performance than even ROBERTA on
end-tasks. Taken together, these results indicate
that in most settings, exposure to more data without considering domain relevance is detrimental
to end-task performance. However, there are two
tasks (SCIERC and ACL-ARC) in which ¬DAPT
marginally improves performance over ROBERTA.
This may suggest that in some cases, continued pretraining on any additional data is useful, as noted
in Baevski et al. .
Domain Overlap
Our analysis of DAPT is based on prior intuitions
about how task data is assigned to speciﬁc domains.
For instance, to perform DAPT for HELPFULNESS,
we only adapt to AMAZON reviews, but not to any
REALNEWS articles. However, the gradations in
Figure 2 suggest that the boundaries between domains are in some sense fuzzy; for example, 40%
of unigrams are shared between REVIEWS and
NEWS. As further indication of this overlap, we
also qualitatively identify documents that overlap
cross-domain: in Table 4, we showcase reviews
and REALNEWS articles that are similar to these
reviews (other examples can be found in Appendix
§D). In fact, we ﬁnd that adapting ROBERTA to
IMDB review
REALNEWS article
“The Shop Around the Corner“ is one of the great ﬁlms from director
Ernst Lubitsch . In addition to the talents of James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan ,
it’s ﬁlled with a terriﬁc cast of top character actors such as Frank Morgan and Felix
Bressart. [...] The makers of “You’ve Got Mail“ claim their ﬁlm to be a remake , but
that’s just nothing but a lot of inﬂated self praise. Anyway, if you have an affection for
romantic comedies of the 1940 ’s, you’ll ﬁnd “The Shop Around the Corner“ to be
nothing short of wonderful. Just as good with repeat viewings.
[...] Three great festive ﬁlms... The Shop Around
the Corner Delightful Comedy by Ernst
Lubitsch stars James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan falling in love at Christmas. Remade as
You’ve Got Mail. [...]
HELPFULNESS review
REALNEWS article
Simply the Best! I’ve owned countless Droids and iPhones, but this one destroys them
all. Samsung really nailed it with this one, extremely fast , very pocketable, gorgeous
display , exceptional battery life , good audio quality, perfect GPS & WiFi
performance, transparent status bar, battery percentage, ability to turn off soft key
lights, superb camera for a smartphone and more! [...]
We’re living in a world with a new Samsung.
[...] more on battery life later [...] Exposure is
usually spot on and focusing is very fast. [...]
The design, display, camera and performance
are all best in class, and the phone feels smaller
than it looks. [...]
Table 4: Examples that illustrate how some domains might have overlaps with others, leading to unexpected
positive transfer. We highlight expressions in the reviews that are also found in the REALNEWS articles.
NEWS not as harmful to its performance on RE-
VIEWS tasks (DAPT on NEWS achieves 65.52.3 on
HELPFULNESS and 95.00.1 on IMDB).
Although this analysis is by no means comprehensive, it indicates that the factors that give rise to
observable domain differences are likely not mutually exclusive. It is possible that pretraining beyond conventional domain boundaries could result
in more effective DAPT; we leave this investigation to future work. In general, the provenance of
data, including the processes by which corpora are
curated, must be kept in mind when designing pretraining procedures and creating new benchmarks
that test out-of-domain generalization abilities.
Task-Adaptive Pretraining
Datasets curated to capture speciﬁc tasks of interest tend to cover only a subset of the text available within the broader domain.
For example,
the CHEMPROT dataset for extracting relations between chemicals and proteins focuses on abstracts
of recently-published, high-impact articles from
hand-selected PubMed categories . We hypothesize that such cases where
the task data is a narrowly-deﬁned subset of the
broader domain, pretraining on the task dataset
itself or data relevant to the task may be helpful.
Task-adaptive pretraining (TAPT) refers to pretraining on the unlabeled training set for a given
task; prior work has shown its effectiveness . Compared to domainadaptive pretraining (DAPT; §3), the task-adaptive
approach strikes a different trade-off: it uses a far
smaller pretraining corpus, but one that is much
more task-relevant (under the assumption that the
training set represents aspects of the task well).
This makes TAPT much less expensive to run than
DAPT, and as we show in our experiments, the performance of TAPT is often competitive with that of
Experiments
Similar to DAPT, task-adaptive pretraining consists
of a second phase of pretraining ROBERTA, but
only on the available task-speciﬁc training data. In
contrast to DAPT, which we train for 12.5K steps,
we perform TAPT for 100 epochs. We artiﬁcially
augment each dataset by randomly masking different words (using the masking probability of 0.15)
across epochs. As in our DAPT experiments, we
pass the ﬁnal layer [CLS] token representation to
a task-speciﬁc feedforward layer for classiﬁcation
(see Table 14 in Appendix for more hyperparameter
Our results are shown in the TAPT column of Table 5. TAPT consistently improves the ROBERTA
baseline for all tasks across domains. Even on the
news domain, which was part of ROBERTA pretraining corpus, TAPT improves over ROBERTA,
showcasing the advantage of task adaptation. Particularly remarkable are the relative differences between TAPT and DAPT. DAPT is more resource intensive (see Table 9 in §5.3), but TAPT manages to
match its performance in some of the tasks, such as
SCIERC. In RCT, HYPERPARTISAN, AGNEWS,
HELPFULNESS, and IMDB, the results even exceed those of DAPT, highlighting the efﬁcacy of
this cheaper adaptation technique.
Additional Pretraining Phases
DAPT + TAPT
HYPERPARTISAN
†HELPFULNESS
Table 5: Results on different phases of adaptive pretraining compared to the baseline ROBERTA (col. 1). Our
approaches are DAPT (col. 2, §3), TAPT (col. 3, §4), and a combination of both (col. 4). Reported results follow the
same format as Table 3. State-of-the-art results we can compare to: CHEMPROT (84.6), RCT (92.9), ACL-ARC
(71.0), SCIERC (81.8), HYPERPARTISAN (94.8), AGNEWS (95.5), IMDB (96.2); references in §A.2.
Transfer-TAPT
87.10.4 (↓0.6)
80.40.6 (↓2.2)
HYPERPARTISAN
Transfer-TAPT
82.27.7 (↓7.7)
93.90.2 (↓0.6)
Transfer-TAPT
64.12.7 (↓3.3)
79.12.5 (↓0.2)
HELPFULNESS
Transfer-TAPT
65.02.6 (↓3.5)
95.00.1 (↓0.7)
Table 6: Though TAPT is effective (Table 5), it is harmful when applied across tasks. These ﬁndings illustrate
differences in task distributions within a domain.
Combined DAPT and TAPT
We investigate the
effect of using both adaptation techniques together.
We begin with ROBERTA and apply DAPT then
TAPT under this setting. The three phases of pretraining add up to make this the most computationally expensive of all our settings (see Table 9). As
expected, combined domain- and task-adaptive pretraining achieves the best performance on all tasks
(Table 5).2
Overall, our results show that DAPT followed by
TAPT achieves the best of both worlds of domain
and task awareness, yielding the best performance.
While we speculate that TAPT followed by DAPT
would be susceptible to catastrophic forgetting of
the task-relevant corpus , alternate methods of combining the procedures may
result in better downstream performance. Future
work may explore pretraining with a more sophisticated curriculum of domain and task distributions.
2Results on HYPERPARTISAN match those of TAPT, within
a standard deviation arising from the ﬁve seeds.
Cross-Task Transfer
We complete the comparison between DAPT and TAPT by exploring whether
adapting to one task transfers to other tasks in the
same domain. For instance, we further pretrain
the LM using the RCT unlabeled data, ﬁne-tune it
with the CHEMPROT labeled data, and observe the
effect. We refer to this setting as Transfer-TAPT.
Our results for tasks in all four domains are shown
in Table 6. We see that TAPT optimizes for single
task performance, to the detriment of cross-task
transfer. These results demonstrate that data distributions of tasks within a given domain might differ.
Further, this could also explain why adapting only
to a broad domain is not sufﬁcient, and why TAPT
after DAPT is effective.
Augmenting Training Data for
Task-Adaptive Pretraining
In §4, we continued pretraining the LM for task
adaptation using only the training data for a supervised task. Inspired by the success of TAPT, we
next investigate another setting where a larger pool
of unlabeled data from the task distribution exists,
Pretraining
DAPT + TAPT
Curated-TAPT
DAPT + Curated-TAPT
Mean test set macro-F1 (for HYP. and
IMDB) and micro-F1 (for RCT-500), with Curated-
TAPT across ﬁve random seeds, with standard deviations as subscripts. † indicates high-resource settings.
typically curated by humans.
We explore two scenarios. First, for three tasks
(RCT, HYPERPARTISAN, and IMDB) we use this
larger pool of unlabeled data from an available
human-curated corpus (§5.1). Next, we explore
retrieving related unlabeled data for TAPT, from a
large unlabeled in-domain corpus, for tasks where
extra human-curated data is unavailable (§5.2).
Human Curated-TAPT
Dataset creation often involves collection of a large
unlabeled corpus from known sources. This corpus
is then downsampled to collect annotations, based
on the annotation budget. The larger unlabeled corpus is thus expected to have a similar distribution
to the task’s training data. Moreover, it is usually
available. We explore the role of such corpora in
task-adaptive pretraining.
We simulate a low-resource setting RCT-
500, by downsampling the training data of the RCT
dataset to 500 examples (out of 180K available),
and treat the rest of the training data as unlabeled.
The HYPERPARTISAN shared task has two tracks: low- and high-resource. We
use 5K documents from the high-resource setting as
Curated-TAPT unlabeled data and the original lowresource training documents for task ﬁne-tuning.
For IMDB, we use the extra unlabeled data manually curated by task annotators, drawn from the
same distribution as the labeled data (Maas et al.,
We compare Curated-TAPT to TAPT and
DAPT + TAPT in Table 7. Curated-TAPT further
improves our prior results from §4 across all three
datasets. Applying Curated-TAPT after adapting to
the domain results in the largest boost in performance on all tasks; in HYPERPARTISAN, DAPT
+ Curated-TAPT is within standard deviation of
Curated-TAPT. Moreover, curated-TAPT achieves
An illustration of automated data selection (§5.2). We map unlabeled CHEMPROT and 1M
BIOMED sentences to a shared vector space using the
VAMPIRE model trained on these sentences. Then,
for each CHEMPROT sentence, we identify k nearest
neighbors, from the BIOMED domain.
Pretraining
150NN-TAPT
500NN-TAPT
Mean test set micro-F1 (for CHEMPROT
and RCT) and macro-F1 (for ACL-ARC), across ﬁve
random seeds, with standard deviations as subscripts,
comparing RAND-TAPT (with 50 candidates) and kNN-
TAPT selection. Neighbors of the task data are selected
from the domain data.
95% of the performance of DAPT + TAPT with the
fully labeled RCT corpus (Table 5) with only 0.3%
of the labeled data. These results suggest that curating large amounts of data from the task distribution
is extremely beneﬁcial to end-task performance.
We recommend that task designers release a large
pool of unlabeled task data for their tasks to aid
model adaptation through pretraining.
Automated Data Selection for TAPT
Consider a low-resource scenario without access to
large amounts of unlabeled data to adequately bene-
ﬁt from TAPT, as well as absence of computational
resources necessary for DAPT (see Table 9 for details of computational requirements for different
pretraining phases). We propose simple unsuper-
vised methods to retrieve unlabeled text that aligns
with the task distribution, from a large in-domain
corpus. Our approach ﬁnds task-relevant data from
the domain by embedding text from both the task
and domain in a shared space, then selects candidates from the domain based on queries using the
task data. Importantly, the embedding method must
be lightweight enough to embed possibly millions
of sentences in a reasonable time.
Given these constraints, we employ VAMPIRE
 , a lightweight
bag-of-words language model. We pretrain VAM-
PIRE on a large deduplicated3 sample of the domain (1M sentences) to obtain embeddings of the
text from both the task and domain sample. We
then select k candidates of each task sentence from
the domain sample, in embeddings space. Candidates are selected (i) via nearest neighbors selection
(kNN-TAPT)4, or (ii) randomly (RAND-TAPT). We
continue pretraining ROBERTA on this augmented
corpus with both the task data (as in TAPT) as well
as the selected candidate pool.
Results in Table 8 show that kNN-TAPT
outperforms TAPT for all cases. RAND-TAPT is generally worse than kNN-TAPT, but within a standard
deviation arising from 5 seeds for RCT and ACL-
ARC. As we increase k, kNN-TAPT performance
steadily increases, and approaches that of DAPT.
Appendix F shows examples of nearest neighbors
of task data. Future work might consider a closer
study of kNN-TAPT, more sophisticated data selection methods, and the tradeoff between the diversity
and task relevance of selected examples.
Computational Requirements
The computational requirements for all our adaptation techniques on RCT-500 in the BIOMED domain in Table 9. TAPT is nearly 60 times faster
to train than DAPT on a single v3-8 TPU and storage requirements for DAPT on this task are 5.8M
times that of TAPT. Our best setting of DAPT +
TAPT amounts to three phases of pretraining, and at
ﬁrst glance appears to be very expensive. However,
once the LM has been adapted to a broad domain, it
can be reused for multiple tasks within that domain,
with only a single additional TAPT phase per task.
While Curated-TAPT tends to achieve the best cost-
3We deduplicated this set to limit computation, since different sentences can share neighbors.
4We use a ﬂat search index with cosine similarity between
embeddings with the FAISS library.
Pretraining
150NN-TAPT
500NN-TAPT
Curated-TAPT
DAPT + TAPT
Table 9: Computational requirements for adapting to
the RCT-500 task, comparing DAPT (§3) and the various TAPT modiﬁcations described in §4 and §5.
beneﬁt ratio in this comparison, one must also take
into account the cost of curating large in-domain
data. Automatic methods such as kNN-TAPT are
much cheaper than DAPT.
Related Work
adaptation
Prior work has shown the beneﬁt of continued
pretraining in domain .5 We
have contributed further investigation of the effects
of a shift between a large, diverse pretraining
corpus and target domain on task performance.
Other studies have
trained language models (LMs) in their domain
of interest, from scratch. In contrast, our work
explores multiple domains, and is arguably more
cost effective, since we continue pretraining an
already powerful LM.
Task-adaptive pretraining
Continued pretraining of a LM on the unlabeled data of a given task
(TAPT) has been show to be beneﬁcial for endtask performance . In the presence of domain shift between train and test data
distributions of the same task, domain-adaptive pretraining (DAPT) is sometimes used to describe what
we term TAPT . Related approaches include language modeling as an auxiliary objective to task
classiﬁer ﬁne-tuning or consider simple syntactic
structure of the input while adapting to task-speciﬁc
5In contrast, Peters et al. ﬁnd that the Jensen-
Shannon divergence on term distributions between BERT’s
pretraining corpora and each MULTINLI domain does not predict its performance, though this
might be an isolated ﬁnding speciﬁc to the MultiNLI dataset.
Training Data
(Unlabeled)
(Unlabeled)
DAPT + TAPT
Curated-TAPT
Table 10: Summary of strategies for multi-phase pretraining explored in this paper.
data . We compare DAPT
and TAPT as well as their interplay with respect to
dataset size for continued pretraining (hence, expense of more rounds of pretraining), relevance to
a data sample of a given task, and transferability to
other tasks and datasets. See Table 11 in Appendix
§A for a summary of multi-phase pretraining strategies from related work.
Data selection for transfer learning
data for transfer learning has been explored in NLP
 . Dai et al. 
focus on identifying the most suitable corpus to
pretrain a LM from scratch, for a single task: NER,
whereas we select relevant examples for various
tasks in §5.2. Concurrent to our work, Aharoni and
Goldberg propose data selection methods
for NMT based on cosine similarity in embedding
space, using DISTILBERT for
efﬁciency. In contrast, we use VAMPIRE, and
focus on augmenting TAPT data for text classiﬁcation tasks. Khandelwal et al. introduced
kNN-LMs that allows easy domain adaptation of
pretrained LMs by simply adding a datastore per
domain and no further training; an alternative to
integrate domain information in an LM. Our study
of human-curated data §5.1 is related to focused
crawling for collection of
suitable data, especially with LM reliance .
What is a domain?
Despite the popularity of
domain adaptation techniques, most research and
practice seems to use an intuitive understanding of
domains. A small body of work has attempted to
address this question . For instance, Aharoni
and Goldberg deﬁne domains by implicit
clusters of sentence representations in pretrained
LMs. Our results show that DAPT and TAPT complement each other, which suggests a spectra of
domains deﬁned around tasks at various levels of
granularity (e.g., Amazon reviews for a speciﬁc
product, all Amazon reviews, all reviews on the
web, the web).
Conclusion
We investigate several variations for adapting pretrained LMs to domains and tasks within those domains, summarized in Table 10. Our experiments
reveal that even a model of hundreds of millions of
parameters struggles to encode the complexity of
a single textual domain, let alone all of language.
We show that pretraining the model towards a speciﬁc task or small corpus can provide signiﬁcant
beneﬁts. Our ﬁndings suggest it may be valuable
to complement work on ever-larger LMs with parallel efforts to identify and use domain- and taskrelevant corpora to specialize models. While our
results demonstrate how these approaches can improve ROBERTA, a powerful LM, the approaches
we studied are general enough to be applied to
any pretrained LM. Our work points to numerous
future directions, such as better data selection for
TAPT, efﬁcient adaptation large pretrained language
models to distant domains, and building reusable
language models after adaptation.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dallas Card, Mark Neumann,
Nelson Liu, Eric Wallace, members of the AllenNLP team, and anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback, and Arman Cohan for providing data.
This research was supported in part by the Ofﬁce
of Naval Research under the MURI grant N00014-
18-1-2670.