F O C U S O N M O L E C U L A R I M A G I N G
PET/MRI: Paving the Way for the Next
Generation of Clinical Multimodality
Imaging Applications
Bernd J. Pichler1, Armin Kolb1, Thomas Na¨gele2, and Heinz-Peter Schlemmer3
1Laboratory for Preclinical Imaging and Imaging Technology of the Werner Siemens Foundation, Department of Radiology,
University of Tu¨bingen, Tu¨bingen, Germany; 2Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, University of Tu¨bingen,
Tu¨bingen, Germany; and 3Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University of Tu¨bingen, Tu¨bingen, Germany
Multimodality imaging and, more speciﬁcally, the combination of
PET and CT has matured into an important diagnostic tool. During the same period, concepts for PET scanners integrated into
an MR tomograph have emerged. The excellent soft-tissue contrast of MRI and the multifunctional imaging options it offers,
such as spectroscopy, functional MRI, and arterial spin labeling,
complement the molecular information of PET. The development
of a fully integrated PET/MRI system is technologically challenging. It requires not only signiﬁcant modiﬁcations of the PET
detector to make it compact and insensitive to magnetic ﬁelds
but also a major redesign of the MRI hardware.
Key Words: clinical multimodality imaging; PET; CT; PET/CT;
arterial spin labeling (ASL); fMRI; spectroscopy; magnetic resonance tomograph (MRT); PET/MRI; positron emission tomography; MR/PET
J Nucl Med 2010; 51:333–336
DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.109.061853
Over the last 20 years, PET and MRI systems have evolved
slowly but steadily. The photomultiplier-based PET detectors
have remained more or less unchanged, ensuring stable
operation and good signal performance despite bulk and high
sensitivity to even the smallest magnetic ﬁelds. Improvements
in PET technology were achieved with faster and low-noise
electronics, faster and brighter scintillation crystals, optimized
light-sharing schemes for the scintillation crystal arrangements, and smaller crystals (1). These adaptations led to PET
scanners with whole-body scan times as short as 10 min,
yielding—together with improved reconstructions, attenuation- and scatter-correction algorithms—low-noise PET images. Advances paved the way to implementing the idea of
time-of-ﬂight PET in clinical scanners (2). Without a doubt,
the most important step toward the establishment of PET as
a clinically viable tool was the introduction of combined PET/
CT in 1998 by David Townsend and Ronald Nutt (3–5).
Nevertheless, many physicians of that time remained skeptical
about the advantages of this dual-modality imaging system
over stand-alone PET and CT.
Clinical MRI evolved toward higher ﬁelds, faster imaging
sequences, and whole-body imaging capabilities. Especially
for brain imaging, 3-T MRI is now the standard. Novel coil
concepts combined with parallel acquisition techniques helped
shorten examination times while maintaining high imaging
quality (6).
PET/MRI: TECHNICAL EVOLUTION
The idea to combine PET and MRI arose as early as the mid
1990s, even before PET/CT was introduced. Simon Cherry and
Paul Marsden saw the need for PET/MRI in small-animal
imaging studies to add anatomic landmarks with high softtissue contrast to the molecular information delivered by PET
(7). Preclinical PET/MRI work was followed by immediate
commercial interest in combining PET and MRI, probably
driven by the limited sensitivity of MRI to trace biomarkers or
to reveal metabolites.
The PET/MRI combination requires 3 risky technologic
steps that modify state-of-the-art PET and MRI. First, the
photomultiplier technology must be replaced with magnetic
ﬁeld–insensitive avalanche photodiodes (8), which have been
used in prototype animal PET systems that had a limited
number of detectors and were temperature-controlled with
costly cooling systems.
Second, compact PET detectors must be constructed to be
invisible to the MRI and to not interfere with the ﬁeld gradients
or MR radiofrequency. Finally, the MRI scanner must be adapted
to accommodate the PET detectors and to allow simultaneous
data acquisition without mutual interference. The radiofrequency coils of the MRI scanner must be integrated into the PET
system. Dedicated coils need to be built to minimize radiofrequency interference with the PET electronics and to avoid
g-ray scatter and attenuation. Furthermore, completely new
strategies for PET attenuation correction, based solely on MRI
information, have to be developed. The development of
Received Aug. 18, 2009; revision accepted Nov. 16, 2009.
For correspondence or reprints contact: Bernd J. Pichler, University of
Tuebingen, Roentgenweg 11, Tuebingen, 72076 Germany.
E-mail: 
COPYRIGHT ª 2010 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine, Inc.
CLINICAL MULTIMODALITY IMAGING • Pichler et al.
integrated PET/MRI is, therefore, a comprehensive endeavor
that requires a signiﬁcant advancement of PET detector
technology, MRI system integration, and new software approaches.
Based on the technologic challenges to combine PET and
MRI into a single gantry, Philips and Siemens proposed 2
fundamentally different prototype PET/MRI designs.
The Siemens prototypes include 4 dedicated brain PET
scanners that slip-ﬁt into a standard 3-T clinical MRI scanner
(9). The PET detectors are based on avalanche photodiodes,
lutetium oxyorthosilicate crystals, and modiﬁed electronic
performance.
Nevertheless, compared with state-of-the-art photomultiplier
detectors, the prototypes have with 4 ns a reduced—by a factor
5—coincidence-timing
resolution.
a spatial resolution of 3 mm in full width at half maximum
iteratively
reconstructed
engineered to limit mutual interference between the PET and
the MRI. A major technologic challenge to using avalanche
photodiodes is the temperature stabilization required to avoid
signiﬁcant gain drifts of 3.5%/Kelvin that result in imagenormalization artifacts, sensitivity variations, and, ﬁnally, PET
quantiﬁcation errors. The PET/MRI system, together with
a dedicated radiofrequency head coil, allows simultaneous
PET/MRI data acquisition of the human brain or body
extremities. Therefore, these prototype scanners should be
viewed as research tools for advanced brain imaging and as
a ﬁrst step toward a fully integrated whole-body system
enabling testing of newly developed PET hardware, evaluation
of novel multimodality imaging protocols, and implementation
of MRI-based PET attenuation correction (10–12).
Philips developed a PET/MRI design in which the gantries
are approximately 2.5 m apart but share a common patient
handling system. This implementation does not allow for
simultaneous data acquisition and, therefore, results in longer
examination times. However, it enables the acquisition of
spatially matched PET and MRI data to develop whole-body
attenuation correction. Additionally, because some protocols
and clinical cases may require that the MRI scan be performed
during PET tracer uptake, the full advantage of PET/MRI can
be explored for whole-body imaging. A clear constraint of this
system is the lack of temporal matching between 2 functional
datasets, such as for MRI perfusion or spectroscopy and PET
tracer uptake.
CLINICAL POTENTIAL OF PET/MRI
The initial euphoria about the medical prospects of PET/
MRI is understandable (9,13). Knowledge of functional
anatomy is a key to medicine; therefore, methods for its
assessment have been developed by physicians and physicists
alike. Substantial progress has been made in noninvasive crosssectional imaging. To date, helical CT enables high-resolution
anatomic imaging of the whole body within seconds. MRI
yields superb soft-tissue contrast and functional information on
perfusion, diffusion, or metabolism. PET enables physicians to
visualize molecular tracers with picomolar sensitivity, providing information about cell metabolism and receptor status.
It is important to note that patient management in oncology is
affected by PET/CT and MRI, as clinical studies and our daily
clinical experience demonstrate. In fact, multimodality imaging is a fast-growing ﬁeld in clinical practice, although, except
for PET/CT, most examinations are performed on separate
machines, a drawback that impacts daily routine: the process is
time-consuming, expensive, and logistically demanding for
patients and staff. Patient repositioning causes inaccurate
anatomic matching, and side-by-side interpretation of images
results in diagnostic inaccuracy. Software fusion of images is
hampered by varying image properties such as spatial
resolution, shifting, tilting, rotation, distortion, partial-volume
effects, and nonrigid organ deformation. Finally, manipulating
the vast amount of imaging—including multimodal—data and
follow-up studies makes high demands on computer and
software technology.
Indeed, PET/MRI has the potential to broaden our horizons
complementary anatomic and biologic information is obtained
and synergisms of both modalities can be expected. Nevertheless, criticism is justiﬁed. The novel imaging technology may
not enter clinical routine before its impact on diagnostic
management and cost-efﬁciency has been considered and
validated. For example, it must be determined which unmet
clinical needs can be addressed by PET/MRI, why higher
diagnostic accuracy is anticipated compared with sequentially
performed PET and MRI, and what the added value could be
with respect to the established PET/CT technology. The high
cost of integrated PET/MRI systems must be considered to
integration
mandatory to meet clinical requirements.
Capabilities and limitations of PET/MRI must be balanced
and compared with PET/CT by considering technologic,
scientiﬁc, medical, and economic aspects. It should not be
forgotten that CT is a robust, widely distributed, and relatively
inexpensive imaging modality that has evolved into a standard
diagnostic tool in clinical practice. In combined PET/CT,
cross-talk effects are virtually nonexistent and CT data can be
used directly for the PET attenuation correction and image
reconstruction. Clinical studies have demonstrated the advantages of PET/CT over separately performed PET and CT, and
the technology has evolved rapidly into a powerful diagnostic
tool, particularly in the ﬁeld of oncology (14). Thus, PET and
CT have already proven to be ideal partners.
However, from a clinical point of view, there are quite a few
arguments for replacing CT with MRI. Whole-body MRI
examinations that maintain state-of-the-art image quality for
different body parts have recently become reality through
technologic advances in multiple receiver and parallel-imaging
technology (15). Furthermore, MRI applies only radiofrequency,
and not ionizing irradiation, to the patient. The applied x-ray
dose of a PET/CT scan predominantly depends on the CT
examination protocol. The total exposure dose to a patient may
be considerable, particularly when repeated whole-body examinations are required for therapeutic monitoring (16,17).
Reducing the radiation exposure is especially important for
children and younger patients.
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 3 • March 2010
It is reasonable to expect that brain PET/MRI will provide
new insights in the ﬁeld of neuroscience and neurologic
disorders, such as neurodegeneration, brain ischemia, neurooncology, or seizures (18). It is feasible with current prototypes
and future-generation systems to simultaneously study brain
function, metabolism, oxygen consumption, and perfusion.
The exact spatial and temporal coregistration of data will allow
the attribution of functional and molecular information to even
anatomically small brain structures. For the ﬁrst time, it may
become possible to study the correlation of local radiotracer
uptake and brain perfusion. Time-dependant processes such as
perfusion changes in stroke patients may rely on simultaneous
diffusion-weighted imaging and detection of PET perfusion
to determine the optimal therapy procedure. In neurooncology,
an accurate spatial match between PET and MRI data is
mandatory for both radiation therapy planning and biopsy
guidance. PET may detect especially small lesions with higher
sensitivity than MRI (Fig. 1). Figure 2 illustrates a clinical case
of an anaplastic glioma that was missed on MRI and was
described only incompletely on PET. The combination of PET
and MRI revealed the full extent of the disease.
WHOLE-BODY PET/MRI
Whole-body PET/MRI will be of particular medical importance because systemic disorders such as cardiovascular disease
and cancer increasingly account for morbidity and mortality.
Therapeutic success with these chronic and often incurable
diseases is linked to early diagnosis, accurate staging, and
therapy monitoring. This requires repeated whole-body assessment of the extent of the disease, relapses, complications, and
concomitant diseases. Clinical studies comparing
PET/CT and whole-body MRI indicate that therapeutically
relevant information is frequently obtained by PET or MRI but
not necessarily by CT (19–23). For example, MRI is more
sensitive than PET/CT in the detection of brain, bone, and liver
metastases, whereas PET/CTis more accurate in the detection of
lymph node metastases, characterization soft-tissue masses, and
therapy monitoring (Fig. 3). The list of conceivable research
topics and clinical applications is extensive. PET/MRI could be
particularly useful for early tumor detection and functional
therapy monitoring in oncology. It will likely be an ideal tool for
investigating the effect of novel drugs, such as inhibitors of
angiogenesis or modulators of the immune system. Integrated
information on individual cell metabolism and microenvironment and their response to therapy will help elucidate the
mechanism of action and optimize treatment schedules. Realtime monitoring of the success of radiofrequency ablation by
PET may be an emerging application for PET/MRI (24).
Combining PET with cardiac MRI and whole-body MR
angiography may enable detection and differentiation of
vulnerable plaques. The combination of late-enhancement
PET/CT and PET/MRI of
71-y-old woman with frontobasal meningioma in olfactory region. PET/CT images were acquired 20 min and PET/MR
images 100 min after injection of 135
MBq of 68Ga-[1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N9,N$,N$9-tetraacetic acid]-D-
Phe1,Tyr3-octreotide. Tracer uptake in
the tumor is seen on PET images. In
addition, second smaller and previously
unknown frontal meningioma was seen
on PET and possibly corresponded to
small mass demonstrated on T2weighted turbo spin-echo MR images.
This ﬁnding was not detected by CT.
A 36-y-old patient with
brain gliomatosis was admitted for
tumor biopsy. In addition to standard
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI
(left), chemical shift imaging (CSI) (echo
time 5 135 ms, center) and PET/MRI
11C-methionine (right) were performed. On standard MRI, no contrast
enhancement in any part of tumor was
found, indicating low-grade tumor. On
CSI, mapping of choline/N-acetylaspartate (Cho/NAA) quotient showed hot
spot in right insular region, whereas
11C-methionine uptake was most pronounced in basal frontal lobe on left
side. Because of discrepancy between CSI and PET/MRI, biopsy was performed in both locations and revealed anaplastic
glioma (World Health Organization grade III) in frontal left region and low-grade glioma (World Health Organization grade II) in
right insular region. CA = contrast agent.
CLINICAL MULTIMODALITY IMAGING • Pichler et al.
MRI and 18F-FDG uptake in a single imaging session may
push cardiac imaging to another level (25). Simultaneously
acquired PET and MRI data will allow accurate motion
correction, particularly in cardiology but also in accurate
detection of lesions in the abdomen or thorax. Disease- and
therapy-speciﬁc PET/MRI examination protocols could be
tailored to individual clinical conditions by using speciﬁc
radiotracer and MRI sequence protocols.
CONCLUSION
Having witnessed an impressive technologic development
of PET detector technology, ﬁrst PET/MRI prototype systems,
and MRI-based PET attenuation correction, as well as
encouraging clinical and speciﬁcally preclinical PET/MRI
results, we now seek opportunities to translate these technologic advances into clinical beneﬁts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this work was supported by the NIH (R21EB004483)
and German DFG (PI771, SFB773).