OBITUARY Deborah Jin,
pioneer of ultracold physics,
remembered p.318
PALAEONTOLOGY Why are women
in the field donning beards
for equality? p.316
ENGINEERING On the many
uses of rotation, from
biology to business p.315
TREES A celebration of the
poet of forest ecology,
Oliver Rackham p.314
advances in the technical domains of AI.
Alongside such efforts, designers and
researchers from a range of disciplines need
to conduct what we call social-systems
analyses of AI. They need to assess the
impact of technologies on their social, cul­
tural and political settings.
A social-systems approach could inves­
tigate, for instance, how the app AiCure —
which tracks patients’ adherence to taking
prescribed medication and transmits records
to physicians — is changing the doctor–
patient relationship. Such an approach
to perform a range of complex tasks in every­
day life. These ranged from the identification
of skin alterations that are indicative of earlystage cancer to the reduction of energy costs
for data centres.
The workshops also highlighted a major
blind spot in thinking about AI. Auto­
nomous systems are already deployed in our
most crucial social institutions, from hospi­
tals to courtrooms. Yet there are no agreed
methods to assess the sustained effects of
such applications on human populations.
Recent years have brought extraordinary
There is a blind spot
in AI research
Fears about the future impacts of artificial intelligence are distracting researchers
from the real risks of deployed systems, argue Kate Crawford and Ryan Calo.
n 12 October, the White House
published its report on the future
of artificial intelligence (AI) — a
product of four workshops held between
May and July 2016 in Seattle, Pittsburgh,
Washington DC and New York City (see
go.nature.com/2dx8rv6).
During these events (which we helped to
organize), many of the world’s leading think­
ers from diverse fields discussed how AI will
change the way we live. Dozens of presenta­
tions revealed the promise of using progress
in machine learning and other AI techniques
Chicago police use algorithmic systems to predict which people are most likely to be involved in a shooting, but they have proved largely ineffective.
ARMANDO L. SANCHEZ/CHICAGO TRIBUNE/TNS/GETTY
2 0 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 8 | N A T U R E | 3 1 1
could also explore whether the use of
historical data to predict where crimes will
happen is driving overpolicing of margin­
alized communities. Or it could investigate
why high-rolling investors are given the right
to understand the financial decisions made
on their behalf by humans and algorithms,
whereas low-income loan seekers are often
left to wonder why their requests have been
A SINGULAR PROBLEM
“People worry that computers will get too
smart and take over the world, but the
real problem is that they’re too stupid and
they’ve already taken over the world.” This
is how computer scientist Pedro Domingos
sums up the issue in his 2015 book The
Master Algorithm1. Even the many research­
ers who reject the prospect of a ‘techno­
logical singularity’ — saying the field is
too young — support the introduction of
relatively untested AI systems into social
institutions.
In part thanks to the enthusiasm of AI
researchers, such systems are already being
used by physicians to guide diagnoses. They
are also used by law firms to advise clients
on the likelihood of their winning a case,
by financial institutions to help decide who
should receive loans, and by employers to
guide whom to hire.
Analysts are expecting the uses of AI
systems in these and other contexts to soar.
Current market analyses put the economic
value of AI applications in the billion-dollar
range (see ‘On the rise’), and IBM’s chief exec­
utive Ginni Rometty has said that she sees a
US$2-trillion opportunity in AI systems over
the coming decade. Admittedly, estimates are
difficult to make, in part because there is no
consensus on what counts as AI.
AI will not necessarily be worse than
human-operated systems at making predic­
tions and guiding decisions. On the con­
trary, engineers are optimistic that AI can
help to detect and reduce human bias and
prejudice. But studies indicate that in some
current contexts, the downsides of AI sys­
tems disproportionately affect groups that
are already disadvantaged by factors such
as race, gender and socio-economic back­
In a 2013 study, for example, Google
searches of first names commonly used by
black people were 25% more likely to flag
up advertisements for a criminal-records
search than those of ‘white-identifying’
names3. In another race-related finding, a
ProPublica investigation in May 2016 found
that the proprietary algorithms widely used
by judges to help determine the risk of reof­
fending are almost twice as likely to mis­
takenly flag black defendants than white
defendants (see go.nature.com/29aznyw).
THREE TOOLS
How can such effects be avoided? So far,
there have been three dominant modes of
responding to concerns about the social and
ethical impacts of AI systems: compliance,
‘values in design’ and thought experiments.
All three are valuable. None is individually
or collectively sufficient.
Deploy and comply. Most commonly, com­
panies and others take basic steps to adhere
to a set of industry best practices or legal
obligations, so as to avoid government,
press or other scrutiny. This approach can
produce short-term benefits. Google, for
example, tweaked its image-recognition
algorithm in 2015 after the system mis­
labelled an African American couple as
gorillas. The company has also proposed
introducing a ‘red button’ into its AI systems
that researchers could press should the sys­
tem seem to be getting out of control4.
Similarly, Facebook made an exception to
its rule of removing images of nude children
from its site after the public backlash about
its censorship of the Pulitzer-prizewinning
photograph of a naked girl, Kim Phúc, flee­
ing a napalm attack in Vietnam. And just
last month, several leading AI companies,
including Microsoft, Amazon and IBM,
formed the Partnership on AI to try to
advance public understanding and develop
some shared standards.
Yet the ‘deploy and comply’ approach can
be ad hoc and reactive, and industry efforts
can prove inadequate if they lack sufficient
critical voices and independent contributors.
The new AI partnership is inviting ethicists
and civil-society organizations to participate.
But the concern remains that corporations
are relatively free to field test their AI systems
on the public without sustained research on
medium- or even near-term effects.
Values in design. Thanks to pioneers in the
ethical design of technology, including the
influential scholars Batya Friedman and
Helen Nissenbaum, researchers and firms
now deploy frameworks such as value sen­
sitive design or ‘responsible innovation’ to
help them to identify likely stakeholders
and their values. Focus groups or other
techniques are used to establish people’s
views about personal privacy, the environ­
ment and so on. The values of prospective
users are then incorporated into the design
of the technology, whether it is a phone
app or a driverless car5. Developers of AI
systems should draw on these important
methods more.
Nevertheless, such tools often work
on the assumption that the system will be
built. They are less able to help designers,
policymakers or society to decide whether
a system should be built at all, or when a
proto­type is too preliminary or unreliable
to be unleashed on infrastructure such as
hospitals or courtrooms.
Thought experiments. In the past few
years, hypothetical situations have domi­
nated the public debate around the social
impacts of AI.
The possibility that humans will create a
highly intelligent system that will ultimately
rule over us or even destroy us has been most
discussed (see, for example, ref. 6). Also, one
relevant thought experiment from 1967 —
the trolley problem — has taken on new
life. This scenario raises questions about
responsibility and culpability. In it, a per­
son can either let a runaway trolley car run
along a track where five men are working,
or pull a lever to redirect the trolley on to
another track where only one person is at
risk. Various commentators have applied
this hypothetical scenario to self-driving
cars, which they argue will have to make
automated decisions that constitute ethical
Yet as with the robot apocalypse, the
possibility of a driverless car weighing up
‘kill decisions’ presents a narrow frame
for moral reasoning. The trolley problem
offers little guidance on the wider social
issues at hand: the value of a massive
SOURCE: CB INSIGHTS
3 1 2 | N A T U R E | V O L 5 3 8 | 2 0 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 6
ON THE RISE
Investment in technologies that use artiﬁcial intelligence has climbed in recent years.
Disclosed investment (US$, millions)
investment in autonomous cars rather than
in public transport; how safe a driverless
car should be before it is allowed to navi­
gate the world (and what tools should be
used to determine this); and the potential
effects of autonomous vehicles on conges­
tion, the environment or employment.
SOCIAL-SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
We believe that a fourth approach is needed.
A practical and broadly applicable socialsystems analysis thinks through all the pos­
sible effects of AI systems on all parties. It
also engages with social impacts at every
stage — conception, design, deployment
and regulation.
As a first step, researchers — across a
range of disciplines, government depart­
ments and industry — need to start inves­
tigating how differences in communities’
access to information, wealth and basic ser­
vices shape the data that AI systems train on.
Take, for example, the algorithmgenerated ‘heat maps’ used in Chicago, Illi­
nois, to identify people who are most likely
to be involved in a shooting. A study8 pub­
lished last month indicates that such maps
are ineffective: they increase the likelihood
that certain people will be targeted by the
police, but do not reduce crime.
A social-systems approach would con­
sider the social and political history of the
data on which the heat maps are based.
This might require consulting members
of the community and weighing police
data against this feedback, both positive
and negative, about the neighbourhood
policing. It could also mean factoring in
findings by oversight committees and
legal institutions. A social-systems analy­
sis would also ask whether the risks and
rewards of the system are being applied
evenly — so in this case, whether the police
are using similar techniques to identify
which officers are likely to engage in mis­
conduct, say, or violence.
As another example, a 2015 study9 showed
that a machine-learning technique used
to predict which hospital patients would
develop pneumonia complications worked
well in most situations. But it made one
serious error: it instructed doctors to send
patients with asthma
home even though
such people are in a
high-risk category.
Because the hospital
automatically sent
patients with asthma
to intensive care,
these people were rarely on the ‘required
further care’ records on which the system
was trained. A social-systems analysis would
look at the underlying hospital guidelines,
and other factors such as insurance policies,
that shape patient records9.
A social-systems analysis could similarly
ask whether and when people affected by
AI systems get to ask questions about how
such systems work. Financial advisers have
been historically limited in the ways they
can deploy machine learning because clients
expect them to unpack and explain all deci­
sions. Yet so far, individuals who are already
subjected to determinations resulting from
AI have no analogous power10.
A social-systems analysis needs to draw
on philosophy, law, sociology, anthropology
and science-and-technology studies, among
other disciplines. It must also turn to stud­
ies of how social, political and cultural val­
ues affect and are affected by technological
change and scientific research. Only by ask­
ing broader questions about the impacts
of AI can we generate a more holistic and
integrated understanding than that obtained
by analysing aspects of AI in silos such as
computer science or criminology.
There are promising signs. Workshops
such as the Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency in Machine Learning meet­
ing being held in New York City next month
is a good example. But funders — govern­
ments, foundations and corporations —
should be investing much more in efforts
that approach AI in the way we describe.
Artificial intelligence presents a cultural
shift as much as a technical one. This is
similar to technological inflection points
of the past, such as the introduction of the
printing press or the railways. Autono­
mous systems are changing workplaces,
streets and schools. We need to ensure that
those changes are beneficial, before they
are built further into the infrastructure of
every­day life. ■ SEE WORLD VIEW P.291
Kate Crawford is a principal researcher
at Microsoft Research in New York City,
a visiting professor at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, and a senior research fellow
at New York University, New York, USA.
Ryan Calo is an assistant professor of law
and of information science (by courtesy),
and faculty co-director of the Tech Policy
Lab at the University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
e-mails: ;
 
1. Domingos, P. The Master Algorithm: How the
Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will
Remake Our World .
2. Barocas, S. & Selbst, A. D. Calif. Law Rev. 104,
671–732 .
3. Sweeney, L. Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery
 ; available at 
ssrn.2208240
4. Armstrong, S. & Orseau, L. in Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings of the Thirty-
Second Conference (eds Ihler, A. & Janzing, D.)
557–566 ; available at
 
5. Friedman, B., Kahn, P. H. & Borning, A. in Human–
Computer Interaction in Management Information
Systems: Foundation (eds Zhang, P. & Galletta,
D.) 348–372 ; available at
 
6. Bostrom, N. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers,
Strategies .
7. Lin, P. in Autonomes Fahren: Technische,
Rechtliche und Gesellschaftliche Aspekte (eds
Maurer, M., Gerdes, J. C., Lenz, B. & Winner, H.)
69–85 ; available at 
8. Saunders, J., Hunt, P. & Hollywood, J. S. J. Exp.
Criminol. 12, 347–371 .
9. Caruana, R. et al. ‘Intelligible models for
healthcare: predicting pneumonia risk and
hospital 30-day readmission’ Proc. 21th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining 1721–1730 .
10. Crawford, K. et al. The AI Now Report: The Social
and Economic Implications of Artificial Intelligence
Technologies in the Near-Term ; available
at 
CRAIG F. WALKER/DENVER POST/GETTY
“Artificial
intelligence
presents a
cultural shift
as much as a
technical one.”
2 0 O C T O B E R 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 8 | N A T U R E | 3 1 3
People with asthma were wrongly graded as low risk by an AI system designed to predict pneumonia.