Bayesian dynamic financial networks with time-varying predictors
Bayesian dynamic ﬁnancial networks with time-varying
predictors
Daniele Durante
 
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Padua
Padua, Italy
David B. Dunson
 
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0251, USA
We propose a Bayesian nonparametric model including time-varying predictors in dynamic
network inference. The model is applied to infer the dependence structure among ﬁnancial
markets during the global ﬁnancial crisis, estimating eﬀects of verbal and material cooperation eﬀorts. We interestingly learn contagion eﬀects, with increasing inﬂuence of verbal
relations during the ﬁnancial crisis and opposite results during the United States housing
Co-movement; Edge Covariates; Financial Network; Gaussian Process; Latent Space; Matrix Factorization.
1. Introduction
The global ﬁnancial crisis is a hotly debated topic having complex roots and ongoing effects. The crisis was driven by the coexistence of a complex system of causes covering easy
credit conditions, lack of proper regulation and the introduction of new ﬁnancial instruments. The 2004-2007 United States housing bubble is a key factor behind the subsequent
ﬁnancial instability, tracing back its causes to the unusually low interest rates decision of
the Federal Reserve to soften the eﬀects of the 2000 dot-com bubble , and
the growing demand for ﬁnancial assets by foreign countries which generated an additional
inﬂux of “saving glut” stimulating the proliferation of risky loans, predatory lending, increasing ﬁnancial complexity and a wide network of
dependencies between ﬁnancial operators worldwide. Optimistic forecasts on the expansion
of the real estate market contributed to the inﬂation of the bubble, which burst between
2006 and 2007, when subprime borrowers proved unable to repay their mortgage, triggering
a vicious cycle with owners holding negative equity motivated to default on their mortgages.
The increasing interconnection between world ﬁnancial markets and institutions generated a contagion eﬀect that took shape through the rapid development and spread of the
subprime mortgage crisis to the 2008-2012 global recession, which aﬀected the entire world
 
2005 first quarter
2008 third quarter
2013 first quarter
Figure 1: Response network: dynamic co-movements in world ﬁnancial markets.
2005 first quarter
2008 third quarter
2013 first quarter
2005 first quarter
2008 third quarter
2013 first quarter
Figure 2: Time-varying edge-speciﬁc regressors. Upper panels: binary indicators for the presence or absence of a signiﬁcant increment in material cooperation among pairs of countries. Lower panels:
same quantities with respect to verbal cooperation.
economy and ﬁnance. In most cases the recession was manifested through a sharp drop in
international trade, low consumer conﬁdence and sovereign-debt crises, which propagated
in the subsequent 2010-2012 European sovereign debt crisis aﬀecting mainly Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Italy, and requiring important material bailout investments by
Spurred by interest in ﬁnancial crises and by the need to provide more ﬂexible and
accurate statistical analysis of ﬁnancial systems, a rich variety of statistical methods have
been recently developed. Beside descriptive studies interpreting empirical evidences in the
light of the key ﬁnancial events, such as Taylor , there is an abundant literature
on model based statistics aimed at exploring co-variations and interconnection structures
among ﬁnancial instruments during recent crises via vector autoregression ,
vector error correction , Bayesian factor stochastic volatility
Bayesian dynamic financial networks with time-varying predictors
models , locally adaptive factor processes and
dynamic matrix factorization . Such applications provide useful overviews on the temporal and geo-economic changes in world ﬁnancial
markets, showing how high volatility phases are directly linked with increasing levels of
interdependence.
Instead of measuring the dynamic dependence structure among a set of ﬁnancial indices via time-varying covariance or correlation matrices of their corresponding log-returns
Rt = [r1,t, . . . , rV,t]T , t ∈T ⊂ℜ+, we treat co-movements as dynamic relational data and
focus inference on the sequence of V × V time-varying symmetric matrices {Yt, t ∈T }
having entries yij,t = yji,t = 1 if index i and index j move in the same direction at time
t, meaning that ri,t > 0 and rj,t > 0, or ri,t < 0 and rj,t < 0 (indices are similar); and
yij,t = yji,t = 0 if opposite increments are recorded (indices are dissimilar); see Fig. 1 for
an example. Financial networks provide insight into the factors driving market behavior
and risk , but proposals
analyzing the impact of other key variables on dynamic variations in ﬁnancial networks
are still lacking. To provide new insights, we exploit the Global Database of Events, Language and Tone to construct two systemic indicators encoding the presence or absence of
substantial increments in verbal and material cooperation eﬀorts among pairs of countries
as in Fig. 2. We generalize a recent Bayesian nonparametric model for dynamic relational
data to explicitly explore the eﬀects of such covariates on ﬁnancial interconnections among
countries.
2. Bayesian Dynamic Networks with Time-Varying Predictors
2.1 Relevant Contributions
There is a growing literature on social networks mainly focusing on exponential random
graphs , stochastic block models ,
mixed membership stochastic block models and latent space models
 . Current dynamic network models raise open questions about coherency,
ﬂexibility, theoretical properties and computational tractability. Contributions considering
edge-speciﬁc covariate eﬀects are available in static settings and developments in the longitudinal framework
have been recently explored . Such approaches inherit the drawbacks of the dynamic network models they seek
to generalize, with only Ward et al. allowing the edge covariate parameters to vary
over time via a sequential estimating approach, which does not borrow dynamic information
eﬃciently, and fails to properly propagate uncertainty.
2.2 Model Formulation
We build on the Durante and Dunson nonparametric Bayesian dynamic model for
relational data, which eﬃciently exploits a latent space representation of network data
while incorporating time dynamics via Gaussian process (GP) latent factors. Speciﬁcally,
the model deﬁnes
yij,t|πij(t)
Bern(πij(t))
independently for each i = 2, . . . , V and j = 1, . . . , i −1, with
1 + e−sij(t) ,
sij(t) = µ(t) + xi(t)T xj(t),
where xi(t) = [xi1(t), . . . , xiH(t)]T , i = 2, . . . , V and xj(t) = [xj1(t), . . . , xjH(t)]T , j =
1, . . . , i −1, are the vectors of latent coordinates of unit i and j, respectively. The link
probabilities are estimated via a logistic regression, with µ(t) a baseline process quantifying
the overall propensity to form links in the network across time and xi(t)T xj(t) favoring a
higher link probability when units i and j have latent coordinates in the same direction;
refer to Durante and Dunson for related theoretical properties. Bayesian inference
proceeds via a data augmentation MCMC algorithm exploiting a representation of Polson
et al. , while allowing estimation of the latent space dimension; see Choi and Hobert
 for recent results on uniform ergodicity of the resulting algorithm. However, there
is no consideration of covariates that may inform about the link probabilities.
We generalize the model to accommodate edge-speciﬁc predictors having time-varying
coeﬃcients as follows:
ij,tβ(t) + xi(t)T xj(t),
where zij,t = [zij1,t, . . . , zijP,t]T is a P-dimensional vector of time-varying edge-speciﬁc predictors for units i and j at time t and β(t) = [β1(t), . . . , βP (t)]T are the corresponding
dynamic coeﬃcients. This allows the proximity between units i and j at time t to depend
on predictors in a manner that varies smoothly with time. These time-varying coeﬃcients
are of substantial inferential interest.
In our motivating ﬁnance application, latent coordinates may represent unexpected in-
ﬂation and investors expectations, respectively, favoring indices of countries with features
in the same directions to co-move, and countries with opposite unexpected inﬂation and
investors expectations to move in diﬀerent directions with higher probability. Additionally,
we allow the presence of a signiﬁcant increment in verbal or material cooperation relations among pairs of countries to further increase or decrease the co-movement probability
proportionally to its corresponding time-varying coeﬃcient.
2.3 Prior Speciﬁcation and Posterior Computation
We follow Durante and Dunson in assuming Gaussian process priors for the baseline
process µ(·) and the time-varying latent features xih(·), i = 1, . . . , V and h = 1, . . . , H, with
the priors for the feature curves designed to adaptively shrink unnecessary latent curves to
zero, allowing inference on the dimension of the latent space. To ﬂexibly model the eﬀect
of the edge-speciﬁc dynamic regressors, we consider independent Gaussian process priors
βp(·) ∼GP(0, cp)
p = 1, . . . , P,
with cp a squared exponential correlation function cp(t, t′) = exp(−κp||t−t′||2
2), which allows
for continuous time analysis and unequal spacing.
Bayesian dynamic financial networks with time-varying predictors
Posterior computation is performed generalizing the Durante and Dunson Gibbs
sampler to update the vector of time-varying regression coeﬃcients. This is accomplished
by modifying the steps outlined in Durante and Dunson to account for the new deﬁnition of sij(t) as in (3) and by considering a further step updating the dynamic regression
coeﬃcients βp(t), p = 1, . . . , P, exploiting the conjugacy provided by P´olya-gamma data
augmentation and the GP assumption.
Speciﬁcally, letting T = {t1, . . . , tN} denote the time grid on which networks are observed, sample βp = [βp(t1), . . . , βp(tN)]T , for each p = 1, . . . , P, from its full conditional
N-variate Gaussian posterior
j=1 zijp,t1 (yij,t1 −1/2 −ωij,t1νijp,t1)
j=1 zijp,tN (yij,tN −1/2 −ωij,tN νijp,tN )
where νijp,t = µ(t)+zT
ij(−p),tβ(−p)(t)+xi(t)T xj(t), t = t1, . . . , tN, with zij(−p),t and β(−p)(t),
the edge-speciﬁc predictor vector and the corresponding dynamic coeﬃcients, respectively,
with the p-th element held out.
In addition the posterior covariance matrix is Σβp =
ijp,t1ωij,t1, . . . , PV
ijp,tN ωij,tN
, with Kp the Gaussian process covariance matrix with entries (Kp)ij = exp , we exploit the indicator IsRootEvent to restrict
our analysis to the subset of important relations in the historical event datasets available
at and use variable QuadClass to compute the
diﬀerence between the total number of verbal cooperation and verbal conﬂict events recorded
among countries i and j at time t, for each pair of countries and quarter t. To mitigate
the explosive non-stationary trend of such quantities and the very diﬀerent scale of each
time series, we use standardized increments obtained by computing the ﬁrst diﬀerence of
each time series and standardizing the latter with its unconditional standard deviation.
Finally, we deﬁne as ‘substantial’ an increment greater than the average of all standardized
ﬁrst diﬀerences at time t, assigning zijv,t = 1 in such cases and zijv,t = 0, otherwise, for
Figure 3: Upper plot: point-wise posterior mean for the baseline µ(t) (colored blue line), and 0.95 highest
posterior density (hpd) intervals (colored blue areas). Lower plot: same quantities for the time
varying verbal (green) and material (red) cooperation regression parameters. (A) Growth and
burst of the United States housing bubble, (B) Global ﬁnancial crisis, (C) Greek debt crisis and
worsening of the European debt crisis.
i = 2, . . . , 22 and j = 1, . . . , i −1 and t = 1, . . . , 36. This procedure allows us to carefully
deﬁne our dynamic edge-speciﬁc binary indicators encoding verbal and material relative
proximity measures among countries.
3.2 Model Interpretation
We apply model (1), with latent similarity measures given by
µ(t) + zijm,tβm(t) + zijv,tβv(t) + xi(t)T xj(t) ,
with i = 2, . . . , 22, j = 1, . . . , i −1 and t = 1, . . . , 36. For inference we set H = 15, length
scales κµ = 0.02, κx = 0.01, κβm = κβv = 0.01 and ﬁx a1 = a2 = 2 for the shrinkage
parameters.
We consider 5,000 Gibbs iterations, with a burn-in of 1,000.
Mixing was
assessed via estimating eﬀective sample sizes for the quantities of interest, represented by
πij(t), µ(t), βm(t) and βv(t) for i = 2, . . . , 22, j = 1, . . . , i −1 and t = 1, . . . , 36 after
burn-in. Most of these values were around 1,500 out of 4,000, suggesting good mixing.
We interestingly ﬁnd that the ﬁrst two latent factors are the most informative, with the
remaining redundant latent features consistently shrunk to zero.
A similar insight was
Bayesian dynamic financial networks with time-varying predictors
Figure 4: Weighted network visualization with weights obtained averaging ˆπ(t) over all the time window
(left), over the period of the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis (middle) and over the period of Greek
debts crisis (right). Edge dimensions are proportional to the corresponding value of the averaged
co-movement probability, with colors going from red to green as the corresponding weight goes
from 0 to 1. Blue, red and yellow nodes represent European, American and Asian countries.
highlighted by Fama and French , showing three common latent factors underlying
stock returns.
The estimated peaks in overall co-movement propensity µ(t) in Fig. 3, during the most
acute phases of the crisis and the change of regime at the burst of the United States housing bubble (A), provide empirical support of contagion eﬀects in correspondence to the
global ﬁnancial crisis (B) and the European sovereign-debt crisis (C). Figure 4 shows three
weighted networks, with weights given by the estimated co-movement probability averaged
over diﬀerent time windows. As expected geo-economic proximity among countries is manifested through tighter networks, with Japan most closely related to western economies,
China having lower interconnections with other economies and stronger networks for European markets and Asian Tigers, respectively. The denseness of the network during the
2008 global ﬁnancial crisis provides a further evidence in support of international ﬁnancial
contagion eﬀects; while the low connections among Greece and almost all the other ﬁnancial
markets during the Greek debt crisis, and the strong relations with Spain and Italy representing the countries most aﬀected by the ﬁnancial instability during such phase, provide
interesting insights on the features of the 2010-2012 European sovereign-debt crisis.
These results conﬁrm Durante and Dunson ﬁndings, and agree with theories
on ﬁnancial crises and recent applications in Kastner et al.
 , Durante et al. .
However, the novelty and signiﬁcance is in providing a
quantitative overview on the dynamic eﬀects of substantial increments in verbal and material
relations on co-movement propensity. The generalization of Durante and Dunson to
include information provided by edge-speciﬁc time-varying regressors allow us to improve
predictions with an area underneath the ROC curve of 0.85 for data at the last time, and
to provide additional important insights as highlighted in the last plot of Fig 3.
Coeﬃcients evolve in general on positive values inducing higher probability to co-move
for countries with substantial increments in verbal or material relations. Trajectories cross
at the beginning and end of the most severe phase of the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis. Such re-
sults highlight the importance of time-varying coeﬃcients, illustrating a signiﬁcantly higher
impact of increments in material relations on co-movement probabilities during the growth
and burst of the United States housing bubble and an opposite behavior when the time
window of the global ﬁnancial crisis is considered.
Recalling the key events during the
period considered, higher values of the material coeﬃcient before 2008 are in line with the
“originate and distribute” banking model and predatory lending during the United States
housing bubble, which favored the creation of securities of great complexity (such as RMBS
and CDO), and stimulated large capital exchanges inﬂating the network of material relations among ﬁnancial institutions worldwide and increasing its impact on the behavior of
ﬁnancial markets. Consistently with this interpretation, the material coeﬃcient peaks in
proximity of the bubble burst and is closer to zero during the most acute phase of the global
crisis when the proliferation of meetings and global conferences between governments and
ﬁnancial institutions, and the lack of material funds to invest in foreign markets, lead to an
increase of the verbal coeﬃcient. The diﬀerence among the two coeﬃcients is less evident
in the time-window of the European sovereign debt crisis, which is characterized by important material bailout investments by the Eurozone institutions, such as European Financial
Stabilization Mechanism, the European Financial Stability Facility, and the International
Monetary Fund.
4. Conclusion
Developing statistical models to ﬂexibly learn time-varying network structures, while inferring the eﬀects of additional variables, is a key issue in many applied domains. It is
increasingly common to have data available on dynamic networks and related node features. In addition, viewing data through a network lens can add substantial new insights,
as we have illustrated in our motivating ﬁnance application. It is interesting to consider
further generalizations and modiﬁcation of our nonparametric Bayes dynamic latent space
model. For example, issues may arise in using a smooth Gaussian process, particularly as
the number of time points at which observations are collected increase. Firstly, there are
computational issues that arise due to bottlenecks and ill-conditioning problems in matrix
inversion. These issues can be directly addressed using low-rank approximations to the
GP, such as the random projection method of Banerjee et al. . In addition, we have
relied on GPs with stationary covariance functions, implying time-constant smoothness in
the latent processes and coeﬃcient curves. In ﬁnance and other network applications, such
as neurosciences, we expect smoothness to vary over time. This motivates the use of timevarying smoothness, potentially accomplished via stochastic diﬀerential equation models,
such as the nested Gaussian process of Zhu and Dunson . Finally, it is important to
develop scalable computational methods that can accommodate very large networks having
huge numbers of nodes; in this respect, models and computational approaches that exploit
sparsity provide a promising direction.