Artiﬁcial Intelligence for 6G Networks: Technology
Advancement and Standardization
Muhammad K. Shehzad, Luca Rose, M. Majid Butt, István Z. Kovács, Mohamad Assaad, and Mohsen Guizani
Abstract—With the deployment of 5G networks, standards
organizations have started working on the design phase for
sixth-generation (6G) networks. 6G networks will be immensely
complex, requiring more deployment time, cost and management
efforts. On the other hand, mobile network operators demand
these networks to be intelligent, self-organizing, and cost-effective
to reduce operating expenses (OPEX). Machine learning (ML),
a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), is the answer to many
of these challenges providing pragmatic solutions, which can
entirely change the future of wireless network technologies. By
using some case study examples, we brieﬂy examine the most
compelling problems, particularly at the physical (PHY) and link
layers in cellular networks where ML can bring signiﬁcant gains.
We also review standardization activities in relation to the use
of ML in wireless networks and future timeline on readiness
of standardization bodies to adapt to these changes. Finally, we
highlight major issues in ML use in the wireless technology,
and provide potential directions to mitigate some of them in 6G
wireless networks.
Index Terms—AI, ML, Wireless networks, 3GPP, 6G.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unprecedented growth in the global cellular trafﬁc (as
shown in Fig. 1) and immense data rate demands have become
a challenge, leading wireless industry to the next-generation,
called 6G. 6G-era will bring digital, physical and biological
worlds together with the goal to improve human experience
and well-being. 6G will be operating in TeraHertz (THz)
frequencies (0.1-10 THz), hence beneﬁcial for multiple use
cases in industrial applications, providing immense data rates
(≈1 Tb/s), accelerating internet-of-things, and wider network
coverage. AI/ML will pave the way for THz communications
at different layers , e.g., supporting channel acquisition 
and modulation classiﬁcation at PHY. Similarly, at the
link layer, beamforming design and channel allocation can
exploit ML . In THz systems, a channel can signiﬁcantly
vary at a micrometer scale, resulting in a tremendous increase
in channel estimation frequency and corresponding overhead.
ML algorithms can counter this issue by using, e.g., improved
channel prediction techniques , .
(corresponding
Bell-Labs,
Laboratoire
CentraleSupelec,
University
Paris-Saclay,
({muhammad.shehzad}@nokia.com/centralesupelec.fr).
Luca Rose, and M. Majid Butt are with Nokia Bell-Labs, France.
({luca.rose, majid.butt}@nokia-bell-labs.com).
István Z. Kovács is with Nokia Standards, Aalborg, Denmark. ( ).
Laboratoire
CentraleSupelec,
University
Paris-Saclay,
( ).
Mohsen Guizani is with Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE. ( ).
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
Estimation of global mobile subscriptions in machine-to-machine
(M2M) and mobile broadband (MBB) from 2020 to 2030. Source: ITU-R
Report M.2370-0 .
Recently, fast-growing deployment of 5G has opened up
many challenges, including massive complexity in network
architecture, low latency, high cost, power consumption, and
deployment of hybrid Long-Term Evolution (LTE) new radio
(NR), leading to difﬁculties in network optimization. In such
a complex scenario, the network intelligence has become
a major focus as it will play a pivotal role in complex
problem solving , e.g., self-healing, self-optimization, and
self-conﬁguration of a network .
Future networks will become “cognitive” in a way that
many aspects such as spectrum sensing/sharing, slicing, radio
resource management (RRM), and mobility management, will
be ML-based. Further, it is expected that ML will impact
6G air interface fundamentally and it will be designed to
support ML natively . Several recent research attempts,
e.g., , propose different road maps for 6G, but they do not
address standardization timeline and related issues regarding
application of ML in 6G. Albeit, to some extent, gives an
overview of ML and standardization; nevertheless, ML-related
technical challenges and its applications from an industrial and
standardization perspective are not addressed.
Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) and non-orthogonal
multiple access (NOMA) are two key technologies for 6G .
RIS can re-engineer electromagnetic waves, hence beneﬁcial to
deliver the information where obstacles block the destination.
RIS can be integrated with ML, allowing RIS to acquire enviarXiv:2204.00914v1 [eess.SP] 2 Apr 2022
Supervised Learning
Task Driven
(Predict next
Reinforcement Learning
Learning from
Regression/
Classification
Deep Learning
Q-Learning
Prediction
Positioning
Correction
Fingerprinting
Estimation
Localization
Unsupervised Learning
Data Driven
(Clustering)
Machine Learning
Clustering/
Dimensionality Reduction
Policy Evaluation
Major Applications in Wireless Networks
Major Tools
Fig. 2. An overview of ML paradigms, major tools, and applications in wireless networks.
ronmental information by conﬁguring various sensors, while
ML can learn dynamic parameters intelligently, reducing the
computation cost of RIS-based networks. Similarly, NOMA
is a promising access technique for 6G. In ML-empowered
NOMA-based networks, gNodeBs (gNB) can intelligently de-
ﬁne their control policy and improve decision-making ability.
Today’s networks use model-based methods to optimize
various network functions providing characteristics of the
process involved. However, these models might be too complex to be implemented in a realistic time frame or they
include a great level of abstraction to function in a general
environment. In contrast, ML-based solutions can adapt to
real-time (RT) scenario changes and localized characteristics,
learning the speciﬁc environment around the transceivers. The
contributions of this article are twofold:
• We look at the above-mentioned problems from an industrial perspective and outline the gap between research
and practice.
• We review standardization activities in the context of
adopting ML in various aspects of wireless communications, e.g., channel acquisition, positioning. Furthermore,
we highlight major issues and possible research directions
in relation to the use of ML in wireless networks.
II. OVERVIEW OF ML TECHNIQUES IN WIRELESS
ML is a process of training machines through data without
explicit programming. Broadly speaking, ML consists of three
paradigms: unsupervised learning, supervised learning, and
reinforcement learning (RL). All these paradigms have a
training/exploration phase to optimize a learning algorithm
that later can be used in prediction/exploitation phase to infer
on unknown inputs. As shown in Fig. 2, we brieﬂy summarize
them by providing some use cases in wireless networks.
1) Supervised Learning: Supervised learning exploits a
labelled data set to learn a (hidden) function that maps an input
to an expected output based on the examples. The standard
techniques used to solve supervised learning-based problems
are artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs), support vector machines (SVMs), Bayesian networks, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), and convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
2) Unsupervised Learning: Unsupervised learning does not
learn from labelled data, instead, training is based on an
unlabelled data set. K-means and principal component analysis
(PCA) are examples of two major tools used for clustering and
dimensionality reduction, respectively.
3) Reinforcement Learning: RL is not based on training
but rather the agent/decision-maker learns and decides online,
maximizing a long-term reward. RL is beneﬁcial in control
problems where the agent adapts to changing environmental
conditions, e.g., uplink power control.
Motivated by the considerable beneﬁts of ML in various
ﬁelds, its applications have also been considered in wireless
networks almost at all layers of communication. Here, we focus on its impact on radio access networks (RAN), particularly
PHY and link layers. Based on ML tools, given in Fig. 2, some
case studies will be explained later in Section III.
A. Machine Learning at PHY
At PHY, many optimization problems are non-convex, e.g.,
sum-rate maximization. ML is a powerful tool to ﬁnd good
solution(s) for such non-convex optimization problems. Based
on advanced learning algorithms, 6G networks provide the
following major advantages by using ML.
• ML can be effective to deal with network complexity. 6G
networks will be more complex due to numerous network
topologies, immense growth in the cellular users, staggering data rate demands, complex air interface, vast network coordination methods, etc. Forecasting considerable
complexity of 6G networks, the derivation of optimum
performance solutions is nearly infeasible without ML.
• ML can play a vital role to deal with model deﬁcit
problems. Current cellular networks are amenable for
mathematical derivation, for instance, information theory
gives closed-form expressions for various problems such
as Shannon theorem. However, the inherent complexity
of 6G networks hinders the possibility of exploiting
closed-form analytical expression(s), which can be due,
for instance, to non-linearities either in the channel or
network devices. ML offers an efﬁcient way to deal
with non-linearities, providing feasible solution(s) in a
tractable manner.
• ML can cope with algorithm deﬁcit problems. In current
cellular networks, many optimal algorithms, although
well-characterized, are impractical to be implemented.
Considering the example of multiple-input multipleoutput (MIMO) systems where optimal solutions are
known (e.g., dirty paper coding), they are overlooked in
favour of linear solutions, e.g., linear minimum meansquared error. It is envisaged that ML can pave the way
to implement more efﬁcient yet practical solutions.
ML has been used to study various PHY issues, and without
being exhaustive, some of the recent areas include:
• CNNs are used for modulation classiﬁcation in .
• An RNN-based wireless channel predictor is used in
 , explained in Section III-C, to deal with inaccurate
channel state information (CSI).
III. WIRELESS NETWORKS: CASE STUDIES
In this section, we present three use cases to demonstrate
the use of ML techniques in industrial wireless networks. ML
tools utilized for these use cases are depicted in Fig. 2.
A. UE Positioning
Highly accurate user equipment (UE) positioning is one
of the prime considerations for Third Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP) studies beyond Release 15. Various angle and
time-of-arrival-based methods are used to determine UE positioning in today’s cellular networks. All of these methods
require triangulation techniques to resolve UE position and
suffer from time synchronization errors.
We studied UE position by using radio frequency (RF)
ﬁngerprinting and two ML techniques, namely deep learning
and decision tree, for an outdoor scenario . Serving cell
Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP) as well as neighbor
cell RSRP values were used as features to train a deep neural
network (DNN). As shown in Fig. 3, nearly 5 m accuracy is
achieved for DNN when only 4 serving cell RSRP values and
corresponding beam IDs are considered as a feature input,
while it improves to nearly 1 m when 2 more RSRP values
from the strongest neighboring cells, respective cell and beam
IDs are added to the input feature set. The decision tree, a
less complex algorithm as compared to DNN, provides about
2 m accuracy using data from both serving and neighboring
cell beams as an input feature. The mean accuracy of nearly
1 m obtained from DNN is comparable to the accuracy level
achieved with traditional methods without requiring triangulation and does not suffer from signal timing synchronization
B. ML-Assisted Proactive Mobility
For seamless and efﬁcient mobility, a well optimized network should reduce the number of Handover (HO) events
while avoiding Handover Failures (HOF) and Radio Link
Failures (RLF). An emerging approach is to utilize ML-based
Comparison of UE position for both DNN and decision tree
techniques. The system level parameters for the network includes 8 sites with
Inter-site distance 110 m and carrier frequency 28 GHz. For details of the
parameters, please refer to .
algorithms, which enable proactive and UE speciﬁc mobility
actions in the gNB. A relatively simple approach to this is
to design an ML-based estimator of the radio measurements,
such as RSRP of serving and neighbor cells, with a certain
minimum accuracy and within a certain time horizon. Radio
measurements are traditionally performed at the UEs side and
reported to the serving gNB (or gNB-Centralized Unit) according to speciﬁc Radio Resource Control (RRC) conﬁgurations.
For ML-based prediction purposes, time-traces of RSRP, or
Reference Signal Received Quality (RSRQ) values need to be
collected either in the UE and/or serving the gNB.
For example, collected time-series of RSRP values are used
as input to the ML-based predictor, which provides at the UE,
and/or at the serving gNB, a set of sufﬁciently accurately
estimated RSRP values within a given future time horizon.
Then, these signal estimations are used for predictive evaluation of possible HO conditions, thus can trigger proactive
measurement reports from the UE and/or proactive HO actions
at the serving gNB. These two steps are repeated with a time
periodicity given, e.g., by the sampling rate and time ﬁltering
of the input RSRP measurements , or alternatively, the
steps can also be triggered by the serving gNB when certain
trafﬁc or mobility Quality-of-Service (QoS) conditions are
The outlined ML-based mobility algorithm can be implemented in either the UE or gNB or both, depending on the
available ML assistance capabilities in each node. Furthermore, the mechanism can be integrated in self-organizing
network-based Mobility Robustness Optimization solutions.
C. CSI Feedback
CSI feedback in the downlink channel is a major challenge
in Release 17 and beyond. Currently, CSI precision is affected
by compressing the measurements imposed by the standard.
In our study, summarized in Section II-A, we assumed two
RNN-based twin channel predictors at the gNB and UE .
The past CSI is utilized for training the RNN at both ends
Quantization Bits
Without ML
(a) Trend of MSE.
Quantization Bits
Precoding Gain
Without ML
(b) Trend of precoding gain.
Fig. 4. Performance of MSE and precoding gain. 2×1 MIMO conﬁguration is
considered, and RNN is composed of 1 hidden layer. For parameters’ details,
refer to .
of the communication system. UE’s feedback is evaluated
with respect to the predicted channel. Fig. 4 depicts the meansquared error (MSE) between the actual channel versus the
acquired channel at the gNB and the precoding gain when
different quantization bits are used to feedback the CSI from
the UE. The results are compared with and without using ML
for the CSI feedback. A clear beneﬁt of using ML can be
observed. We believe that ML-based solutions will improve
current performance without increasing signaling overhead.
IV. ROLE OF ML IN STANDARDIZATION
The potential of ML for 5G has been widely acknowledged in the literature and applications made it even in the
standard at higher levels, e.g., for networking and security
 . 3GPP has introduced a speciﬁcation, named network
data analytics function (NWDAF), in Release 15 and 16, as
part of the 5G Core (5GC) architecture . NWDAF is
responsible for providing network analytics when requested
by a network function (NF). Data is collected via application
function (AF), operation, administration, and maintenance
Fig. 5. A generalized framework for 5G network automation in Release 16, representing that NWDAF should be able to collect data from the operator OAM,
AFs and 5GC network functions .
(OAM), NF, and data repositories. The speciﬁcations have
also addressed the problem of inter-working for automation
and data collection, which analytics vendors previously faced.
3GPP NWDAF framework for 5G systems is depicted in
Fig. 5. This automation gives leverage to network vendors
for the deployment and testing of non-RT ML-related use
cases. In Fig. 5, inward interfaces aggregate data from different
network sources, where communication occurs using existing
service-based interfaces. Outward interfaces provide decisions
(analytics-based, algorithmic) to AF and NF.
Regarding PHY, ML techniques lag behind, due to a number
of issues. First, PHY makes use of abstractions and mathematical models that are inferred from the physical reality and
electromagnetic principles. As long as such models describe
the real-world precisely, there is no need for ML. Nevertheless,
in practice, models and ﬁxed algorithms are inefﬁcient when
facing rapidly changing and heterogeneous environments. For
example, using the same channel acquisition scheme to acquire
CSI from a laptop in line-of-sight with a gNB, a tablet
on a fast train, or a mobile quickly moving in a super
densely covered area might not be optimal. Consequently, the
standardization efforts of intelligent techniques have gained
momentum, and while 3GPP is ready to begin a study item
on ML implementations, open-radio access network (O-RAN)
will be ML-native, deﬁning a RAN intelligent controller (RIC),
which will enhance several RAN functions.
3GPP has started studying the implications of the ML use
at layer-1 and a study item on ML for NR air interface has
been agreed upon. After the RAN-1 working group studies,
protocol aspects will be studied in RAN-2 and subsequently,
interoperability and testability aspects will be considered in
RAN-4 working group. The remaining part of this section
summarizes the status of the standardization of ML techniques
for PHY for both 3GPP and O-RAN.
A. CSI Feedback
CSI feedback for downlink channel in Release 17 is a
complex issue in which UE-based beam selection is followed
by CSI reference symbols (RS) training and precoding matrix
index (PMI) reporting, and lastly by Demodulation Reference
Signal (DMRS) and consequent estimation of the precoded
channel. Broadly, beam selection aims to establish a sufﬁciently strong link budget between the UEs and the gNB. The
CSI-RS is used for ﬁne channel estimation, which is then fed
back to the gNB to compute a precoder (eventually multiuser); ﬁnally, DMRS are precoded pilots that the UEs use
to implement coherent demodulation. Currently, each of these
phases is created following pre-established rules, with little to
none room for intelligent behaviour. ML has been envisioned
to possibly enhance each phase in a different way. Beam
selection can be improved by intelligently correlating the
beams with position or identity of the UEs. This would allow
for a smart selection of the beams from the gNB side, thus
avoiding brute-force selection. The CSI-RS can be enhanced
by compressing the pilots and the PMI feedback exploiting
ad hoc ML compressors. Furthermore, channel prediction
techniques can be used in order to pre-establish a baseline
for the CSI feedback . Other aspects that can be improved
include frequency of pilots in both CSI-RS and DMRS, power
and timing and CSI-RS port selection.
B. RS-DMRS
Roughly speaking, DMRS are RS used for channel estimation to perform coherent demodulation. The correct estimation
of the channel using such pilots have a strong impact on the
performance in terms of bit-error-rate and thus block-errorrate. The role of the ML in such domain is twofold. First,
it can be used to improve the performance of the channel
estimation. Second, the ML can provide a smarter positioning
of DMRS in order to reduce their frequency, hence reducing
the overhead footprint in 6G.
C. Positioning
A precise positioning is one of the aspects that sees the
largest improvement with respect to LTE’s observed time
difference of arrival (OTDOA) and uplink time difference
of arrival (UTDOA), deﬁned in Release 9 onward. Various
aspects of 6G allow for precise positioning of the UE, such
as large number of antenna elements at the gNB, millimeter
wave transmissions, dense network deployment. However,
the methods based on angle-of-arrival and time-of-arrival
fall short when non-line-of-sight scenarios are considered,
in interference-limited scenarios. ML techniques, see Fig. 2,
are expected to help in improving the position by exploiting
channel charting, hence learning the likely position of a UE
based on a report, and multiplexing together information that
carries positioning information but are hard to exploit in a
classical way, such as CSI report and sounding reference signal
D. Mobility Enhancements
In 6G, frequent cell-selection, and frequent RSRP measurement could impact UEs’ battery life. Furthermore, load
balancing algorithms can use intelligent techniques that exploit the UE speciﬁc channel prediction, movement trajectory prediction and trafﬁc demands prediction. Furthermore,
the scenarios like fast-trains or non-terrestrial networks, will
pose challenges to HO and conditional-HO operations. Novel
solutions envisaged, compared to current 3GPP Release 17,
include the use of UE speciﬁc ML-based predictive algorithms,
addressed in Section III-B, designed to reduce paging errors
and HO failures; thus, improve the overall QoS.
E. Standardization for ML Data Collection
3GPP has started working on data collection for running
ML algorithms in 5G networks . The scope of such
studies include identifying mechanisms to collect data from
the network through minimization of drive test framework
or further advanced enhancements. Furthermore, studies will
focus on discussing hosting of ML models both for training
as well as inference purposes at various network entities for
various use cases and deﬁning any new interfaces required for
transporting data to the models.
F. Federated Learning Model Collection
Training and prediction based on ML models will put an
extra load on networks already transporting a large volume
of data. Therefore, it is important to estimate the effect of
model training and inference on network trafﬁc, particularly
for federated learning (FL) where UEs will act as distributed
hosts . The latency in collecting locally trained models is
bounded in FL and network links should be able to meet delay
budgets. This is particularly challenging in today’s networks
where a UE’s own QoS requirements are already demanding
and the FL model training and collection will further incur
an extra burden on the network. Similarly, the split inference,
where UEs cooperate with each other to perform joint inference, results in increasing the network trafﬁc. 3GPP studies in
Release 18 will focus on the above mentioned issues to
support training and inference for ML/FL models over wireless
G. O-RAN-RIC
O-RAN alliance, aims to deﬁne a RAN network that is
non-vendor speciﬁc, and that has an innate support for ML
as an enabler for automation and OPEX savings. O-RAN
alliance has deﬁned interfaces for exchange of information
in the protocol stack. To this end, in the O-RAN architecture,
ML-assisted RAN intelligent controller (RIC) is included for
network automation, for both scenarios, i.e., non-RT and RT.
In the non-RT RIC, ML algorithms’ training is done by
using the data obtained at lower layers. However, the learning
process remains slow; therefore, it is called non-RT RIC.
Later, the learner is fed into the RT RIC, which utilizes the
RT captured data to perform decisions online. Additionally,
the functionality of non-RT includes policy management and
higher layer procedure optimization. Therefore, the RAN or
core-network can deploy such a mechanism based on the
collected data.
V. OPEN CHALLENGES AND ROADMAP FOR DEPLOYING
ML TECHNIQUES
Though ML is a potential technology and enabler for nextgeneration wireless networks, several challenges related to its
practical use are addressed below.
A. Data Availability and Benchmarking
One of the foremost challenges in wireless networks is
data availability. Data availability concerns the problem of
identifying a common and accepted set of data (e.g., channel
realizations) with the goal of testing and benchmarking ML
algorithms. Such a problem is of a pivotal importance for
standardization, where normally algorithms and proposals are
tested using agreed underlying physical models (e.g., urban
macrocells/microcells channel models), evaluation methodologies and calibrated simulators. Contrary to other ﬁelds,
cellular networks have no standard data set to train and
benchmark an ML algorithm. Therefore, a synthetic data set
or software generated data set is of a predominant importance
to train and benchmark ML algorithm(s), and to agree on
a common evaluation methodology to rank proposition and
standard algorithms.
Identifying a set of key performance indicators in wireless
networks is another crucial task for ML standardization. It
is necessary to design a set of metrics to classify and rank
ML algorithms and their performance. Classic approaches
such as throughput and signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio
(SINR) might not be sufﬁcient since a small improvement
in these values might come at the cost of large complexity
augmentation and exacerbated energy consumption.
Fig. 6. Model collection for FL in a wireless network when some of the UEs have large blockage and use D2D communication for model transfer. Cluster-based
UE selection is another solution for asynchronous model collection to meet network QoS requirements.
B. Selection of ML versus Non-ML Solutions
ML tools are regarded as an implementation-oriented tool
rather than a standard relevant aspect. The idea behind this
relies on the fact that each vendor has the freedom to efﬁciently
implement each aspect of the standard as long as the external
interfaces are respected. A simple example of this is given
in the CSI feedback, where a UE needs to select a speciﬁc
PMI, but the standard does not specify any speciﬁc way in
which this selection is performed. Recently, however, the idea
of having ML dedicated message exchanges and performance
that only an ML-aided algorithm can achieve has paved the
way for standardization of ML algorithms . This opens
the door for several issues, e.g., will the standard impose
a speciﬁc ML structure, classifying minimum performance
and implementation structure, or will it remain far from
the implementation? With regards to NNs, it is still open
if hyperparameters are going to be left to vendor-speciﬁc
implementation or will they be set by the standard.
C. Complexity of ML Algorithms
Considering the limited battery life, storage, computational
capability, and limited communication bandwidth in most
cellular network entities, an ML model’s cost-performance
tradeoff becomes a fundamental issue. Another issue is the
speed/time-steps at which the training and inference needs
to be performed. Whereas hard-wired gNB have sufﬁcient
computational power to run complex ML algorithms, UEs
need to face battery, heating and stringent complexity limits.
Possible solutions to such issue include, but not limited to
implementation of substitute rule-based algorithms at the UE
side, migrating the load all on the gNB side.
D. Communication-aware Federated Learning
Traditional ML models support centralized learning. Due to
difﬁculties in collecting large amount of training data from
the UEs, privacy issues and bandwidth bottleneck, FL has
emerged as a promising solution. In FL, training is performed
distributively over network devices, called local model hosts,
and an application server on the network side acts as a
central host to aggregate local models transmitted by the
local learners. Typically, an application server host aggregates
models only when updates are available from all the local
learners, called synchronous model transfer. However, this
is highly inefﬁcient in wireless networks where links are
unpredictable, local learners (UEs) are energy limited and have
their own QoS requirements. Asynchronous model collection
is the most viable solution for FL in wireless networks, where
a subset of UEs is selected for a local model update in each
round of model collection. However, UE selection in each
round is a complex problem because UEs are energy limited
and the network bandwidth is scarce, hindering collection of
local models from all the UEs to represent independently
and identically data collection. These mechanisms are usually
vendor proprietary, but standardization still needs to deﬁne
some common mechanisms for efﬁcient model collection. As
shown in Fig. 6, UE clustering and local device-to-device
(D2D) communication for asynchronous model collection are
possible solutions to decrease network communication and
will require standardization support.
E. Stability and Adaptability of ML Techniques
ML algorithms applied to wireless networks must be adaptive as they will have to deal with parameters that change
dynamically. Particularly, the weights of the NN are evaluated
online based on the trained data. However, this approach
may not be applicable in wireless, and speciﬁcally in a
standard, where coordination among entities belonging to
different operators and provided by different vendors have
to coexist, and in which the need for quick response could
prevent one or the other solution. Possible solutions include:
pre-trained NN, or partially trained NN (i.e., NN in which the
starting point is pre-set); cloud-based downloadable data set
for NN training; codebook-based NN, in which a codebook
of different NNs is used and agreed upon between the gNB
and UEs. Another related problem is to detect an outdated
ML model with high inference error and replace it. Replacing
an outdated model with a new model incurs further delay.
Thus, there must be a proactive mechanism to adapt the ML
model to network conditions such that network functions suffer
minimum performance loss.
VI. CONCLUSION
Motivated by the promise of the use of ML algorithms,
we presented an overview of ML techniques to be used in
5G-Advanced and 6G wireless networks. Furthermore, we
discussed the key roles of ML-based solutions from industrial
and standardization perspectives. We also highlighted the
practical challenges of deploying ML techniques in wireless
networks and how to deal with them. Non-RT and higher layer
ML-based solutions can be, and are, applied already in today’s
networks. Implementing RT ML solutions at PHY/MAC in 6G
networks are the next big challenge in the research community.
We believe that overcoming these challenges, both in research
as well as at standardization levels, will pave the way for
next-generation wireless communication to be effective and
sustainable.