© 1911 Nature Publishing Group
SEPTEMBER 14, I9II]
river flood and protect certain areas in time of the
inundation; while no less important are the rivertraining works to restrict the erosive action of the
river on its banks at points where it may damage
existing distributing works and towns or villages.
The information so brought together shouid be of
much interest to irrigation engineers, and would have
been valuable to a wider circle if fuller material had
been provided for those not personally conversant with
the Punjab.
The case of the gradual destruction of
the town of Dera Ghazi Khan on the west bank of the
Indus by the gradual erosion of its right bank furnh;hes an interesting case of river action by the annual
flood, and is illustrated by a series of ten plans showing
the disposition of the river at this point from 1882 to
the present time.
Elsewhere general statements and descriptions are
in the majority, and we should have welcomed more
quantitative treatment of some of the interesting points
which are raised. The regimen of a part of a river
cannot be properly understood without some knowledge
of the whole, and the lack of this is especially apparent
in the first chapter, where a general map of the basin,
some information regarding its size, form, relief,
structure, &c., would have given a valuable setting to
the study of the utilisation of its water which follows.
The subjects of rainfall and discharge are dealt with
in two brief paragraphs, while we look in vain for
maps showing the distribution of the rainfall or diagrams explaining the variations of discharge at
different points and at different seasons. A number of
plans and diagrams illustrate the report, but in only
one case is the scale of the former indicated on it,
though in some other cases it can be found from the
References to other .works on the Indus would
have been a useful addition.
ELEMENTARY STATISTICS.
An Introduction to the Theory of Statistics.
Udny Yule.
Pp. xiii + 376.
(London : C. Griffin
and Co., Ltd., Igii.) Price Ios. 6d. net.
F all the works a man may set himself to write,
the most difficult must surely be an elementary
text-book on statistics. The writer of a text-book on
almost any scientific subject has to face the difficulties
resulting from a recent rapid development of the
science of which he is writing, but in statistics he
has the further difficulty that many practical methods
have been reached by mathematical analysis that is
unsuitable for an elementary text-book.
Nor is this
all, for the subject appeals to so many diverse interests
that points simple or useful to one student are merely
troublesome or inconsequent to another.
Mr. Yule has made an attempt to explain some of
the methods used in practice, without demanding
much mathematical knowledge of his readers.
course explains the advantages as well as the limitations of his work, for it has enabled him on one
hand to display his natural facility of explanation,
and, on the other, it has debarred him from giving
more than a sketch of some of the most important
parts of the subject; it has even led him to avoid
NO. 2185, VOL. 87]
giving certain formulre and methods that are of
almost everyday use.
The book is divided into three parts, the first of
which deals with the theory of attributes. We confess
that this type of statistical work does not greatly
appeal to us, for while good may be done with these
methods by a statistician of Mr. Yule's ability, we are
doubtful if the notation and formulre he gives are of
real help to a student.
To most minds statistical
errors in reasoning, for instance, are best explained
arithmetically, and many of Mr. Yule's examples in
part i. will help his readers more than his algebra or
letterpress. The second part deals with the theory of
variables, "ideal frequency distributions," averages,
deviations,
correlation
coefficients.
There is a chapter on partial correlation which should
be helpful to many readers, but we wish room had
also been found for an account of some of the most
recently discovered methods of calculating correlation
coefficients. The last part of the book deals with the
theory of sampling, and is mainly concerned with
probable errors.
Possibly because of the mathematical work involved, Mr. Yule does not deal with the fitting of
curves to statistical data, but a student who has
proceeded so far as to study partial correlations and
the correlation surface should, we think, have some
idea how to do this.
The gap will perhaps be filled
in a future edition, and revision in some other respects will, we think, also be wanted.
For instance,
on p. 38 a formula is given for measuring the degree
of association, and if it is applied to the example of
imbecility and deaf-mutism on p. 34• the value is o·g,
indicating a high degree of association. On p. 213,
instead of giving the ordinary formula for working
out coefficients of correlation from fourfold tables,
Mr. Yule gives a simple expression which he implies
can be used in some cases.
Unfortunately, in the
particular case mentioned above to which a student
might be tempted to apply it, the value, instead of
being about o·g, is only o·o2, and gives quite a wrong
impression. It was, we think, a great mistake to give
the formula on p. 213, as it is open to considerable
criticism.
Another example of a case where readers might be
misled occurs on p. 67, where a student might easily
misunderstand Mr. Yule's discussion of isotropic distributions, and think that they affected the calculation
of a coefficient of contingency.
While we are very ready to admit that, within the
limitations he has placed on himself, Mr. Yule has
given much that is of interest and value, we also feel
that there is much in his work which lends itself to
criticism-more, in fact, than one wo,uld expect to see
in an elementary text-book. The two cases that we
have given above are merely examples of this, but
although we have felt it necessary to criticise, it is
a pleasure to add that we have been much interested
in reading Mr. Yule's work, and have throughout
appreciated his numerous arithmetical examples and
the trouble that must have been taken to arrange the
book in so clear a form and to supply it with such
excellent diagrams.