Explaining NonLinear Classiﬁcation Decisions with
Deep Taylor Decomposition
Gr´egoire Montavon∗, Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Wojciech Samek∗, and Klaus-Robert M¨uller∗
Abstract—Nonlinear methods such as Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) are the gold standard for various challenging machine
learning problems, e.g., image classiﬁcation, natural language
processing or human action recognition. Although these methods
perform impressively well, they have a signiﬁcant disadvantage,
the lack of transparency, limiting the interpretability of the
solution and thus the scope of application in practice. Especially
DNNs act as black boxes due to their multilayer nonlinear
structure. In this paper we introduce a novel methodology for
interpreting generic multilayer neural networks by decomposing
the network classiﬁcation decision into contributions of its input
elements. Although our focus is on image classiﬁcation, the
method is applicable to a broad set of input data, learning tasks
and network architectures. Our method is based on deep Taylor
decomposition and efﬁciently utilizes the structure of the network
by backpropagating the explanations from the output to the
input layer. We evaluate the proposed method empirically on
the MNIST and ILSVRC data sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nonlinear models have been used since the advent of
machine learning (ML) methods and are integral part of
many popular algorithms. They include, for example, graphical
models , kernels , , Gaussian processes , neural
networks , , , boosting , or random forests .
Recently, a particular class of nonlinear methods, Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), revolutionized the ﬁeld of automated image
classiﬁcation by demonstrating impressive performance on
large benchmark data sets , , . Deep networks
have also been applied successfully to other research ﬁelds
such as natural language processing , , human action
recognition , , or physics , . Although these
models are highly successful in terms of performance, they
have a drawback of acting like a black box in the sense that it is
not clear how and why they arrive at a particular classiﬁcation
This work was supported by the Brain Korea 21 Plus Program through
the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of
Education. This work was also supported by the grant DFG (MU 987/17-
1) and by the German Ministry for Education and Research as Berlin Big
Data Center BBDC (01IS14013A). This publication only reﬂects the authors
views. Funding agencies are not liable for any use that may be made of the
information contained herein. Asterisks indicate corresponding author.
∗G. Montavon is with the Berlin Institute of Technology (TU Berlin), 10587
Berlin, Germany. (e-mail: )
S. Bach is with Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, 10587 Berlin, Germany.
(e-mail: )
A. Binder is with the Singapore University of Technology and Design,
487372, Singapore. (e-mail: alexander )
∗W. Samek is with Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, 10587 Berlin,
Germany. (e-mail: )
∗K.-R. M¨uller is with the Berlin Institute of Technology (TU Berlin),
10587 Berlin, Germany, and also with the Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea (e-mail: )
decision. This lack of transparency is a serious disadvantage as
it prevents a human expert from being able to verify, interpret,
and understand the reasoning of the system.
An interpretable classiﬁer explains its nonlinear classiﬁcation decision in terms of the inputs. For instance, in image
classiﬁcation problems, the classiﬁer should not only indicate
whether an image of interest belongs to a certain category or
not, but also explain what structures (e.g. pixels in the image)
were the basis for its decision (cf. Figure 1). This additional
information helps to better assess the quality of a particular
prediction, or to verify the overall reasoning ability of the
trained classiﬁer. Also, information about which pixels are
relevant in a particular image, could be used for determining
which region of the image should be the object of further analysis. Linear models readily provide explanations in terms of
input variables (see for example , ). However, because
of the limited expressive power of these models, they perform
poorly on complex tasks such as image recognition. Extending
linear analysis techniques to more realistic nonlinear models
such as deep neural networks, is therefore of high practical
relevance.
Recently, a signiﬁcant amount of work has been dedicated
to make the deep neural network more transparent to its
user, in particular, improving the overall interpretability of the
learned model, or explaining individual predictions. For example, Zeiler et al. have proposed a network propagation
technique to identify patterns in the input data that are linked
to a particular neuron activation or a classiﬁcation decision.
Subsequently, Bach et al. have introduced the concept
of pixel-wise decomposition of a classiﬁcation decision, and
how such decomposition can be achieved either by Taylor decomposition, or by a relevance propagation algorithm.
Speciﬁcally, the authors distinguish between (1) functional
approaches that view the neural network as a function and
disregard its topology, and (2) message passing approaches,
where the decomposition stems from a simple propagation
rule applied uniformly to all neurons of the deep network.
The main goal of this paper is to reconcile the functional
and rule-based approaches for obtaining these decompositions,
in a similar way to the error backpropagation algorithm 
that also has a functional and a message passing interpretation.
We call the resulting framework deep Taylor decomposition.
This new technique seeks to replace the analytically intractable
standard Taylor decomposition problem by a multitude of
simpler analytically tractable Taylor decompositions—one per
neuron. The proposed method results in a relevance redistribution process like the one illustrated in Figure 1 for a neural
network trained to detect the digit “0” in an image, in presence
 
Classiﬁcation
Explanation
Trained Network
Our Method
Overview of our method for explaining a nonlinear classiﬁcation
decision. The method produces a pixel-wise heatmap explaining why a neural
network classiﬁer has come up with a particular decision (here, detecting the
digit “0” in an input image composed of two digits). The heatmap is the
result of a deep Taylor decomposition of the neural network function. Note
that for the purpose of the visualization, the left and right side of the ﬁgure
are mirrored.
of another distracting digit. The classiﬁcation decision is ﬁrst
decomposed in terms of contributions R1, R2, R3 of respective
hidden neurons x1, x2, x3, and then, the contribution of each
hidden neuron is independently redistributed onto the pixels,
leading to a relevance map (or heatmap) in the pixel space,
that explains the classiﬁcation “0”.
A main result of this work is the observation that application
of deep Taylor decomposition to neural networks used for
image classiﬁcation, yields rules that are similar to those
proposed by (the αβ-rule and the ϵ-rule), but with
speciﬁc instantiations of their hyperparameters, previously set
heuristically. Because of the theoretical focus of this paper,
we do not perform a broader empirical comparison with other
recently proposed methods such as or . However, we
refer to for such a comparison.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces
the general idea of decomposition of a classiﬁcation score in
terms of input variables, and how this decomposition arises
from Taylor decomposition or deep Taylor decomposition of
a classiﬁcation function. Section III applies the proposed deep
Taylor decomposition method to a simple detection-pooling
neural network. Section IV extends the method to deeper
networks, by introducing the concept of relevance model and
describing how it can be applied to large GPU-trained neural
networks without retraining. Several experiments on MNIST
and ILSVRC data are provided to illustrate the methods
described here. Section V concludes.
Related Work
There has been a signiﬁcant body of work focusing on the
analysis and understanding of nonlinear classiﬁers such as
kernel machines , , , , neural networks ,
 , , , or a broader class of nonlinear models ,
 . In particular, some recent analyses have focused on the
understanding of state-of-the-art GPU-trained convolutional
neural networks for image classiﬁcation , , ,
offering new insights on these highly complex models.
Some methods seek to provide a general understanding of
the trained model, by measuring important characteristics of
it, such as the noise and relevant dimensionality of its feature
space(s) , , , its invariance to certain transformations of the data or the role of particular neurons .
In this paper, we focus instead on the interpretation of the
prediction of individual data points, for which portions of the
trained model may either be relevant or not relevant.
Technically, the methods proposed in , do not explain the decision of a classiﬁer but rather perform sensitivity
analysis by computing the gradient of the decision function.
This results in an analysis of variations of that function, without however seeking to provide a full explanation why a certain
data point has been predicted in a certain way. Speciﬁcally,
the gradient of a function does not contain information on
the saliency of a feature in the data to which the function is
applied. Simonyan et al. incorporate saliency information
by multiplying the gradient by the actual data point.
The method proposed by Zeiler and Fergus was designed to visualize and understand the features of a convolutional neural network with max-pooling and rectiﬁed linear
units. The method performs a backpropagation pass on the
network, where a set of rules is applied uniformly to all
layers of the network, resulting in an assignment of values
onto pixels. The method however does not aim to attribute
a deﬁned meaning to the assigned pixel values, except for
the fact that they should form a visually interpretable pattern. proposed a layer-wise propagation method where
the backpropagated signal is interpreted as relevance, and
obeys a conservation property. The proposed propagation rules
were designed according to this property, and were shown
quantitatively to better support the classiﬁcation decision .
However, the practical choice of propagation rules among
all possible ones was mainly heuristic and lacked a strong
theoretical justiﬁcation.
A theoretical foundation to the problem of relevance assignment for a classiﬁcation decision, can be found in the
Taylor decomposition of a nonlinear function. The approach
was described by Bazen and Joutard as a nonlinear
generalization of the Oaxaca method in econometrics .
The idea was subsequently introduced in the context of image
analysis , for the purpose of explaining machine
learning classiﬁers. Our paper extends the standard Taylor
decomposition in a way that takes advantage of the deep
structure of neural networks, and connects it to rule-based
propagation methods, such as .
As an alternative to propagation methods, spatial response
maps build heatmaps by looking at the neural network
output while sliding the neural network in the pixel space.
Attention models based on neural networks can be trained to
provide dynamic relevance assignment, for example, for the
purpose of classifying an image from only a few glimpses of it
 . They can also visualize what part of an image is relevant
at a given time in some temporal context . However, they
usually require speciﬁc models that are signiﬁcantly more
complex to design and train.
II. PIXEL-WISE DECOMPOSITION OF A FUNCTION
In this section, we will describe the general concept of
explaining a neural network decision by redistributing the
function value (i.e. neural network output) onto the input variables in an amount that matches the respective contributions of
these input variables to the function value. After enumerating
a certain number of desirable properties for the input-wise
relevance decomposition, we will explain in a second step
how the Taylor decomposition technique, and its extension,
deep Taylor decomposition, can be applied to this problem.
For the sake of interpretability—and because all our subsequent empirical evaluations focus on the problem of image
recognition,—we will call the input variables “pixels”, and
use the letter p for indexing them. Also, we will employ the
term “heatmap” to designate the set of redistributed relevances
onto pixels. However, despite the image-related terminology,
the method is applicable more broadly to other input domains
such as abstract vector spaces, time series, or more generally
any type of input domain whose elements can be processed
by a neural network.
Let us consider a positive-valued function f : Rd →R+. In
the context of image classiﬁcation, the input x ∈Rd of this
function can be an image. The image can be decomposed as
a set of pixel values x = {xp} where p denotes a particular
pixel. The function f(x) quantiﬁes the presence (or amount)
of a certain type of object(s) in the image. This quantity can
be for example a probability, or the number of occurrences of
the object. A function value f(x) = 0 indicates the absence
of such object(s) in the image. On the other hand, a function
value f(x) > 0 expresses the presence of the object(s) with a
certain probability or in a certain amount.
We would like to associate to each pixel p in the image a
relevance score Rp(x), that indicates for an image x to what
extent the pixel p contributes to explaining the classiﬁcation
decision f(x). The relevance of each pixel can be stored in a
heatmap denoted by R(x) = {Rp(x)} of same dimensions as
the image x. The heatmap can therefore also be visualized
as an image. In practice, we would like the heatmapping
procedure to satisfy certain properties that we deﬁne below.
Deﬁnition 1. A heatmapping R(x) is conservative if the sum
of assigned relevances in the pixel space corresponds to the
total relevance detected by the model, that is
∀x : f(x) =
Deﬁnition 2. A heatmapping R(x) is positive if all values
forming the heatmap are greater or equal to zero, that is:
∀x, p : Rp(x) ≥0
The ﬁrst property was proposed by and ensures that
the total redistributed relevance corresponds to the extent to
which the object in the input image is detected by the function
f(x). The second property forces the heatmapping to assume
that the model is devoid of contradictory evidence (i.e. no
pixels can be in contradiction with the presence or absence of
the detected object in the image). These two properties of a
heatmap can be combined into the notion of consistency:
Deﬁnition 3. A heatmapping R(x) is consistent if it is
conservative and positive. That is, it is consistent if it complies
with Deﬁnitions 1 and 2.
In particular, a consistent heatmap is forced to satisfy
(f(x) = 0) ⇒(R(x) = 0). That is, in absence of an
object to detect, the relevance is forced to be zero everywhere
in the image (i.e. empty heatmap), and not simply to have
negative and positive relevance in same amount. We will use
Deﬁnition 3 as a formal tool for assessing the correctness of
the heatmapping techniques proposed in this paper.
It was noted by that there may be multiple heatmapping
techniques that satisfy a particular deﬁnition. For example, we
can consider a heatmapping speciﬁcation that assigns for all
images the relevance uniformly onto the pixel grid:
where d is the number of input dimensions. Alternately,
we can consider another heatmapping speciﬁcation where all
relevance is assigned to the ﬁrst pixel in the image:
if p = 1st pixel
Both (1) and (2) are consistent in the sense of Deﬁnition
3, however they lead to different relevance assignments. In
practice, it is not possible to specify explicitly all properties
that a heatmapping technique should satisfy in order to be
meaningful. Instead, it can be given implicitly by the choice
of a particular algorithm (e.g. derived from a particular mathematical model), subject to the constraint that it complies with
the deﬁnitions above.
A. Taylor Decomposition
We present a heatmapping method for explaining the classiﬁcation f(x) of a data point x, that is based on the Taylor
expansion of the function f at some well-chosen root point
ex, where f(ex) = 0. The ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of the
function is given as
f(x) = f(ex) +
· (x −ex) + ε
x=ex· (xp −exp)
where the sum P
p runs over all pixels in the image, and
{exp} are the pixel values of the root point ex. We identify
the summed elements as the relevances Rp(x) assigned to
pixels in the image. The term ε denotes second-order and
higher-order terms. Most of the terms in the higher-order
expansion involve several pixels at the same time and are
therefore more difﬁcult to redistribute. Thus, for simplicity, we
will consider only the ﬁrst-order terms for heatmapping. The
heatmap (composed of all identiﬁed pixel-wise relevances)
can be written as the element-wise product “⊙” between the
gradient of the function ∂f/∂x at the root point ex and the
difference between the image and the root (x −ex):
x=ex ⊙(x −ex).
Figure 2 illustrates the construction of a heatmap in a cartoon
example, where a hypothetical function f detects the presence
of an object of class “building” in an image x. In this example,
Root point
Cartoon showing the construction of a Taylor-based heatmap from
an image x and a hypothetical function f detecting the presence of objects
of class “building” in the image. In the heatmap, positive values are shown
in red, and negative values are shown in blue.
the root point ex is the same image as x where the building
has been blurred. The root point ex plays the role of a neutral
data point that is similar to the actual data point x but
lacks the particular object in the image that causes f(x) to
be positive. The difference between the image and the root
point (x −ex) is therefore an image with only the object
“building”. The gradient ∂f/∂x|x=ex measures the sensitivity
of the class “building” to each pixel when the classiﬁer f
is evaluated at the root point ex. Finally, the sensitivities are
multiplied element-wise with the difference (x−ex), producing
a heatmap that identiﬁes the most contributing pixels for the
object “building”. Strictly speaking, for images with multiple
color channels (e.g. RGB), the Taylor decomposition will be
performed in terms of pixels and color channels, thus forming
multiple heatmaps (one per color channel). Since we are here
interested in pixel contributions and not color contributions,
we sum the relevance over all color channels, and obtain as a
result a single heatmap.
For a given classiﬁer f(x), the Taylor decomposition approach described above has one free variable: the choice of the
root point ex at which the Taylor expansion is performed. The
example of Figure 2 has provided some intuition on what are
the properties of a good root point. In particular, a good root
point should selectively remove information from some pixels
(here, pixels corresponding to the building at the center of
the image), while keeping the surroundings unchanged. This
allows in principle for the Taylor decomposition to produce
a complete explanation of the detected object which is also
insensitive to the surrounding trees and sky.
More formally, a good root point is one that removes
the object (e.g. as detected by the function f(x), but that
minimally deviates from the original point x. In mathematical
terms, it is a point ex with f(ex) = 0 that lies in the vicinity
of x under some distance metric, for example the nearest
root. If x, ex ∈Rd, one can show that for a continuously
differentiable function f the gradient at the nearest root always
points to the same direction as the difference x −ex, and
their element-wise product is always positive, thus satisfying
Deﬁnition 2. Relevance conservation in the sense of Deﬁnition
1 is however not satisﬁed for general functions f due to the
possible presence of non-zero higher-order terms in ε. The
nearest root ex can be obtained as a solution of an optimization
problem , by minimizing the objective
subject to
where X is the input domain. The nearest root ex must
therefore be obtained in the general case by an iterative minimization procedure. It is time consuming when the function
f(x) is expensive to evaluate or differentiate. Furthermore, it
is not necessarily solvable due to the possible non-convexity
of the minimization problem.
We introduce in the next sections two variants of Taylor
decomposition that seek to avoid the high computational
requirement, and to produce better heatmaps. The ﬁrst one
called sensitivity analysis makes use of a single gradient
evaluation of the function at the data point. The second one
called deep Taylor decomposition exploits the structure of the
function f(x) when the latter is a deep neural network in order
to redistribute relevance onto pixels using a single forwardbackward pass on the network.
B. Sensitivity Analysis
A simple method to assign relevance onto pixels is to set it
proportional to the squared derivatives of the classiﬁer :
where the power applies element-wise. This redistribution can
be viewed as a special instance of Taylor decomposition where
one expands the function at a point ξ ∈Rd, which is taken at
an inﬁnitesimally small distance from the actual point x, in
the direction of maximum descent of f (i.e. ξ = x−δ·∂f/∂x
with δ small). Assuming that the function is locally linear, and
therefore, the gradient is locally constant, we get
f(x) = f(ξ) +
= f(ξ) + δ
where the second-order terms are zero because of the local
linearity. The resulting heatmap is positive, but not conservative since almost all relevance is absorbed by the zero-order
term f(ξ), which is not redistributed. Sensitivity analysis only
measures a local effect and does provide a full explanation of a
classiﬁcation decision. In that case, only relative contributions
between different values of Rp are meaningful.
C. Deep Taylor Decomposition
A rich class of functions f(x) that can be trained to map
input data to classes is the deep neural network (DNN).
A deep neural network is composed of multiple layers of
representation, where each layer is composed of a set of
neurons. The neural network is trained by adapting its set of
parameters at each layer, so that the overall prediction error is
minimized. As a result of training a deep network, a particular
forward pass
relevance propagation
Graphical depiction of the computational ﬂow of deep Taylor decomposition. A score f(x) indicating the presence of the class “cat” is obtained by
forward-propagation of the pixel values {xp} into a neural network. The function value is encoded by the output neuron xf. The output neuron is assigned
relevance Rf = xf. Relevances are backpropagated from the top layer down to the input, where {Rp} denotes the relevance scores of all pixels. The last
neuron of the lowest hidden layer is perceived as relevant by higher layers and redistributes its assigned relevance onto the pixels. Other neurons of the same
layer are perceived as less relevant and do not signiﬁcantly contribute to the heatmap.
structure or factorization of the learned function emerges .
For example, each neuron in the ﬁrst layer may react to a
particular pixel activation pattern that is localized in the pixel
space. The resulting neuron activations may then be used in
higher layers to compose more complex nonlinearities 
that involve a larger number of pixels.
The deep Taylor decomposition method presented here is
inspired by the divide-and-conquer paradigm, and exploits
the property that the function learned by a deep network is
structurally decomposed into a set of simpler subfunctions that
relate quantities in adjacent layers. Instead of considering the
whole neural network function f, we consider the mapping
of a set of neurons {xi} at a given layer to the relevance
Rj assigned to a neuron xj in the next layer. Assuming that
these two objects are functionally related by some function
Rj({xi}), we would like to apply Taylor decomposition on
this local function in order to redistribute relevance Rj onto
lower-layer relevances {Ri}. For these simpler subfunctions,
Taylor decomposition should be made easier, in particular, root
points should be easier to ﬁnd. Running this redistribution
procedure in a backward pass leads eventually to the pixelwise relevances {Rp} that form the heatmap.
Figure 3 illustrates in details the procedure of layer-wise
relevance propagation on a cartoon example where an image
of a cat is presented to a hypothetical deep network. If the
neural network has been trained to detect images with an
object “cat”, the hidden layers have likely implemented a
factorization of the pixels space, where neurons are modeling
various features at various locations. In such factored network,
relevance redistribution is easier in the top layer where it has
to be decided which neurons, and not pixels, are representing
the object “cat”. It is also easier in the lower layer where the
relevance has already been redistributed by the higher layers to
the neurons corresponding to the location of the object “cat”.
Assuming the existence of a function that maps neuron
activities {xi} to the upper-layer relevance Rj, and of a
neighboring root point {exi} such that Rj({exi}) = 0, we can
then write the Taylor decomposition of P
j Rj at {xi} as
· ({xi} −{exi}) + ε
{exi}· (xi −exi)
that redistributes relevance from one layer to the layer below,
where ε denotes the Taylor residual, where
{exi} indicates
that the derivative has been evaluated at the root point {exi},
j runs over neurons at the given layer, and where P
runs over neurons in the lower layer. Equation 4 allows us to
identify the relevance of individual neurons in the lower layer
in order to apply the same Taylor decomposition technique
one layer below.
If each local Taylor decomposition in the network is conservative in the sense of Deﬁnition 1, then, the chain of equalities
Rf = . . . = P
i Ri = . . . = P
p Rp should
hold. This chain of equalities is referred by as layerwise relevance conservation. Similarly, if Deﬁnition 2 holds
for each local Taylor decomposition, the positivity of relevance
scores at each layer Rf, . . . , {Rj}, {Ri}, . . . , {Rp} ≥0 is
also ensured. Finally, if all Taylor decompositions of local
subfunctions are consistent in the sense of Deﬁnition 3, then,
the whole deep Taylor decomposition is also consistent in the
same sense.
III. APPLICATION TO ONE-LAYER NETWORKS
As a starting point for better understanding deep Taylor
decomposition, in particular, how it leads to practical rules
for relevance propagation, we work through a simple example, with advantageous analytical properties. We consider a
detection-pooling network made of one layer of nonlinearity.
The network is deﬁned as
ixiwij + bj
where {xi} is a d-dimensional input, {xj} is a detection layer,
xk is the output, and θ = {wij, bj} are the weight and bias
parameters of the network. The one-layer network is depicted
sumpooling
neural network
Detection-pooling network that implements Equations 5 and 6:
The ﬁrst layer detects features in the input space, the second layer pools the
detected features into an output score.
in Figure 4. The mapping {xi} →xk deﬁnes a function g ∈G,
where G denotes the set of functions representable by this onelayer network. We will set an additional constraint on biases,
where we force bj ≤0 for all j. Imposing this constraint
guarantees the existence of a root point {exi} of the function g
(located at the origin), and thus also ensures the applicability
of standard Taylor decomposition, for which a root point is
We now perform the deep Taylor decomposition of this
function. We start by equating the predicted output to the
amount of total relevance that must be backpropagated. That
is, we deﬁne Rk = xk. The relevance for the top layer can
now be expressed in terms of lower-layer neurons as:
Having established the mapping between {xj} and Rk, we
would like to redistribute Rk onto neurons {xj}. Using Taylor
decomposition (Equation 3), redistributed relevances Rj can
be written as:
{exj} · (xj −exj).
We still need to choose a root point {exj}. The list of all root
points of this function is given by the plane equation P
0. However, for the root to play its role of reference point, it
should be admissible. Here, because of the application of the
function max(0, ·) in the preceding layer, the root point must
be positive. The only point that is both a root (P
j exj = 0) and
admissible (∀j : exj ≥0) is {exj} = 0. Choosing this root point
in Equation 8, and observing that the derivative ∂Rk
∂xj = 1, we
obtain the ﬁrst rule for relevance redistribution:
In other words, the relevance must be redistributed on the
neurons of the detection layer in same proportion as their
activation value. Trivially, we can also verify that the relevance
is conserved during the redistribution process (P
j xj = Rk) and positive (Rj = xj ≥0).
Let us now express the relevance Rj as a function of the
input neurons {xi}. Because Rj = xj as a result of applying
the propagation rule of Equation 9, we can write
ixiwij + bj
that establishes a mapping between {xi} and Rj. To obtain
redistributed relevances {Ri}, we will apply Taylor decomposition again on this new function. The identiﬁcation of the
redistributed total relevance P
j Rj onto the preceding layer
was identiﬁed in Equation 4 as:
{exi}(j) · (xi −ex(j)
Relevances {Ri} can therefore be obtained by performing
as many Taylor decompositions as there are neurons in the
hidden layer. Note that a superscript (j) has been added to
the root point {exi} in order to emphasize that a different root
point is chosen for decomposing each relevance Rj. We will
introduce below various methods for choosing a root {exi}(j)
that consider the diversity of possible input domains X ⊆Rd
to which the data belongs. Each choice of input domain and
associated method to ﬁnd a root will lead to a different rule
for propagating relevance {Rj} to {Ri}.
A. Unconstrained Input Space and the w2-Rule
We ﬁrst consider the simplest case where any real-valued
input is admissible (X = Rd). In that case, we can always
choose the root point {exi}(j) that is nearest in the Euclidean
sense to the actual data point {xi}. When Rj > 0, the nearest
root of Rj as deﬁned in Equation 10 is the intersection of the
plane equation P
i wij +bj = 0, and the line of maximum
descent {exi}(j) = {xi} + t · wj, where wj is the vector of
weight parameters that connects the input to neuron xj and t ∈
R. The intersection of these two subspaces is the nearest root
point. It is given by {exi}(j) = {xi −
i xiwij + bj)}.
Injecting this root into Equation 11, the relevance redistributed
onto neuron i becomes:
The propagation rule consists of redistributing relevance according to the square magnitude of the weights, and pooling
relevance across all neurons j. This rule is also valid for
Rj = 0, where the actual point {xi} is already a root, and
for which no relevance needs to be propagated.
Proposition 1. For all g ∈G, the deep Taylor decomposition
with the w2-rule is consistent in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.
The w2-rule resembles the rule by , for determining
the importance of input variables in neural networks, where
absolute values of wij are used in place of squared values. It is
important to note that the decomposition that we propose here
is modulated by the upper layer data-dependent Rjs, which
leads to an individual explanation for each data point.
B. Constrained Input Space and the z-Rules
When the input domain is restricted to a subset X ⊂Rd, the
nearest root of Rj in the Euclidean sense might fall outside
of X. In the general case, ﬁnding the nearest root in this
constrained input space can be difﬁcult. An alternative is to
further restrict the search domain to a subset of X where
nearest root search becomes feasible again.
We ﬁrst study the case X = Rd
+, which arises, for example
in feature spaces that follow the application of rectiﬁed linear
units. In that case, we restrict the search domain to the segment
({xi1wij<0}, {xi}) ⊂Rd
+, that we know contains at least one
root at its ﬁrst extremity. Injecting the nearest root on that
segment into Equation 11, we obtain the relevance propagation
(called z+-rule), where z+
ij, and where w+
ij denotes
the positive part of wij. This rule corresponds for positive
input spaces to the αβ-rule formerly proposed by with
α = 1 and β = 0. The z+-rule will be used in Section IV
to propagate relevances in higher layers of a neural network
where neuron activations are positive.
Proposition 2. For all g ∈G and data points {xi} ∈Rd
the deep Taylor decomposition with the z+-rule is consistent
in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.
For image classiﬁcation tasks, pixel spaces are typically
subjects to box-constraints, where an image has to be in
the domain B = {{xi} : ∀d
i=1 li ≤xi ≤hi}, where
li ≤0 and hi ≥0 are the smallest and largest admissible
pixel values for each dimension. In that new constrained
setting, we can restrict the search for a root on the segment
({li1wij>0+hi1wij<0}, {xi}) ⊂B, where we know that there
is at least one root at its ﬁrst extremity. Injecting the nearest
root on that segment into Equation 11, we obtain relevance
propagation rule:
i′ zi′j −liw+
(called zB-rule), where zij = xiwij, and where we note the
presence of data-independent additive terms in the numerator
and denominator. The idea of using an additive term in the
denominator was formerly proposed by and called ϵstabilized rule. However, the objective of was to make
the denominator non-zero to avoid numerical instability, while
in our case, the additive terms serve to enforce positivity.
Proposition 3. For all g ∈G and data points {xi} ∈B, the
deep Taylor decomposition with the zB-rule is consistent in the
sense of Deﬁnition 3.
Detailed derivations of the proposed rules, proofs of Propositions 1, 2 and 3, and algorithms that implement these rules
efﬁciently are given in the supplement. The properties of
the relevance propagation techniques considered so far (when
applied to functions g ∈G), their domain of applicability,
their consistency, and other computational properties, are
summarized in the table below:
sensitivity
nearest root on X
conservative
consistent
unique solution
fast computation
(⋆) e.g. using the continuously differentiable approximation of the
detection function max(0, x) = limt→∞t−1 log(0.5+0.5 exp(tx)).
C. Experiment
We now demonstrate empirically the properties of the
heatmapping techniques introduced so far on the network of
Figure 4 trained to predict whether a MNIST handwritten digit
of class 0–3 is present in the input image, next to a distractor
digit of a different class 4–9. The neural network is trained
to output xk = 0 if there is no digit to detect in the image
and xk = 100 if there is one. We minimize the mean-square
error between the true scores {0, 100}, and the neural network
output xk. Treating the supervised task as a regression problem
forces the network to assign approximately the same amount
of relevance to all positive examples, and as little relevance as
possible to the negative examples.
The input image is of size 28 × 56 pixels and is coded
between −0.5 (black) and +1.5 (white). The neural network
has 28×56 input neurons {xi}, 400 hidden neurons {xj}, and
one output xk. Weights {wij} are initialized using a normal
distribution of mean 0 and standard deviation 0.05. Biases {bj}
are initialized to zero and constrained to be negative or zero
throughout training, in order to meet our speciﬁcation of the
one-layer network. The neural network is trained for 300000
iterations of stochastic gradient descent with a minibatch of
size 20 and a small learning rate. Training data is extended
with translated versions of MNIST digits. The root {exi} for the
nearest root Taylor method is chosen in our experiments to be
the nearest point such that f({exi}) < 0.1f({xi}). The zB-rule
is computed using as a lower- and upper-bounds ∀i : li = −0.5
and hi = 1.5.
Heatmaps are shown in Figure 5 for sensitivity analysis,
nearest root Taylor decomposition, and deep Taylor decomposition with the w2- and zB-rules. In all cases, we observe
that the heatmapping procedure correctly assigns most of the
relevance to pixels where the digit to detect is located. Sensitivity analysis produces unbalanced and incomplete heatmaps,
with some input points reacting strongly, and others reacting
weakly, and with a considerable amount of relevance associated to the border of the image, where there is no information.
Nearest root Taylor produces selective heatmaps, that are still
not fully complete. The heatmaps produced by deep Taylor
decomposition with the w2-rule, are similar to nearest root
Taylor, but blurred, and not perfectly aligned with the data. The
domain-aware zB-rule produces heatmaps that are still blurred,
but that are complete and well-aligned with the data.
Figure 6 quantitatively evaluates heatmapping techniques of
Figure 5. The scatter plots compare the total output relevance
Sensitivity (rescaled)
Taylor (nearest root)
Deep Taylor (w2-rule)
Deep Taylor (zB-rule)
Comparison of heatmaps produced by various decompositions. Each input image (pair of handwritten digits) is presented with its associated heatmap.
Sensitivity (rescaled)
Taylor (nearest root)
Deep Taylor (w2-rule)
Deep Taylor (zB-rule)
p Rp|⟩= 24.5
p Rp|⟩= 0.0
p Rp|⟩= 0.0
p min(0, Rp)⟩= −0.0
p min(0, Rp)⟩= 0.0
p min(0, Rp)⟩= 0.0
Quantitative analysis of each decomposition technique. Top: Scatter plots showing for each data point the total output relevance (x-axis), and the
sum of pixel-wise relevances (y-axis). Bottom: Histograms showing in log scale the number of times a particular value of pixel relevance occurs.
with the sum of pixel-wise relevances. Each point in the scatter
plot is a different data point drawn independently from the
input distribution. These scatter plots test empirically for each
heatmapping method whether it is conservative in the sense of
Deﬁnition 1. In particular, if all points lie on the diagonal line
of the scatter plot, then P
p Rp = Rf, and the heatmapping
is conservative. The histograms just below test empirically
whether the studied heatmapping methods satisfy positivity in
the sense of Deﬁnition 2, by counting the number of times
(shown on a log-scale) pixel-wise contributions Rp take a
certain value. Red color in the histogram indicates positive
relevance assignments, and blue color indicates negative relevance assignments. Therefore, an absence of blue bars in the
histogram indicates that the heatmap is positive (the desired
behavior). Overall, the scatter plots and the histograms produce
a complete description of the degree of consistency of the
heatmapping techniques in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.
Sensitivity analysis only measures a local effect and therefore does not conceptually redistribute relevance onto the
input. However, we can still measure the relative strength of
computed sensitivities between examples or pixels. The nearest
root Taylor approach, although producing mostly positive
heatmaps, dissipates a large fraction of the relevance. The
deep Taylor decomposition on the other hand ensure full
consistency, as theoretically predicted by Propositions 1 and 3.
The zB-rule spreads relevance onto more pixels than methods
based on nearest root, as shown by the shorter tail of its
relevance histogram.
IV. APPLICATION TO DEEP NETWORKS
In order to represent efﬁciently complex hierarchical problems, one needs deeper architectures. These architectures are
typically made of several layers of nonlinearity, where each
layer extracts features at different scale. An example of deep
architecture is shown in Figure 7 (left). In this example, the
input is ﬁrst processed by feature extractors localized in the
pixel space. The resulting features are combined into more
complex mid-level features that cover more pixels. Finally,
these more complex features are combined in a ﬁnal stage of
nonlinear mapping, that produces a score determining whether
the object to detect is present in the input image or not. A
practical example of deep network with similar hierarchical
architecture, and that is frequently used for image recognition
tasks, is the convolutional neural network .
In Section II and III, we have assumed the existence
and knowledge of a functional mapping between the neuron
activities at a given layer and relevances in the higher layer.
However, in deep architectures, the mapping may be unknown
(although it may still exist). In order to redistribute the
relevance from the higher layers to the lower layers, one needs
redistribution
propagation
deep neural network
1. min-max
relevance model
sumpooling
2. training-free
relevance model
sumpooling
Left: Example of a 3-layer deep network, composed of increasingly high-level feature extractors. Right: Diagram of the two proposed relevance
models for redistributing relevance onto lower layers.
to make this mapping explicit. For this purpose, we introduce
the concept of relevance model.
A relevance model is a function that maps a set of neuron
activations at a given layer to the relevance of a neuron in
a higher layer, and whose output can be redistributed onto
its input variables, for the purpose of propagating relevance
backwards in the network. For the deep network of Figure
7 (left), on can for example, try to predict Rk from {xi},
which then allows us to decompose the predicted relevance
Rk into lower-layer relevances {Ri}. For practical purposes,
the relevance models we will consider borrow the structure of
the one-layer network studied in Section III, and for which we
have already derived a deep Taylor decomposition.
Upper-layer relevance is not only determined by input
neuron activations of the considered layer, but also by highlevel information (i.e. abstractions) that have been formed in
the top layers of the network. These high-level abstractions
are necessary to ensure a global cohesion between low-level
parts of the heatmap.
A. Min-Max Relevance Model
We ﬁrst consider a trainable relevance model of Rk. This
relevance model is illustrated in Figure 7-1 and is designed
to incorporate both bottom-up and top-down information, in a
way that the relevance can still be fully decomposed in terms
of input neurons. It is deﬁned as
ixivij + aj
where aj = min(0, P
lRlvlj + dj) is a negative bias that
depends on upper-layer relevances, and where P
l runs over
the detection neurons of that upper-layer. This negative bias
plays the role of an inhibitor, in particular, it prevents the
activation of the detection unit yj of the relevance model in
the case where no upper-level abstraction in {Rl} matches the
feature detected in {xi}.
The parameters {vij, vlj, dj} of the relevance model are
learned by minimization of the mean square error objective
( bRk −Rk)2
where Rk is the true relevance, bRk is the predicted relevance,
and ⟨·⟩is the expectation with respect to the data distribution.
Because the relevance model has exactly the same structure
as the one-layer neural network described in Section III, in
particular, because aj is negative and only weakly dependent
on the set of neurons {xi}, one can apply the same set of rules
for relevance propagation. That is, we compute
for the pooling layer and
for the detection layer, where qij = v2
ij, qij = xiv+
qij = xivij −liv+
ij if choosing the w2-, z+-, zBrules respectively. This set of equations used to backpropagate
relevance from Rk to {Ri}, is approximately conservative,
with an approximation error that is determined by how much
on average the output of the relevance model bRk differs from
the true relevance Rk.
B. Training-Free Relevance Model
A large deep neural network may have taken weeks or
months to train, and we should be able to explain it without
having to train a relevance model for each neuron. We consider
the original feature extractor
ixiwij + bj
xk = ∥{xj}∥p
where the Lp-norm can represent a variety of pooling operations such as sum-pooling or max-pooling. Assuming that the
upper-layer has been explained by the z+-rule, and indexing
by l the detection neurons of that upper-layer, we can write
the relevance Rk as
The ﬁrst term is a linear pooling over detection units that has
the same structure as the network of Section III. The second
term is a positive Lp/L1 pooling ratio, which is constant under
any permutation of neurons {xj}, or multiplication of these
neurons by a scalar. The last term is a positive weighted sum
of higher-level relevances, that measures the sensitivity of the
neuron relevance to its activation. It is mainly determined by
the relevance found in higher layers and can be viewed as a
top-down contextualization term dk({Rl}). Thus, we rewrite
the relevance as
· ck · dk({Rl})
where the pooling ratio ck > 0 and the top-down term
dk({Rl}) > 0 are only weakly dependent on {xj} and
are approximated as constant terms. This relevance model is
illustrated in Figure 7-2. Because the relevance model above
has the same structure as the network of Section III (up to a
constant factor), it is easy to derive its Taylor decomposition,
in particular one can show that
where relevance is redistributed in proportion to activations in
the detection layer, and that
where qij = w2
ij, qij = xiw+
ij, or qij = xiwij −liw+
if choosing the w2-, z+-, zB-rules respectively. If choosing
the z+-rule for that layer again, the same training-free decomposition technique can be applied again to the layer below,
and the process can be repeated until the input layer. Thus,
when using the training-free relevance model, all layers of the
network must be decomposed using the z+-rule, except the
ﬁrst layer for which other rules can be applied such as the
w2-rule or the zB-rule.
advantages
disadvantages
heatmapping method are summarized in the table below:
sensitivity Taylor
consistent
unique solution
training-free
fast computation
† Conservative up to a ﬁtting error between the redistributed relevance
and the relevance model output. ‡ Root ﬁnding and relevance model
training are in the general case both nonconvex.
C. Experiment on MNIST
We train a neural network with two layers of nonlinearity
on the same MNIST problem as in Section III. The neural
network is composed of a ﬁrst detection-pooling layer with
400 detection neurons sum-pooled into 100 units (i.e. we sumpool groups of 4 detection units). A second detection-pooling
layer with 400 detection neurons is applied to the resulting
100-dimensional output of the previous layer, and activities are
sum-pooled onto a single unit representing the deep network
output. In addition, we learn a min-max relevance model for
the ﬁrst layer. The relevance model is trained to minimize the
mean-square error between the relevance model output and the
true relevance (obtained by application of the z+-rule in the
top layer). The deep network and the relevance models are
trained using stochastic gradient descent with minibatch size
20, for 300000 iterations, and using a small learning rate.
Figure 8 shows heatmaps obtained with sensitivity analysis,
standard Taylor decomposition, and deep Taylor decomposition with different relevance models. We apply the zB-rule
to backpropagate relevance of pooled features onto pixels.
Sensitivity analysis and standard Taylor decomposition produce noisy and incomplete heatmaps. These two methods
do not handle well the increased depth of the network. The
min-max Taylor decomposition and the training-free Taylor
decomposition produce relevance maps that are complete,
and qualitatively similar to those obtained by deep Taylor
decomposition of the shallow architecture in Section III.
This demonstrates the high level of transparency of deep
Taylor methods with respect to the choice of architecture. The
heatmaps obtained by the trained min-max relevance model
and by the training-free method are of similar quality.
Similar advantageous properties of the deep Taylor decomposition are observed quantitatively in the plots of Figure 9.
The standard Taylor decomposition is positive, but dissipates
relevance. The deep Taylor decomposition with the min-max
relevance model produces near-conservative heatmaps, and the
training-free deep Taylor decomposition produces heatmaps
that are fully conservative. Both deep Taylor decomposition
variants shown here also ensures positivity, due to the application of the zB- and z+-rule in the respective layers.
D. Experiment on ILSVRC
We now apply the fast training-free decomposition to explain decisions made by large neural networks (BVLC Reference CaffeNet and GoogleNet ) trained on the dataset
of the ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenges
ILSVRC 2012 and ILSVRC 2014 respectively. For
these models, standard Taylor decomposition methods with
root ﬁnding are computationally too expensive. We keep the
neural networks unchanged.
The training-free relevance propagation method is tested
on a number of images from Pixabay.com and Wikimedia
Commons. The zB-rule is applied to the ﬁrst convolution layer.
For all higher convolution and fully-connected layers, the z+rule is applied. Positive biases (that are not allowed in our deep
Taylor framework), are treated as neurons, on which relevance
can be redistributed (i.e. we add max(0, bj) in the denominator
Sensitivity (rescaled)
Taylor (nearest root)
Deep Taylor (min-max)
Deep Taylor (training-free)
Comparison of heatmaps produced by various decompositions and relevance models. Each input image is presented with its associated heatmap.
Sensitivity (rescaled)
Taylor (nearest root)
Deep Taylor (min-max)
Deep Taylor (training-free)
p Rp|⟩= 14.7
p Rp|⟩= 6.0
p Rp|⟩= 0.0
p min(0, Rp)⟩= −0.2
p min(0, Rp)⟩= 0.0
p min(0, Rp)⟩= 0.0
Top: Scatter plots showing for each type of decomposition and data points the predicted class score (x-axis), and the sum-of-relevance in the input
layer (y-axis). Bottom: Histograms showing the number of times (on a log-scale) a particular pixel-wise relevance score occurs.
of zB- and z+-rules). Normalization layers are bypassed in the
relevance propagation pass. In order to visualize the heatmaps
in the pixel space, we sum the relevances of the three color
channels, leading to single-channel heatmaps, where the red
color designates relevant regions.
Figure 10 shows the resulting heatmaps for eight different images. Deep Taylor decomposition produces exhaustive
heatmaps covering the whole object to detect. On the other
hand, sensitivity analysis assigns most of the relevance to a few
pixels. Deep Taylor heatmaps for the Caffenet and Googlenet
have a high level of similarity, showing the transparency
of the heatmapping method to the choice of deep network
architecture. However, GoogleNet being more accurate, its
corresponding heatmaps are also of better quality, with more
heat associated to the truly relevant parts of the image.
Heatmaps identify the dorsal ﬁn of the shark, the head of
the cat, the ﬂame above the matchsticks, or the wheels of the
motorbike. The heatmaps are able to detect two instances of
the same object within a same image, for example, the two
frogs and the two stupas. The heatmaps also ignore most of
the distracting structure, such as the horizontal lines above
the cat’s head, the wood pattern behind the matches, or the
grass behind the motorcycle. Sometimes, the object to detect
is shown in a less stereotypical pose or can be confused with
the background. For example, the sheeps in the top-right image
are overlapping and superposed to a background of same color,
and the scooter is difﬁcult to separate from the complex and
high contrast urban background. This confuses the network
and the heatmapping procedure, and in that case, a signiﬁcant
amount of relevance is lost to the background.
Figure 11 studies the special case of an image of class
“volcano”, and a zoomed portion of it. On a global scale,
the heatmapping method recognizes the characteristic outline
of the volcano. On a local scale, the relevance is present on
both sides of the edge of the volcano, which is consistent
with the fact that the two sides of the edge are necessary
to detect it. The zoomed portion of the image also reveals
different stride sizes in the ﬁrst convolution layer between
CaffeNet (stride 4) and GoogleNet (stride 2). Therefore, our
proposed heatmapping technique produces explanations that
are interpretable both at a global and local scale in the pixel
V. CONCLUSION
Nonlinear machine learning models have become standard
tools in science and industry due to their excellent performance
even for large, complex and high-dimensional problems. However, in practice it becomes more and more important to
understand the underlying nonlinear model, i.e. to achieve
transparency of what aspect of the input makes the model
Sensitivity (CaffeNet)
Deep Taylor (CaffeNet)
Deep Taylor (GoogleNet)
Images of different ILSVRC classes (“frog”, “shark”, “cat”, “sheep”, “matchstick”, “motorcycle”, “scooter”, and “stupa”) given as input to a deep
network, and displayed next to the corresponding heatmaps. Heatmap scores are summed over all color channels.
Deep Taylor (CaffeNet)
Deep Taylor (GoogleNet)
Rescaled Gradient (CaffeNet)
Fig. 11. Image with ILSVRC class “volcano”, displayed next to its associated
heatmaps and a zoom on a region of interest.
To achieve this, we have contributed by novel conceptual
ideas to deconstruct nonlinear models. Speciﬁcally, we have
proposed a novel relevance propagation approach based on
deep Taylor decomposition, that is used to efﬁciently assess
the importance of single pixels in image classiﬁcation applications. Thus, we are now able to compute heatmaps that clearly
and intuitively allow to better understand the role of input
pixels when classifying an unseen data point.
In particular, we have shed light on theoretical connections between the Taylor decomposition of a function and
rule-based relevance propagation techniques, showing a clear
relationship between these two approaches for a particular
class of neural networks. We have introduced the concept of
relevance model as a mean to scale deep Taylor decomposition
to neural networks with many layers. Our method is stable
under different architectures and datasets, and does not require
hyperparameter tuning.
We would like to stress, that we are free to use as a starting
point of our framework either an own trained and carefully
tuned neural network model or we may also download existing
pre-trained deep network models (e.g. the Caffe Reference
ImageNet Model ) that have already been shown to achieve
excellent performance on benchmarks. In both cases, our layerwise relevance propagation concept can provide explanation.
In other words our approach is orthogonal to the quest for
enhanced results on benchmarks, in fact, we can use any
benchmark winner and then enhance its transparency to the
REFERENCES
 M. I. Jordan, Learning in Graphical Models. MIT Press, Nov. 1998.
 B. Sch¨olkopf and A. J. Smola, Learning with Kernels Support Vector
Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond. MIT Press, 2002.
 K.-R. M¨uller, S. Mika, G. R¨atsch, K. Tsuda, and B. Sch¨olkopf, “An
introduction to kernel-based learning algorithms,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 181–201, 2001.
 C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning. MIT Press, 2006.
 C. M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition.
University Press, Inc., 1995.
 G. Montavon, G. B. Orr, and K.-R. M¨uller, eds., Neural Networks: Tricks
of the Trade, Reloaded, vol. 7700 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS). Springer, 2nd edn ed., 2012.
 Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K.-R. M¨uller, “Efﬁcient backprop,”
in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade - Second Edition, pp. 9–48,
Springer, 2012.
 R. E. Schapire and Y. Freund, Boosting. MIT Press, 2012.
 L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
 A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pp. 1106–1114, 2012.
 D. C. Ciresan, A. Giusti, L. M. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber, “Deep
neural networks segment neuronal membranes in electron microscopy
images,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25,
pp. 2852–2860, 2012.
 C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1409.4842, 2014.
 R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and P. P.
Kuksa, “Natural language processing (almost) from scratch,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2493–2537, 2011.
 R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y. Ng,
and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality
over a sentiment treebank,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, (Stroudsburg,
PA), pp. 1631–1642, Association for Computational Linguistics, October
 S. Ji, W. Xu, M. Yang, and K. Yu, “3d convolutional neural networks
for human action recognition,” in Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 495–502, 2010.
 Q. V. Le, W. Y. Zou, S. Y. Yeung, and A. Y. Ng, “Learning hierarchical
invariant spatio-temporal features for action recognition with independent subspace analysis,” in The 24th IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3361–3368, 2011.
 G. Montavon, M. Rupp, V. Gobre, A. Vazquez-Mayagoitia, K. Hansen,
A. Tkatchenko, K.-R. M¨uller, and O. A. von Lilienfeld, “Machine learning of molecular electronic properties in chemical compound space,”
New Journal of Physics, vol. 15, no. 9, p. 095003, 2013.
 P. Baldi, P. Sadowski, and D. Whiteson, “Searching for exotic particles
in high-energy physics with deep learning,” Nature Communications,
vol. 5, no. 4308, 2014.
 S. Haufe, F. C. Meinecke, K. G¨orgen, S. D¨ahne, J. Haynes, B. Blankertz,
and F. Bießmann, “On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear
models in multivariate neuroimaging,” NeuroImage, vol. 87, pp. 96–110,
 R. Oaxaca, “Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets,”
International Economic Review, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 693–709, 1973.
 M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1311.2901, 2013.
 S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. M¨uller, and
W. Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation,” PLoS ONE, vol. 10,
p. e0130140, 07 2015.
 D. Rumelhart, G. Hinton, and R. Williams, “Learning representations
by back-propagating errors,” Nature, vol. 323, no. 6088, pp. 533–536,
 K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency maps,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1312.6034, 2013.
 W. Samek, A. Binder, G. Montavon, S. Bach, and K.-R. M¨uller,
“Evaluating the visualization of what a deep neural network has learned,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1509.06321, 2015.
 M. L. Braun, J. M. Buhmann, and K.-R. M¨uller, “On relevant dimensions
in kernel feature spaces,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9,
pp. 1875–1908, 2008.
 D. Baehrens, T. Schroeter, S. Harmeling, M. Kawanabe, K. Hansen,
and K.-R. M¨uller, “How to explain individual classiﬁcation decisions,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 11, pp. 1803–1831, 2010.
 K. Hansen, D. Baehrens, T. Schroeter, M. Rupp, and K.-R. M¨uller,
“Visual interpretation of kernel-based prediction models,” Molecular
Informatics, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 817–826, 2011.
 G. Montavon, M. L. Braun, T. Krueger, and K.-R. M¨uller, “Analyzing
local structure in kernel-based learning: Explanation, complexity, and
reliability assessment,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 62–74, 2013.
 D. G. Garson, “Interpreting neural-network connection weights,” AI
Expert, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 46–51, 1991.
 A. T. C. Goh, “Back-propagation neural networks for modeling complex
systems,” AI in Engineering, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 143–151, 1995.
 I. J. Goodfellow, Q. V. Le, A. M. Saxe, H. Lee, and A. Y. Ng, “Measuring
invariances in deep networks,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 22, pp. 646–654, 2009.
 G. Montavon, M. L. Braun, and K.-R. M¨uller, “Kernel analysis of deep
networks,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2563–
2581, 2011.
 S. Bazen and X. Joutard, “The Taylor decomposition: A uniﬁed generalization of the Oaxaca method to nonlinear models,” tech. rep., Aix-
Marseille University, 2013.
 C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. J.
Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1312.6199, 2013.
 D. Erhan, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Understanding representations
learned in deep architectures,” Tech. Rep. 1355, University of Montreal,
 H. Fang, S. Gupta, F. N. Iandola, R. Srivastava, L. Deng, P. Doll´ar,
J. Gao, X. He, M. Mitchell, J. C. Platt, C. L. Zitnick, and G. Zweig,
“From captions to visual concepts and back,” CoRR, vol. abs/1411.4952,
 H. Larochelle and G. E. Hinton, “Learning to combine foveal glimpses
with a third-order Boltzmann machine,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pp. 1243–1251, 2010.
 K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. C. Courville, R. Salakhutdinov,
R. S. Zemel, and Y. Bengio, “Show, attend and tell: Neural image
caption generation with visual attention,” in Proceedings of the 32nd
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2048–2057, 2015.
 M. Gevrey, I. Dimopoulos, and S. Lek, “Review and comparison of
methods to study the contribution of variables in artiﬁcial neural network
models,” Ecological Modelling, vol. 160, no. 3, pp. 249–264, 2003.
Modelling the structure of acquatic communities: concepts, methods and
 H. Lee, R. B. Grosse, R. Ranganath, and A. Y. Ng, “Convolutional deep
belief networks for scalable unsupervised learning of hierarchical representations,” in Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 609–616, 2009.
 Y. Bengio, “Learning deep architectures for AI,” Foundations and Trends
in Machine Learning, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–127, 2009.
 Y. LeCun, “Generalization and network design strategies,” in Connectionism in Perspective (R. Pfeifer, Z. Schreter, F. Fogelman, and
L. Steels, eds.), (Zurich, Switzerland), Elsevier, 1989.
an extended
version was published as a technical report of the University of Toronto.
 Y. Jia, “Caffe: An open source convolutional architecture for fast feature
embedding.” 2013.
 J. Deng, A. Berg, S. Satheesh, H. Su, A. Khosla, and F.-F. Li, “The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge 2012 (ILSVRC2012).”
 
 O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma,
Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. S. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and
F. Li, “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge,” International
Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.
Explaining NonLinear Classiﬁcation Decisions with
Deep Taylor Decomposition
(SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL)
Gr´egoire Montavon, Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert M¨uller
Abstract—This supplement provides proofs, detailed derivations, pseudocode, and empirical comparisons with other relevance propagation techniques.
I. DERIVATIONS OF PROPAGATION RULES
In this section, we give the detailed derivations of propagation rules resulting from deep Taylor decomposition of the
neural network of Section III of the paper. Each propagation
rule corresponds to different choices of root point {exi}(j). For
the class of networks considered here, the relevance of neurons
in the detection layer is given by
Rj = max(0, P
ixiwij + bj),
where bj < 0. All rules derived in this paper are based on the
search for a root in a particular search direction {vi}(j) in the
input space associated to neuron j:
{exi}(j) = {xi} + t{vi}(j)
We need to consider two cases separately:
C1 = {j : P
ixiwij + bj ≤0} = {j : Rj = 0}
C2 = {j : P
ixiwij + bj > 0} = {j : Rj > 0}
In the ﬁrst case (j ∈C1), the data point itself is already the
nearest root point of the function Rj. Therefore,
In the second case (j ∈C2), the nearest root point along
the deﬁned search direction is given by the intersection of
Equation 2 with the plane equation P
i wij + bj = 0 to
which the nearest root belong. In particular, resolving t by
injecting (2) into that plane equation, we get
i xiwij + bj
Starting from the generic relevance propagation formula proposed in Section II we can derive a more speciﬁc formula that
involve the search directions {vi}(j):
{exi}(j) · (xi −ex(j)
i xiwij + bj
From (5) to (6) we have considered the two listed cases
separately, and injected their corresponding roots found in
Equations 3 and 4. From (6) to (7), we have used the fact
that the relevance for the case C1 is always zero to recombine
both terms.
The derivation of the various relevance propagation rules
presented in this paper will always follow the same three steps:
1) Deﬁne for each neuron j ∈C2 a line or segment in
the input space starting from data point {xi} and with
direction {vi}(j).
2) Verify that the line or segment lies inside the input
domain and includes at least one root of Rj.
3) Inject the search directions {vi}(j) into Equation 7, and
obtain the relevance propagation rule as a result.
An illustration of the search directions and root points selected
by each rule for various relevance functions Rj({xi}) is given
in Figure 1.
A. w2-Rule
The w2-rule is obtained by choosing the root of Rj that
is nearest to {xi} in Rd. Such nearest root must be searched
for on the line including the point {xi}, and with direction
corresponding to the gradient of Rj (the ith component of
this gradient is wij). Therefore, the components of the search
vector are given by
This line is included in the input domain Rd, and always
contains a root (the nearest of which is obtained by setting
t = −Rj/ P
ij in Equation 2). Injecting the deﬁned search
direction vi into Equation 7, we get
The z-rule (originally proposed by ) is obtained by
choosing the nearest root of Rj on the segment (0, {xi}).
This segment is included in all domains considered in this
paper (Rd, Rd
+, B), provided that {xi} also belongs to these
domains. This segment has a root at its ﬁrst extremity, because
Rj(0) = max(0, P
i 0 · wij + bj) = max(0, bj) = 0 since bj
is negative by design. The direction of this segment on which
we search for the nearest root corresponds to the data point
 
Illustration of root points (empty circles) found for a given data point (full circle) for various propagation rules, relevance functions, and input
domains. Here, for the zB-rule, we have used the bounding box l1 = −1, h1 = 1, l2 = −1, h2 = 1.
Injecting this search direction into Equation 7, and deﬁning
the weighted activation zij = xiwij, we get
C. z+-Rule
The z+-rule is obtained by choosing the nearest root on
the segment ({xi1wij<0}, {xi}). If {xi} is in Rd
+, then, the
segment is also in the domain Rd
+. The relevance function has
a root at the ﬁrst extremity of the segment:
Rj({xi1wij<0}) = max(0, P
ixi1wij<0wij + bj)
= max(0, P
ij + bj) = 0,
since xi ≥0 and w−
ij ≤0, and therefore xiw−
ij ≤0, and since
bj < 0 by design. The direction of this segment on which we
search for the nearest root is given by:
= xi −xi1wij<0
= xi1wij≥0.
Injecting this search direction into Equation 7, and deﬁning
ij with w+
ij = 1wij≥0wij, we get
D. zB-Rule
The zB-rule is obtained by choosing the nearest root on the
segment ({li1wij>0 + hi1wij<0}, {xi}). Provided that {xi} is
in B, the segment is also in B. The relevance function has a
root at the ﬁrst extremity of the segment:
Rj({li1wij>0 + hi1wij<0})
= max(0, P
ili1wij>0wij + hi1wij<0wij + bj)
= max(0, P
ij + bj) = 0,
because all summed terms are either negative or the product
of a negative and positive value. The search direction for this
choice of segment is given by
= xi −li1wij>0 −hi1wij<0
Injecting this search direction in to Equation 7, we get
i zij −liw+
II. ALGORITHMS FOR PROPAGATION RULES
We give here algorithms to implement the rules derived
in Section I of the supplement. A useful property of these
rules is that they can all be expressed in terms of matrix
multiplications, thus, making them easily implementable with
numerical libraries such as Matlab or Python/Numpy.
A. w2-Rule
Weight matrix W = {wij}
Upper-layer relevance vector R = {Rj}
Procedure:
N ←V ⊘( · V)
return N · R
where ⊙and ⊘denote the element-wise multiplication and
division respectively, and is a matrix of ones. Note that
for efﬁciency purposes, the squaring and normalization of the
weight matrix can be performed once, and reused for many
heatmaps computations.
Weight matrix W = {wij}
Input activations X = {xi}
Upper-layer relevance vector R = {Rj}
Procedure:
return X ⊙(W · (R ⊘Z))
where ⊙and ⊘denote the element-wise multiplication and
division respectively, and where the variable Z is the sum of
weighted activations for each upper-layer neuron.
C. z+-Rule
Weight matrix W = {wij}
Input activations X = {xi}
Upper-layer relevance vector R = {Rj}
Procedure:
return X ⊙(V · (R ⊘Z))
where ⊙and ⊘denote the element-wise multiplication and
division respectively, and where the operation (·)+ keeps the
positive part of the input matrix. For efﬁciency, like for the w2rule, the matrix V can be precomputed and reused for multiple
heatmaps computations.
D. zB-Rule
Weight matrix W = {wij}
Input activations X = {xi}
Upper-layer relevance vector R = {Rj}
Lower-bound L = {li}
Upper-bound H = {hi}
Procedure:
N ←R ⊘(W⊤X −V⊤L −U⊤H)
return X ⊙(W · N) −L ⊙(V · N) −H ⊙(U · N)
where ⊙and ⊘denote the element-wise multiplication and
division respectively, and where the operations (·)+, (·)−keep
the positive part and the negative part of the input matrix
respectively. For efﬁciency, like for the previous rules, the
matrices U and V can be precomputed and reused for multiple
heatmaps computations.
III. PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS
Deﬁnition 1. A heatmapping R(x) is conservative if the sum
of assigned relevances in the pixel space corresponds to the
total relevance detected by the model, that is
∀x : f(x) =
Deﬁnition 2. A heatmapping R(x) is positive if all values
forming the heatmap are greater or equal to zero, that is:
∀x, p : Rp(x) ≥0
Deﬁnition 3. A heatmapping R(x) is consistent if it is
conservative and positive. That is, it is consistent if it complies
with Deﬁnitions 1 and 2.
Proposition 1. For all g ∈G, the deep Taylor decomposition
with the w2-rule is consistent in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.
Proof: We ﬁrst show that the heatmapping is conservative:
xj = f(x).
where we have assumed the weights to be never exactly zero.
Then, we show that the heatmapping is positive:
Therefore, because the heatmapping is both conservative and
positive, it is also consistent.
For the case where P
ij = 0, it implies that wij = 0
for all i and therefore zij = 0 for all i too. Because bj ≤0,
then Rj = xj = 0 (there is no relevance to redistribute to the
lower layer).
Proposition 2. For all g ∈G and data points {xi} ∈Rd
the deep Taylor decomposition with the z+-rule is consistent
in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.
Proof: The proof is the same as for Proposition 1 for the
case where P
ij > 0. We simply replace w2
For the case where P
ij = 0, it implies that zij ≤0 for
all i. Because bj ≤0, then Rj = xj = 0 (there is no relevance
to redistribute to the lower layer).
Proposition 3. For all g ∈G and data points {xi} ∈B, the
deep Taylor decomposition with the zB-rule is consistent in the
sense of Deﬁnition 3.
Proof: We ﬁrst show that the numerator of the zB-rule
qij = zij −liw+
ij is greater or equal than zero for
qij = zij −liw+
= xiwij −liw+
= (xi −hi)
+ (xi −li)
Then, the proof is the same as for Proposition 1 for the case
i qij > 0. We simply replace w2
ij by qij in the
proof. For the case where P
i qij = 0, we will show that
the contributions zij of the inputs to the detection neurons
cannot be positive, and that there is therefore no relevance that
needs to be redistributed. The equality P
i qij = 0 implies that
∀i : qij = 0, which can be satisﬁed by one of the four sets of
conditions:
a) xi = hi and xi = li: In that case xi = 0 (because
li ≤0 and hi ≥0), and therefore zij = 0 · wij = 0.
b) xi = hi and w+
ij = 0: In that case, zij = hiwij, and
because hi ≥0, then zij ≤0.
ij = 0 and xi = li: In that case, zij = liwij, and
because li ≤0, then zij ≤0.
ij = 0 and w+
ij = 0: In that case, wij = 0, and
therefore, zij = xi · 0 = 0.
Therefore, inputs are in all cases prevented from contributing positively to the neuron xj. In particular, the total
contribution is given by zj = P
i zij ≤0. Because bj ≤0,
then Rj = xj = 0 (there is no relevance to redistribute to the
lower layer).
IV. EMPIRICAL COMPARISON WITH LRP
In this section, we compare heatmaps produced by the
rules based on deep Taylor decomposition, and the layer-wise
relevance propagation (LRP) rules proposed by . The last
rules include in particular, the αβ-rule:
where α −β = 1, and the ϵ-stabilized rule:
i zij + bj)Rj,
where s(t) = t+ϵ(1t≥0−1t<0) is a stabilizing function whose
output is never zero. The respective hyperparameters α and ϵ
of these rules are typically selected such that the produced
heatmaps have the desired quality.
Figure 2 and 3 compare heatmaps obtained by applying
deep Taylor and LRP to the one-layer and two-layer networks
considered in this paper for the MNIST problem. In the twolayer case, deep Taylor uses the min-max relevance model.
LRP applies the same rules in both layers. Figure 4 compares
heatmaps obtained by deep Taylor and LRP on the BVLC CaffeNet and the GoogleNet. For deep Taylor, we use the trainingfree relevance model. Normalization layers are ignored in the
backward pass.
It can be observed that the quality of the deep Taylor
heatmaps is less inﬂuenced by the choice of model and dataset
than LRP with a ﬁxed set of parameters. Deep Taylor heatmaps
look similar in all cases. LRP also produces high-quality
heatmaps, but the best parameters differ in each setting. For
example, the parameters α = 2, β = 1 perform well for the
CaffeNet, but tend to produce too sparse heatmaps for the
GoogleNet, or to produce a large amount of negative relevance
on the MNIST dataset. Various parameters of LRP produce
various artefacts such as the presence of residual relevance
on the irrelevant MNIST digit, or the presence of negative
relevance in the black areas of the MNIST images. On the
other hand, LRP-based heatmaps are sharper than Taylor-based
heatmaps and less subject to the stride artefact that arises with
convolutional neural networks. They also tend to assign very
little evidence to irrelevant parts of the image. Future work will
seek to identify the reason for the superiority of LRP on these
particular aspects, and investigate whether the deep Taylor
decomposition method and its underlying principles can be
reﬁned to incorporate these desirable properties of a heatmap
while retaining its stability.