City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Kulesza, T., Stumpf, S., Burnett, M., Yang, S., Kwan, I. & Wong, W-K . Too
much, too little, or just right? Ways explanations impact end users' mental models.
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing,
VL/HCC, pp. 3-10. doi: 10.1109/VLHCC.2013.6645235
This is the accepted version of the paper.
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version.
Permanent repository link: 
Link to published version: 
Copyright: City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City,
University of London available to a wider audience. Copyright and Moral Rights
remain with the author(s) and/or copyright holders. URLs from City Research
Online may be freely distributed and linked to.
Reuse: Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge.
Provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is
not changed in any way.
City Research Online
City Research Online: 
Too Much, Too Little, or Just Right?
Ways Explanations Impact End Users’ Mental Models
Todd Kulesza1, Simone Stumpf2, Margaret Burnett1, Sherry Yang3, Irwin Kwan1, Weng-Keen Wong1
1School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
2Centre for HCI Design
School of Informatics
City University London, UK
3Computer Systems Engineering Technology
Oregon Institute of Technology
Klamath Falls, Oregon, USA
{kuleszto, burnett, kwan, wong}@eecs.oregonstate.edu, , 
Abstract—Research is emerging on how end users can correct
mistakes their intelligent agents make, but before users can
correctly “debug” an intelligent agent, they need some degree of
understanding of how it works. In this paper we consider ways
intelligent agents should explain themselves to end users,
especially focusing on how the soundness and completeness of the
explanations impacts the fidelity of end users’ mental models.
Our findings suggest that completeness is more important than
soundness: increasing completeness via certain information types
helped participants’ mental models and, surprisingly, their
perception of the cost/benefit tradeoff of attending to the
explanations. We also found that oversimplification, as per many
commercial agents, can be a problem: when soundness was very
low, participants experienced more mental demand and lost trust
in the explanations, thereby reducing the likelihood that users
will pay attention to such explanations at all.
Keywords—mental models; explanations; end-user debugging;
recommender systems; intelligent agents
INTRODUCTION
How should intelligent agents explain themselves to users?
The predominant approach in commercial agents is to “keep it
simple” (e.g., the music recommender Pandora.com describes
its song recommendations via a single sentence). However,
such simplicity may prevent users from understanding how the
agent makes decisions, erecting a barrier to users’ potential
ability to help the agent improve; i.e., it may obstruct their
ability to effectively debug the agent’s reasoning.
As with other kinds of end-user debugging, users’ mental
models of how an agent works help them decide exactly what
about the agent they need to correct, and how to go about it
 . In this paper we raise the question of whether simplicity
is always the right attribute to prioritize when designing agent
explanations. Another possibility is to prioritize explanation
completeness; prior work has shown that providing end users
with detailed explanations about an intelligent agent’s
reasoning can increase their understanding of how the system
works . However, information comes at the price of
attention—a user’s time (and interest) is finite, so the solution
may not simply be “the more information, the better”.
To investigate how intelligent agents should explain
themselves to their users, we performed a qualitative study to
separately consider two dimensions of explanation fidelity:
soundness (how truthful each element in an explanation is with
respect to the underlying system) and completeness (the extent
to which an explanation describes all of the underlying
system). We then investigated how varying soundness and
completeness (as in Fig. 1) impacted users’ mental models of a
music-recommending
intelligent
information were most helpful in the explanations, how
explanation fidelity impacted users’ perceptions of the costs
and benefits of attending to these explanations, and users’ trust
in the explanations’ veracity. Our research questions were:
RQ-1: How do soundness and completeness impact end
users’ mental models?
RQ-2: Which types of information are most helpful for
users’ mental models?
RQ-3: What obstacles do end users encounter when
building mental models of an intelligent agent’s reasoning?
RQ-4: How do users’ perceived costs and benefits of
attending to explanations change with explanation fidelity?
RQ-5: How does user trust change as explanation
soundness and completeness increase?
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Functional and Structural Mental Models
Mental models are internal representations that people build
based on real world experiences. These models allow people to
understand, explain, and predict phenomena , and to then act
accordingly. For example, a mental model of a computer could
be that it displays everything typed on the keyboard and
remembers these things after the user presses a “save” button.
This simple model would help a novice predict that turning off
the computer without pressing “save” will result in lost work.
Mental models can vary in their fidelity—software developers
hold higher fidelity models of computers, for example.
There are two types of mental models: functional models
This work was supported by NSF 0803487.
Fig. 1. Our problem space: How sound and complete do explanations
need to be to help end users build high-fidelity mental models?
imply that the end user knows how to use something, but not
how it works in detail, whereas structural models provide a
detailed understanding of how and why it works. Norman 
reported many instances of erroneous mental models leading to
behavior with unexpected consequences, suggesting the
importance of structural models.
B. Building Mental Models of Intelligent Agents
Our prior work investigated the feasibility of end users
high-fidelity
structural
recommender systems ; participants grasped many nuances
of the recommendation algorithm, and as they developed
higher-fidelity mental models, they better controlled the
recommender. That study, however, relied on a human
instructor instead of automated explanations. Tullio et al.
studied user interactions with an intelligent agent that predicted
office workers’ availability, finding that even when faced with
contradictory evidence, users often tried to fit it into their
existing mental model of the agent ; this suggests that it is
important to help end users develop correct models as quickly
as possible. Cramer et al. found that providing explanations of
why an intelligent agent believes two items are similar helped
participants believe they understood how the agent worked, but
their actual mental models were not measured .
Lim and Dey explored intelligibility types—different
types of information—that intelligent agents can present to end
users. Their taxonomy includes categories for the inputs used
by an agent, its reasoning process, and concrete explanations of
why it made a particular decision, among others. They later
showed that one of their intelligibility types can help end users
better understand the output of decision trees . Our work
uses the Lim/Dey taxonomy of intelligibility types in our
investigation of explanation fidelity.
There is an open question of how much information agents
should present to users—existing research about explanation
fidelity has focused on the value of low fidelity explanations
versus no explanations. For example, when Herlocker et al. 
evaluated 21 ways of explaining collaborative filtering
systems, they investigated only low fidelity explanations
because they wanted to “avoid creating a new kind of
information overload by presenting too much or too confusing
data”. Other researchers have also investigated explanation
fidelity in recommender systems (Tintarev and Masthoff
provide a comprehensive overview in ), but primarily as it
relates to trust, acceptance, or satisfaction.
One hypothesis is that more information in an explanation
will help users build better mental models. However, very
complete or complex explanations require more attention to
process, which disincentivizes users to build accurate mental
models. Rosson et al., for example, found that the Minimalist
explanation model —which minimizes passive learning
tasks, such as reading long explanations, favoring instead short
explanations coupled with try-it-out exploration—helped
programmers understand Smalltalk programs up to two orders
of magnitude faster than traditional instruction techniques .
On the other hand, the Attention Investment Model predicts
that people will still use high-cost explanations if they perceive
the benefits will outweigh the costs (e.g., time) and risks (e.g.,
no reward) of doing so . Thus, rather than simplifying
explanations to one or two salient points (as contemporary
agents do), an alternative may be to identify the most helpful
information for the end user (as in the Minimalist explanation
model), and then communicate the benefits of paying attention
to it. One successful way to communicate the benefits of
invested attention is the Surprise-Explain-Reward method ,
which leverages curiosity by surprising users (e.g., showing
odd values to test spreadsheet formulas), then explains the
benefits of the behavior it is trying to encourage (e.g., fewer
formula errors), which is the user’s reward for investing their
attention. In the case of intelligent agents, benefits may take the
form of an enhanced ability to control the system , or a
more appropriate level of trust in the system.
Without clear benefits, however, users may ignore
explanations altogether. For example, Bunt et al. found that
when users had no direct control over an agent’s reasoning,
user interest in any type of explanation was very low.
EXPLANATION SOUNDNESS AND COMPLETENESS
We tease apart soundness and completeness because agent
system designers can make choices independently in each as to
the fidelity of their agents’ explanations. The terms soundness
and completeness are borrowed from the field of formal logic,
in which a deductive system is sound if all of the statements it
can create evaluate to true, and complete if its compositional
rules allow it to generate every true statement. We apply these
terms to explanations in an analogous manner:
Soundness (“nothing but the truth”): the extent to which
each component of an explanation’s content is truthful in
describing the underlying system.
Completeness (“the whole truth”): the extent to which all
of the underlying system is described by the explanation.
For example, an agent that explains its reasoning with a
simpler model than it actually uses (e.g., a set of rules instead
of additive feature weights) is reducing soundness, whereas an
agent that explains only some of its reasoning (e.g., only a
subset of a user neighborhood) is reducing completeness.
METHODOLOGY
To investigate our research questions, we presented 17
participants with up to eight music recommendations made by
a functional prototype. Each recommendation came with
various kinds of explanations of the system’s reasons for
choosing that song, and participants were asked why they
thought the system made that recommendation.
A. Prototype Recommender System
We developed a prototype music recommender to make
personalized song recommendations for each participant. Our
prototype used a hybrid recommendation approach, as such
approaches have been shown to out-perform more traditional
types of recommenders and provide more “moving parts”
to explain. Specifically, our prototype employed user-based
collaborative filtering to find artists, and a content-based
approach for selecting songs by those artists.
To train our recommender, we collected the listening habits
of about 200,000 Last.fm listeners between July 2011 and July
2012 via the Last.fm API1. We identified the 50 most-played
artists for each of these listeners during this time period, and
then used the Mahout framework 2 to build a k-nearestneighborhood (k=15), where distance between Last.fm users
was based on overlap in the artists they listened to (calculated
via the log-likelihood metric ).
Prior to the study, we asked each participant to imagine a
situation where they would want a playlist of music, and to tell
us five artists they would like to hear on it. Our prototype took
these artists and, using the technique described above,
recommended 20 artists for the given participant (Fig. 2, top).
To select specific songs, our prototype used a bagged decision
tree based on Weka’s J48 implementation (the bagging
ensemble consisted of 100 decision trees). This classifier was
independently trained for each participant using a set of
positive training instances (the top 1,500 songs played by
Last.fm listeners in the participant’s user neighborhood) and a
set of negative training instances (the top 1,500 songs played
by Last.fm listeners who did not listen to any artists that
neighborhood members listened to). This resulted in a classifier
able to predict whether a given user would or would not like a
particular song, along with a certainty score (Fig. 2, bottom).
The song features (a feature is a piece of information a
classifier can use to discriminate between output classes) came
from The Echonest’s 3 database, which includes information
such as tempo, energy, and key.
To determine which songs to recommend to a participant,
our prototype collected the 25 most popular songs by each
recommended artist (a 500 song set). We used these songs’
feature vectors as input to our classifier, which predicted
whether or not the participant would like each song. The
positive results were sorted by decreasing certainty, with the
top eight used as song recommendations for the participant.
B. Treatments and Explanations
Even though this was a qualitative investigation, we
explored four treatments, which are shown in Table I: HH
(high-soundness,
high-completeness),
(mediumsoundness, medium-completeness), HSLC (high-soundness,
low-completeness),
(low-soundness,
highcompleteness). Fig. 1 visualizes this design space, with HH in
the top right, HSLC in the bottom right, LSHC in the top left,
and MM in the middle. We used multiple treatments to gather
data on a variety of explanation configurations, but restricted
ourselves to four for feasibility.
To objectively manipulate completeness, our treatments
used a varying number of the intelligibility types identified by
Lim and Dey : inputs (features the system is aware of),
model (an overview of the agent’s decision making process),
why (the reasons underlying a specific decision), and certainty
(the agent’s confidence in each decision). We also increased
completeness by exposing more information in the why (artist)
intelligibility type. All treatments included explanations of the
song selection process (Fig. 3), five members of the user’s
“neighborhood” of similar Last.fm listeners (Fig. 4), and the
1 
2 
3 
features the recommender could use (Fig. 5). The treatments
with more completeness (MM, HH, and LSHC) added the
certainty intelligibility type (Fig. 3, bottom left) and showed 10
members of the participant’s user neighborhood. The highcompleteness treatments (HH and LSHC) also added a highlevel description of the recommender’s algorithm (the model
intelligibility type, Fig. 6) and showed all 15 members of the
participant’s user neighborhood.
To objectively manipulate soundness, our treatments used a
range of simplified models of the recommender’s reasons for
each song selection. The explanation used in the highsoundness treatments (HH and HSLC) described the bagged
decision tree (the actual algorithm used to produce the playlist).
For the medium-soundness treatment (MM), we trained a
simpler model (a single J48 decision tree) using the bagged
classifier’s predicted labels for all of the training instances, and
explained this derived model (a variation of the technique in
 ). For the low-soundness treatment (LSHC), we used the
same approach to train an even simpler model (a one-feature
decision tree, or decision stump) to explain (Fig. 3, bottom
right). Because the low-soundness model only explained one
highly discriminative feature, we considered it a functional
analog for contemporary agent explanations (e.g., a movie
recommender that explains its selections by their genres).
C. Participants and Study Task
We recruited 17 participants (10 females, 7 males) from the
local community via flyers and announcements to university
mailing lists. Participants’ ages ranged from 19 to 34, none had
a background in computer science, and each was randomly
assigned to one of the four treatments.
participants
recommended playlist while a researcher provided participants
with the paper explanations described in 4.B. After each song,
a researcher asked the participant why they thought it had been
recommended. At the end of the study we measured
participants’ mental models via a combination of short-answer
and Likert scale questions. Each session was videotaped and
later transcribed.
D. Data Analysis
To qualitatively analyze the data, we developed a code set
based upon how well participants understood the operation of
the recommender system, plus additional codes for their
knowledge gaps, produced using grounded theory methods
 . The resulting code set is presented in Table II.
Fig. 2. Our prototype used a k-nearest neighbor stage to identify similar
and dissimilar users (top), and a bagged decision tree stage to predict
which songs the participant would most enjoy (bottom).
200,000 Last.fm listeners
Recommended
Use their favorite artists'
songs as potential
recommendations
Use their favorite
songs as positive
Use their favorite
songs as negative
Most-similar
Least-similar
neighbor stage
bagged decision
tree stage
We transcribed participant utterances during each song and
applied the codes to these utterances (each code could be
most, once per
Two researchers
independently coded a small portion of the transcripts and then
discussed areas of disagreement. Once the researchers agreed
on the coding of these transcripts, they independently coded
two complete transcripts (12% of the data)—their agreement,
as calculated by the Jaccard index (the intersection of all
applied codes over the union of all applied codes), was 83%.
Given this acceptable level of agreement, a single researcher
coded the remaining transcripts and post-study questionnaires.
Participants’ mental model “scores” were the number of
correct minus the number of incorrect statements participants
made during the experiment and on the post-study
questionnaire, translated to a 0-to-10 (lowest-to-highest) scale.
Table II shows which types of verbalizations/responses were
correct vs. incorrect. Participants’ verbalizations during the
study and post-study questionnaire responses were weighted
A. RQ-1 and RQ-2: Soundness, Completeness, and Types
As Fig. 7 shows, HH participants achieved three of the top
four scores. In contrast, all but one of the participants in the
other treatments clustered around lower scores. This surprised
us because we had expected the HH treatment to overload
participants to the point where they would not attend to so
much complex information. Instead, we expected the MM
treatment to be a “sweet spot” in the trade-off between
informativeness and simplicity—but most of the MM
participants clustered around the lowest scores.
Further, HH participants’ mental model scores were
consistently high across features and processes, as Fig. 8’s
results from the post-task questionnaire show. In fact, HH
participants were the only ones to correctly describe the song
selection process (third column of Fig. 8, coded as per Table
II), and only one HH participant made any incorrect post-task
observations at all (right half of Fig. 8). (Note from Table II
that participants in any of the treatments could potentially get
credit for process descriptions that had correct process
concepts, e.g., using combinations of features.)
1) Completeness and Intelligibility Types
Two of the intelligibility types, why and input, relate to
features, and participants tended to do better at understanding
features than process (Fig. 8). However, a closer look at which
Fig. 3. Excerpts from the Why this Song explanation (why intelligibility type).
(Top left): The high-soundness sheet showed a random sample of decision
trees from the bagging ensemble.
(Top right): Each tree was represented as a set of ordered features with allowed
ranges of values. The medium soundness sheet was similar, but only showed
one derived decision tree that approximated the bagging ensemble’s reasoning.
(Bottom right): The low soundness sheet was also similar, but only showed
one derived decision stump (single-featured tree).
(Bottom left): For the HH, LSHC, and MM treatments, this sheet also included
the certainty intelligibility type.
Fig. 4. Excerpt from Why this Artist (why intelligibility type), which showed
the artists selected by their user neighborhood. All participants received this
explanation, but with different neighborhood sizes (see Table I).
Fig. 5. Excerpt from What the Computer Knows (input intelligibility type),
which showed a comprehensive list of features that the recommender used. All
participants received this explanation.
Fig. 6. Excerpt from How it All Works Together (model intelligibility type),
which showed how the participants’ artists list was used to make song
recommendations. (Positive and negative training sets were color-coded
throughout the flow-chart.) Only HH and LSHC participants received this
explanation.
Breed by N
Why this song?
The computer looked at what the green songs tend to have in common, and what makes th
different from the red songs.
It did this 100 times, each time randomly picking songs from the red and green groups .
In 93 of the 100 times, it predicted that you’ll like this song. Here are four of the prediction
each one, the computer thinks that you’ll like songs with all of these characteristics:
Prediction #1
Prediction #2
Danceability
Danceability
Key and mode
Key and mode
Beat grouping
Beat grouping
Not used for this prediction
Not used for this prediction
Not used for this prediction
Not used for this prediction
Prediction #3
Prediction #4
Danceability
Danceability
Beat grouping
Key and mode
Key and mode
Songs that similar people listened to
Songs that dissimilar people li
each one, the computer thinks that you’ll like so
Prediction #1
Danceability
Key and mode
Beat grouping
The computer is 93% confident
you’ll like this song:
Danceability
Not used for this prediction
Not used for this prediction
Key and mode
Not used for this prediction
Your list of musicians
Find 15 people who listen to your list of musicians
(Sorted by how many musicians you both like)
Get each person's 100 mostplayed songs in the past
Get the 20 other artists
these people most often
200,000 Last.fm listeners
Find 15 people who don't listen to
any of the musicians you listed
Get each person's 100 mostplayed songs in the past
TABLE I. THE “WHY (SONG)” INTELLIGIBILITY TYPE WAS AVAILABLE IN
ALL TREATMENTS, BUT ITS SOUNDNESS VARIED. THE OTHER
INTELLIGIBILITY TYPES WERE USED TO VARY COMPLETENESS.
Relative Soundness
Relative Completeness
Intelligibility types
Why (song) Bagged
Why (artist) Nearest
participants did better suggests that their understanding of
features aligned with completeness. For example, participants
in the high-completeness groups (HH and LSHC) averaged 5.5
valid feature codes per participant, versus the other treatments’
average of 4.3. The invalid features added more evidence
consistent with this, with high-completeness participants
averaging 4.6 invalid features versus other participants’ 6.3
invalid features.
Completeness
participants
understand the recommendation process. As Fig. 9 shows,
participants’ understanding (as per Table II codes) of the artist
recommendation process (explained through the model and
why-artist intelligibility types) tended to increase with the
completeness of their treatment. In particular, the model
explanation was referenced by half of the participants who
correctly discussed the artist recommendation process (Fig.
10). Completeness showed no evidence of impacting
participant understanding of the song recommendation process;
however, this was primarily explained via the Why this Song
explanation, and this explanation did not vary in the
completeness dimension across treatments.
Recall that we also increased completeness by adding the
certainty intelligibility type, but this type did not seem to
interest participants: only two participants mentioned certainty
at all, and each did so only once. Although research has shown
that certainty is a useful intelligibility type to users assessing an
intelligent agent’s reliability , other researchers have found
that certainty does not help users’ perceived understanding of
how a recommender operates . Our work suggests that this
finding extends to actual understanding.
These results suggest that increasing completeness was
beneficial to participants’ mental models, and that some
effective ways to increase completeness included the model
intelligibility type and the completeness of the why type.
However, we found no evidence that increasing completeness
via certainty improved participants’ mental models.
2) Soundness and Intelligibility Types
Although HH participants’ performance may at first glance
suggest that high soundness was also helpful, looking at
soundness in isolation suggests a different story. Highsoundness participants (HH and HSLC) showed almost no
differences from the other participants in their mentions of
valid vs. invalid features or processes. Instead, the clearest
pattern was one of decreased understanding of the artist
recommendation process as soundness increased (Fig. 9).
One hypothesis is that HH and HSLC participants spent
most of their attention on their complex Why this Song
explanations, causing them to ignore other explanations.
Indeed, participants in these high soundness treatments viewed
the How it All Works explanation only about half as often as
participants in the low-soundness treatment (mean 0.8 vs. 1.4
views per person). Instead, they focused on their complex Why
this Song explanations: they viewed these during more songs
than participants in the low-soundness treatment (mean of 7.6
vs. 6.3 songs) and often even reviewed prior Why this Song
explanations (during an average of 1.9 songs vs. 0.7). P9-HH
TABLE II. CODE SET USED TO ASSESS PARTICIPANTS’ MENTAL MODELS.
Participant discussed/said…
the participant
discussed an
aspect of the
recommender
Valid artist
the artist was chosen via
collaborative filtering
Valid song
specific song features used by
the recommender
Valid song
a combination of features
were responsible for the
recommendation
Incorrect:
the participant
incorrectly
discussed an
aspect of the
recommender
Invalid feature
specific features not used by
the recommender
the computer’s reasoning
involved a single path through
a decision tree or another
incorrect description of the
artist/song selection process.
the participant
uncertainty
about their
recommender
Don’t know
not knowing how the
recommender works
uncertainty regarding their
answer of how the
recommender works
explanation
needing more details about
the explanations
recommender
needing more details about
the recommender
Fig. 7. Participants’ mental model fidelity scores. Each mark is one
participant’s score. (Note: MM had one more participant than the others.)
The highest scores were mostly those of HH participants.
Fig. 8. Post-task questionnaire results. Each mark is one participant,
represented as in Fig. 7. Only HH participants described all the valid
aspects of the recommender (left), and only one made an invalid
description (right).
Fig. 9. Each dot is the percentage of participants who correctly
understood the artist recommendation process (as per Table II’s codes).
More participants understood it as completeness (black) increased, but
fewer participants understood it as soundness (light) increased.
Mental model score
Valid artist
Valid song
Valid song
Participants
Completeness
explained why she kept reviewing prior explanations:
P9-HH: “The [high-soundness Why this Song] sheet is a
little bit hard to look at [flips through prior Why this Song
sheets], but I’m just looking for things that I’m seeing, from
one song to the next, that are similar, and that it says it’s
using for matching and making the predictions.”
Further, the high-soundness explanations were associated
with over twice as many Information Gap codes, which
indicate that as participants viewed these explanations, they
had additional questions and expressed more uncertainty as
they described why they thought each song had been
recommended (mean 7.0 codes per participant) than other
treatments (mean 3.3 codes per participant).
Thus, increasing soundness may risk over-complexity, but
increasing completeness alongside soundness may mitigate this
effect. While HH participants (those with high soundness and
high completeness) ended our study with the best mental
models, the HSLC (high-soundness and low-completeness)
participants’ models were among the worst (Fig. 7).
B. RQ-3: Barriers to High-Fidelity Mental Models
No participant’s understanding of the recommender was
perfect: the highest mental model score was 8.4 out of 10
(recall Fig. 7). We found evidence of two barriers to building
high-fidelity mental models; these barriers were shared among
all participants, regardless of treatment.
First was participants’ incorrect assumptions about the
explanations’ completeness. Every participant, at some point
during their task, incorrectly assumed that the recommender
used information that it did not have access to (e.g., the tone of
the singer’s voice)—even though the input explanation (What
the Computer Knows) was complete across all treatments. For
example, participant P6-HSLC had read the What the
Computer Knows explanation multiple times before asking:
P6-HSLC: “So I guess, does a computer have access to
lyrics for a song, does it take that into consideration?”
[Facilitator refuses to answer, and participant re-reads
the What the Computer Knows sheet yet again.]
P6-HSLC: “Oh right, so probably not then.”
The counts from the post-session questionnaire results were
consistent with this phenomenon. In responding to a question
asking if the explanations included every important detail
about why a song was recommended, the average response was
only 13.0 (21 indicating “always”, 0 indicating “never”). HH
participants, however, responded more positively (mean of
18.0), suggesting that high soundness and high completeness
together can help convince users that the explanations do
discuss everything relevant to the agent’s reasoning.
The second barrier was lack of knowledge of the process of
how recommendations were made. Participants rarely
discussed process, focusing much more heavily on features, as
Fig. 10 illustrates. Some participants even described a single
feature as the sole reason for a recommendation:
P2-HH: “Yeah, see, it’s all the way at the bottom of the
loudness [feature]. So… that’s why [it was recommended].”
Features may have been easier for participants to
understand because they were explained concretely (i.e., in the
context of specific examples). Fig. 11 shows that participants
used the concrete Why this Song and Why this Artist
explanations much more than the abstract (i.e., no specific
examples) How it All Works and What the Computer Knows
explanations.
Note, however, that although our abstract How it All
Works explanation was infrequently used, when participants
did use it, a larger percentage (50%) correctly discussed the
recommendation process than with any other explanation (Fig.
10). Similarly, participants who used the abstract What the
Computer Knows explanation discussed more valid features
than invalid features. Perhaps abstract explanations may be
best made available on demand via a layering approach, in
which users can “drill up” from a concrete explanation to view
more abstract details.
Alternatively, participants may have paid the most attention
to the Why this Song explanations because it was the only
explanation that changed during the experiment. The other
explanation types were presented at the beginning of the study
and may have attracted less participant attention because they
were never updated. Dynamically updating explanations may
be one presentation option to draw a user’s attention to the full
range of explanations in a highly complete system, but this is
an open question that requires further investigation.
C. RQ-4: Is It Worth It?
The Attention Investment Model predicts that users will
use high-cost explanations only if they think the benefits will
outweigh the costs. Thus, we investigated participants’
perceived benefits (given the perceived costs) using the
Fig. 10. Participants giving correct (smiles) and incorrect (frowns)
descriptions upon referencing an explanation. Each face = 2 participants.
(Light): song features. (Gray): artist recommendation process. (Black):
song recommendation process. Both why explanations were popular, but
What the Computer Knows produced fewer invalid features, and How it
All Works had the highest percentage of participants correctly describing
the process.
Fig. 11. Number of times participants referenced each explanation: each
music note = 10 references. Participants referenced the Why this Song
explanation during almost every recommended song.
questions “If the recommendations improve, do you think it is
worth the time and effort you spent during this study to give
feedback to the recommender?” and “Would you take a similar
amount of time as this study to learn similar things about other
recommenders you use?” (Each study session lasted less than
two hours.) We used the summation of these questions to
estimate perceived benefits, and the summation of the NASA-
TLX questions about mental demand, effort expended, and
frustration/annoyance to estimate costs (each question had a
21-point scale).
As Fig. 12 shows, the LSHC participants were surprisingly
positive about the benefits vs. costs of referring to the
explanations—more than three times as positive as participants
viewing less complete but more sound explanations (MM and
HSLC). We had expected the MM treatment to best balance
costs vs. benefits—these participants received explanations that
seemed likely to be the easiest to understand at a reasonable
cost. However, our results showed that instead, high
completeness seemed to be important to our participants. To
summarize Fig. 12, participants in the two high-completeness
treatments perceived working with the explanations to be a
better cost/benefit proposition than the other treatments’
participants did. In contrast, soundness did not seem to be an
asset to participants’ perception of cost-benefit. This may come
back to the lower understanding associated with higher
soundness (recall Fig. 9). P6-HSLC reinforced this point,
remarking that the high-soundness explanations could have
been useful, but she was unable to make much sense of them
during the study:
P6-HSLC: Probably should have looked at [the Why this
Song sheet] more.
Facilitator: Do you think this could have been useful?
P6-HSLC: Yeah… I guess I’m still trying to grasp and
understand this whole thing here (points at Why this Song
D. RQ-5: In Explanations We Trust?
To some low-soundness participants, the decision stump in
their explanations seemed clearly wrong. For example:
P13-LSHC: “It says loudness again, I’m really not
understanding why it keeps going back to that and not using
energy, or like, anything else.”
To understand participants’ perceptions of whether the
explanations they viewed were sound and complete, we asked
them “Do you think the explanations are accurate about why
the recommender chose each song?” (perceived soundness),
and “Do you think the explanations are including all of the
important information about why the recommender chose each
song?” (perceived completeness). We asked about soundness
and completeness separately to determine whether participants
could discern whether explanations were sound, complete, or
both. For example, we hypothesized LSHC participants would
rate their explanations as more complete than sound, while
HSLC participants would consider their explanations more
sound than complete. However, our results suggest that
participants did not differentiate explanations in this way: the
average difference between the two scores was only 1.5 on a
21-point scale, and both LSHC and HSLC participants rated
their explanations as slightly more sound than complete.
Because the perceived soundness and completeness scores
together form a holistic assessment of trust, we summed them
to yield a single trust score. The results, plotted for each
participant, are shown in Fig. 13. The LSHC participants had
the three lowest trust ratings, while most HH participants
accurately gauged their explanations to be the most sound and
most complete. This suggests there is some danger to
simplifying explanations by reducing soundness—users may
perceive that such explanations do not accurately represent the
system’s reasoning, and so may distrust (and disregard) them.
DISCUSSION
Our results suggest that the most sound and most complete
explanations (HH) were the most successful at helping
participants understand how the agent worked, and did so with
a surprisingly good cost/benefit ratio. Further, HH participants
trusted their explanations more than participants in other
treatments, particularly LSHC. Indeed, the main problem we
identified with HH was that participants were at risk of
focusing on a single complex explanation to the exclusion of
other information.
The story was different when only soundness or
completeness was at our highest level. High completeness
alone (LSHC) provided participants with the best perceived
cost/benefit ratio of attending to the explanations, the secondhighest
understanding of the artist recommendation process. However,
these participants placed the least trust in the explanations.
High soundness alone (HSLC) did result in more trust, but was
also associated with higher perceived costs, lower perceived
benefits, and flawed mental models.
Overall, we found that presenting explanations in a sound
and complete manner is a surprisingly good design choice,
even for relatively low-benefit agents such as media/product
recommendation, when they go wrong. (Indeed, we saw a
slightly negative relationship between mental model score and
user satisfaction with the recommendations, suggesting that the
hope of improving even such low-benefit agents may be
Fig. 12. Perceived benefit vs, cost scores (benefit score – cost score),
averaged by treatment. The high-completeness participants (top two
rows) perceived relatively high benefits vs. costs of the explanations.
Fig. 13. Trust scores for each participant. The LSHC treatment’s scores
were relatively low: these participants accurately rated their explanations
as unsound, but also inaccurately rated them as incomplete.
Trust score
sufficient motivation for users to learn more about the agent.)
However, if a designer’s user testing of an agent system reveals
that its target audience believes such explanations are not
worth attending to, our findings suggest that reducing
soundness while preserving completeness will improve the
cost/benefit ratio of attending to explanations. Fig. 14
summarizes what tool designers may expect to see when
presenting end users (like our participants) with explanations
that are very sound, very complete, or both.
VII. CONCLUSION
Part of enabling end users to “debug” their intelligent
agents is explaining these agents to users well enough for them
to build useful mental models. In this paper we considered two
dimensions of explanations—soundness and completeness—
and explored how each impacts end users’ mental model
fidelity, their perceptions of the cost/benefit trade-off of
attending to these explanations, and their trust in the
explanations. Among our findings were:
RQ-1 (Soundness and Completeness): Our most complete
explanations (HH and LSHC) were associated with the best
mental models; reduced completeness was the shared feature of
the two worst-performing treatments (HSLC and MM).
RQ-2 and RQ-3 (Explanations and Obstacles): Participants
had more difficulty understanding the agent’s reasoning
process than the features it used, but abstract explanations of
the model intelligibility type helped overcome this obstacle.
However, participants appeared to prefer more concrete
explanations (recall Fig. 11).
Benefits):
explanations were associated with the highest perceived
benefits and lowest perceived costs of learning about the
system; completeness even helped moderate the cost of very
sound explanations (as in HH).
RQ-5 (Trust): Participants correctly perceived that the
LSHC explanations were unsound, but also refused to trust that
these explanations were complete. Participants placed the most
trust in HH explanations.
These findings suggest that many popular intelligent agents
offer explanations that are too low in fidelity to enable users to
understand how they work, and show how different
intelligibility types (e.g., why, model, etc.) can increase
explanation fidelity, and with it user’s mental models. Further,
our cost/benefit results show that users want to learn more
about these systems if their effort is rewarded with the ability
to improve their intelligent agents. Thus, increasing
explanation fidelity can be a win/win for end users—motivated
users can learn how their agents operate, and then employ that
knowledge to personalize their agents’ reasoning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our study participants for their time, and Romina
Rodriguez and Amber Hovarth for evaluating our prototype.