Language to Action: Towards Interactive Task Learning with Physical Agents
Joyce Y. Chai1, Qiaozi Gao1, Lanbo She2, Shaohua Yang1, Sari Saba-Sadiya1, Guangyue Xu1
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
2 Microsoft Cloud & AI, Redmond, WA 98052
{jchai, gaoqiaoz, yangshao, sadiyasa, xuguang3}@cse.msu.edu, 
Language communication plays an important role
in human learning and knowledge acquisition.
With the emergence of a new generation of cognitive robots, empowering these robots to learn directly from human partners becomes increasingly
important. This paper gives a brief introduction to
interactive task learning where humans can teach
physical agents new tasks through natural language
communication and action demonstration. It discusses research challenges and opportunities in language and communication grounding that are critical in this process. It further highlights the importance of commonsense knowledge, particularly
the very basic physical causality knowledge, in
grounding language to perception and action.
Introduction
As AI starts to enter our everyday life, it’s important for end
users who are not technical experts to be able to teach artiﬁcial agents new knowledge and skills. Imagine in the future,
you can purchase or rent a robot assistant. This robot comes
with pre-programed knowledge and pre-trained skills. However the robot does not know anything about your household.
There is no large amount of data available about your speciﬁc needs. You also cannot wait for the robot to explore
your house by itself (and certainly don’t want to risk the mess
or destruction possibly brought to your kitchen). So what is
ideal is for you to teach the robot the new environment and
tasks as if you were teaching a human assistant.
To address this issue, a new research area on Interactive
Task Learning (ITL) is emerging [Gluck and Laird, 2018].
ITL is broadly deﬁned as “any process by which an agent (A)
improves its performance (P) on some task (T) through experience (E), when E consists of a series of sensing, effecting,
and communication interactions between A, its world, and
crucially other agents in the world.” [Mitchell et al., 2018]. In
this paper, we discuss a speciﬁc form of ITL - communicative
task learning, where humans can teach embodied agents (e.g.,
robots) in a shared physical world through language communication and action demonstration.
Communication provides a natural way for humans to acquire generic knowledge. Through a single exchange of information, teachers can selectively manifest the information
to be acquired by learners. Such knowledge transfer can take
the form of linguistic communication and manual demonstration, and is previously termed as natural pedagogy [Csibra
and Gergely, 2009]. This is a kind of social learning which
can accelerate learning by avoiding trials-and-errors and statistical generalization based on observations [Thomaz et al.,
Studies in developmental psychology have shown
evidence of receptiveness and adaptation for natural pedagogy in young infants [Csibra and Gergely, 2006]. Through
childhood to adulthood, humans have developed the ability
to learn and teach through natural pedagogy, which appears
universal across cultures and can be traced back to our ancestors [Tehrani and Riede, 2008]. As communication plays
an important role in human learning, one question becomes
important: how to enable natural pedagogy between humans
and artiﬁcial agents and empower the agents to acquire new
knowledge through communication with humans?
Recent years have seen an increasing amount of work on
teaching robots new tasks through demonstration and instruction [Rybski et al., 2007; Mohseni-Kabir et al., 2018].
For example, learning from demonstration (LfD) [Thomaz
and Cakmak, 2009; Argall et al., 2009] learns a mapping
from world states to robots’ manipulations based on the
human demonstration of desired robot behaviors.
work has also explored the use of natural language and dialogue to teach robots new actions [Mohan and Laird., 2014;
Scheutz et al., 2017]. We have also applied natural language
communication and action demonstration to teach robots new
tasks [She et al., 2014; She and Chai, 2016; Liu et al., 2016;
She and Chai, 2017]. This paper gives a brief introduction
to this research effort and discusses research challenges and
opportunities.
Language Grounding in Learning through
Communication
Language can be used in various ways to teach robots new
tasks. For example, a human can teach a robot how to make
tea by “telling” and “showing” and the robot learns through
observation (shown in Figure 1a), or through its own actions
by following human instruction and/or demonstration (Figure 1b). During learning, the robot observes how the world
has been changed by the actions either performed by the hu-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
(a) Robot learning from human language
instruction and action demonstration.
(b) Robot learning through its own actions by
following human instruction and demonstration
(c) Robot’s perception of the physical world during learning.
Figure 1: An example setup of teaching a Baxter robot how to make tea.
make_smoothie
open_ blender
state: open
strawberry
cut_strawberry
H1: I'm going to teach you how to make smoothie. First cut
a few strawberries.
R1: How do you do that?
H2: You put the strawberries on the cutting board and slice
them into pieces.
R2: I don't see a cutting board.
H3: This is the cutting board on my hand (pick it up to show
the robot).
H4: Next you add the strawberries into the blender.
R4: Did you open the blender first?
Figure 2: An example dialogue teaching the robot how to make smoothie (a) and the acquired grounded task structure (b).
man or by itself . The robot can also communicate with
the human back-and-forth to acquire tasks and task-related
knowledge. Figure 2(a) shows an example dialogue where the
human teaches the robot how to make smoothie. At the end
of communication, the robot generates a grounded task structure that represents its understanding of this task as shown in
Figure 2(b). Tasks are compositional in nature which can be
captured by grammars [Liu et al., 2016], Hierarchical Task
Networks [Hogg et al., 2009], or internal programming language [Wang et al., 2017], etc. An overall task can be broken
down into subtasks with possible constraints (e.g., temporal).
A subtask can be decomposed into atomic actions which is
grounded to the physical world where the agent can perceive
or act. If the robot has the underlying manipulation ability
(e.g., is able to perform the primitive action cut), the grounded
task structure will allow the robot to plan and perform the
learned task.
Enabling such communicative task learning faces many
challenges. As shown in Figure 3, humans and robots are copresent in a shared environment. They both perceive from the
environment and can potentially act to change the environment. However, they have signiﬁcantly mismatched capabilities in perception, action, and reasoning. Their knowledge
about the world is also vastly misaligned. All of these lead
to disparities in their respective representations of the shared
world and the task. The lack of common ground makes language communication between them difﬁcult. Humans and
agents will need to make extra collaborative effort to strive for
a joint representation of the task structure. For example, they
will need to keep track of each other’s knowledge, beliefs, and
intention as well
as each other’s abilities and limitations (i.e., user models)
when interpreting or planning for communication. During
this process, the robot acquires task-related knowledge and
task structures to enrich its own knowledge base and also continuously updates its own representation of the shared world
given the new knowledge. Thus, communicative task learning
is more than just a process of acquiring grounded task structures. It is also intertwined with language learning (i.e., learning the grounded meanings of new words or language constitutes) and interactive knowledge acquisition (i.e., acquiring
task-related knowledge and commonsense knowledge).
At the center of this process is the issue of grounding, a
highly ambiguous term used in various context. In language
communication with physical agents, two types of grounding
are essential:
• Semantic grounding refers to the process where semantics of language is grounded to the agent’s internal representations of perception from the world and actions to
the world.
• Communicative grounding is the process for commu-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Knowledge &
Capability
Knowledge &
Capability
Representation
Representation
Communicative Grounding
Acquisition
joint representation
Perception
Perception
Communication
Figure 3: Semantic grounding and communicative grounding for learning a joint representation.
nication partners to reach a common ground - mutually
agreed knowledge, beliefs, and assumptions. Communicative grounding is vital to keep partners on the same
page to achieve joint communication goals.
Semantic Grounding
Semantic grounding relates to the classical concept of symbol grounding [Harnad, 1990] in Cognitive Science which
proposes that meanings of symbols should be connected to
the sensorimotor experience from the physical world. This
notion has a particular signiﬁcance in language communication with robots. In order for the robot to understand human
language and act upon it, the meanings of language such as
words, phrases, and utterances need to be grounded to the
robot’s sensors which perceive the environment and to the
actuators which act to the environment.
Grounding to Perception
Grounding language to perception involves connecting meanings of words to machine perception [Roy, 2005; Matuszek
et al., 2012; Kennington and Schlangen, 2015; Thomason et
al., 2016] and grounding language expressions to visual objects [Liu et al., 2012; Williams and Scheutz, 2018], to physical landmarks [Tellex et al., 2011] and to actions or activities [Chen and Mooney, 2011; Artzi and Zettlemoyer, 2013].
In the context of communicative learning, grounding verbs
and their arguments to the perceived world is crucial.
In Linguistics, verb semantics are often captured by semantic roles that specify arguments participating in an action such
as agent (i.e., the one who performs the action), patient
(the object the action is directed upon), instrument (the
instrument used in the action) and so on [Baker et al., 1998;
Palmer et al., 2005]. As shown in Figure 2(a), the verb cut
takes the patient “strawberries” (H1); the verb put takes the
patient “strawberries” and the destination “the cutting board”
(H2). The robot will need to ﬁrst identify different roles from
linguistic utterances and then ground them to the perceived
environment. Some of these roles such as patient are explicitly speciﬁed in language (i.e., explicit roles), but other
roles, for example, the instrument (i.e., knife) associated
with cut and slice (H2) is not explicitly stated (i.e., implicit
roles). Our previous work [Yang et al., 2016] has shown that,
for a set of commonly used verbs, the role instrument is
almost never explicitly speciﬁed in language, however it can
be inferred from perception. For some verbs such as take,
the source (where the things are taken from) is less likely
speciﬁed and the destination (where the things taken to)
is almost never explicitly stated. Nevertheless, these implicit
roles are important components of an action. Therefore, the
ability to ground not only explicit roles, but also implicit roles
is vital in order for the robot to fully understand the composition of an action and possibly perform it.
Grounding to Action
Grounding verb arguments to the environment is not sufﬁcient for the agent to perform corresponding actions. What
controls actions of a robot typically consists of a discrete
planner which captures a space of possible actions and their
associated states, and a continuous planner that computes
the trajectory for the movement.
A robotic arm such as
a SCHUNK industrial arm only has speciﬁcations for three
primitive actions such as open-gripper, close-gripper, and
move-to. Any higher level actions (e.g., speciﬁed by an action verb) will need to be translated to a sequence of primitive actions for the agent to perform [Kress-Gazit et al.,
2008]. Recent work has applied deep learning models to directly map language instructions and raw visual observations
to actions [Misra and Langford, 2017] or action representations [Arumugam et al., 2017]. These approaches require a
large amount of training data which may not be available for
the task at hand. In addition, to strive for a common ground
in ITL, it is important for the agent to be able to explain its
decision and receive relevant human feedback to update its
model (particularly when an action fails). Thus, approaches
that can connect verbs with the planning system and the ability to explain the robot’s internal representations and decision
making become important.
Communicative Grounding
In human-human communication, what enables us to understand each other depends on common ground and shared intentionality [Clark, 1996; Tomasello, 2008]. It is well established that communication is a cooperative process where
both parties cooperate with each other to achieve common
communication goals. These ﬁndings from human communication not only provide basis but also have new implications
in human-robot communication.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Incremental acquisition and update
seed physical causality knowledge of action verbs
(verb, noun)
(verb + argument)
(verb, noun)
(verb + argument)
(verb, noun)
(verb + argument)
(verb‐noun)
(Effect phrases)
(Effect categories)
(Effect phrases)
(Effect categories)
(Effect phrases)
(Effect categories)
(categories, descriptions,
phrases, predicate calculus)
physical action and effect states
symbolic representation of action and effect
Figure 4: Physical causality knowledge of action verbs.
As shown in Figure 3, mismatched representations significantly jeopardize the common ground between humans and
agents, making language communication difﬁcult. When the
common ground is missing, the intrinsic cooperative motivation will enable partners to collaborate and strive to establish a common ground. This is the process of communicative grounding. This cooperative principle brings challenges
and opportunities in human-robot communication. For example, to mediate differences in the representation of the shared
world, the speaker often produces language in an episodic
and incremental manner to make sure the listener is following [Liu et al., 2012].
The listener provides immediate feedback which may prompt the speaker to change language production in the middle of the planning. Therefore,
from the robot perspective, algorithms for language interpretation will need to account for collaborative behaviors from
the human, and algorithms for language generation will need
to produce collaborative behaviors from the robot [Chai et
al., 2016]. Different mechanisms can be employed by humans and robots in communicative grounding such as using implicit or explicit conﬁrmation [Thomaz et al., 2018].
As shown in our previous work [Chai et al., 2014], enabling
transparency from the agent about its internal representations
can reveal misunderstanding and signiﬁcantly improve common ground. Moreover, the nature of embodiment in situated communication (i.e., non-verbal modalities such as gaze
and deictic gestures) provides additional channels for communicative grounding [Chai et al., 2018].
One of the key challenges to communicative grounding
is presupposition. In human-human communication, much
of background knowledge about the world is pre-assumed.
The partners believe they share the same kind of background
knowledge so do not need to explicitly state it in their communication. However artiﬁcial agents don’t have the same
kind of commonsense knowledge. To improve communicative grounding, one important solution is to equip the agent
with an ability to acquire commonsense knowledge. Next we
introduce some of our on-going efforts on acquiring commonsense knowledge, particularly, very basic causality knowledge associated with action verbs that are critical to task
learning and execution.
Physical Causality of Action Verbs
Linguistics studies have shown that concrete action verbs can
be divided into two categories manner verbs that “specify as
part of their meaning a manner of carrying out an action”
(e.g., laugh, run, swim), and result verbs that “specify the
coming about of a result state” (e.g., empty, chop, open, enter) [Hovav, 2010]. While manner verbs play an important
role in communicative task learning, our current work has focused on result verbs, particularly modeling causality - effects
on the world given corresponding actions.
Different from other types of world knowledge (e.g.,
knowledge about places, people, events of the world), basic causality knowledge and the physics of the world is often
presupposed and rarely explicitly stated in interpersonal or
written communications. Applying NLP techniques to automatically populate knowledge base such as DBPedia, Freebase, and YAGO is not likely to result in basic causality
knowledge of concrete actions. Existing resources such as
VerbNet, FrameNet, and Propbank provide important information about the composition of a verb and its arguments,
but they do not provide details on how the corresponding action may change the physical world. Recent work has investigated learning physics of the world from videos [Fire
and Zhu, 2016] and simulations [Wu et al., 2017]. However,
except for a few works that look into physical properties of
verbs [Forbes and Choi, 2017; Zellers and Choi, 2017], how
verbs and their corresponding actions affect the state of the
physical world is largely under-explored.
Representation. As shown in Figure 4, physical causality
knowledge is represented by a mapping between action and
effect. Symbolically, an action is speciﬁed as a verb-noun
pair where a verb is a concrete result verb and a noun is a
concrete noun which serves as a direct patient of the verb.
An effect can be represented in various ways, for example, it
can be as simple as categories to indicate the dimension of
state change caused by the action to the direct object. It can
also be captured by language descriptions (e.g., “the cucumber is chopped into pieces”), phrases (e.g., “cucumber + into
pieces”), or predicate calculus that details the aspects of the
changed world. As discussed in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2,
different effect representations can be used in different tasks.
The physical world captures physical actions (e.g., observed
or manipulated by the agent) and perceived effect states (e.g.,
through vision and haptics). Symbolic actions and effects
are grounded to physical actions and effects to facilitate language communication between humans and agents. As actions cause effects, such causality modeling will provide the
agents basic knowledge about the physical world. Based on
this knowledge, given an action, the agent can anticipate potential effects to the world; and given an effect state, the agent
can reason about potential actions that may have led to that
state. The acquired causality knowledge can be integrated
with more formal models [Pearl, 2009] in the future to endow
the agents more advanced abilities to do causal reasoning.
Acquisition. Causality knowledge can be acquired through
three main channels. First, collective intelligence based on
crowd-sourcing is used to create an initial seed knowledge
base. After agents are deployed, it’s likely they will encounter
new verbs or new actions in a novel context for which there is
no existing effect knowledge. Thus it is important to establish
a process where the robot can incrementally and continuously
acquire physical causality knowledge from collective intelli-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
gence, web data (e.g., for images), and human partners the
robot is working with. Next sections describe a few examples
of our recent work that address acquisition of physical causality knowledge and how the acquired knowledge is applied to
grounding language to perception and action.
Action-Effect Knowledge in Perception
Physical Causality in Grounding Verb Arguments. We
ﬁrst collected a dataset of commonly used verb-noun pairs (in
a kitchen setting) and their effect descriptions using crowdsourcing [Gao et al., 2016]. As shown from the data, result
verbs often specify some movement along a scale [Hovav,
2010], which have similar behaviors of scalar adjective (e.g.,
big, small, long, short, etc.). Motivated by the typology for
adjectives [Dixon and Aikhenvald, 2006], we have identiﬁed
eighteen dimensions of physical change (i.e., physical causality categories) such as size, shape, color, texture, visibility, solidity, temperature, and attachment, etc. The changes along
these dimensions can be potentially perceived from the environment, e.g., through visual or haptic sensors. Given a verb,
the agent can anticipate the dimension of physical changes
that can occur to the world. Given a noun, the agent can
predict the affordance of the denoted object [Gibson, 1979;
Chao et al., 2015].
One important motivation of modeling physical causality
is to provide top-down guidance for the agent to actively perceive the environment. When humans hear “pick up/take/put
something”, we anticipate the location of that something will
change; when hearing “slice something”, we anticipate that
something will be changed into smaller pieces. Such anticipation is driven by the knowledge of the outcome associated
with these result verbs during human language acquisition.
If artiﬁcial agents have similar kinds of causality knowledge
and can anticipate what may have happened or what is likely
to happen to the physical environment, they can better perceive the environment and plan for lower level actions.
To validate this hypothesis, we incorporated causality
knowledge into models to ground verb arguments to the environment [Gao et al., 2016]. For each of the causality categories related to visual perception, we deﬁned a set of visual detectors that aim to detect the kind of changes in the
environment. For example, for the attachment category, the
visual detector looks for “one object track breaks into multiple tracks”. We then incorporate causality modeling in two
different approaches. In the knowledge-based approach, the
verb phrase (together with its causality category) from a human instruction will trigger corresponding visual detectors to
ground arguments of verbs to objects that are most compatible with the detectors. In the learning-based approach, visual
detectors are implemented as intermediate features and the
association between the detectors and argument grounding is
learned based on the training data. Our experimental results
have shown that both approaches signiﬁcantly improve argument grounding performance.
Action-Effect Reasoning. Given a verb-noun pair in language instruction, the anticipation of potential world change
will enable the agent to better perceive the environment. Similarly, given a physical state of the world, the ability to infer
what actions could cause that state of the world is equally
important. For example, when teaching a robot, a human
teacher may not explicitly describe every needed step. In H4
(Figure 2), while the language instruction is “add the strawberries into the blender”, but the human demonstrates by ﬁrst
opening the lid of the blender then putting the strawberries
into the blender. When observing such a demonstration, the
robot should ideally be able to infer that add-strawberry follows the step open-blender (i.e., R4) although this step is not
explicitly instructed by the human. Partly inspired by this
observation, our recent work has introduced a new task on
naive physical action-effect prediction: given an effect state
depicted by an image, predict actions (in the form of verbnoun pairs) that can potentially cause such effect [Gao et al.,
2018]. One problem of learning action-effect prediction models is the lack of training data. It is very expensive to have a
large amount of image data (effect) which is annotated with
corresponding causes (i.e., actions). To address this problem,
we have applied a bootstrapping approach that harnesses web
data through distant supervision for model training.
Although the performance on action-effect prediction is yet
to be improved, our empirical results have shown that the
web data can be used to complement a small number of seed
examples (e.g., three images for a verb-noun pair in our experiments). This opens up possibilities for agents to learn
physical action-effect relations for tasks at hand through communication with humans with a few examples. Given recent
advances in distributional semantics, word embedding, and
deep learning, our recent work has shown that there is a great
potential the causality knowledge for known verb-noun pairs
can be extended to new verb-noun pairs that may be encountered during task learning.
Action-Effect Knowledge in Planning
Incremental Acquisition of Grounded Verb Semantics.
As discussed in Section 2.1, when following a natural
language command, a robot needs to translate the action
speciﬁed by a verb phrase to the lower-level primitive actions. Such translation often involves planning (e.g., classical STRIP or PDDL based planners or probabilistic planning based on Markov Decision Process). The core to these
planners is action schemas or transition models which specify how primitive actions can cause the change of the world
from one state to another. Therefore, another direction of our
work is learning grounded verb semantics which explicitly
models verb semantics (particularly for result verbs) as the
desired goal states [She et al., 2014; She and Chai, 2016].
Then given a verb and their arguments, planning algorithms
can be applied to search for a sequence of primitive actions.
As social learning plays a pivotal role in child language
acquisition [Tomasello, 2003], we developed an interactive learning framework where the agent can incrementally
acquire grounded verb semantics by following the human
teacher’s instructions step by step. For example, a human can
teach the agent the meaning of “ﬁll the cup with water” by
breaking it down into a sequence of steps, e.g., “pick up the
cup, move to the sink, put down the cup, turn on the faucet,
etc.” As the robot performs each step, the teacher monitors
its outcome. If the robot does not know how to perform a
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
particular step, additional instructions will be given, e.g., until all the way down to the primitive actions. At the end of
teaching, after experiencing a sequence of changes in the environment, the robot will connect the state changes (i.e., a
conjunction of predicates) with the new verb. In this case,
the grounded semantic meaning for fill(cup,water) is
λxλyλo1λo2 isa(x, cup) ∧isa(y, water) ∧isa(o1, sink) ∧
isa(o2, table) ∧has(x, y) ∧in(x, o1) ∧¬on(x, o2). The hypothesis learned from this instance includes cup in the sink
(i.e., in(x, o1)) and cup not on the table (¬on(x, o2)). It is
very speciﬁc and may not be relevant to a new situation. Our
recent work thus extends a single hypothesis to form a hypothesis space to represent grounded verb semantics. The
hypothesis space captures the speciﬁc-to-general hierarchy
of all possible hypotheses applicable from this teaching instance [She and Chai, 2016].
During learning/teaching, a
new hypothesis space can be acquired for each new verb (or
new use of an existing verb) encountered. Existing hypothesis
spaces are also combined, pruned, and updated given new experience. During execution, if there exists a hypothesis space
for the verb in a language command, the robot will select the
best hypothesis which is most relevant to the current situation
(this selection can be learned through experience as well) and
performs the action. If there is no knowledge of that verb or if
the action is not correctly performed, a new teaching process
as described above is initiated. This learning and execution
form a loop which potentially allows the agent to continuously learn and acquire grounded verb semantics from human
partners in the ﬁeld. Using the data made available by [Misra
et al., 2015], our empirical results have shown the hypothesis space representation of grounded semantics signiﬁcantly
outperforms the single hypothesis representation.
Collaboration in Interactive Learning. As mentioned in
Section 2.2, communication is a cooperative process. When
humans and agents have mismatched capabilities and representations, both parties will make extra collaborative effort
to achieve communication goals. For example, in our earlier work on teaching robots new verbs in a simpliﬁed blocks
world [She et al., 2014], we had human teachers perform two
types of teaching: (1) teach one step at a time and make
sure every step is correctly followed before moving to the
next step; and (2) provide a complete instruction with multiple steps. Our empirical studies have shown that, as expected, the time taken for teaching is signiﬁcantly higher in
the one-step-at-a-time setting. However, when the agent applied the learned verb semantics in novel situations, the representations acquired from the one-step-at-a-time setting led
to higher performance in action planning. These results have
demonstrated that teaching style affects learning outcome, no
exception for robots. Then the question is, how to make human teachers aware of the agent’s abilities and limitations so
that teachers can be more cooperative, for example, by providing the right kind of scaffolding in the teaching process.
This makes explainable AI particularly important. The agent
needs to communicate to the human teacher to explain its prediction, decision making, and action so that the teacher can
provide the right kind of feedback (e.g., correction, additional
instructions, etc.).
Agents should also be proactive in learning, especially
when there are many levels of uncertainties. For example,
the perceived world is full of uncertainties and is error-prone.
How to make the agent to learn a reliable model of grounded
verb semantics given the noise from the environment becomes an important question [She and Chai, 2017]. Motivated by previous work on interactive robot learning of new
skills [Cakmak and Thomaz, 2012], we identiﬁed a set of
questions for the agent to inquire about the state of the environment. We used an existing dataset [Misra et al., 2015] to
simulate different levels of noise of the environment and simulate interaction with a human teacher through question answering. Reinforcement Learning (RL) was applied to learn
when to ask what question in order to maximize the long-term
reward. Our results have shown that the policy learned from
RL leads to not only more efﬁcient interaction but also better models for the grounded verb semantics. Although this
is encouraging, how to apply the learned policy to real world
interaction across different tasks remains a challenging and
important research question.
Conclusion
Language communication provides an efﬁcient and natural
means for artiﬁcial agents to acquire new tasks and taskrelated knowledge directly from humans. This paper gives a
brief introduction to the key challenges in language and communication grounding to enable communicative task learning.
What’s presented here is only the tip of the iceberg.
There are many research challenges ranging from commonsense reasoning, knowledge acquisition and sharing, to explainable AI, and human-agent collaboration.
more problems are yet to be discovered. Given recent advances in language, vision, robotics, cognitive modeling, machine learning, and many other related disciplines, it has
never been a better time to explore this exciting, highly multidisciplinary, and less studied territory.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Malcolm Doering, Sarah Fillwock, James Finch, and Kenneth Stewart for their contributions to data collection, annotation, and experiments. This
work was supported by IIS-1208390 and IIS-1617682 from
the National Science Foundation and the DARPA XAI program under a subcontract from UCLA (N66001-17-2-4029).