Natural Language Generation enhances human decision-making with
uncertain information
Dimitra Gkatzia
School of Computing
Edinburgh Napier University
Edinburgh, EH10 5DT, UK
 
Oliver Lemon
Interaction Lab
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
 
Verena Rieser
Interaction Lab
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
 
Decision-making is often dependent on
uncertain data, e.g. data associated with
conﬁdence scores or probabilities.
present a comparison of different information presentations for uncertain data and,
for the ﬁrst time, measure their effects
on human decision-making.
that the use of Natural Language Generation (NLG) improves decision-making under uncertainty, compared to state-of-theart graphical-based representation methods. In a task-based study with 442 adults,
we found that presentations using NLG
lead to 24% better decision-making on average than the graphical presentations, and
to 44% better decision-making when NLG
is combined with graphics. We also show
that women achieve signiﬁcantly better results when presented with NLG output
(an 87% increase on average compared to
graphical presentations).
Introduction
Natural Language Generation (NLG) technology
can achieve comparable results to commonly used
data visualisation techniques for supporting accurate human decision-making . In
this paper, we investigate whether NLG technology can also be used to support decision-making
when the underlying data is uncertain.
data-to-text systems assume that the underlying
data is precise and correct – an assumption which
is heavily criticised by other disciplines concerned
with decision support, such as medicine , environmental modelling , climate change , or weather forecasting . However, simply presenting numerical expressions of risk and uncertainty is not enough.
Psychological studies on decision making have
found that a high percentage of people do not
understand and can’t act upon numerical uncertainty . For example, only 28% of Germans and 25% of Americans are able to answer the
question: “Which of the following numbers represents the biggest risk of getting a disease: 1 in
100, 1 in 1000, 1 in 10?” .
So far, the NLG community has investigated
the conversion of numbers into language and the use of vague expressions .
In this work,
we explore how to convert numerical representations of uncertainty into Natural Language so as to
maximise conﬁdence and correct outcomes of human decision-making. We consider the exemplar
task of weather forecast generation. We initially
present two NLG strategies which present the uncertainty in the input data. The two strategies are
based on (1) the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) guidelines and (2)
commercial forecast presentations (e.g. from BBC
presenters). We then evaluate the strategies against
a state-of-the-art graphical system , which presents the uncertain data in a
graphical way. Figure 1 shows an example of this
baseline graphical presentation. We use a gamebased setup to perform taskbased evaluation, to investigate the effect that the
different information presentation strategies have
on human decision-making.
Weather forecast generation is a common topic
within the NLG community, e.g. . Previous approaches
have not focused on how to communicate uncertain information or the best ways of referring to
Figure 1: Graphics for temperature data.
probabilities of meteorological phenomena to occur. In addition, their evaluation is based on user
ratings of grammatically, semantic correctness,
ﬂuency, coherence or via post-edit evaluation. Although these metrics are indicative of the quality
of the text produced, they do not measure the impact the texts might have in people’s comprehension of uncertainty or on their ability to make decisions based on the information conveyed.
Our contributions to the ﬁeld are as follows: (1)
We study a principled mapping of uncertainty to
Natural Language and provide recommendations
and data for future NLG systems; (2) We introduce a game-based data collection environment
which extends task-based evaluation by measuring
the impact of NLG on decision-making (measuring user conﬁdence and game/task success); and
(3) We show that effects of the different representations vary for different user groups, so that user
adaptation is necessary when generating multimodal presentations of uncertain information.
The Extended Weather Game
In this section, we present our extended version
of the MetOfﬁce’s Weather Game . The player has to choose where to send an
ice-cream vendor in order to maximise sales, given
weather forecasts for four weeks and two locations. These forecasts describe (1) predicted rainfall (Figure 2) and (2) temperature levels together
Likelihood of occurrence
Lexicalisation
“extremely likely”
0.90 ≤p ≤0.99
“very likely”
0.70 ≤p ≤0.89
0.55 ≤p ≤0.69
“probable - more likely than not”
0.45 ≤p ≤0.54
“equally likely as not”
0.30 ≤p ≤0.44
“possible - less likely than not”
0.10 ≤p ≤0.29
“unlikely”
0.01 ≤p ≤0.09
“very unlikely”
“extremely unlikely”
Table 1: WMO-based mapping of likelihoods.
with their likelihoods in three ways: (a) through
graphical representations (which is the version of
the original game), (b) through textual forecasts,
and (c) through combined graphical and textual
forecasts.
We generated the textual format using two rule-based NLG approaches as described
in the next section. Users are asked to initially
choose the best destination for the ice-cream vendor and then they are asked to state how conﬁdent
they are with their choice. Based on their decisions and their conﬁdence levels, the participants
are ﬁnally presented with their “monetary gain”.
For example, the higher the likelihood of sunshine,
the higher the monetary gain if the player has declared that s/he is conﬁdent that it is not going to
rain and it doesn’t actually rain. In the opposite
scenario, the player would lose money. The decision on whether rain occurred is estimated by
sampling the probability distribution. At the end
of the game, users were scored according to their
“risk literacy” following the Berlin Numeracy Test
 . Further details are presented
in .
Natural Language Generation from
Uncertain Information
We developed two NLG systems, WMO-based
and NATURAL, using SimpleNLG , which both generate textual descriptions of rainfall and temperature data addressing
the uncertain nature of forecasts.
WMO-based: This is a rule-based system which
uses the guidelines recommended by the WMO
 for reporting uncertainty, as
shown in Table 1. Consider for instance a forecast of sunny intervals with 30% probability of
rain. This WMO-based system will generate the
following forecast: “Sunny intervals with rain being possible - less likely than not”.
NATURAL: This system imitates forecasters and
Figure 2: Screenshot of the Extended Weather Game (Rainfall: Graphics and WMO condition).
their natural way of reporting weather. The rules
used in this system have been derived by observing the way that experts (e.g. BBC weather reporters) produce forecasts. For the previous example (sunny intervals with 30% probability of rain),
this system will generate the following forecast:
“Mainly dry with sunny spells”.
Evaluation
In order to investigate what helps people to better
understand and act upon uncertainty in information presentations, we use ﬁve conditions within
the context of the Extended Weather Game:
1. Graphics only: This representation shows
the users only the graphical representation of
the weather forecasts. For this condition we
used the graphs that scored best in terms of
human comprehension from (Stephens et al.,
2. Multi-modal Representations:
a multi-modal representation consisting of
graphics (as described in the previous condition) and text produced by the NATURAL
−Graphics and WMO-based: This is also
a multi-modal representation consisting of
graphics and text produced by the WMObased system.
3. NLG only:
−NATURAL only: This is a text-only representation as described above.
−WMO-based system only: This is also a
text-only representation.
We recruited 442 unique players (197 females1,
241 males, 4 non-disclosed) using social media.
We collected 450 unique game instances
(just a few people played the game twice). The
anonymised data will be released as part of this
submission.
In order to investigate which representations assist people in decision-making under uncertainty,
we analysed both the players’ scores (in terms of
monetary gain) and their predictions for rainfall
with regard to their conﬁdence scores. As we described in Section 2, the game calculates a monetary gain based on both the decisions and the con-
ﬁdence of the player, i.e. the decision-making ability of the player. Regarding conﬁdence, we asked
users to declare how conﬁdent they are on a 10point scale. In our analysis we therefore focus on
both conﬁdence and score at the game.
1Women made up 44.5% of the subjects.
Monetary gains
Graphs only
Multi-modal
Table 2: Average Monetary gains and Conﬁdence
scores (All Adults).
Results for all adults
Multi-modal vs. Graphics-only: We found that
use of multi-modal representations leads to gaining signiﬁcantly higher game scores (i.e. better
decision-making) than the Graphics-only representation (p = 0.03, effect = +36.36). This is a
44% average increase in game score.
Multi-modal vs. NLG-only: However, there is no
signiﬁcant difference between the NLG only and
the multi-modal representation, for game score.
NLG vs. Graphics-only: We found that the NLG
representations resulted in a 24.8% increase in average task score (i.e. better decision-making) compared to the Graphics-only condition, see Table 2:
an average score increase of over 20 points. There
was no signiﬁcant difference found between the
WMO and NATURAL NLG conditions.
Conﬁdence: For conﬁdence, the multi-modal representation is signiﬁcantly more effective than
NLG only (p < 0.01, effect = 17.7%). However,
as Table 2 shows, although adults did not feel very
conﬁdent when presented with NLG only, they
were able to make better decisions compared to
being presented with graphics only.
Demographic factors:
We further found that
prior experience on making decisions based on
risk, familiarity with weather models, and correct literacy test results are predictors of the players’ understanding of uncertainty, which is translated in both conﬁdence and game scores. In contrast, we found that the education level, the gender,
or being native speaker of English does not contribute to players’ conﬁdence and game scores.
Results for Females
We found that females score signiﬁcantly higher
at the decision task when exposed to either of the
NLG output presentations, when compared to the
graphics-only presentation (p < 0.05, effect =
This is an increase of 87%, also see
In addition, the same group of users
scores signiﬁcantly higher when presented with
the multi-modal output as compared to graphics
only (p = 0.05, effect =60.74%). Interestingly, for
Monetary gains
Graphs only
Multi-modal
Table 3: Average Monetary gains and Conﬁdence
scores (Females).
this group, the multi-modal presentation adds little more in effectiveness of decision-making than
the NLG-only condition, but the multi-modal presentations do enhance their conﬁdence (+15%).
We furthermore found that educated (i.e. holding
a BSc or higher degree) females, who also correctly answered the risk literacy test, feel significantly more conﬁdent when presented with the
multi-modal representations than with NLG only
(p = 0.01, effect = 16.7%).
Results for Males
We found that males obtained similar game scores
with all the types of representation. This suggests
that the overall improved scores (for All Adults)
presented above, are largely due to the beneﬁcial
effects of NLG for women. In terms of conﬁdence,
males are more likely to be more conﬁdent if they
are presented with graphics only (81% of the time)
or a multi-modal representation (85% of the time)
(p = 0.01).
Conclusions and Future Work
We present results from a game-based study on
how to generate descriptions of uncertain data –
an issue which so far has been unexplored by
data-to-text systems. We ﬁnd that there are signiﬁcant gender differences between multi-modal,
NLG, and graphical versions of the task, where for
women, use of NLG results in a 87% increase in
task success over graphics. Multimodal presentations lead to a 44% increase for all adults, compared to graphics. People are also more conﬁdent
of their judgements when using the multimodal
representations. These are signiﬁcant ﬁndings, as
previous work has not distinguished between genders when comparing different representations of
data, e.g. . It also conﬁrms research on gender effects in multi-modal systems,
as for example reported in . The results are also related to educational
research, which shows that women perform better in verbal-logical tasks than visual-spatial tasks
 . An interesting investigation for future research is the interplay between uncertainty,
risk-taking behaviour and gender, as for example
reported in .
Acknowledgments
This research received funding from the EPSRC projects GUI
(EP/L026775/1), DILiGENt (EP/M005429/1) and MaDrIgAL (EP/N017536/1).