QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community
sequencing data
J Gregory Caporaso1,12, Justin Kuczynski2,12, Jesse Stombaugh1,12, Kyle Bittinger3,
Frederic D Bushman3, Elizabeth K Costello1, Noah Fierer4, Antonio Gonzalez Peña5, Julia
K Goodrich5, Jeffrey I Gordon6, Gavin A Huttley7, Scott T Kelley8, Dan Knights5, Jeremy E
Koenig9, Ruth E Ley9, Catherine A Lozupone1, Daniel McDonald1, Brian D Muegge6, Meg
Pirrung1, Jens Reeder1, Joel R Sevinsky10, Peter J Turnbaugh6, William A Walters2,
Jeremy Widmann1, Tanya Yatsunenko6, Jesse Zaneveld2, and Rob Knight1,11
Rob Knight: 
1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA
2Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado, USA
3Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
4Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences and Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA
5Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA
6Center for Genome Sciences, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri,
7Computational Genomics Laboratory, John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian
National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
8Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego, California, USA
9Department of Microbiology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
10Luca Technologies, Golden, Colorado, USA
11Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boulder, Colorado, USA
To the Editor
High-throughput sequencing is revolutionizing microbial ecology studies. Efforts like the
Human Microbiome Projects1 and the US National Ecological Observatory Network2 are
helping us to understand the role of microbial diversity in habitats within our own bodies
and throughout the planet.
Pyrosequencing using error-correcting, sample-specific barcodes allows hundreds of
communities to be analyzed simultaneously in multiplex3. Integrating information from
© 2010 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Correspondence to: Rob Knight, .
12These authors contributed equally to this work.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare competing financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML
version of the paper at 
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 16.
 
Nat Methods. 2010 May ; 7(5): 335–336. doi:10.1038/nmeth.f.303.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
thousands of samples, including those obtained from time series, can reveal large-scale
patterns that were inaccessible with lower-throughput sequencing methods. However, a
major barrier to achieving such insights has been the lack of software that can handle these
increasingly massive datasets. Although tools exist to perform library demultiplexing and
taxonomy assignment4,5, tools for downstream analyses are scarce.
Here we describe ‘quantitative insights into microbial ecology’ (QIIME; prounounced
‘chime’), an open-source software pipeline built using the PyCogent toolkit6, to address the
problem of taking sequencing data from raw sequences to interpretation and database
deposition. QIIME, available at supports a wide range of
microbial community analyses and visualizations that have been central to several recent
high-profile studies, including network analysis, histograms of within- or between-sample
diversity and analysis of whether ‘core’ sets of organisms are consistently represented in
certain habitats. QIIME also provides graphical displays that allow users to interact with the
data. Our implementation is highly modular and makes extensive use of unit testing to
ensure the accuracy of results. This modularity allows alternative components for
functionalities such as choosing operational taxonomic units (OTUs), sequence alignment,
inferring phylogenetic trees and phylogenetic and taxon-based analysis of diversity within
and between samples (including incorporation of third-party applications for many steps) to
be easily integrated and benchmarked against one another (Supplementary Fig. 1).
We applied the QIIME workflow to a combined analysis of previously collected data (see
Supplementary Discussion) for distal gut bacterial communities from conventionally raised
mice, adult human monozygotic and dizygotic twins and their mothers, and a time series
study of adult germ-free mice after they received human fecal microbiota (Fig. 1,
Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Discussion). This analysis combined ten full 454
FLX runs and one partial run, totalling 3.8 million bacterial 16S rRNA sequences from
previously published studies, including reads from different regions of the 16S rRNA gene.
QIIME is thus a robust platform for combining heterogeneous experimental datasets and for
rapidly obtaining new insights about various microbial communities. Because QIIME scales
to millions of sequences and can be used on platforms from laptops to high-performance
computing clusters, we expect it to keep pace with advances in sequencing technology and
to facilitate characterization of microbial community patterns ranging from normal
variations to pathological disturbances in many human, animal and other environmental
ecosystems.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank our collaborators for their helpful suggestions on features, documentation and the manuscript, and our
funding agencies for their commitment to open-source software. This work was supported in part by Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and grants from the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America, the German Academic
Exchange Service, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Colorado Center for Biofuels and Biorefining and
the US National Institutes of Health (DK78669, GM65103, GM8759, HG4872 and its ARRA supplement,
HG4866, DK83981 and LM9451).