ANALYSIS VERSUS SYNTHESIS IN SIGNAL PRIORS†
Michael Elad∗, Peyman Milanfar+, and Ron Rubinstein∗
∗Computer Science Department
+Electrical Engineering Department
Technion IIT, Haifa, Israel
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA
The concept of prior probability for signals plays a key role in the
successful solution of many inverse problems.
Much of the literature on this topic can be divided between analysis-based and
synthesis-based priors. Analysis-based priors assign probability to a
signal through various forward measurements of it, while synthesisbased priors seek a reconstruction of the signal as a combination of
atom signals. In this paper we describe these two prior classes, focusing on the distinction between them. We show that although
when reducing to the complete and under-complete formulations
the two become equivalent, in their more interesting overcomplete
formulation the two types depart. Focusing on the ℓ1 denoising
case, we present several ways of comparing the two types of priors,
establishing the existence of an unbridgeable gap between them.
1. INTRODUCTION
The general inverse problem seeks the recovery of an unknown signal X ∈RN (a vector of dimension N over the real numbers) based
on indirect measurements of it given in the vector Y ∈RM. A typical
model for describing the relation between X and Y is
Y = T{X}+V ,
where T : RN →RM is a (possibly non-linear) known operator,
and V ∈RM is a zero-mean white Gaussian additive noise vector
(other models for the noise can also be considered, but here we restrict our discussion to the assumptions made above for simplicity).
The structure (1) represents many important problems in signal and
image processing; in this paper we focus on the denoising problem,
corresponding to the choice T{X} = X. Many of our conclusions
for this simpliﬁed case will remain relevant when considering the
more general inverse problem.
Inverting the above process in (1) can be done in many different ways. When lacking any a-priori knowledge about the unknown, Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimation suggests ﬁnding the
X that leads to the most probable set of measurements Y. However, this option is often problematic, as most inverse problems are
ill-posed. A stabilized solution to the inverse problem posed above
comes from the Maximum-A-posteriori Probability (MAP) estimator, which regularizes the estimation process using an assumed prior
distribution on the signal space. Indeed, such signal priors are implicitly used in many other signal processing applications such as
compression, signal decomposition, recognition, and more.
MAP-Analysis Approach. When studying the variety of published
work in the ﬁeld, two main prior types emerge. The ﬁrst utilizes an
analysis-based approach, deriving the probability of a signal from a
set of forward transforms applied to it. Such priors are the backbone
of many classic as well as more recent algorithms, and most commonly appear as regularizing elements in optimization problems or
PDE methods.
In this paper, we focus on a robust Gibbs-like distribution, of
P{X} = Const·exp{−α ·∥ΩX∥p
where Ω∈M[L×N] is some pre-speciﬁed matrix, and ∥·∥p
p is the ℓp
norm. The term ∥ΩX∥p
p is an energy functional that is supposed to
†This research was supported by the USA-Israel binational science
foundation (BSF) grant #2004199
be low for highly probable signals, and higher as the signal is less
probable. We refer to Ωas the analyzing operator. Merged with the
Gaussianity assumption on the additive noise, this poses the MAP
denoising process as the minimization problem
ˆXMAP−A = Argmin
2 +λ ·∥ΩX∥p
If robust norms are used (p < 2 or some robust M-function ),
an iterative algorithm is typically employed for the minimization of
this penalty function. Preference should be given to p ≥1 so that
the overall penalty function is convex, thus guaranteeing a unique
solution. We name this method the MAP-Analysis approach since
the prior is based on a sequence of linear ﬁlters applied to the signal,
essentially analyzing its behavior.
MAP-Synthesis Approach. The second type of prior arises from
employing a synthesis-based approach. Synthesis-based methods
are a more recent contribution, and stem in a large part from the
Basis Pursuit method pioneered by Chen, Donoho & Saunders .
Suppose that a signal X ∈RN is to be represented as a linear
combination of “building-block” atoms taken as the columns of a
full-rank matrix D ∈M[N×L], with L ≥N (notice the different size
compared to Ω); we refer to the columns of D as the atom signals.
This leads to the linear under-determined equation set X = Dγ,
where γ ∈RL is overcomplete. We assume for the idealized signal X that its representation γ is sparse, implying that only a few
atoms are involved in its construction. Assuming Y is a noisy version of this signal, then the following is the MAP-Synthesis option
for the recovery of X:
ˆXMAP−S = D·Argmin
2 +λ ·∥γ∥p
In this expression, the ℓp-norm with p < 2 seeks the sparsest representation vector γ that explains Y in terms of the dictionary
columns. Note that if the solution of the optimization problem is
denoted as ˆγ, the estimated output signal is given by ˆXMAP−S = Dˆγ.
Through the MAP framework, this approach may be generalized to incomplete dictionaries. We let ΓX = {γ | X = Dγ} denote
the set of representations of X in D, where ΓX may be inﬁnite,
empty, or a singleton. The a-priori probability assumed for X depends on its sparsest representation in D; in this setting, signals not
spanned by the columns of D are assigned a-priori probability 0.
The MAP-Synthesis prior is therefore given as a Gibbs distribution on the optimal representations:
Const·exp{−α ·∥ˆγ(X)∥p
if ΓX ̸= /0
ˆγ(X) = Arg min
This prior, when plugged into the MAP formulation, leads precisely
to the process described in (3). From a practical point of view, an
iterative algorithm is required for the solution of (3), and there are
many methods to do so effectively. For p ≥1, we are guaranteed to
have a unique solution.
Analysis versus Synthesis. Comparing the two recovery processes
in (2) and (3), we see that the two describe very similar structures.
14th European Signal Processing Conference , Florence, Italy, September 4-8, 2006, copyright by EURASIP
The heuristic behind each remains sparsifying the representation of
the signal — be this its forward projection on the basis elements, or
its reconstruction as their linear combination.
Analysis-based methods, speciﬁcally in their robust form, are
a very common structure in image processing and computer vision applications. MAP-Analysis leads to a simple optimization
problem, which in the overcomplete case is considerably easier
to solve (due to the smaller unknown) compared to similar-sized
MAP-Synthesis. Nonetheless, a growing number of works are utilizing the synthesis approach for inverse problem regularization.
Synthesis-based priors are an attractive choice due to their more
intuitive and versatile structure. This trend is strengthened by a
wealth of theoretical and practical advancements, making this approach both more appealing and computationally tractable .
Despite these achievements, MAP-Synthesis remains a prohibitive option in many cases. This has led several works to seek alternative approaches over direct minimization. One speciﬁc option
is to approximate the synthesis-based method by an analysis-based
one, as is done in where the analysis operator is taken as the
pseudo-inverse of the synthesis dictionary. This approach is only
partially justiﬁed there; the algebraic viewpoint of this transform is
discussed in section 3.
In light of these recent developments, it is our goal in this paper to clarify the distinction between the two approaches, and shed
some light on the conceptual and technical gaps between them.
We show that for speciﬁc cases, the two approaches are equivalent, utilizing a pseudo-inverse relation between the analysis operator and synthesis dictionary. Such is the case for the the square
and under-complete formulations, as well as for the ℓ2 (i.e. p = 2)
choice. However, as we go to the general overcomplete formulation
(L > N), the equivalence between the two MAP options breaks. In
this paper we characterize this gap, and show that in the general
case the two methods can behave very differently. We concentrate
on the p = 1 case, which is often favored due to its convexity and
robustness, and provide theoretical as well as numerical results indicating that the two methods are fundamentally distinct. A more
complete discussion of this work can be found in .
THE SQUARE AND UNDER-DETERMINED CASES
We begin our discussion by showing that in the (under-)determined
case (i.e., L ≤N), the two methods remain equivalent.
Theorem 1. Square Non-Singular Case – Complete Equivalence. MAP-Analysis and MAP-Synthesis are equivalent if MAP-
Analysis utilizes a square and non-singular analyzing operator Ω.
The equivalent MAP-Synthesis method is obtained for the dictionary D = Ω−1.
Proof. We start with the MAP-Analysis approach as posed in equation (2). Since Ωis square and non-singular, deﬁning ΩX = γ leads
to X = Ω−1γ. Putting this into (2), we get an alternative optimization problem with γ replacing X as unknown,
ˆX = Ω−1 ·Argmin
∥Y −Ω−1γ∥2
2 +λ ·∥γ∥p
and the equivalence to the MAP-Synthesis method in (3) is evident.
Likewise, starting from the MAP-Synthesis formulation and using
the same argument, we can obtain a MAP-Analysis one — and thus
the two methods are equivalent.
An immediate consequence of this theorem is that the two
prior assumptions behind the two methods are essentially the same
for full-rank and L = N analyzing operator/dictionary.
Choosing a sparse representation over a square-non-singular dictionary
amounts to the same probability density as that obtained from using
the corresponding (inverse) analyzing operator and requiring sparsity of the ﬁltered coefﬁcients.
The generalization of Theorem 1 for the L ≤N case requires
a more delicate analysis, but is based on similar arguments. We
point out that complete equivalence cannot be guaranteed in this
case, due to the property of MAP-Synthesis to only produce results
in the column-span of D, whereas MAP-Analysis poses no such
restriction. We arrive at the following result (stated without proof):
Theorem 2. Under-Complete Case – Near-Equivalence. MAP-
Analysis with a full-rank operator Ω∈M[L×N] (L ≤N) is nearlyequivalent to MAP-Synthesis with D = Ω+. This is expressed by
the relation ˆXMAP−A = ˆXMAP−S +Y D⊥, with Y D⊥representing the
component of the input orthogonal to the column-span of D.
Theorem 2 represents, both conceptually and computationally,
a complete equivalence between the two approaches, as knowing
the solution to either one immediately ﬁxes the solution to the other.
We also see that when the input is in the column-span of D (as in
the square non-singular case), we have ˆXMAP−A = ˆXMAP−S.
3. THE OVER-DETERMINED CASE
We have seen that the two methods are equivalent for the L ≤N
case. Our main interest however is in the overcomplete (L > N)
case, advocated strongly by the Basis Pursuit approach.
an idea of the difﬁculties arising when going to this overcomplete case, we begin by considering the natural pseudo-inverse relation, which has thus far successfully achieved equivalence in the
(under-)complete case. We assume Ωhas full column rank, and
hence Ω+Ω= I. Beginning with the MAP-Analysis formulation in
(2), we let ΩX = γ. Since Ω+Ω= I, recovering X from γ is done by
X = Ω+γ. However, in replacing the unknown from X to γ we must
add the constraint that γ is spanned by the columns of Ω, due to its
deﬁnition; this can be represented by the constraint ΩΩ+γ = γ.
Thus we obtain the following equivalent MAP-Analysis form:
ˆXMAP−A = Ω+ · Argmin
2 +λ ·∥γ∥p
If the MAP-Synthesis solution (with D = Ω+) satisﬁes the constraint ΩΩ+γ = γ, then omitting it in (5) has no effect, and both
approaches arrive at the same solution. However, in the general
case this constraint is not satisﬁed, and thus the two methods lead
to different results. An interesting observation is that while the representation results could differ vastly, the ﬁnal estimators ˆX = Ω+ˆγ
in both could be very similar; this is because in multiplying by Ω+
we null-out content not in the column-span of Ω, and essentially
satisfy the constraint. However, as we will see, this does not turn
out to close the gap between the two methods. An exception is the
non-robust ℓ2 case, in which equivalence still holds:
Theorem 3. Over-Complete Case – Equivalence for p = 2.
MAP-Analysis with a full-rank analyzing operator Ω∈ML×N
(L > N) is equivalent to MAP-Synthesis with D = Ω+ for p = 2.
Proof. From (5) the proof is trivial. When p = 2, the unknown γ can
be assumed to be the sum of two parts, γ = γΩ+ γΩ⊥, where γΩ
comes from the column-span of Ω, and γΩ⊥from the orthogonal
subspace. The second penalty term (∥γ∥2
2) clearly prefers γΩ⊥to be
zero; as to the ﬁrst term (∥Y −Ω+γ∥2
2), γΩ⊥has no impact on it as
it is nulled down by Ω+. Thus, γΩ⊥that violates the constraint in γ
is chosen as zero, and the two methods coincide.
3.1 MAP-Analysis and MAP-Synthesis in ℓ1
In the remainder of this paper we consider the two MAP approaches
with p = 1. The use of the ℓ1 norm for signal and image recovery has received considerable attention beginning at the late 1980’s,
with the development of robust statistics; probably most notable of
these are the Total Variation -based methods which are analysisbased, and the later Basis Pursuit method which is synthesis-based.
The ℓ1 option is a favorable choice due to its combination of convexity, robustness, and proximity to ℓ0 in the synthesis case .
14th European Signal Processing Conference , Florence, Italy, September 4-8, 2006, copyright by EURASIP
Looking at the MAP formulations in (2) and (3), we see that
both depend on a weighting parameter λ to control the regularizing element; for λ = 0 both reproduce the input as the solution,
and as λ →∞they deviate from the input until ﬁnally converging
to 0. However, the rate at which this occurs may vary substantially
between the two methods, and thus this parameterization is inconvenient for our purposes. Alternatively, we propose the following
reformulations of the two problems:
ˆXMAP−A(a) = Argmin
∥Y −X∥2 ≤a
ˆXMAP−S(a) = D·Argmin
∥Y −Dγ∥2 ≤a.
These formulations are conceptually simpler, with a directly controlling the deviation from the input. The original MAP target functions are essentially the Lagrangian functionals of these constrained
versions (with λ representing the inverse of the Lagrange multiplier), and thus the two formulations are equivalent.
3.2 Geometry of MAP
In the modiﬁed formulations, the two MAP methods take a clear
geometric structure. The solutions of both are obviously conﬁned
to a ball of radius a about Y (this is true as we assume D is full
rank). We also assume this ball does not include the origin, otherwise the solution is trivially zero. Considering MAP-Analysis ﬁrst,
the level-sets of its target function fA(X) = ∥ΩX∥1 are a collection of concentric, centro-symmetric polytopes {X | ∥ΩX∥1 ≤c}.
Graphically, the solution can be obtained by taking a small levelset {∥ΩX∥1 ≤c} about the origin, and gradually inﬂating it (by
increasing c) until it ﬁrst encounters the ball. The point of intersection constitutes the MAP-Analysis solution, as there cannot be a
point in the ball with a smaller value of ∥ΩX∥1.
As to MAP-Synthesis, a similar process may be described using the collection of concentric and centro-symmetric polytopes
D · {γ | ∥γ∥1 ≤c}1. A fact to note for both MAP methods is that
these ”inﬂations” we visualize are performed via simple scaling:
we have {∥ΩX∥1 ≤c} = c · {∥ΩX∥1 ≤1}, and D{∥γ∥1 ≤c} =
c·D{∥γ∥1 ≤1}. This implies that given the canonical MAP deﬁning polytopes ΨΩ= {∥ΩX∥1 ≤1} and ΦD = D·{∥γ∥1 ≤1}, the
inﬂation processes are fully deﬁned, and so are the MAP solutions;
in fact, specifying these polytopes is completely equivalent to specifying Ωor D, respectively. We ﬁnd that the behavior of each of
the methods is governed exclusively by the geometry of a single
high-dimensional polytope, and this provides us with the necessary
basis for comparing the two methods. We therefore continue by
characterizing the geometry of these polytopes; for the discussion,
we recall that a face of an N-dimensional polytope is any intersection of this polytope with a tangent hyperplane (e.g. a vertex, edge,
ridge etc.), and a facet is an N −1-dimensional face.
MAP-Analysis Deﬁning Polytope. The MAP-Analysis deﬁning
polytope is a level set of the target function fA(X) = ∥ΩX∥1. Applying the gradient operator to fA, we ﬁnd that the normal to this
surface satisﬁes n(X) ∝ΩT sign(ΩX). Evidently n(X) is deﬁned
for any X in which all coordinates of ΩX are non-zero; where one
or more of these vanishes, n(X) exhibits a discontinuity arbitrarily
ﬁlled-in by the sign function. Intuitively, consider the signals X on
the boundary of the deﬁning polytope, then the facets correspond to
the locations where n(X) is smooth, whereas the other faces correspond to where n(X) is discontinuous. This formalizes as
Lemma 4. Let X ∈∂ΨΩ(the boundary of the deﬁning polytope),
and let k denote the rank of the rows in Ωto which X is orthogonal
to. Then X resides strictly within2 a face of dimension (N −k −1)
of the MAP-Analysis deﬁning polytope.
1Note that these sets exist in signal space, and have the explicit form
{X | ∃γ, X = Dγ ∧∥γ∥1 ≤c}
2We use the term strictly within a face to indicate a signal located in the
interior of a face, in the sense that there exists a ﬁnite ε-ball about it — of the
same dimension as the face — entirely contained within this face (note that
The lemma implies that to obtain a vertex of ΨΩ, we choose
N −1 linearly-independent rows in Ω, determine their 1D nullspace v and normalize such that ∥Ωv∥1 = 1 (this deﬁnes two antipodal vertices). Edges are similarly obtained, by choosing N −2
linearly-independent rows, and taking any properly normalized signal in their 2D null-space. This leads to an immediate conclusion
concerning the complexity of the MAP-Analysis deﬁning polytope:
evidently its vertex count is equal to the number of choices of N −1
linearly-independent rows in Ω, and in the worst-case, this may
reach an exponential
. In fact, there are examples where this
bound is met, and thus the bound is tight (for the worst-case). This
is also the expected number of vertices when the directions of the
rows in Ωare random and uniformly distributed on the unit sphere.
Several conclusions can be drawn from Lemma 4 concerning
the structure of the MAP-Analysis deﬁning polytope. For instance,
each set of edges, stemming from the same 2D null-space of some
N −2 rows in Ω, forms a planar edge-loop of consecutive edges
all existing on this common plane. We thus ﬁnd that the edges of
ΨΩare arranged in loops about the origin. Similar arguments lead
to higher dimensional regularities, corresponding to the choices of
N −k independent rows from Ω, for k > 2. We also ﬁnd that this
polytope has a strict neighborliness pattern, where each of its vertices has precisely 2(N −1) neighbors.
MAP-Synthesis Deﬁning Polytope. The MAP-Synthesis deﬁning
polytope is given by ΦD = D · {γ | ∥γ∥1 ≤1}. It is a known result (and quite simple to show) that this polytope is obtained as the
convex hull of the columns of D and −D:
The MAP-Synthesis deﬁning polytope ΦD = D ·
{∥γ∥1 ≤1} is obtained as the convex hull of {±di}i=1...L, where
{di} are the columns of D.
This lemma simply states that the vertices of ΦD are those
columns of ±D which cannot be represented as a convex combination of any other columns (and their antipodes); the other faces
are the convex combinations of neighboring vertices. A vertex can
therefore be represented as V = Dγ where γ has a single non-zero
element γi = ±1, and a point on an edge can be represented similarly with γ having two non-vanishing elements γi,γ j satisfying
|γi|+|γ j| = 1. In general, a point on a k-dimensional face will have
a representation X = Dγ with γ having k + 1 non-vanishing elements, and ∥γ∥1 = 1. We emphasize that this is not a sufﬁcient condition, so a signal X = Dγ synthesized from a sparse representation
γ might not reside on a low-dimensional face if the corresponding
columns of ±D are not neighbors, or do not constitute vertices.
3.3 MAP-Synthesis as a Superset of MAP-Analysis
The geometrical viewpoint leads to an important consequence concerning the relationship between the two MAP formulations. From
the geometrical description, it is clear that any ℓ1 MAP-Analysis estimator may be reformulated as an equivalent MAP-Synthesis one;
this is accomplished by simply taking all the MAP-Analysis deﬁning polytope vertices — one of each antipodal pair — as the MAP-
Synthesis dictionary atoms. Since both methods will have the same
deﬁning polytope, they will be completely equivalent. This establishes the generality of MAP-Synthesis over MAP-Analysis in ℓ1:
Theorem 6. Over-Complete ℓ1 Case – Generality of MAP-
Synthesis. For any ℓ1 MAP-Analysis form with full-rank analyzing
operator Ω(L ≥N), there exists a dictionary D(Ω) describing an
equivalent ℓ1 MAP-Synthesis form. The reverse is not true.
The reverse direction fails due to the strict regularity imposed
on the MAP-Analysis deﬁning polytopes. Since this regularity does
this covers signals that are vertices, who reside strictly within themselves).
Also, as opposed to standard residence, strict residence is unique, as the
faces are considered open rather than closed and thus do not overlap.
14th European Signal Processing Conference , Florence, Italy, September 4-8, 2006, copyright by EURASIP
not apply to MAP-Synthesis, it may clearly describe structures not
represented in MAP-Analysis form.
We emphasize that the actual equivalence transform is of little
practical value; except for the special case of N = 2, where the size
of D(Ω) will be equal to (or even smaller than) that of ΩT , the
size of D(Ω) will generally grow exponentially. Nonetheless, the
theorem describes a deﬁnite one-way relationship between the two
formulations: the synthesis formulation is clearly more general than
the analysis one, with a vast collection of MAP-Synthesis priors
unrepresented by the stricter MAP-Analysis form.
The fact that the equivalence transform is impractical stems directly from the incompatibility between the two polytopal structures in their vertex counts; this incompatibility is complemented
by a parallel one in the neighborliness properties of these polytopes. Our observation for MAP-Analysis that every vertex has a
linear number of neighbors, while their total number is exponential,
implies that the probability of any two vertices to be neighbors approaches 0 as N →∞. In contrast, Donoho has recently presented
opposite results for MAP-Synthesis polytopes; as it turns out,
for these polytopes the probability of any 2 (non-antipodal) vertices
to be neighbors approaches 1 as N →∞. 3 We therefore ﬁnd that
while MAP-Analysis polytopes feature very large numbers of vertices with very low neighborliness, MAP-Synthesis polytopes exhibit low vertex counts and very high neighborliness. We see that
the two structures are in fact fundamentally different.
3.4 Experiencing the Gap
The geometrical inconsistencies suggest a large gap between the
two formulations in the over-determined ℓ1 case. In this section we
provide some feeling about this gap, through an actual example.
Recoverability and Principal Signal. To compare the two methods, we will seek those signals which are favored in some sense by
each of the priors. We conﬁne ourselves to a ﬁxed-energy sphere,
w.l.o.g. the unit sphere, and on this sphere search for the signals
most effectively recovered by the speciﬁc MAP method. We use
the term recoverability of a signal in a qualitative manner, referring
to the ability of the MAP method to recover this signal successfully
given noisy versions of it. More speciﬁcally, assume an energyconserving variant of the MAP estimator where the denoised solution is post-processed by re-normalizing it to the magnitude of the
input (thus eliminating its decay to zero caused by the low-energy
preference of the prior). Under these conditions, the MAP estimation essentially searches the neighborhood of the input on the ﬁxedenergy sphere, outputting a higher-probability (and presumably less
noisy) signal near the input. We thus consider a signal as highly
recoverable when its prior probability is maximal relative to a signiﬁcant enough part of the directions about it on the ﬁxed-energy
sphere; indeed, such signals are generally recovered most successfully by the MAP method. The local maxima of the distribution on
the unit sphere, which are clearly the most highly recoverable signals, will be referred to as the principal signals of the distribution.
The geometry of the MAP deﬁning polytope directly dictates
the behavior of the distribution on the unit sphere, and consequently
the recoverability of the signals on it. The relation may be described
as follows: For both MAP priors, the boundaries of the deﬁning
polytopes deﬁne iso-surfaces of signals with equal a-priori probability. On the ﬁxed-energy sphere, those signals whose projections
on the deﬁning polytope are farther from the origin correspond to
the more probable signals. It follows that the highly recoverable signals must be projected to the extreme points – the low-dimensional
faces – of the polytope. Speciﬁcally, the principal signals of the
distribution project to vertices of the MAP deﬁning polytope.
It is important to point out that projection onto a lowdimensional face is only a necessary condition for high recoverability. For instance, a vertex will not always lead to a principal
signal, as demonstrated in ﬁgure (1). Simulation results show a dra-
3The dictionary is assumed to be of linear size in N, and to fulﬁll certain
randomness conditions; see Theorem 1 in .
Figure 1: Principal signals and the MAP deﬁning polytope. The dotted circles denote
the unit sphere in 2D signal space. The two polygons are different scales of the same
MAP deﬁning polytope. (a) A principal signal, obtained at a vertex of the deﬁning
polytope. (b) A vertex which does not represent a principal signal.
matic difference in the recovery performance of principal vs. nonprincipal vertices.
Locating Principal Signals. The principal signals of a MAP prior
are tightly related to the vertices of its deﬁning polytope. However,
not every vertex necessarily implies a principal signal; for this, it
must be maximally distant from the origin relative to all the directions about it on the boundary of the deﬁning polytope. We begin
with MAP-Synthesis, whose deﬁning polytope is the convex hull of
the columns of ±D. We assume the vertices of this polytope to be
known — this can be achieved by solving a set of LP problems, or
alternatively by normalizing the dictionary atoms to a ﬁxed-length,
in which case they all become vertices. Still, identifying those who
represent principal signals is in general very difﬁcult. We therefore limit the discussion to dictionaries with normalized columns
– which are very common in practice – and in this case it can be
shown that indeed all atoms constitute principal signals, hence locating these becomes trivial.
As to MAP-Analysis, the geometry of its deﬁning polytope is
described in Lemma 4, which also provides a practical method for
generating its vertices. To locate those which represent principal
signals, we use a simple traversal algorithm: Beginning with some
initial vertex, we examine its incident edge-loops. If it is found to
be maximal relative to all its incident edges, then (and only then)
does it constitute a principal signal. Otherwise, it is not maximal
relative to some incident edge. In this case we replace it with a
vertex with larger ℓ2-norm from the violating edge loop, and continue the traversal. This swapping continues until a local maximum
is encountered, providing one MAP-Analysis principal signal. The
entire process can now be repeated using a new vertex as a starting
point. The traversal approach is obviously time-consuming relative
to the immediacy in the MAP-Synthesis case; on the other hand, it
poses no assumptions on the structure of the operator Ω.
Simulation Results. We provide some simulation results demonstrating the theoretical gaps we have described. For the experiment,
we selected the pseudo-inverse relation between the dictionary and
analysis operator; this is a natural choice for bridging the two methods, however in reality, it may lead to very different behaviors of the
two methods. We selected the 128×256 Identity-Hadamard dictionary D =
2 [I H] and its pseudo-inverse Ω= DT =
the synthesis dictionary and analysis operator. This is an interesting
choice as the two feature the same two-ortho structure, and furthermore D is a near-optimal Grassmanian frame making it favorable
for MAP-Synthesis methods .
The dictionary size immediately limits the number of distinct
MAP-Synthesis principal signals to a mere 256. In contrast, MAP-
Analysis boasts an enormous amount of principal signals: our
traversal algorithm easily produced 10,000 such signals. Moreover,
the program was designed to reject new signals if these resided in
a radius of < .1 from any existing principal signal; however, after 10,000 generated signals, the rejection rate remained negligible, suggesting that the true number of such signals is much greater
 , Florence, Italy, September 4-8, 2006, copyright by EURASIP
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Figure 2: Denoising MAP principal signals. (a) Results for MAP-Analysis principal signals (10,000 examples). Distributions of optimal errors obtained using MAP-
Analysis (above) and MAP-Synthesis (below). (b) The same for MAP-Synthesis principal signals (256 examples).
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Optimal relative error
Signal count
Figure 3: Denoising signals on low-dimensional MAP-Synthesis faces. (a) Results for
signals on 2D faces (1,000 examples). Distributions of optimal errors obtained using
MAP-Analysis (above) and MAP-Synthesis (below). (b) The same for signals on 3D
faces (1,000 examples).
mentioned earlier that this is only a necessary condition for highrecoverability; however in many cases (speciﬁcally when the dictionary is normalized) this indeed turns out to produce well-recovered
signals. For this experiment, we generated 1,000 signals on 2D
faces, 1,000 on 3D faces, and so on up to 12D faces.
To quantify the performance of a speciﬁc method on a set of signals, we applied that method (in its energy-preserving form), with
varying a values, to each of the signals in the set. We then selected,
for each signal individually, the optimal a value aopt and its associated relative error erropt = ∥bXMAP(aopt)−X∥2/∥Y −X∥2 to represent the performance of the method on this signal. We collected
the optimal errors for all signals in the set, and these were used to
characterize the performance of the method on the entire set.
Figures (2)-(4) summarize the results. The ﬁrst two present histograms of the optimal errors obtained on the principal signal sets
and the MAP-Synthesis 2D and 3D signal sets. The ﬁnal ﬁgure
summarizes the results for all 12 sets of MAP-Synthesis signals.
Examining these results, we ﬁnd that as anticipated, each
method is successful in recovering its own sets of favorable signals; this therefore acts to support the geometrical models we have
presented. It is also interesting to note that the two methods exhibit comparable performance when evaluated each on their own
set of principal signals. This observation is particularly evident in
the MAP-Synthesis principal signal test – ﬁgure (2(b)) – as the signals in this test are also principal to MAP-Analysis.
On the other hand, the results also depict a clear disparity between the two methods. We see that MAP-Analysis completely fails
in recovering the MAP-Synthesis favorable signals, while MAP-
Synthesis performs notably poorly compared to MAP-Analysis on
its massive number of principal signals. These acute inconsistencies lead to the inevitable conclusion that the pseudo-inverse relation does not bridge between the two methods, as the theoretical
models have anticipated.
4. BEYOND DENOISING
Our discussion thus far was focused (for simplicity) on the denoising problem. However, many of the points made in this paper are in
fact more general statements. Theorem 1, which established equivalence between the two prior types in the square case, is a general
result which applies to the two prior structures. Most of our statements for the overcomplete case are also general, as they stem directly from the geometry of the distribution level-sets, and as such
are independent of the speciﬁc choice of problem. Speciﬁcally, the
Face Dimension
Mean relative error
MAP-Analysis
MAP-Synthesis
Figure 4: Denoising MAP-Synthesis highly recoverable signals. The graphs show the
mean optimal errors obtained versus the MAP-Synthesis face dimension; error bars
correspond to the standard deviation of the errors.
results provided in Theorem 6, as well as all conclusions which follow, still hold when considering the more general case. Finally, the
equivalence for the ℓ2 case is a general result as well.
The notable exception is the equivalence in the strict undercomplete case, which does not reproduce in general. As it turns
out, the fact that the MAP-Synthesis solution is constrained to the
column-span of D may become crucial in general, preventing the
possibility of an equivalence.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have discussed and compared two popular MAPbased methods for inverse problems — the MAP-Analysis and the
MAP-Synthesis formulations. We have shown that the two are essentially identical in the (under-)complete case, utilizing a pseudoinverse relation between the dictionary and analysis operator. However, in the overcomplete case the two methods were shown to depart. We concentrated on the overcomplete ℓ1 case, and found that
the geometrical structures underlying the two approaches exhibit
very different properties. This perspective has led to a generality
relation of MAP-Synthesis over MAP-Analysis, though the actual
transform remains impractical. Our theoretical results were demonstrated for the pseudo-inverse relation, where the two methods performed dramatically differently on large families of signals. We
conclude that the two widely-used MAP-based methods retain a respectable distance between them. Whether any one may be considered superior, however, remains an open question.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Prof. David
L. Donoho for the enlightening discussions and ideas which helped
in developing the presented work.