Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Teachers of Poor Communities: The Tale of Instructional Media
Teachers of Poor Communities: The Tale of Instructional Media
Use in Primary Schools of Gedeo Zone, Southern Ethiopia
Use in Primary Schools of Gedeo Zone, Southern Ethiopia
Mehadi Abdo
Hawassa University, Ethiopia
Tesfaye Semela
University of Tübingen, Germany
Follow this and additional works at: 
Part of the Education Commons
Recommended Citation
Recommended Citation
Abdo, M., & Semela, T. . Teachers of Poor Communities: The Tale of Instructional Media Use in
Primary Schools of Gedeo Zone, Southern Ethiopia. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 35(7).
 
This Journal Article is posted at Research Online.
 
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Teachers of Poor Communities: The Tale of Instructional Media Use
in Primary Schools of Gedeo Zone, Southern Ethiopia
Mehadi Abdo
Hawassa University, Ethiopia
Tesfaye Semela
University of Tübingen, Germany
Abstract: The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of
working conditions at school on teachers’ level of instructional media
use in the primary school system of Gedeo Zone, southern Ethiopia. The
survey was made on a sample of 139 (24.4 % female and male 75.6 %)
teachers who were randomly drawn from 9 primary schools (four rural
and five urban primary schools). The instruments used to generate data
were self-reported questionnaires tapping the level of instructional media
use and the associated school-level environmental factors. The findings
based on Factor Analysis revealed three independent dimensions of
school environment factors related to the use of instructional media by
teachers. It is further disclosed that the level of use of instructional media
is low with an average frequency of use swinging between once in two
weeks to twice in three weeks during four weeks of instruction. The
implications of the findings related to pre-service and in-service teacher
training are also discussed.
Integration of instructional technology in school curriculum believed to bolster the quality
of instruction via fostering student-centered pedagogies . Specifically, research evidence show that teachers’ use of instructional media
sustain students’ attention, increase the meaningfulness of abstract concepts, encourage deep
processing, and boosts class performance through increased content acquisition . Most importantly, it is argued that the advent of information and communication
technology calls for modification of students’ and teachers’ roles as it triggers a shift from
teacher-centered to constructivist modes of classroom instruction , and causes teachers to confront their established beliefs about instruction .
Apparently, as educational innovations change the modes of school instruction in the West, the
new development is also felt in different parts of the globe including the poorest corners of the
world, and Ethiopia is one of them.
Recognizing the pedagogical implications, the Ethiopian Education and Training Policy
(ETP) promises to intensify the integration instructional technology in school curriculum . In view of that, the ETP states that: “…due attention will be given to the
supply, distribution and utilization of educational materials, educational technology and
facilities.” . Furthermore, the recently introduced General Education Quality
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Improvement Package (GEQIP) clearly stipulates a separate ICT integration implementation
program . This new move indicates the political will to facilitate the
integration of instructional technology in schools. However, little or no empirical evidence exist
related to teachers’ role in the process of integrating instructional technology in Ethiopian school
system. The limited studies conducted in the late 90s do not provide sufficient evidence since a lot has changed
over the past decade partly due to the rapid expansion of primary education in Ethiopia . Thus, updated empirical evidence is necessary to inform policy, practice, and future
The purpose of this study is, therefore, to examine the use of instructional media resources
among primary schoolteachers in Gedeo Zone. Notwithstanding its limited scope, however, the
findings of the present study is believed to provide some empirical evidence regarding the state
of instructional media integration in school curriculum and its implications for pre-service and
in-service teacher training programs in Ethiopia.
The Study Context
Gedeo Zone is located in Sothern Nations Nationalities and Peoples Regional State
(SNNPRS) of Ethiopia with a population of less than one Million. The Zone is predominately
inhabited by ethnic Gedeo, one of the 56 ethnic groups inhabiting the SNNPRS. Despite the
significant increase over the past decade, Gedeo Zone stands at the bottom four out of 22 Zones
and Special Weredas in terms of primary school participation . The
2007/8 Education Statistics shows that the primary school Net Enrollment Rate (NER) in Gedeo
Zone was 59.4 % with Gender Parity Index (GPI) of 0.66 (i.e. for every 100 boys enrolled, there
were only 66 girls) . This figure is smaller than both the regional (SNNPR
GPI = .87) and the national average (National GPI = 0.90) depicting significant
female under representation in primary education. On the other hand, despite its comparatively
low NER, the number of teachers and classrooms in the Zone is dismal. In this regard, the 2007/8
statistics reveals that teacher-pupils-ratio (TPR) and pupils-section-ratio (PSR) at first cycle
primary level were 73 and 75 respectively . In short, available data and
actual observations indicate that relative to most Zones within the SNNPRS, Gedeo Zone is one
of the least resourced and less developed in terms of material and human resources, school
infrastructure and facilities even by Ethiopian standards.
Hence, it is against this background that this article attempts to examine the level of
instructional media use (as measured by frequency of use) among primary school teachers in
Gedeo Zone. Specifically, the study will answer the following research questions:
1. How frequent do primary schoolteachers in Gedeo Zone utilize instructional media in
their teaching?
2. What are the most important school-level work environment variables that matters most
to teachers when they intend to use media for teaching purposes?
3. Do teachers’ perceptions of their work environment variables related to their level of
instructional media use?
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
School-Based Barriers of Instructional Technology Integration
A bourgeoning body of research unraveled the
array factors associated with successful technology integration in school. To put this assortment
of factors in proper perspective, Ertmer’s classification of barriers of technology
integration appears relevant. Ertmer categorized barriers of technology integration by
teachers into two broader classifications: first-order barriers ‘extrinsic’ to teachers (access, time,
support, resources, and training) and second-order barriers ‘intrinsic’ to teachers (attitudes,
beliefs, practices and resistance). For the purpose of this paper, reviewing some of the first-order
barriers that are directly influenced by the school in the process of instructional technology integration
seems appropriate. Thus, this section reviews existing literature that focus on the role of (a) availability of
and access to media resources ,
Para-professional support/technical , (b) teachers’ workload and nature of
teaching tasks ; and, (c) school culture and leadership support
 in teachers’
instructional media integration.
Availability of Media and Technical Support
Availability of and access to instructional technology resources and technical support
 are important factors that determine the frequency with which teachers use
instructional materials . In this connection, Holloway suggests
that the frequency with which elementary school teachers use instructional technology is related
to the availability of technological hardware in the classroom, buildings and districts media
centers in that order. In a survey study Kardeza reported that lack of instructional media
resources are one of the reasons for minimal use of instructional technology in teachers training
institution in Malawi. In an earlier study conducted in Ethiopia, Asegedom reported lack
of the required instructional media resources in the one hand, and failure of school pedagogical
centers to make available ones accessible on the other, as reasons for teachers’ limited use of
instructional media. In another study, Fuller reported that teachers are encouraged to use
technology in classroom if they are given technical support.
Workload and Nature of Teaching Tasks
The nature of the teaching tasks (i.e. the amount of school subjects taught, the number of
students in class, time constrain during planning, and the weekly teaching load) is also cited as a
major factor influencing much of what teachers do in their classrooms . In this connection, Moore et al. reported that
teachers resent assignments requiring them to teach subjects they do not know, entail
considerable time for class preparations, or teaching very large classes. In a comprehensive
review of research, Earle identified shortage of ‘planning time’ among teachers as one of
the major restraining factors of technology integration in school. Further. it is to be noted that
leave alone in situations where class sizes are already large, and physical space is limited and
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
substandard , that teachers are reluctant to immediately integrate
technology in their teaching even when both first-order (extrinsic) and second-order (intrinsic)
barriers have been removed . Thus, considering the inherent complexity of
technology integration, Wang and Reeves recommend that instructional designers and
researchers need to seriously consider teachers’ perspectives while attempting to integrate
instructional technology in schools.
School Culture and Leadership Support
There is evidence to suggest that that leadership is one of the most important factors affecting the
successful integration of technology . In a study conducted in British school system, Tearle found that the
school culture and the principal’s ‘strong leadership’ are important in ICT implementation.
Consistently, related studies concluded
that principal’s support encourages teachers to use technology in the classroom. Asegedom
 endorsed the role of school principals in encouraging or discouraging the use of
media by teachers in Ethiopian school system. Parker , on the other hand, noted that
technophobia among principals can hold back successful IT (Information Technology)
implementation in school. Taken together, the existing literature on school-based or extrinsic
factors that affect teachers’ use or integration of instructional technology
provides empirical as well as substantive evidence that availability of and accessibility of
instructional media/technology, teachers’ workload, planning time and teaching tasks (as related
to time constraint) , and the
support of school leadership and technical support 
impinge on teachers’ use of instructional technology in classroom. Similar findings were
reported in earlier studies conducted in Ethiopian context .
Methodology
Participants
The participants in this study were selected from a population of 697 primary school
teachers in Wenago Wereda. The identification of the study site was made based on lottery
method out of the four Weredas in Gedeo Zone. The sample included 150 teachers, who were
drawn using a systematic random sampling technique the nine target schools (four rural and five
urban primary schools). The sample accounted for 21.5% of primary school teachers in the
Wereda. Of the 150 initial participants, however, usable data were obtained on 139 (Female =
24.4 % and Male = 75.6 %) teachers whose mean age was 37.5 (SD = 7.2) years and average
teaching experience of 8.6 years (SD = 4.2 years). The total response rate was 92.6%. The
proportion of response was considered to be high, thus, acceptable for further analysis (as measured by the frequency of instructional media use) and
teachers’ evaluations of their working environment (TEWE).
Teachers’ Perception of their Level of Instructional Media Use
The LMU scale asked the respondents to indicate the type and the frequency of
instructional media items over one month period of classroom teaching. Eight types of
instructional media materials were identified based on visits to schools, informal talk with school
principals and teachers, and a syllabus analysis. Thus, eight items were developed to assess the
level of media use by the teachers. These included: (1) teacher- made instructional materials
including drawings, diagrams, handouts, and other materials; (2) still pictures (3) threedimensional instructional materials including models, mock-ups, globes and real objects; (4)
two-dimensional instructional materials such as maps, charts, graphs; (5) display boards; (6)
motion projected media such as video or television; (7) audio materials such as radio and tape
materials; and (8) flash cards, posters, and cartoons. A seven-point Likert scale was used for each
media item; ranging from "every day" to “not at all” [i.e. every day = 7, twice a week = 6, once a
week = 5, once in two weeks = 4, once in three weeks = 3, once in four weeks = 2, and; not at all
= 1]. The level of instructional media use (LMU) was determined by summing up teachers’
ratings across the eight items for each individual respondent. The maximum possible score in
this scale was 8 x 7 =56; while the minimum possible score was 8 x 1 = 8. High score on the
scale indicates high level (frequency) of instructional media use.
Teachers’ Evaluations of their Working Environment
The second instrument was designed to investigate teachers’ perception and evaluation of
their work environment. This measure contained questions pertaining to school-level
factors/variables that influence their instructional media use. There were 10-items measuring the
TEWC. The respondents were expected to indicate their assessment of the school-level
factors/variables as they relate to their use of instructional technology. All items were measured
along a five-point Likert-type scale that ranged from “Strongly agree” (5 point in the scale) to
“Strongly disagree” (one point in the scale). High score on the TEWC measure indicates positive
or favorable working conditions within the school environment. Scores on negatively stated
items were reverse coded before analyzing the responses.
Instruments Development
The two instruments employed in this study were subjected to initial item screening for
content and logical validity by seven experts. Four of these experts were selected from the
Department of Curriculum in the Southern Nations Nationalities Administrative Region
Education Bureau (SNNPAR-EB) while the remaining three were postgraduate students in the
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Department of Curriculum and Instruction at Addis Ababa University. Based on their feedback,
some modifications were made to improve the quality of the items. Following that, a tryout data
collection was made on 40 primary teachers. Finally, nine items were eliminated from the major
data collection instruments due to low logical validity and marginal total-item correlation.
Internal consistency reliabilities (Cronbach alpha) for the final versions of Level of Media Use
(LMU) and Teachers’ Evaluations of their Working Conditions (TEWC) scales were found to be
0.71and 0.68 respectively. All items included in the questionnaire were written in Amharic
language in order to avoid communication barrier.
Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics. Descriptive statistics
(Means and SDs) was used to analyze the data generated through the LMU measure. The
remaining 10 items that made up the TEWC measure was subjected to Factor Analysis, a
statistical technique that helps to identify items tapping the same construct . Extraction of environmental factors was made using principal component analysis and
rotated employing a Varimix rotation procedure. The justification for employing the Varimix
rotation option was to identify the set of items tapping the different factors of work environment
 .
The sampling adequacy of the measure was checked based on Kaiser - Meyer - Olkin
(KMO) sampling adequacy measure. Accordingly, KMO was found to be 0.763 (with Bartlett’s
test of sphericity = 247.78, p <. 0001). This indicates that the sample size considered to run the
analysis was adequate. In addition, in order to determine the number of factors to be retained,
using the Kaiser Criterion was employed . Accordingly,
three factors with Eiganvalues greater than 1 were retained. The three work environment factors
collectively accounted for about 79.8% of the total variance. Further, a Pearson coefficient of
correlation was computed to find bivariate relationships between the dependent (Level of Media
Use) and the independent variables (Work environment factors). All statistical significance tests
were made at alpha 0.05. Data entry and analysis was made using the SPSSWIN version 11.
As stated earlier, the level of media use (LMU) was assessed based on teachers’
responses to the questions regarding the frequency with which they used instructional technology
during their teaching work. The mean frequency of use among teachers for all types of
instructional materials considered in this investigation is depicted in Figure 1 below.
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Frequency of media use
Number of respondents
Figure 1. Teachers’ frequency of media use
Figure 1 portrays that generally, the majority of the teachers do not frequently use media in the
actual teaching-learning situation. The computed overall mean of the level (frequency) of media
use (LMU) is 25.1 (Mean = 25.1, SD = 3.73, N= 139). This qualitatively implies that teachers,
on average, use media resources between once in two weeks to once in three weeks of the
instructional time for each media type. In other words, over one month of classroom instruction,
the significant majority of the teachers did not even use media once in a week. Figure 2 further
illustrate the frequency of media (y-axis) use (LMU) and the corresponding proportion of
teachers (X-axis). Accordingly, of the total of 139 teachers, 54 (38.8%) reported to use media
only twice in three weeks while two (1.4%) of them admitted to have employed only once in a
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Figure 2. Average level of media use (LMU)
Analysis of School-Level Factors Related to Instructional Media Use
In order to determine the school-level factors affecting teachers’ use of instructional
media, a factor analysis technique was employed to identify items that represent different
dimensions of the work environment. The factors emerged from the analyses then rotated using
the Varimax option to determine the independent school work environment factors affecting
instructional media use. The results are presented in Table 1 below.
Number of respondents
Media use by category
Once in 4 weeks
Once in 3 weeks
Twice in 3 weeks
Once in a week
Twice in a week
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Work Environment Measure
Factor I: Availability of Media Resources
In my school Paraprofessional support in easily obtainable.
In my school, ready-made instructional materials are available.
Available school media are easily accessible.
Local materials that are needed for media preparation car easily be
Factor II: Manageability of Classroom Tasks
My weekly teaching load is reasonable.
The class-size is appropriate for my instructional tasks
Classroom physical conditions are comfortable.
Factor III. Administrative support and encouragement provided by the
school principal
The school administration assigns faire and reasonable co-curricular
assignments.
The school principal is supportive in the design and implementation
of the school media policy and rules
The school /the principal provides adequate media storage and
preparation space
*KMO- measure of sampling adequacy = .7633, Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity = 247.78, p < .0001
Table 1. Factor loadings of the rotated work environment factors
As can be seen from Table 1, there are three dimensions/factors of the school environment that
matters most to school teachers when integrating instructional media materials. Factor I
characterize teachers’ perception of the school environment with regard to the availability of
instructional media resources (human and material resources) within their school, which we
called: “Availability of Media Resources” (AMR). Factor II represent the extent to which
teachers’ assess the appropriateness and manageability of their teaching tasks or teaching
assignments within the classroom/school settings which is referred here as “Manageability of
Classroom Tasks” (MCT). The third dimension that emerged as Factor III represents teachers’
perception of the level of administrative support and encouragement provided by the school
leadership which is identified as “Administrative Support” (AS).
A minimum of three or four items were represented under each of the main school
environment factors. Factor I included four items (items 10, 4, 7, and 8) in relation to the
teachers’ perception of the school environment with regard to the availability and accessibility of
instructional media resources (human and material resources) within their school settings. One
item represented this dimension with regard to the availability of human resources that can
facilitate the use of media within the school settings was: “In my school, paraprofessional
support is easily obtainable from media personnel”. Another item representing the same
dimension yet with regard to the availability of material resources in the school environment
was: “In my school, ready-made instructional materials are available in sufficient number”.
Factor II represent the extent to which teachers’ assess the appropriateness and
manageability of their teaching tasks or teaching assignments within the classroom/school
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
settings. It is represented by three items (items 1, 3 and 9). All the items under this Factor
solicited the respondents to assess the appropriateness and manageability of their teaching tasks
including the class-size, weekly teaching load, and physical conditions needed to use media in
the classroom.
The third dimension that emerged as Factor III represents the teachers’ perception of the
level of administrative support and encouragement provided by the school principal. This factor
is represented by the remaining three items (items 2, 5, and 6). This dimension include items
such as “The school principal is supportive in the design and implementation of the school media
policy and rules”, “The school administration assigns fair and reasonable co-curricular
assignments”, and “The school /the principal provides adequate media storage and preparation
Relationships between School-Based Factors and Level of Teachers' Media Use
Having identified the three dimensions of the work environment variables, it is attempted
to uncover a bivariate linear relationship between LMU and the school-based environmental
factors related to teachers’ use of instructional media resources. The Pearson coefficient of
correlation computed between LMU and the three work environment factors is presented in
Table 2 below.
Criterion Variable
Level of Media Use (LMU)
Environmental Factors
Availability of Media Resources (AMR)
Manageability of Classroom Tasks (MCT)
Administrative Support (AS)
* p < .10, ** p < .05
Table 2. Means, SD, and correlation coefficients of work environment factors with LMU
As depicted in Table 2, level of media use (LMU) was significantly correlated (r = .18, p < .001)
with availability of media resources (AMR). In addition, administrative support (AS) moderately
correlated (r =. 073, p < .10) with level of media use (LMU) even though not correlated to the
accepted level. On the contrary, manageability of classroom tasks did not produce statistical
significance with level of media use.
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
Discussion and Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to assess the extent to which teachers’ employ instructional
media resources in the primary schools of Gedeo Zone in southern Ethiopia. Although a wide
array of instructional media items can be used by school teachers, this study has focused on eight
types of instructional media materials identified earlier in the methodology section. Accordingly,
the use of instructional media resources is found to be infrequent among primary school teachers
as can be discerned from the observed mean (Mean = 25.12, SD = 3.73). This finding is in
agreement with previous studies conducted in other regions of Ethiopia and recent study among tutors of teacher training colleges in Malawi . Thus, considering earlier works of Asegedom and Fanta who reported
infrequent use of instructional media by school teachers in Ethiopian context, it can be argued
that little attention is going into integration of instructional technology. Notwithstanding a policy
direction for student-centered and problem-solving pedagogies, y , the finding shows
little has changed decades since the Education and Training Policy came into force.
This apparently calls for a renewed policy attention to redress the unwelcome consequences of
failure to integrate technology on the quality of education.
Dimensions of School-Based Factors Related to Instructional Media Use
According to the factor analysis, one of the school environment dimensions which is
found to matter most to school teachers is availability and accessibility of instructional media.
This finding is in agreement with results of previous studies which reported that teachers need to have instructional technology at their disposal to
apply them in classroom teaching learning. Further, the statistically significant linear association
between Level of Media Use (LMU) and Availability of Media Resources (AMR) shows the
existence a systematic relationship. In other words, the finding demonstrates that the quantity
and quality of available materials within a given school environment may have a positive or
negative influence on the degree to which media are utilized. In this regard, Asegedom’s 
reported that the unavailability of instructional materials is one of the greatest obstacles affecting
teachers in Ethiopian schools. Thus, it can be concluded that infrequent use of media among
Ethiopian school teachers can be partly attributed to the shortage of appropriate instructional
media resources, including lack of technical personnel, facilities, and the necessary
infrastructure. In view of this, the finding that identifies instructional media resource availability
as significant variable related to teachers’ use of technology resources is not surprising since a
resource shortfall is commonplace in both rural and urban primary schools in Ethiopia . Unlike in adequately resourced schools of the developed world,
actual experience in Gedeo Zone classrooms presents a scenario whereby even finding a
functioning classroom doors and windows is a luxury. Thus, leave alone ICT infrastructure, a
well maintained chalkboard and classroom furniture is a very rare phenomena. Thus, it is hard to
argue that availability of media resources does not affect teachers’ use of it.
Manageability of Classroom Tasks (MCT) is the other critical factor which is found
affect teachers’ use of instructional media. Nevertheless, the bivariate correlation between MCT
and LMU reveals no linear association. This implies that the frequency with which teachers use
media in classroom was not impacted by teachers’ workload, time constraint, class size, and the
physical conditions of the classroom such as availability of space to use instructional media. This
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
is contrary to our expectation as well as assertions made in earlier studies that claim infrequent use of instructional technology is associated with lack of
teachers’ planning time and space needed to select, prepare,
modify, and integrate instructional media . Hence, in the presence of
compelling evidence as to the importance of MCT in impacting LMU, it may be imprudent to
completely ignore previous findings simply because contradictory result is obtained in the
present study. Thus, it is important to conduct further research using both qualitative and
quantitative methodologies to arrive at conclusive results.
The third dimension that teachers’ viewed as a key factor impinging on instructional
media use is the level of administrative support and encouragement provided by the school
principal (AS). The finding has a considerable empirical support from earlier works in Western
culture as well as a survey
study carried out in Northern Ethiopia . In the present investigation, however,
teachers’ perception of the level of administrative support (AS) provided by the school
leadership was positively but not significantly related to their frequency of instructional media
use. Though the present study failed to offer strong evidence, a number of studies indicate that teachers’ ability of
technology integration in classroom is affected by the strength of school leadership 
and administrative support . In agreement with the assertion of Western
scholars, Asegedom’s study in Northern Ethiopian primary schools confirmed that school
leadership is critical in facilitating instructional media use. In the context the present study,
school principals fully control instructional resources, personnel, and finance to procure new
materials and equipments. Hence, it can be argued that little can be achieved (and much might be
lost) without their endorsement and active support. Therefore, the degree to which a school
principal offers or deprives teachers’ instructional opportunities shapes their decision to engage
or not to engage in a teaching task.
In a nut shell, notwithstanding the need for a comprehensive research, each of the three
school environment factors identified in this study deserve due heed in policy and practice during
technology integration in the school curriculum. Obviously, the identified factors represent
simply, the ‘tip of an iceberg’ of challenges that confront the process of education in Ethiopia.
To get a detailed and comprehensive data on technology integration in schools, there is a need
for a nation-wide research on what Ertmer referred as first-and second-order barriers of
technology integration in Ethiopian schools.
Implications
On the bases of the findings of this investigation, despite its limitations in its scope and the
methodology employed, the following implications can be identified:
Strengthening the capacity of primary schools in terms of finance, material and human
resource to acquire the necessary instructional media resources and ICT.
Offer pre-service and in-service teacher training for primary teachers on the use and
preparation of relevant instructional media resources and ICT.
Develop the technical capacity of school pedagogical centers to provide technical support
for teachers on day-to-day bases.
Making instructional media part of school principal training, developing school level
policy and guidelines for optimum use of instructional media resources and production of
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Vol 35, 7, November 2010
the same from local materials in school pedagogical centers with the participation of
teachers and students.