A Novel Bi-hemispheric Discrepancy Model for
EEG Emotion Recognition
Yang Li, Student Member, IEEE, Wenming Zheng∗, Senior Member, IEEE, Lei Wang, Senior Member, IEEE,
Yuan Zong, Lei Qi, Zhen Cui, Member, IEEE, Tong Zhang, Tengfei Song
Abstract—The neuroscience study has revealed the discrepancy of emotion expression between left and right hemispheres
of human brain. Inspired by this study, in this paper, we
propose a novel bi-hemispheric discrepancy model (BiHDM) to
learn the asymmetric differences between two hemispheres for
electroencephalograph (EEG) emotion recognition. Concretely,
we ﬁrst employ four directed recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
based on two spatial orientations to traverse electrode signals
on two separate brain regions, which enables the model to
obtain the deep representations of all the EEG electrodes’ signals
while keeping the intrinsic spatial dependence. Then we design
a pairwise subnetwork to capture the discrepancy information
between two hemispheres and extract higher-level features for
ﬁnal classiﬁcation. Besides, in order to reduce the domain shift
between training and testing data, we use a domain discriminator
that adversarially induces the overall feature learning module
to generate emotion-related but domain-invariant feature, which
can further promote EEG emotion recognition. We conduct
experiments on three public EEG emotional datasets, and the
experiments show that the new state-of-the-art results can be
Index Terms—EEG emotion recognition, bi-hemispheric discrepancy, spatial-temporal network
I. INTRODUCTION
Emotion, as a common mental phenomenon, is closely
related to our daily life. Although it is easy to sense other
people’s emotion in human-human interaction, it is still difﬁcult for machines to understand the complicated emotions of
human beings . As the ﬁrst step to make machines capture
human emotions, emotion recognition has received substantial
attention from human-machine-interaction (HMI) and pattern
recognition research communities in recent years , , .
Human emotional expressions are mostly based on verbal behavior methods (e.g., speech), and nonverbal behavior
methods (e.g., facial expression). Thus, a large body of literature concentrates on learning the emotional components
Yang Li and Tengfei Song are with the Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science (Ministry of Education), and the Department of
Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
210096, China.
Wenming Zheng and Yuan Zong are with the Key Laboratory of Child
Development and Learning Science (Ministry of Education), School of
Biological Sciences and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, 210096, China.(∗Corresponding author: Wenming Zheng (E-mail:
wenming ).)
Lei Wang is with the School of Computing and Information Technology,
University of Wollongong, NSW, 2500, Australia.
Lei Qi is with the State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210096, China.
Tong Zhang and Zhen Cui are with the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
210096, China.
from speech and facial expression data. However, from the
viewpoint of neuroscience, humans emotion originates from
a variety of brain cortex regions, such as the orbital frontal
cortex, ventral medial prefrontal cortex, and amygdala ,
which provides us a potential approach to decode emotion
by recording the continuous human brain activity signals
over these brain regions. For example, by placing the EEG
electrodes on the scalp, we can record the neural activities in
the brain, which can be used to recognize human emotions.
Most existing EEG emotion recognition methods focus on
two fundamental challenges. One is how to extract discriminative features related to emotions. Typically, EEG features
can be extracted from the time domain, frequency domain, and
time-frequency domain. In , Jenke et al. evaluated all the
existing features by using machine learning techniques on a
self-recorded dataset. The other challenge is how to classify
the features correctly. Many EEG emotion recognition models
and methods have been proposed over the past years , .
For example, Zheng et al. proposed a group sparse canonical correlation analysis method for simultaneous EEG channel
selection and emotion recognition. Li et al. fused the
information propagation patterns and activation difference in
the brain to improve the performance of emotional recognition.
These techniques have shown excellent performance on some
EEG emotional datasets.
Recently, many researchers have attempted to consider the
neuroscience ﬁndings of emotion as the prior knowledge
to extract features or develop models, effectively enhancing
the performance of EEG emotion recognition. For example,
Hinrikus et al. used EEG spectral asymmetry index for
the depression detection. It is well realized through neuroscience study that although the anatomy of human brain
looks like symmetric, the left and right hemispheres have
different responses to emotions. For example, from the view
of neuroscience, Dimond et al. , Davidson et al. , and
Herrington et al. have studied the asymmetry of emotion
expression, and Schwartz et al. , Wager et al. , and
Costanzo et al. have discussed the emotion lateralization. Furthermore, the literature of EEG emotion recognition
has seen the use of asymmetry to classify EEG emotional
signal. Lin et al. investigated the relationships between
emotional states and brain activities, and extracted power
spectrum density, differential asymmetry power, and rational
asymmetry power as the features. Motivated by their previous
ﬁndings of critical brain areas for emotion recognition, Zheng
et al. selected six symmetrical temporal lobe electrodes
as the critical channels for EEG emotion recognition. Li et
 
al. separately extracted two brain hemispheric features
and achieved the state-of-the-art classiﬁcation performance.
The above researches demonstrate that it is a promising
and fruitful way to integrate the unique characteristics of
EEG signal into the machine learning algorithms. It will be
an interesting and meaningful topic of how to utilize this
discrepancy property of two brain hemispheres to improve
EEG emotion recognition.
Thus, in this paper, we propose a novel neural network
model BiHDM to learn the bi-hemispheric discrepancy for
EEG emotion recognition. BiHDM aims to obtain the deep
discrepant features between the left and right hemispheres,
which is expected to contain more discriminative information
to recognize the EEG emotion signals. To achieve this goal,
we need to solve two major problems, i.e., how to extract
the features for each hemispheric EEG data and meanwhile
measure the difference between them. Unlike other data structures such as skeletal action data, in which the position of
each node varies with time, the EEG data consists of several
electrodes that are set under the predeﬁned coordinates on the
scalp. Hence, to avoid losing this intrinsic graph structural
information of EEG data, we can simplify the graph structure
learning process by using the horizontal and vertical traversing
RNNs, which will construct a complete relationship graph
and generate discriminative deep features for all the EEG
electrodes. After obtaining these deep features of each electrodes, we can extract the asymmetric discrepancy information
between two hemispheres by performing speciﬁc pairwise
operations for any paired symmetric electrodes. The concrete
process is as follows:
(1) Firstly, we employ individual two RNN modules to separately scan all spatial electrodes’ data on the left and right
hemispheres and generate deep feature representations for
all the EEG electrodes. Herein, when the RNN module
traverses the spatial regions, it will walk under two
predeﬁned stack strategies determined with respect to the
horizontal and vertical direction streams;
(2) In each stream, we will obtain the deep features of
all the electrodes, and perform speciﬁc pairwise operations for the paired electrodes. Herein, the rule of
identifying the paired electrodes refers to the symmetric
locations on the brain scalp, and the pairwise operations
include subtraction, division, and inner product. These
operations will model the discrepancy information from
different aspects. Subsequently, another RNN summarizes
all the asymmetric discrepancy information and produces
a global deep representation in each directional stream;
(3) Finally, we integrate the global features from horizon
and vertical streams with learnable linear transformation
matrices and use a classiﬁer to map this representation
into the label space. Considering the tremendous data
distribution shift of EEG emotional signal, especially in
the case of subject-independent task where the source
(training) and target (testing) data come from different subjects, we leverage a domain discriminator that
works cooperatively with the classiﬁer to encourage the
emotion-related but domain-invariant data representation
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to
integrate the electrodes’ discrepancy relation on two hemispheres into deep learning models to improve EEG emotion
recognition. The experimental results verify the discrimination
and effectiveness of this differential information between the
left and right hemispheres for EEG emotion recognition.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
section II, we specify the method of BiHDM as well as
its application to EEG emotion recognition. In section III,
we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed
method for EEG emotion recognition. In sections IV and V,
we discuss the paper and conclude it.
II. THE PROPOSED MODEL FOR EEG EMOTION
RECOGNITION
A. The BiHDM model
To specify the proposed method clearly, we illustrate the
framework of the BiHDM model in Fig. 1. Its goal is to
capture the asymmetric differential information between two
hemispheres. We adopt three steps to achieve this goal. First,
we obtain the deep representations of all the electrodes’ data.
Subsequently, we characterize the relationship between the
identiﬁed paired electrodes on two hemispheres, and generate
a more discriminative and higher-level discrepancy feature
for ﬁnal classiﬁcation. Third, we leverage a classiﬁer and
a discriminator to corporately induce the above process to
generate the emotion-related but domain-invariant features.
The overall process is described as follows.
1) Obtaining the deep representation for each electrode: In
BiHDM, we attempt to separately extract the EEG electrodes’
deep features on left and right brain hemispheres by using
two independent RNN modules. To avoid losing the intrinsic
graph structural information of EEG data, for each hemispheric
EEG data, we build the RNN module traversing the spatial
regions under two predeﬁned stacks, which are determined
with respect to horizontal and vertical directions. These two
directional RNNs are actually complementary for simplifying
the technology to construct a complete relationship graph of
electrodes’ locations. Concretely, for an EEG sample Xt, it
can be split as Xt = [Xl
1, · · · , xl
1, · · · , xr
Rd×N, where Xl
t denote the EEG electrodes’ data
on the left and right hemispheres, d is the dimension of each
EEG electrode’s data and N is the number of electrodes. When
modeling spatial dependencies, two graphs, i.e., Gl={Nl, El}
and Gr = {Nr, Er}, are used to separately represent the
electrodes’ spatial relations on the left and right hemispheres,
where Nl = {xl
i} and Nr = {xr
i }, (i = 1, 2, · · · , N
2 ) denote
the electrode sets, while El = {el
ij} and Er = {er
ij} represent
the edges between spatially neighboring electrodes. Then
we traverse through Gl and Gr separately with a predeﬁned
forward evolution sequence so that the input state and the
previous states can be deﬁned for an RNN unit. This process
can be formulated as
i = σ(Ulxl
j + bl) ∈Rdl×1,
i = σ(Urxr
j + br) ∈Rdr×1,
Fig. 1: The framework of BiHDM. BiHDM consists of four RNN modules to capture each hemispheric EEG electrodes’
information from horizontal and vertical streams. Then all the electrodes’ data representations interact and construct the ﬁnal
vector for the classiﬁer and discriminator.
otherwise,
i and dl, dr are the hidden units and the dimensions of RNN modules on the left and right hemispheres,
respectively; σ(·) denotes the nonlinear operation such as
Sigmoid function; {Ul∈Rdl×d, Vl∈Rdl×dl, bl∈Rdl×1} and
{Ur ∈Rdr×d, Vr ∈Rdr×dr, br ∈Rdr×1} are the learnable
transformation matrices of the two hemispheric RNN modules;
i) denotes the set of predecessors of the node x·
Here dl = dr. As the RNN modules traverse all the nodes in
Nl and Nr, the obtained hidden states sl
i can be used
as the deep features to represent the i-th electrode’s data on
two hemispheres.
Particularly, for the left and right hemispheric RNN modules, they traverse the spatial regions under two predeﬁned
horizontal and vertical stacks. Therefore, we will obtain two
paired deep feature sets, i.e., (Slh
t ) and (Slv
t ), where
i } ∈Rdl×(N/2) and Srh
i } ∈Rdr×(N/2) represent the left and right hemispheric electrodes’ deep features
under horizontal direction, while Slv
i }∈Rdl×(N/2) and
i } ∈Rdr×(N/2) represent the deep features under
vertical direction. So far, we obtain the deep representation
of each electrode, which has the emotional discriminative
information and keeps the location structural relation.
2) Interaction between the paired electrodes on two hemispheres: After obtaining the deep features of every electrode
above, i.e., (Slh
t ) and (Slv
t ), we perform a speciﬁc
pairwise operation on the paired electrodes referring to the
symmetric locations on the brain scalp to identify the asymmetric differential information between two hemispheres. This
operation can be expressed as
t ) = F({slh
i }) ∈Rdp×(N/2),
t ) = F({slv
i }) ∈Rdp×(N/2),
i } and ˆSv
i } are the deep asymmetric differential features, F(·) denotes the pairwise operation between
any two paired electrodes’ data representations. Concretely, for
any paired data (sl·
i ), we perform subtraction, division and
inner product on it, which can be formulated as
i } ∈Rdp1× N
i } ∈Rdp2× N
i,1 + · · · + sl·
2 } ∈Rdp3× N
where dp1 = dp2 = dl and dp3 = 1.1
To further capture the higher-level discrepancy discriminative features, we utilize another RNN module that performs
on the obtained differential asymmetric features {ˆsh
i } from the horizontal and vertical streams. Formally, the
operations on them can be written as
i = σ(Uhˆsh
i−1 + bh) ∈Rdg×1,
i = σ(Uvˆsv
i−1 + bv) ∈Rdg×1,
where {Uh ∈Rdg×dp, Vh ∈Rdg×dg, bh ∈Rdg×1} and
{Uv ∈Rdg×dp, Vv ∈Rdg×dg, bv ∈Rdg×1} are the learnable
1Precisely, division operation models the differential information in terms
of the relative ratio of magnitude; the (minus) inner product operation models
such information in terms of (dis) similarity.
parameter matrices, and dg is the hidden unit’s dimension
of the high-level RNN module. Moreover, to automatically
detect the salient information related to emotion among these
paired differential features, projection matrices are applied to
the higher-level discrepancy discriminative features {˜sh
i } obtained by Eq. (7) and (8). Denoting the projection
matrices for the horizontal and vertical traversing directions by
ik](N/2)×K and Wv = [wv
ik](N/2)×K, the projection
can be written as
i + ˆbh) ∈Rdg×1, k=1, 2, · · · , K,
i + ˆbv) ∈Rdg×1, k=1, 2, · · · , K. (10)
Finally, we use two learnable mapping matrices Gh ∈
Rdo×dg and Gv ∈Rdo×dg to summarize the stimulus ¯Sh
k} ∈Rdg×K and ¯Sv
k} ∈Rdg×K from two directional
streams, namely,
Until now, for an input EEG sample Xt, the output feature
is obtained.
3) Discriminative prediction and domain adversarial strategy: Like most supervised models, we add a supervision term
into the network by applying the softmax function to the output
feature Shv
k }, (k=1, · · · , K) to predict the class label.
Let o = [(shv
1 )T, (shv
2 )T, · · · , (shv
K )T] ∈R1×Kdo denotes
the output feature vector, then
y = oP + bc = {y1, y2, · · · , yC} ∈R1×C,
where P∈RKdo×C and bc ∈R1×C are the transform matrices,
and C is the number of emotion types.
Finally, the output vector of BiHDM is fed into the softmax
layer for emotion classiﬁcation, which can be written as
P(c|Xt) = exp(yc)/
i=1 exp(yi),
where P(c|Xt) denotes the predicted probability that the input
sample Xt belongs to the c-th class. As a result, the label ˜lt
of sample Xt is predicted as
˜lt = arg max
Consequently, the loss function of the classiﬁer can be
expressed as
Lc(Xt; θf, θc) =
−τ(lt, c) × logP(c|Xt),
τ(lt, c) =
if lt = c,
otherwise.
Here θf and θc denote the learnable parameters of the feature
extraction module and the classiﬁer, while lt and M1 are the
ground-truth label of sample Xt and the number of training
samples. By minimizing the above loss function, discriminative features could be extracted for emotion recognition.
To align the feature distributions between source and target
domains, we adopt the domain adversarial strategy by adding a
discriminator into the network. It works cooperatively with the
classiﬁer to induce the feature extraction process to generate
emotion-distinguishable but domain-invariant features.
Concretely, we predeﬁne the source domain label set DS =
{0, 0, · · · , 0} ∈ZM1×1 and target domain label set DT =
{1, 1, · · · , 1} ∈ZM2×1, where M2 is the number of testing
samples. Then through maximizing the loss function of the
discriminator, which can be denoted as
t′; θf, θd)
k=1 logP(0|XS
k′=1 logP(1|XT
the feature extraction process expects to have the ability to
generate the data representation to confuse the discriminator
to distinguish which domain the input comes from (i.e., the
domain-invariant features). Here XS
t′ denote the t-th
and t′-th sample in the source and target data set respectively,
and θd represents the learnable parameter of discriminator.
B. The optimization of BiHDM
The overall optimization of BiHDM can be expressed as
min L(X; θf, θc, θd)
= min Lc(XS; θf, θc) + max Ld(XS, XT ; θf, θd), (18)
where L(·) is the loss function of the overall model, and X denotes the entire data set that consists of the source data set XS
and target data set XT , i.e., X=[XS, XT ]∈Rd×N×(M1+M2).
This max-minimizing loss function will force the parameters
of feature extraction module to generate emotion-related but
domain-invariant data representation, which beneﬁts for EEG
emotion recognition because of the tremendous data distribution shift for EEG emotional signal, especially in the case
of subject-independent task where the source and target data
come from different subjects.
Speciﬁcally, the maximizing problem can be transferred
to a minimizing problem by using a gradient reversal layer
(GRL) before the discriminator, which can be optimized
by using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm 
easily. GRL acts as an identity transform in the forwardpropagation but reverses the gradient sign while performing
the back-propagation operation. The overall optimization process follows the rules below
θc ←θc −α∂Lc
θd ←θd −α∂Ld
θf ←θf −α(∂Lc
where α is the learning rate. In this way, we can iteratively
train the classiﬁer and the discriminator to update the parameters with the similar approach of standard deep learning
methods by chain rule.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Setting up
To evaluate the proposed BiHDM model, in this section,
we will conduct experiments on three public EEG emotional
datasets. All the three datasets were collected when the participants sat in front of a monitor comfortably and watched
emotional video clips. The EEG signals are recorded from 62
electrode channels using ESI NeuroScan with a sampling rate
of 1000 Hz. The locations of electrodes are on the basis of
the international 10-20 system. Thus in the experiment, we
perform the pairwise operation on the 31 paired electrodes
based on the symmetric locations on the left and right brain
hemispheric scalps. The detailed information of these datasets
are described as follows:
(1) SEED . SEED dataset contains 15 subjects, and each
subject has three sessions. During the experiment, the
participants watched three kinds of emotional ﬁlm clips,
i,e, happy, neutral and sad, where each emotion has 5
ﬁlm clips. Consequently, there are totally 15 trails, and
each trail has 185-238 samples for one session of each
subject. Then there are totally about 3400 samples in
one session;
(2) SEED-IV2 . SEED-IV dataset also contains 15 subjects, and each subject has three sessions. But it includes
four emotion types with the extra emotion fear compared
with SEED, and each emotion has 6 ﬁlm clips. Thus
there are totally 24 trails, and each trail has 12-64
samples for one session of each subject. Then there are
totally about 830 samples in one session;
(3) MPED2 . MPED dataset contains 30 subjects and
each subject has one session. It includes seven reﬁned
emotion types, i.e., joy, funny, neutral, sad, fear, disgust
and anger, and each emotion has 4 ﬁlm clips. There are
totally 28 trails, and each trail has 120 samples. There
are totally 3360 samples in one subject.
To evaluate the proposed BiHDM model adequately, we design two kinds of experiments including the subject-dependent
and subject-independent ones. We use the released handcrafted
features, i.e., the differential entropy (DE) in SEED and SEED-
IV, and the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) in MPED,
as the input to feed our model. Thus the sizes d × N of
the input sample Xt are 5×62, 5×62 and 1×62 for these
three datasets, respectively. Moreover, in the experiment, we
respectively set the dimension dl of each electrode’s deep
representation to 32; the parameters dg and K of the global
high-level feature to 32 and 6; and the dimension do of the
output feature to 16 without elaborate traversal. Speciﬁcally,
we implemented BiHDM using TensorFlow on one Nvidia
1080Ti GPU. The learning rate, momentum and weight decay
rate are set as 0.003, 0.9 and 0.95 respectively. The network
is trained using SGD with batch size of 200. In addition, we
adopt the subtraction as the pairwise operation of the BiHDM
model in the experiment section, and discuss the other two
types of operations in section III-D.
B. The EEG emotion recognition experiments
1) The subject-dependent experiment: In this experiment,
we adopt the same protocols as , and . Namely,
for SEED, we use the former nine trails of EEG data per
session of each subject as source (training) domain data while
2Note that both SEED-IV and MPED are multi-modal datasets. MPED
consists of 30 subjects’ EEG data, among which 23 subjects contain multimodal data. In this experiment, we only use the EEG modal data.
using the remaining six trials per session as target (testing)
domain data; for SEED-IV, we use the ﬁrst sixteen trials per
session of each subject as the training data, and the last eight
trials containing all emotions (each emotion with two trials)
as the testing data; for MPED, we use twenty-one trials of
EEG data as training data and the rest seven trails consist of
seven emotions as testing data for each subject. The mean
accuracy (ACC) and standard deviation (STD) are used as the
ﬁnal evaluation metrics for all the subjects in the dataset.
To validate the superiority of BiHDM, we also conduct the same experiments using twelve methods, including
linear support vector machine (SVM) , random forest
(RF) , canonical correlation analysis (CCA) , group
sparse canonical correlation analysis (GSCCA) , deep
believe network (DBN) , graph regularization sparse linear
regression (GRSLR) , graph convolutional neural network (GCNN) , dynamical graph convolutional neural
network (DGCNN) , domain adversarial neural networks
(DANN) , bi-hemisphere domain adversarial neural network (BiDANN) , EmotionMeter , and attention-long
short-term memory (A-LSTM) . All the methods compared in our paper are the representative ones in the previous
studies. We directly take (or reproduce) their results from the
literature to ensure a convincing comparison with the proposed
method. The results are summarized in Table I.
classiﬁcation
performance
subjectdependent EEG emotion recognition on SEED, SEED-IV and
MPED datasets.
ACC / STD (%)
83.99/09.72
56.61/20.05∗
32.39/09.53∗
78.46/11.77
50.97/16.22∗
23.83/06.82∗
77.63/13.21
54.47/18.48∗
29.08/07.96∗
GSCCA 
82.96/09.95
69.08/16.66∗
36.78/07.76∗
86.08/08.34
66.77/07.38∗
35.07/11.25∗
GRSLR 
87.39/08.64
69.32/19.57∗
34.58/08.41∗
87.40/09.20
68.34/15.42∗
33.26/06.44∗
DGCNN 
90.40/08.49
69.88/16.29∗
32.37/06.08∗
91.36/08.30
63.07/12.66∗
35.04/06.52∗
BiDANN 
92.38/07.04
70.29/12.63∗
37.71/06.04∗
EmotionMeter 
70.59/17.01
A-LSTM 
88.61/10.16∗
69.50/15.65∗
38.99/07.53∗
93.12/06.06
74.35/14.09
40.34/07.59
∗indicates the experiment results obtained are based on our own
implementation.
−indicates the experiment results are not reported on that dataset.
From Table I, we can see that the proposed BiHDM model
outperforms all the compared methods on all the three public
EEG emotional datasets, which veriﬁes the effectiveness of
BiHDM. Especially for the result on SEED-IV, the proposed
method improves over the state-of-the-art method Emotion-
Meter by 4%. Besides, we can see that the compared method
BiDANN, which also considers the bi-hemispheric asymmetry,
achieves a comparable performance. The main difference
between BiDANN and BiHDM is that the former adopts two
hemispheric local discriminators to separately narrow the left
and right hemispheric data distribution gaps in either source
or target domain but not directly captures the discrepancy
information. In contrast, the latter (i.e., the proposed BiHDM)
focuses on constructing model to learn the discrepancy relation
between two hemispheres and these differential components
are beneﬁcial for emotion recognition. Meanwhile, both the
results of BiHDM and BiDANN indicate the importance of
considering the difference between the left and right cerebral
hemispheric data for EEG emotion recognition.
To test if the proposed BiHDM is statistically signiﬁcantly
better than the baseline method, paired t-test statistical analysis
is conducted at the signiﬁcant level of 0.05. When the improvement of BiHDM over the method is statistically signiﬁcant, the
results will be underlined in the table. Table II shows the t-test
statistical analysis results, from which we can see BiHDM is
signiﬁcantly better than the baseline method.
TABLE II: The t-test statistics analysis between BiHDM and
the baseline method at the signiﬁcance level of 0.05. When
the improvement of BiHDM over the method is statistically
signiﬁcant, the result will be underlined.
BiHDM vs. BiDANN
a and b indicate the subject-dependent and independent
experiment results respectively.
Besides, although the representative methods DANN and
BiDANN in Table I have used the unlabelled testing data to
enhance their performance, some compared baseline methods
only use the labelled training data to learn the model. To
have a fair comparison with them, we follow their setting
by taking off the discriminator and only using the labelled
training data to conduct the same experiments. The accuracy
becomes 91.07%, 72.22% and 38.55% on SEED, SEED-IV
and MPED datasets, which still achieves comparable performance. This indicates our differential features are indeed more
discriminative.
2) The subject-independent experiment: In this experiment,
we adopt the leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) cross-validation
strategy to evaluate the proposed BiHDM model. LOSO
strategy uses the EEG signals of one subject as testing data and
the rest subjects’ EEG signals as training data. This procedure
is repeated such that the EEG signals of each subject will be
used as testing data once. Again, the mean accuracy (ACC) and
standard deviation (STD) are used as the evaluation metrics.
In addition, for comparison purpose, we use twelve methods
including Kullback-Leibler importance estimation procedure
(KLIEP) , unconstrained least-squares importance ﬁtting
(ULSIF) , selective transfer machine (STM) , linear
SVM, transfer component analysis (TCA) , transfer component analysis (TCA) , geodesic ﬂow kernel (GFK) ,
DANN, DGCNN, deep adaptation network (DAN) ,
BiDANN, and A-LSTM, to conduct the same experiments.
Note that the distribution gap in the subject-independent task
is much larger than the subject-dependent one, so that transfer learning methods always achieve promising performance.
Therefore, in the subject-independent task, we include lots of
domain adaptation methods in the comparison. By doing so,
we can effectively validate the state-of-the-art performance of
our method. The results are shown in Table III.3
TABLE III: The classiﬁcation performance for subjectindependent EEG emotion recognition on SEED, SEED-IV
and MPED datasets.
ACC / STD (%)
KLIEP 
45.71/17.76
31.46/09.20∗
18.92/04.54∗
ULSIF 
51.18/13.57
32.99/11.05∗
19.63/03.81∗
51.23/14.82
39.39/12.40∗
20.89/03.62∗
56.73/16.29
37.99/12.52∗
19.66/03.96∗
63.64/14.88
56.56/13.77∗
19.50/03.61∗
69.00/10.89
64.44/09.46∗
20.74/04.17∗
71.31/14.09
64.38/11.41∗
20.27/04.34∗
A-LSTM 
72.18/10.85∗
55.03/09.28∗
24.06/04.58∗
75.08/11.18
47.59/10.01∗
22.36/04.37∗
DGCNN 
79.95/09.02
52.82/09.23∗
25.12/04.20∗
83.81/08.56
58.87/08.13
BiDANN 
83.28/09.60
65.59/10.39∗
25.86/04.92∗
85.40/07.53
69.03/08.66
28.27/04.99
∗indicates the experiment results obtained are based on our own
implementation.
−indicates the experiment results are not reported on that dataset.
From Table III, it can be clearly seen that the proposed
BiHDM method achieves the best performance in the three
public datasets, which veriﬁes the effectiveness of BiHDM in
dealing with subject-independent EEG emotion recognition.
For the three datasets, the improvements on accuracy are 2.2%,
3.5% and 2.4%, respectively, when compared with the existing
state-of-the-art methods. On the other hand, we also perform
the paired t-test between BiHDM and the baseline method
at the signiﬁcant level of 0.05 to see whether BiHDM has
an improvement of recognition rate. Table II shows the t-test
statistical analysis results, from which we can see BiHDM is
signiﬁcantly better than the baseline method.
C. Confusion matrix
To see the confusions of BiHDM in recognizing different
emotions, we depict the confusion matrices of the above two
experiments in Fig. 2 from which, we have two observations:
(1) From Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(d) corresponding to the SEED
dataset, we can see that the emotions happy and neutral
are much easier to be recognized than sad. But comparing
the results between these two kinds of experiments, it is
easy to see that in the subject-independent experiment,
when the training and testing data come from different
people, the recognition rates of emotions neutral and sad
will decrease about 10% and 9% while the emotion happy
only decreases 3%. We can also observe the same case
3Note that the subspace based methods, such as TCA, SA and GFK, are
problematic to handle a large amount of EEG data due to the computer
memory limitation and computational issue. Therefore, to compare with them
we have to randomly select 3000 EEG feature samples from the training data
set to train these methods.
from the two confusion matrices of the SEED-IV dataset
from Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(e). This shows that the emotion
happy causes more similar brain reﬂection over different
people than neutral and sad;
(2) For MPED, which consists of seven emotion types, it is
much more complicated than the other two datasets. For
the subject-dependent experimental result in Fig. 2(c),
we can ﬁnd that the emotions funny, neutral and
sad are much easier to be recognized than the other
four emotions. However, comparing it with the subjectindependent confusion matrix in Fig. 2(f), we can see
that the recognition rate of sad decreases signiﬁcantly,
which is same as the case observed in the above (i.e.,
point (1)). It is possibly because the pattern of emotion
sad varies considerably from one subject to another.
Moreover, it is interesting to see that the recognition rate
of emotion funny decreases signiﬁcantly but the emotion
anger increases, which may be because the participants
share common response to the anger emotional videos
but have different interpretation about funny.
D. Different pairwise operations
In this section, we investigate the performance of using
different pairwise operations in BiHDM, as shown in Eq. (6).
Here, we denote the subtraction, division and inner product
variants as BiHDM-S, BiHDM-D, and BiHDM-I, respectively.
The results are shown in Fig. 3. As seen, the subtraction operation achieves the best performance among the three pairwise
operations. This may be because the subtraction operation
directly measure the discrepancy between two hemispheres,
whereas the other two operations describe the difference
from various aspects. However, both BiHDM-I and BiHDM-
D achieve comparable performance compared with the other
methods shown in Table I and III, which can show the effectiveness of considering the differential information between
two cerebral hemispheres. We will explore more pairwise
operations such as nonlinear kernel functions in the future
To further verify the performance of pairwise operations,
we conduct additional experiments for subject-dependent
EEG emotion recognition on SEED, SEED-IV and MPED
datasets by replacing subtraction with concatenation, and obtain 90.52%, 72.68% and 37.89% in accuracy. It is clearly inferior to the proposed subtraction operation (93.12%, 74.35%
and 40.34%). This shows that using pairwise operation to
explicitly extract the discrepancy indeed helps EEG emotion
recognition.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. The activity maps of the paired EEG electrodes
To explore the contribution of the differential information
from various brain areas for emotion expression, we depict the
electrode activity maps in Fig. 4. The contribution is evaluated by computing each column’s 2-norm of the asymmetric
differential features ˆSh
t in Eq. (4) and (5) for all the
testing data and mapping these values into the corresponding
electrodes. The two electrodes in a pair share the same value.
(b) SEED-IV
(1) Subject-dependent experiment results
(e) SEED-IV
(2) Subject-independent experiment results
Fig. 2: The confusion matrices of the experiments.
From Fig. 4, we can see that the frontal EEG asymmetry appears to serve as a more important role in emotion recognition
for all the three datasets, which is consistent with the cognition
observation in biological psychology . Moreover, for the
MPED dataset, which consists of more emotion types, the
temporal lobe asymmetry also makes important contribution
as the frontal asymmetry.
Speciﬁcally, to explore where the differential information
coming from in terms of the emotion expressed, we separately depict the electrode activity maps corresponding to
each emotion in Fig. 5. Although it looks quite similar with
Fig. 4, i.e., the asymmetry on frontal and temporal lobes make
more contribution to discriminate different emotions, we can
observe some delicate distinctions from these maps of different
(1) For the positive emotions (happy in SEED and SEED-IV,
joy and funny in MPED), we can see that the asymmetry
on temporal lobe actives as same as (or even more than)
(b) SEED-IV
Fig. 3: The experimental results by using BiHDM-S, BiHDM-
D and BiHDM-I models on three datasets.
(b) SEED-IV
Fig. 4: The EEG electrode activity maps of the subjectdependent experiments. Darker red denotes more signiﬁcant
contribution. Note that these maps are symmetric because it
shows the value computed by pairwise operation shared by
paired electrodes. (Best Viewed in Color)
the frontal lobe;
(2) On the contrary, for the neutral emotion (Fig. 5(b),
Fig. 5(e) and Fig. 5(j)), the asymmetry on frontal lobe
contributes more than temporal lobe;
(3) For the sad emotion (Fig. 5(c), Fig. 5(f) and Fig. 5(k)),
the asymmetry on frontal lobe basically dominates this
emotion expression. But we can ﬁnd that there is a
broad activation area closing to the frontal-central lobe,
especially in SEED-IV and MPED which contains more
types of emotions than SEED;
(4) For the fear emotion (Fig. 5(g)), the asymmetry on
frontal lobe dominates the emotion expression. But on
MPED dataset, which includes more negative emotions
(anger and disgust), the temporal lobe will have the same
contribution with the frontal lobe.
B. Electrodes reduction
For the emotion recognition system in real-world applications, fewer electrodes will be preferred considering the
feasibility and comfort. Thus in this section, we investigate
how the performance varies with relatively small numbers
of electrodes. Motivated by the results from Fig. 4 and 5,
we select the paired electrodes on four brain areas referring
to the locations of frontal and temporal lobes, denoted by
Frontal (6), Frontal (10), Temporal (6) and Temporal (9) 4.
The experimental results are shown in Table IV. We can have
two observation from this table:
(1) The obtained recognition results based on fewer electrodes are comparable with that based on all the 31 paired
electrodes especially on SEED dataset, which agrees with
the observation of Fig. 4 and 5. It also veriﬁes that the
frontal and temporal lobes’ asymmetry indeed contributes
more to the EEG emotion recognition than the other brain
areas. It is possible to consider utilizing fewer electrodes
in EEG emotion recognition systems;
(2) Comparing between these two important brain regions,
we can see the results based on temporal lobe electrodes
outperform that based on frontal lobe. It seems temporal lobe associated more with emotion expression than
frontal lobe for EEG emotion recognition;
TABLE IV: The classiﬁcation performance based on the
frontal and temporal lobe EEG data for subject-dependent
and subject-independent EEG emotion recognition on SEED,
SEED-IV and MPED datasets.
(a) Subject-dependent experiment results
Electrode area
ACC / STD (%)
Frontal (6)
80.15/09.86
57.93/13.88
29.02/05.68
Frontal (10)
84.49/08.83
63.02/16.95
32.37/06.79
Temporal (6)
88.16/08.03
64.88/15.76
33.61/07.19
Temporal (9)
90.16/07.44
65.19/16.03
33.13/07.06
93.12/06.06
74.35/14.09
40.34/07.59
(b) Subject-independent experiment results
Electrode area
ACC / STD (%)
Frontal (6)
74.33/08.70
67.28/08.19
23.54/02.73
Frontal (10)
80.28/09.94
68.16/07.85
25.44/04.95
Temporal (6)
85.04/07.13
65.07/08.74
26.07/04.32
Temporal (9)
84.09/07.78
66.92/08.74
26.43/04.55
85.40/07.53
69.03/08.66
28.27/04.99
C. The performance based on single hemispheric EEG data
From the above discussion, we can see the discrepancy
information between the left and right hemispheres indeed
contributes to the EEG emotion recognition task. On the other
hand, it will be interesting to investigate which hemisphere
is more tightly associated to emotion recognition. Therefore,
4Concretely, Frontal (6) includes the paired electrodes of FP1-Fp2, AF3-
AF4, F7-F8, F5-F6, F3-F4 and F1-F2; Frontal (10) includes the paired
electrodes of Frontal (6) and FT7-FT8, FC5-FC6, FC3-FC4 and FC1-FC2;
Temporal (6) includes the paired electrodes of FT7-FT8, FC5-FC6, T7-T8,
C5-C6, TP7-TP8 and CP5-CP6; Temporal (9) includes the paired electrodes
of Temporal (6) and FC3-FC4, C3-C4 and CP3-CP4.
(b) Neutral
(e) Neutral
(2) SEED-IV
(j) Neutral
(n) Disgust
Fig. 5: The EEG electrode activity maps in terms of different emotions based on the results of subject-dependent experiments.
Darker red denotes more signiﬁcant contribution. (a)-(c), (d)-(g), and (h)-(n) are the results on SEED, SEED-IV, and MPED
datasets respectively. Note that these maps are symmetric because it shows the value computed by pairwise operation shared
by paired electrodes. (Best Viewed in Color)
in this section, we focus on this problem and conduct the
same experiments by separately feeding our BiHDM with the
left and right hemispheric data. The obtained experimental
results are shown in Table V, from which we can see the
left hemisphere is superior to the right for EEG emotion
recognition, especially in the experiments on SEED-IV and
MPED datasets. Besides, comparing it with the results in
Table IV(a), which are based on feeding the model with less
symmetric electrodes’ data, we can observe that results are
comparable or even better than this experiment based on single
hemisphere data. This veriﬁes the effectiveness of discrepancy
information for EEG emotion recognition from another aspect.
TABLE V: The classiﬁcation performance based on single
hemispheric EEG data for subject-dependent EEG emotion
recognition on SEED, SEED-IV and MPED datasets.
Hemisphere
ACC / STD (%)
BiHDM-left
86.63/08.88
64.48/15.34
35.92/07.26
BiHDM-right
86.39/07.54
60.11/13.53
33.08/08.30
BiHDM-overall
93.12/06.06
74.35/14.09
40.34/07.59
D. The effect of two directional RNNs to extract spatial
information
In BiHDM, the horizontal and vertical RNNs are adopted
to model the structural relation between the electrodes. To
evaluate the effect of this spatial information extraction for
emotion recognition, we modiﬁed the framework of BiHDM
with a single directional RNN, denoted by BiHDM-h and
BiHDM-v respectively, to conduct the same experiments. The
results are summarized in Table VI, from which we can see
that the predeﬁned strategy of traversing the spatial region
with horizontal and vertical RNNs achieves much better performance than the single directional RNN. This shows that the
proposed spatial feature learning method is helpful to extract
the discriminative information for EEG emotion recognition.
TABLE VI: The classiﬁcation performance of different spatial
feature extraction methods for EEG emotion recognition on
SEED, SEED-IV and MPED datasets.
(a) Subject-dependent experiment results
Electrode area
ACC / STD (%)
87.47/09.17
62.06/15.01
36.24/08.41
86.75/07.09
65.57/15.43
36.69/08.20
93.12/06.06
74.35/14.09
40.34/07.59
(b) Subject-independent experiment results
Electrode area
ACC / STD (%)
82.38/09.33
66.80/08.22
28.05/04.98
81.03/10.28
66.96/08.28
27.86/05.06
85.40/07.53
69.03/08.66
28.27/04.99
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel bi-hemispheric discrepancy model (BiHDM) for EEG emotion recognition. The proposed framework is easy to implement and generally achieves
the state-of-the-art performance. This shows the effectiveness
of incorporating the asymmetric differential information into
EEG emotion recognition. In the future work, we will further
investigate more left and right hemispheric differential operations to explore the potential efﬁcacy of cerebral hemisphere
asymmetry in EEG emotion recognition.