Multi-Atlas Segmentation of Biomedical Images: A Survey
Juan Eugenio Iglesias1 and Mert R. Sabuncu2
Juan Eugenio Iglesias: ; Mert R. Sabuncu: 
1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Spain.
2A.A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, USA.
Multi-atlas segmentation (MAS), first introduced and popularized by the pioneering work of
Rohlfing, Brandt, Menzel and Maurer Jr , Klein, Mensh, Ghosh, Tourville and Hirsch
 , and Heckemann, Hajnal, Aljabar, Rueckert and Hammers , is becoming one of the
most widely-used and successful image segmentation techniques in biomedical applications. By
manipulating and utilizing the entire dataset of “atlases” (training images that have been
previously labeled, e.g., manually by an expert), rather than some model-based average
representation, MAS has the flexibility to better capture anatomical variation, thus offering
superior segmentation accuracy. This benefit, however, typically comes at a high computational
cost. Recent advancements in computer hardware and image processing software have been
instrumental in addressing this challenge and facilitated the wide adoption of MAS. Today, MAS
has come a long way and the approach includes a wide array of sophisticated algorithms that
employ ideas from machine learning, probabilistic modeling, optimization, and computer vision,
among other fields. This paper presents a survey of published MAS algorithms and studies that
have applied these methods to various biomedical problems. In writing this survey, we have three
distinct aims. Our primary goal is to document how MAS was originally conceived, later evolved,
and now relates to alternative methods. Second, this paper is intended to be a detailed reference of
past research activity in MAS, which now spans over a decade and entails novel
methodological developments and application-specific solutions. Finally, our goal is to also
present a perspective on the future of MAS, which, we believe, will be one of the dominant
approaches in biomedical image segmentation.
Multi-atlas segmentation; Label fusion; Survey
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
 
Med Image Anal. 2015 August ; 24(1): 205–219. doi:10.1016/j.media.2015.06.012.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
1. Historical Introduction and Background
Segmentation is one of the fundamental problems in biomedical image analysis and refers to
the process of tagging image pixels or voxels with biologically meaningful labels, such as
anatomical structures and tissue types. Depending on the application, these labels might
constitute a handful of, possibly disjoint, regions of interest (ROIs) and a “background”,
which would refer to the parts of the image one might ignore in subsequent analysis.
Alternatively, the labels might densely cover a substantial portion or all of the image, which
is sometimes referred to as “parcellation.”
The traditional approach to segment a given biomedical image involves the manual
delineation (sometimes referred to as “annotation”) of the ROIs by a trained expert. This
practice, however, can be painstakingly slow, prone to error, hard to reproduce, expensive,
and unscalable. Furthermore, the quality of the results will depend on the performance of the
expert. Thus, manual delineation is typically not suitable for deploying on large-scale
datasets or in applications where time is critical, such as treatment planning. Automatic or
semi-automatic segmentation algorithms can address these challenges, by speeding up the
process, reducing the cost, and offering reliability, repeatability, and scalability.
Some segmentation algorithms, such as those that assign voxels to tissue types , might not require the availability of training data in the form of manually delineated
images (commonly called “atlases”). However, the class of methods we consider for this
survey will depend on such training data and thus can be viewed as supervised learning
algorithms. The goal of atlas-guided segmentation is to use/encode the relationship between
the segmentation labels and image intensities observed in the atlases, in order to assign
segmentation labels to the pixels or voxels of an unlabeled (i.e., novel) image.
In the early days of atlas-guided segmentation, atlases were rare commodities. In fact, in
many applications, there was only a single atlas1, i.e., a single image that was delineated by
an expert. In this context, the classical atlas-guided approach treats segmentation as an
image registration problem , where spatial correspondence is established
between the atlas and novel image coordinates. Registration is typically a computationally
expensive task that involves deforming (using some appropriate deformation model) one of
the images until it is similar to the other one. The resulting mapping between the two
coordinate systems can then be employed to transfer (or “propagate”) the segmentation
labels from the atlas to the novel image voxels . We
refer to this technique as registration-based segmentation.
A single atlas coupled with a deformation model is usually insufficient to capture wide
anatomical variation . Therefore, the use of several atlases is expected to
yield improved segmentation results. Initial methods that utilized several atlases for
segmentation took a two-step approach. In the first step, the most relevant atlas was
identified, which was then used in a second registration-based segmentation step . As we will see below, this can be viewed as a special case of multi-atlas
segmentation, since all atlases are consulted for segmentation. However, the approach that
dominated early atlas-guided segmentation was probabilistic atlas-based segmentation
 , which had two distinctive properties. First, there was a single atlas coordinate
frame, defined through the co-registration of the training images used to build the atlas.
Second, statistics about the labels, such as the probability of observing a particular label at a
given location, are precomputed in atlas space. The novel image was then segmented in the
atlas coordinate frame with a probabilistic inference procedure that utilized parametric
statistical models. The spatial normalization to the atlas could be computed via registration
with a population template created at training, or estimated jointly with the segmentation
within the probabilistic model; the latter alternative has the advantage that it is adaptive to
variations in image intensity profiles, such as MRI contrast .
Probabilistic atlas-based segmentation offered two major advantages. First, by employing a
single coordinate frame, to which all images were normalized, one automatically established
spatial correspondence across all images. This facilitated the statistical analysis of biological
variation across the population, as famously exemplified in voxel-based morphometry
 . The second advantage was computational. One needed to run
the computationally expensive image registration step (spatial normalization) only once per
novel image.
In 2003–2004, in a series of papers , Rohlfing and
colleagues proposed an alternative segmentation strategy, which at the time might have not
seemed radically different. Yet, as we elaborate below, this work inspired a rapidly growing
class of methods (see Figure 1), including the pioneering work of Klein et al. ,
Heckemann et al. and others. We collectively refer to these methods as multi-atlas
segmentation (MAS). In this approach, the atlases are not summarized in a (probabilistic)
model. Instead, each atlas is available and potentially used for segmenting the novel image.
A classical example involves applying a pairwise registration between the novel image and
each atlas image. These registration results are then used to propagate the atlas labels to the
novel image coordinates, where at each voxel, the most frequent label is selected. This is
commonly referred to as “majority voting.”
We can subdivide a MAS algorithm into several components that we depict in Figure 2.
These components might be implemented as independent, sequential steps, where earlier
steps are placed above in the illustration. However, there are many exceptions to this
structural organization. For example, in some algorithms, some blocks might be unified,
form feedback loops, swap places, or even be omitted altogether. That said, we find this
diagram useful for organizing methodological developments in MAS. Therefore, the part of
our survey covering methods will adhere to this organization, with subsections
corresponding to each one of these components.
The remainder of this survey is structured as follows. Section 2 presents an account of
published MAS methods, organized into the aforementioned building blocks. Section 3
surveys published studies that apply a MAS algorithm to a novel biomedical problem. We
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
conclude with a discussion and pointers to promising future directions of research in Section
4. Finally, we would like to note that we have made all effort to cover the relevant literature
as comprehensively as possible . Yet, we are bound to have missed
some pertinent publications. Furthermore, we made the conscious choice to leave out some
redundant papers. For example, earlier conference versions of more detailed journal
publications were typically omitted.
2. Survey of Methodological Developments
2.1. Generation of Atlases
Atlases, i.e., labeled training images, form the core foundation of MAS algorithms. They are
typically obtained by the meticulous and costly effort of a domain-specific expert who relies
on an interactive visualization software, such as , and might exploit multiple imaging modalities,
while recruiting textbook anatomical knowledge. However, as we discuss below, there are
exceptions to this rule.
Before seeing the to-be-segmented novel image, most methods treat each manually
segmented image equally. Yet, to improve performance, one might identify high quality
training cases, for example via visual inspection . Another option is to
borrow ideas from the feature selection literature to automatically
preselect the subset of atlases that is expected to yield the maximal performance when new
data are segmented . Prior knowledge
on the problem at hand can also be used to preselect the atlases. For example, Tung et al.
 selected the atlases with narrow lumen in a neointima segmentation method in
coronary optical coherence tomography (OCT), since neointima only exists in coronary
arteries with narrow lumen. Such approaches can increase the accuracy of segmentation by
discarding low quality training data, but a decrease in segmentation quality is also possible
due to the reduction of the atlas pool size, which also represents a waste of labeling effort.
Another way of improving the performance of the segmentation is to apply population-level
preprocessing (e.g., by co-registering the atlases) to increase their signal-to-noise (SNR)
ratio . While higher SNR can yield a more accurate registration and
segmentation of the novel image, this improvement will depend on the quality of the coregistration and noise properties of the data. A similar approach was recently used to
compute multiple population templates via a clustering strategy, which were manually
labeled .
In applications where the atlases might not be a representative sample of the population, one
can synthesize atlases that offer a better representation of anatomical variability. Despite the
higher computational cost in the subsequent analysis, such an approach can increase the
accuracy of the segmentation by enriching the atlas pool. For example, Jia et al. used
a statistical model based on principal component analysis (PCA) to synthesize deformations.
One disadvantage of this technique is that the synthetic deformations might not always be
anatomically plausible. In a related effort, Doshi et al. proposed to cluster all
available training images using k-means on the L2 norm of intensity differences in order to
identify a representative subset of cases that can be then manually labeled. Their algorithm,
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
which is closely related to active learning, can greatly reduce the manual labeling effort, but
also requires a large pool of unlabeled data. Recently, Awate and Whitaker presented
a strategy that used a small number of labeled cases and a model of MAS based on nonparametric regression in the space of images, in order to predict the total number of atlases
that need to be manually segmented to obtain a desired level of segmentation accuracy
within a MAS framework. This technique can be useful for planning the manual
segmentation phase.
In an alternative approach, one might exploit the wide availability of non-expert segmenters,
instead of trying to obtain high quality expert manual segmentations. Trading off quality of
annotations for number of atlases can be beneficial in some applications. For example,
Bogovic et al. consider this scenario and propose to directly model the unknown
“expertise” of each atlas, encoded in a confusion matrix between true and estimated labels.
Bryan et al. , on the other hand, consider relying on the self-declared “confidences” of
the manual segmenters, which are used to weigh their contributions when merging their
“opinions” in the segmentation of novel images. In other scenarios, atlases might have been
segmented multiple times, as in , or only portions (e.g. certain slices) of the training data might have been manually
traced, as in . This information needs to be considered in the
subsequent steps of the MAS pipeline. Finally, there are several proposed approaches, e.g.
 , that exploit the novel, unlabeled images to enrich the training
data, for instance, by employing automatic segmentations as atlases, or by using them to
generate different registration paths between the atlases and the target scan to segment. The
former can be seen as a form of self-training (a semi-supervised learning technique in which
unlabeled data are automatically classified and added to the pool of training samples). While
it can take advantage of unlabeled data, it also inherits self-training’s shortcoming that
segmentation mistakes reinforce themselves. The latter (using multiple registration paths)
can increase the performance by generating more training segmentations for label fusion
(i.e., the combination of propagated labels into a segmentation estimate), but at the same
time, these might be poor candidates due to suboptimal registration and eventually worsen
the final segmentation.
2.2. Offline Learning
Classical MAS algorithms applied no or very little processing to the atlas data offline, i.e.,
prior to observing the novel image. Atlases were manipulated and analyzed solely based on
information from the image to be segmented. However, some of the more recent methods
we review here perform what we call “offline learning,” where the atlases are analyzed
offline and some sort of information is garnered to be used during the segmentation of the
novel image. For example, one can learn a strategy to compute rough regions of interest in
the novel image, in order to constrain or guide subsequent processing steps and/or reduce
computational cost . In a very different approach, van der Lijn et al. proposed to construct a
likelihood model on the training data, which quantifies the probability of observed image
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
intensities conditioned on the underlying labels. While such a model can improve the
segmentation by linking labels and image intensities, it can also degrade it if the intensities
of the atlases and novel image are not well matched. Similarly, Zikic et al. suggest
to train a random forest classifier corresponding to each atlas, which learns to predict labels
based on the image appearance. Instead of labels propagated via a registration step, atlas
predictions computed using these classifiers are combined into a segmentation. Since
classification with random forests is fast, this method can be computationally more efficient
than conventional registration-based multi-atlas segmentation, but also less accurate, as it
will fail to capitalize on the high accuracy of modern registration methods. In a related
effort, Wang and Yushkevich considered a tumor segmentation application, where
the algorithm cannot rely on spatial correspondences between the images. Instead, they
employed a data-driven clustering strategy on atlas voxels to identify super-voxels (i.e.,
patches of irregular size), which were then used by a k-nearest neighbor classifier to
segment the novel image. In a parallel effort, Wang et al. proposed to use a local
random forest classifier trained on the atlases to predict the segmentation label in the novel
Another direction involves analyzing the training data in order to learn how to assign
weights to each atlas when conducting label fusion. One such strategy estimates measures of
reliability associated with the atlases by co-registering them and computing the agreement
between the propagated labels; atlases than can better predict the labels of others’ receive
higher weights . Alternatively, supervised learning
approaches have been proposed to predict the weights from the novel image. For example,
Sjöberg and Ahnesjö pre-registered the atlases and learned the distribution of Dice
scores given the registration similarity measure; label fusion weights were derived from this
distribution. In a similar fashion, Sanroma et al. trained a support vector machine to
predict a ranking of the atlases based on image features. The main disadvantage of these
approaches is that they do not always generalize well beyond the training data. A related, yet
different technique involves applying clustering ,
manifold learning , or computing a minimum spanning tree on the atlases . These
learning algorithms are employed to construct a structure on the space of training images,
which yields the means to efficiently compute distances between the atlases and novel
image(s), run registrations, and propagate manual labels.
2.3. Registration
Registration is the task of establishing spatial correspondence between images and is
considered one of the fundamental problems in biomedical image processing. Image
registration involves deforming (or warping) one or more images to maximize an objective
function that combines a metric of spatial alignment with a regularizer that quantifies the
plausibility of the deformation. The three components of an image registration algorithm are
thus the deformation model, the objective function, and the optimizer. The deformation
model represents the class of spatial transformations that are plausible in the application at
hand. This can be as simple as a rigid transform, or as complex as a non-parametric model in
which each location is assigned a spatial transformation vector. Some deformation models
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
incorporate constraints that exploit prior knowledge to make the spatial transforms more
realistic. These constraints can be integrated in the deformation model (e.g., inverse
consistency, diffeomorphism), or explicitly specified in the objective function through
regularizers. The objective function is typically based on either the spatial distance between
corresponding landmarks (manually placed or automatically detected) or on image
intensities. In the latter case, metrics such as sum of squares or cross-correlation have been
widely used in intramodality scenarios, whereas statistical metrics such as mutual
information have been popular when registering across modalities. Finally, the optimization
method is often an iterative algorithm, e.g., gradient descent, conjugate gradient, Levenberg-
Marquardt, of the BFGS algorithm. However, discrete, graph-based methods are also
becoming popular, e.g., Glocker et al. . An extensive review on deformation models,
objective functions and optimizers can be found in Sotiras et al. .
The optimal choice of algorithm specifics largely depends on the biomedical application, its
goal , and operational constraints, such as available computational
resources, desired accuracy, and restrictions on time. Once registration is complete, the
resulting spatial transform can then be used to map from the frame of one image to the
coordinates of another.
In MAS, registration is the step that determines the spatial correspondence between each
atlas and the novel image. Early MAS methods, such as , relied on nonlinear deformation models, such as spline-based
parameterized transformations or non-parametric
diffeomorphisms , which seek voxel-level
alignment accuracy. Several studies have conducted empirical comparisons of the impact of
different registration algorithms on MAS performance in different applications.
Typically, one independent registration is computed between each atlas and the novel image
and generic intensity-based registration tools, such as , are used. Yet, Rohlfing and Maurer Jr 
experimented with running the registration step several times with different parameter
settings and combining all resulting propagated labels. As explained in Section 2.1 above,
generating more candidate segmentations can improve the subsequent fusion, but also might
worsen it by introducing poor candidates generated by suboptimal registrations. A similar
strategy, proposed by Wang et al. , employs pre-computed registrations between
pairs of atlases to generate a multitude of propagated labels by concatenating the pairwise
registration results. In a parallel effort, Datteri et al. relied on pre-registered atlases to
estimate registration accuracy for the novel image based on registration circuits. Also,
several authors proposed to employ the manual segmentations , multiple imaging channels
 , or automatically computed tissue maps to establish more accurate alignment, often at a higher computational
cost. Instead of computing the pairwise atlas-to-novel image registrations independently,
Lee et al. recently proposed to solve them simultaneously in a group-wise
registration framework. In another parallel effort, motivated by the observation that the
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
registration step would benefit from the knowledge of the underlying segmentation labels,
Hao et al. , Iglesias et al. , Tang et al. , and Stavros et al. 
developed MAS algorithms that integrated the registration and label fusion steps. Thus,
instead of treating registration as an independent preprocessing step, these algorithms iterate
between registration and segmentation, which yields a small increase in segmentation
accuracy at the expense of reduced computational efficiency.
Typically, MAS treats the unknown deformation between the atlas and novel image as a
nuisance, which once computed is only used to deform the atlas image intensities and/or
propagate the labels. Yet, a growing number of methods recognize the value in the
deformation fields themselves and propose to use information about the amount of
deformation in the computations of the fusion weights. For example, Commowick and
Malandain used the Euclidean norm of the deformation, Ramus et al. used its
Jacobian determinant, and Wang et al. used its harmonic energy.
The registration step is the computational bottleneck of the MAS algorithm and largely
determines run time. One strategy to reduce the computational burden introduced by
registration is via atlas selection (see next section), which can obviate expensive
registrations with unselected atlases. An alternative, popular approach employs a common
coordinate system, similar to conventional probabilistic atlas segmentation methods, either
via a standard template , a population average , or one of
the atlases . Here, all atlases are co-registered
offline, and the novel image is registered with the template image. The template-to-novel
image transformation can then be concatenated with the atlas-to-template transformations in
order to propagate labels from the atlases to the novel image . Such an approach can
reduce the computational cost of registration, but also might negatively impact the
performance due to the suboptimality of the registrations. The use of a common coordinate
frame further enables the definition of regions of interests, which the segmentation
algorithm can employ in subsequent steps, e.g., atlas selection or label
fusion . Yet another strategy to accelerate the
registration step is to exploit the rapidly growing availability and capability of GPU
processors, as proposed in .
A recent technique is inspired by the non-local means method and
utilizes a patch-based search strategy to identify correspondences with the atlases. This
technique was introduced to biomedical MAS by Coupé et al. and recently has been
gaining popularity . These papers have demonstrated that a patch-based
search strategy can be used in a wide range of MAS methods to improve performance, for
example, by relaxing the one-to-one correspondence assumption or eliminating the need for
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
highly accurate registration results. In contrast with common implementations of non-local
means in computer vision, its biomedical applications can be computationally efficient, cf.
 , for instance, by assuming a rough alignment (e.g., achieved via a linear
transformation model), which allows one to restrict the patch search to a local neighborhood
of each voxel. Furthermore, the anatomical context can be used to improve the quality of the
patch matches, as demonstrated in .
2.4. Atlas Selection
There are two main motivations not to use all available atlases in MAS. First, by reducing
the number of atlases, one can improve computational efficiency. This might be particularly
important for applications where time is a significant constraint. A typical MAS algorithm’s
computational demand is at least linear with respect to the number of utilized atlases. So,
selecting only half of all available atlases would be expected to about double the speed of
the algorithm and reduce the memory requirements by up to a half. Second, by excluding
irrelevant atlases that might misguide the segmentation procedure, one might expect to
improve final segmentation accuracy. The specifics of the problem and utilized algorithm
determine how applicable and significant these two points are. For example, it has been
observed that atlas selection can improve the accuracy of majority voting , but is less critical for weighted fusion .
The effectiveness and efficiency of atlas selection are closely related to the registration step.
If all atlases are nonlinearly registered to the novel images, the atlas selection step will be
well informed by the similarity of the images, but the computational savings will be
nonexistent or minimal. If no registration is performed, the computational efficiency of the
algorithm is much higher, but it is more difficult to select the atlases that are most relevant
to the novel images to segment. A compromise can be achieved by linearly registering all
the atlases to the novel scan, performing the selection, and continuing with the nonlinear
component of the registration only for the chosen atlases. While the selection is typically
conducted prior to the segmentation of the novel image, several authors have proposed
methods that iterate between segmentation and atlas selection, pruning or adding to the
selected atlas set based on the current estimate of the segmentation.
Early atlas selection methods employed a metric to rank the relevance of the atlases. These
metrics included similarity measures based on image intensities, e.g., sum of squared
differences, correlation or mutual information ; non-image meta-data such as
age ; registration consistency ; amount of deformation ; and anatomical geometry . Several studies have conducted
empirical comparisons of these different atlas selection strategies in various MAS
applications , concluding that sum of squared differences and crosscorrelation (after histogram matching) of intensity values, along with age difference, are
reliable metrics to rank the relevance of atlases.
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
More recently, other works have proposed to define similarity measures based on an image
manifold structure. For example, Duc et al. used Isomap, locally linear embedding
and Laplacian eigenmaps to learn the manifold. Cao et al. used locality preserving
projections, and Asman et al. used principal components analysis. These approaches
introduce additional complexity to the system, but can outperform standard similarity
measures in the atlas selection task. Another approach to increase the efficiency and
accuracy of atlas selection utilizes clustering, where the atlases, possibly together with the
novel image(s), are analyzed to identify clusters of similar cases using methods such as kmeans , affinity propagation and Floyd’s
algorithm . Then, cluster representatives (or exemplars) are used for the
initial search of the most relevant atlases. These methods can yield a performance similar to
approaches that do not preselect atlases, but at a much lower computational cost.
Alternatively, atlas selection can be treated as a learning problem, where the optimal
strategy to choose the relevant atlases can be learned on the atlases themselves, utilizing the
manual segmentations, as demonstrated by Cao et al. (manifold learning), Konukoglu
et al. (random forests) and Sanroma et al. (support vector machines). These
strategies are not straightforward to implement but have been shown to improve
segmentation performance.
While the atlas selection method has a significant impact on segmentation performance, with
notable exceptions , the optimal
number of atlases to be selected seems to be an overlooked topic of research. Some
algorithms simply choose the most suitable single atlas, and apply registration-based
segmentation . Yet
most MAS methods end up using more than one atlas . Typically, the number of atlases to be selected is either
estimated, e.g., based on heuristics such as computational expectations, or determined
empirically via cross-validation, bootstrapping or a similar sampling strategy.
2.5. Label Propagation
Once the relevant atlases are selected, and spatial correspondence is established with the
novel image, the classical multi-atlas segmentation strategy proceeds by propagating the
atlas labels to the novel image coordinates. Since early MAS methods , one of the most popular strategies has been to utilize “nearest neighbor
interpolation,” where each atlas transfers a single label to each novel image voxel, e.g.,
 . Although
this label corresponds to that of the closest voxel in atlas space, Sdika showed that
higher performance can be achieved by augmenting the information with a tissue
consistency step. That is, the nearest neighbor search is conducted among those atlas voxels
with a tissue segmentation (obtained automatically, from a separate step) consistent with the
target voxel. However, this approach depends on the performance of the separate tissue
segmentation step, which can be sensitive to outliers, as in the case of very old or diseased
subjects not represented in the atlas pool. The nearest neighbor strategy can further be
refined using, for example, linear interpolation ,
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
where each atlas’s vote is spread over multiple labels, with associated weights that reflect
the ratio of partial volumes.
An alternative approach involves using the signed distance maps of the original atlas label
images . Each label has an
associated signed distance map, which takes positive values within the corresponding
structure, negative values outside, and the magnitude is proportional to the closest distance
to the label boundary. The signed distance map encodes the uncertainty close to label
boundaries and the relative confidence deep within a region. While signed distance maps are
not naturally normalized (i.e., the scale depends on the size and shape of the anatomical
structure), one strategy is to use them to compute label probabilities, e.g., via the logistic
mapping . A complementary technique transforms the atlas label
boundaries directly, rather than applying a volumetric warp to the images . Finally, rather than
transferring over atlas labels via a geometric deformation model, one can employ learning
algorithms trained on each atlas to generate voxel-level candidate label estimates for each
atlas, as recently proposed in . This technique does not seem to increase
segmentation accuracy, but can considerably reduce the run time of the algorithm by
requiring only one nonlinear registration (to align a probabilistic atlas to the novel scan).
2.6. Online Learning
The labels of the atlases that have been propagated to novel image coordinates are often
merged directly into a single estimate of the segmentation with a label fusion algorithm.
However, several MAS methods perform an “online learning” step, which aims to boost the
performance of the algorithm by exploiting the relationships between the registered atlases
and the novel images.
Some methods use the estimated segmentation of the novel image to iteratively perform
atlas selection and/or registration. For example, the selected atlas set can be determined
based on the similarity between the deformed atlas labels and the current estimate of the
segmentation, which can increase segmentation accuracy by excluding outlier atlases from
fusion . Alternatively, van Rikxoort et al. divide the novel
image into blocks, which are used to update the local registrations and selection of atlases.
This way, they are able to automatically stop the local registration of atlases when no
improvement is expected, reducing the computational cost without a negative impact on
performance.
Other approaches exploit the relationship between the labels and intensities of the novel
image in order to assist the fusion step. This can be achieved via conditional Gaussian
models , or non-parametric density estimators , which can be employed to refine the propagated labels. However, this
strategy can be counterproductive when the intensities of the atlases and the novel scan are
not well matched. In a related effort, Hao et al. use a discriminative technique to
model the posterior label probability directly. More specifically, they use the intensities and
labels of the registered atlases in a window around each spatial location to build a set of
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
local classifiers – one per voxel of the novel image. Each classifier is an L1-regularized
support vector machine that predicts the label of the voxel at hand from hundreds of image
features computed with different filters. In this case, label fusion is implicitly carried out in
the classification.
Finally, we have semi-supervised approaches that utilize the collection of novel images
along with the atlases. For example, the LEAP algorithm first learns a
manifold structure on all (novel plus training) images. Next, a small number of novel images
closest to the atlases are automatically segmented via a multi-atlas procedure. These
automatically segmented novel images are then added to the atlas list and the whole
procedure is repeated. By using stepping stones, this strategy boosts the performance in
cases where some novel images are considerably different from the atlases. There are other
algorithms that also rely on self-training, i.e., using the automatically segmented images as
new training data . These approaches have the disadvantage that segmentation mistakes
reinforce themselves. Another way of exploiting unlabeled data is to use unlabeled scans to
generate multiple deformations of a single labeled atlas to a novel scan, again using the
unlabeled volumes as stepping stones .
2.7. Label Fusion
Label fusion, i.e., the step of combining propagated atlas labels, is one of the core
components of MAS. The earliest and simplest fusion methods are best atlas selection
 and majority voting . In best atlas selection, a single atlas is utilized, which is usually
chosen based on examining the match between the registered atlas and novel image
intensities, for example, as captured by the registration cost function (e.g., sum of squared
differences, normalized cross-correlation, or mutual information). Relying on a single atlas
disregards potentially useful information in all other atlases. Majority voting chooses the
most frequent label at each location, therefore using information from all atlases at all
locations; however, it has the drawback that it ignores image intensity information.
An extension of majority voting is weighted voting, where each atlas is associated with a
weight (global or local) that reflects the similarity between the atlas and novel image. The
first method using global weights was proposed by Artaechevarria et al. , who used
weights proportional to the normalized mutual information between the registered atlas
image and novel image intensities. A related approach is to estimate the weights by posing it
as a least squares problem, where the novel image intensities are assumed to be equal to the
weighted combination of atlas intensities . An alternative strategy
involves defining the weights based on the similarity of the labels, which can be computed
iteratively with respect to the current segmentation, either globally or
within predefined ROIs ; or estimated by examining the pairwise
similarities between the atlases .
Global weights cannot model the spatially-varying nature of registration accuracy. For this
reason, the use of global weights was later replaced by local and semi-local weighting
schemes. The earliest examples of this strategy used weights inversely proportional to the
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
absolute difference between local intensities of the novel image and deformed atlas , and standard local intensity-based registration
metrics such as local cross-correlation . Alternative local
weighting strategies were further explored, including the use of a precomputed local
reliability measure , the Jacobian determinant of the deformation fields
 , a Gaussian intensity difference function , the inverse of the squared standard score , a measure of the
saliency of each atlas , local mutual information ,
estimates of local registration accuracy , and structural relationships
between locally extracted wavelet features . Other studies have used
weights defined as a function of ranks of local similarity, computed with correlations
 or Jacobian determinants . Bridging global and
local weighting, Wolz et al. used weights that combined three different terms,
reflecting global, organ-level and local (intensity-based) similarities. In a related effort, a
combination of region-wise and voxel-wise similarities (all based on sum of squares) were
used in . Even though these strategies improve the segmentation
accuracy obtained with global weights, the optimality of the chosen local weight metrics
remains unclear.
In a series of papers, Wang et al. computed fusion weights that exploited the
correlation structure between the atlases. The weights were optimized to minimize the
expectation of segmentation error, which in turn led to relaxing the common independence
assumption on the atlases. Moreover, the registration-determined correspondence was
refined via a local patch search. In a later paper, the same authors improved their algorithm
to make the segmentations of the novel images consistent, such that the automatic
segmentations are recruited as atlases, but with a lower weight than the manually labeled
ones .
Other works have used more complicated schemes to define local weights, for example via
offline learning. One such method assumed that the weights were a linear combination of the
dissimilarities of the voxels at each location, and learned them with Tikhonov-regularized
least squares (ridge regression) . Another related approach pre-registered
all the atlases with each other to compute a reliability metric as the average agreement of the
propagated labels; the reliabilities were then used as weights in the fusion .
Along a similar direction, Zhang et al. used a forward-backward, patch-based search
to compute a measure of correspondence specificity with respect to each atlas. Label fusion
is then conducted in a sequential manner, starting at voxels that the algorithm is confident
about segmenting and employing already segmented voxels within the neighborhood for
guiding the segmentation of yet-to-be-labeled voxels. A related method that was recently
proposed by Koch et al. , uses a graph that connects similar regions across images to
allow label information to iteratively flow from high confidence to low confidence voxels.
In a different approach, Wachinger and Golland used spectral clustering to identify
homogeneous regions, and then performed semi-local label fusion within each region to
finally compute a single label per region by pooling the votes within its boundaries.
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
An alternative label fusion strategy involves the use of patches to compute weights at each
voxel, which can be used with a conventional label fusion method . This technique has recently become more sophisticated. For example,
Xiao et al. and Wang et al. used this approach to compute local label fusion
weights using multi-channel MRI data. Wang et al. proposed to use the anatomical
context to improve the quality of the patch matches. Instead of labeling the central voxel,
one can segment the whole patch, and overlapping segmentations can then be fused (e.g. via
majority voting) . These methods have
produced state-of-the-art segmentation accuracy, often at a high computational cost.
Rather than directly using the similarity between patches, one can also compute the label
fusion weights by seeking sparse linear combinations from a patch dictionary to reconstruct
each patch of the novel image .
Along a similar direction, Sanroma et al. recently formulated label fusion as a
matrix completion problem, which can be viewed as unifying the weight estimation
framework with a learning-based approach. Cao et al. also used weights that best
reconstructed the intensities of the novel images from the k nearest atlases, computed on an
image manifold. Instead of focusing on reconstruction error, a different method involves modifying the framework to reflect the consistency in the segmentations,
such that atlases that propagate similar labels to the segmentation have a similar
contribution.
A different view of label fusion formulates segmentation as an optimization problem, where
the agreement with the propagated atlases makes up a data fit term. In this framework, one
can incorporate prior expectations such as spatial and temporal smoothness in longitudinal
data, as in .
Some of the label fusion techniques discussed above can be derived from probabilistic
models of the data. Casting a segmentation method as a Bayesian inference problem in a
probabilistic model has several advantages. First, it can easily deal with missing data, e.g.,
lack of labels in a given region of an atlas. Second, the estimated parameters of the model
might have a direct interpretation that can provide us with some insight about the data and
the fit of the model. Third, the modeling assumptions have to be clearly stated and their
effect on final accuracy can be empirically examined. Fourth, the impact of the inference or
estimation strategy can also be assessed by investigating alternative methods. Finally,
Bayesian methods are based on a principled and flexible framework, which can be adapted
to the specifications of the problem at hand.
A generative probabilistic model of label fusion was first proposed by Sabuncu et al. . The model comprises of an unknown discrete membership field that indexes the atlas
that “generated” each voxel of the novel image and an additive Gaussian noise component.
This generative model framework unifies some of the most popular label fusion algorithms,
generalizing local, semi-local and global weighted fusion methods, including majority
voting and best atlas selection. The generative model has been extended to intermodality
fusion , replacing the Gaussian noise by a joint histogram; and to
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
patch-based fusion , by augmenting the membership field with a spatial
shift and defining the intensity likelihood term as a function of patches.
There is a family of generative models for label fusion that can be viewed as a modification
of Sabuncu’s model , where the latent membership field is only
used to define a prior on the labels and the novel image intensities are generated directly
from the underlying segmentation, e.g., via a parametric Gaussian. This model does not
utilize the relationship between the image intensities and labels observed in the atlases and
thus can be used to segment images of a modality different from the atlases , or multichannel images . This strategy will be suboptimal for
scenarios where the intensity profiles of the atlases and the novel scans are matched.
Iglesias, Tang and colleagues later proposed to integrate registration into this generative
model , which offers a small but significant
improvement in segmentation accuracy at an increased computational cost. Finally, many
methods that use label fusion to construct a prior in a probabilistic segmentation algorithm
 
can be viewed to be (approximate and/or modified) instantiations of the probabilistic
generative label fusion framework.
Another family of probabilistic fusion methods builds on the STAPLE algorithm . STAPLE was originally developed to model manual segmentations as noisy
observations of the hidden (ground truth) segmentation and the noise was modeled with a
stationary confusion matrix {θn}. The original STAPLE algorithm only supported binary
segmentations , but was soon after extended to the multi-class setting
 . Many extensions of STAPLE correspond (or can be shown to
correspond) to modifications of the original probabilistic model, for example placing a Beta
prior on the parameters of the confusion matrix ,
replacing the hard atlas segmentations with probabilistic maps , dealing with missing atlas label data , altering the confusion
matrix to account for self-assessed uncertainty , employing a hierarchical noise model , introducing and
estimating unknown reliability weight maps , and learning and
exploiting the relationship between performance parameters and intensity similarities
 .
Rather than making explicit changes to the original framework and solving the
corresponding model, some extensions of STAPLE are based on ad-hoc modifications. For
instance, some researchers have introduced spatially varying performance parameters to the
model by estimating local confusion matrices from windows around each voxel . One can view these methods as approximate
solvers to a version of the STAPLE model, in which the noise parameters vary smoothly
over space. In a different approach, Langerak et al. , Cardoso et al. , Nouranian
et al. , and Weisenfeld and Warfield proposed using only a subset of atlases
in label fusion. Langerak et al. ’s SIMPLE algorithm integrates the atlas selection step into
STAPLE and solves for that iteratively. The SIMPLE method was recently integrated with
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
context learning to exploit exogenous information, e.g, about tissue likelihood . Cardoso et al. ’s method obtains the subset by ranking the atlases in terms of local
similarity to the novel image; Nouranian et al. ’s algorithm iteratively computes the
segmentation with STAPLE and removes the atlases that do not agree with the current
estimate of the labels; and Weisenfeld et al. use a probabilistic formulation to disregard
atlases that do not agree with the current segmentation estimate. Again, these algorithms can
be seen as an approximate solution to a model, in which the atlases to be explained are
indicated by a latent field. Finally, Asman and Landman incorporated information
from intensity image patches in STAPLE. From a probabilistic modeling perspective, this
approach would require modifying STAPLE’s model to connect the novel image intensities
to the training images.
2.8. Post-processing
The label fusion result does not necessarily represent the final segmentation; sometimes it is
fed to another algorithm to estimate the output labels. The extent to which this postprocessing changes the segmentation varies across methods.
Some methods use the output of label fusion to simply initialize a subsequent algorithm, for
instance, to determine the bounding box where a segmentation method is applied , to start the evolution of an active contour , or to fit a smooth contour to the object boundary . Other MAS algorithms rely on applying heavy post-processing to the label fusion
output, for example by employing an error detection and correction classifier , deriving features to drive a subsequent voxel-wise
segmentation method, based for example on level sets , random forests , support vector machines , patchbased techniques , or a graph-cut-based method . Along a similar direction, one can apply a refinement to the MAS results,
for example, by comparing the observed intensities in the novel image to tissue-based
expected intensity profiles . Alternatively, label fusion results have been
used to compute priors in probabilistic segmentation algorithms . These methods can be robust to changes in image appearance, for example, in
applications where there is significant variation in imaging parameters or the novel subject’s
anatomy is not represented in the atlases. However, they will be less accurate than standard
MAS methods when the intensity profiles and appearance distribution are well matched
between the novel image and atlases. In a related effort, Liu et al. used MAS to
define a prior for the detection of lymph nodes in thoracic CT scans. A different strategy is
to examine summary measurements (e.g., volume of an ROI) computed from the MAS to
statistically determine whether the segmentation result is an outlier and thus might have
failed – in which case one can resort to manual delineation .
There are also methods that operate on the posterior probability map obtained from label
fusion, rather than applying a hard threshold to obtain a segmentation. For example,
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
applying a deconvolution to the probability map has been shown to reduce the spatial bias in
the segmentation of convex structures . In the context of
neointima (scar tissue) segmentation in coronary optical coherence tomography, Tung et al.
 augment the posterior probability with an anatomically-informed probability, defined
upon the distance to the vessel wall. While this prior knowledge enhances the performance
of the method, it is highly domain specific and not applicable to other problems. In a parallel
approach, Asman et al. propose to analyze the posterior probabilities to detect
outliers that are not well represented in the atlas set. This is shown to be beneficial in the
presence of anomalous regions (e.g., tumors).
3. Survey of Applications
Since its original application to confocal microscopy of bee brains , MAS has been successfully used in a large variety of
biomedical segmentation problems. The most prevalent field of application has been brain
MRI analysis, for two different reasons; first, segmentation’s crucial role in a wide range of
widely studied neuroimaging problems; and second, the success of image registration
techniques in this field.
Most of the MAS work applied to brain MRI data has focused on the segmentation of
cortical and subcortical regions in structural images, typically acquired with T1-weighted
MRI sequences. Many methods have been developed to parcellate the whole brain,
segmenting it into a large number of regions ,
while other studies have focused on small sets or individual ROIs, such as the caudate
nucleus ; the cerebellum ; the amygdala ;
the corpus callosum ; the striatum
 ; the subthalamic nucleus, red nucleus and substantia nigra ; the ventricles ; and, most notably, the
hippocampus, which has attracted much attention due to its association with dementia and
Alzheimer’s disease .
In the context of segmentation of structural human brain MRI, multi-atlas techniques have
also been applied to preprocessing tasks such as skull stripping and tissue classification ,
the segmentation of tumors , eyes and optic nerves . MAS has also
been employed for the segmentation of cortical and subcortical structures in MRI data from
fetuses, neonates, and infants too , in which the contrast inversion due to ongoing myelination
complicates the segmentation. Another area of application of MAS has been the
segmentation of brain MRI in animal studies, e.g., mice , rats and
non-human primates . Finally, there are also studies that have applied
MAS to the analysis of diffusion brain MRI data of humans , which requires specific strategies for the registration, atlas
selection and label fusion steps, due to the nature of the data, which are typically described
by directional functions defined on the sphere at each voxel.
Outside brain imaging, the prevalence of prostate cancer in men has sparked interest in
applications within prostate imaging, using modalities such as MRI , CT and ultrasound . Likewise, interest in
radiotherapy treatment planning has been the main driver of applications in head, neck, and
thoracic CT segmentation , which have mainly focused
on segmenting tumors , organs at risk and lymph node metastases . MAS has also been used in abdominal imaging, despite the
relatively poor performance of image registration in this domain (e.g., compared with brain
MRI) due to the shifting of organs within the abdominal cavity. Nonetheless, MAS has been
successful in liver , spleen and multi-organ segmentation in CT scans.
Finally, there are many other applications that have benefited from MAS within human
medical imaging, including: segmentation of pelvic bones in MRI ; lungs in CT scans 
and chest X-rays ; heart and its ventricles in CT , MRI , MR angiography
 , ultrasound , and CT angiography
 ; breast tissues and lesions in X-ray mammography
 and MRI ;
cartilage and bone in knee MRI ; the vertebrae in spinal MRI ; scar tissue in intravascular
coronary optical coherence tomography (OCT) ; the mitral valve in
transesophageal echocardiography ; skeletal muscle
in whole-body MRI ; kidneys in CT images ; and
bone in dental cone-beam CT images .
4. Discussion and Future Directions
By taking full advantage of the entire training data, rather than a model-based summary,
MAS delivers highly accurate segmentation algorithms. This approach has come a long way
since the early days of “majority voting”, which basically consisted of three independent
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
steps: registration, label propagation, and fusion. Today, most MAS algorithms have many
more steps, some of which form feedback loops. Furthermore, each one of these steps is
becoming increasingly more sophisticated, employing ideas from optimization, computer
vision, machine learning, probabilistic modeling, and other fields.
The biggest shortcoming of MAS is its ravenous appetite for computational resources.
Analyzing, manipulating, and processing all atlases typically demands a substantial amount
of memory and time. We believe this is one of the main reasons why MAS has not been
widely adopted in clinical applications yet, even though, research suggests that it can
produce state of the art segmentation tools in many domains. However we expect that
several recent developments alleviate the computational challenges of MAS. Firstly, the
continued exponential growth in computer hardware technologies is to our advantage. We
note, however, this technological benefit is to some extent countered by the rapidly
increasing resolution of biomedical images, which multiplies the computational burden.
Secondly, we observe that many of the subcomponents of MAS are parallelizable and thus
can take advantage of multi-core architectures and GPUs. At the coarsest level, the
registrations that need to be computed with each atlas can be solved in parallel. Furthermore,
each registration can be implemented such that the bulk of the voxel- or region-level
computations can be distributed over multiple processors. This approach has already been
used for the GPU-acceleration of the registration step . A similar strategy can be adopted in the label fusion
step, particularly by algorithms that conduct numerical optimization in label fusion and not
just simple counting. Finally, some of the online computational burden can be shifted
offline, via learning structure on the training images, which can then be utilized to optimize
the processing of the novel image, as proposed in .
The manually delineated training data form the main foundation of atlas-based
segmentation. Empirical evidence suggests that the number and quality of training cases can
critically impact segmentation accuracy. For this reason, the careful definition and
standardization of annotation guidelines is paramount to obtaining accurate automatic
segmentations, especially when the atlases are manually delineated by multiple experts. Yet,
obtaining high quality segmentations annotated by experts is both time consuming and
expensive. Most past research has dealt with scenarios where the development of the
segmentation algorithm is independent of the manual segmentation process. We believe a
better strategy is to integrate the two pipelines. For example, as recently demonstrated
 , given a segmentation method, one can estimate the number of
cases that need to be manually delineated to achieve a desired level of accuracy.
Furthermore, one can imagine an algorithm that indicates the cases, which, if manually
segmented, assist the segmentation algorithm the most. Active learning can provide the
framework to derive such an algorithm. An alternative approach is to use automatic
segmentations as atlases, after applying a quality control step. Yet a different strategy is to
harness the potential of non-expert segmenters , for
example, via a crowd-sourcing framework .
Although many biomedical segmentation problems rely on anatomical expertise, it is not
clear whether this expertise has to be deployed in the delineation of every single atlas. One
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
can imagine certain scenarios, where the expert(s) provides a handful of example
annotations, which can be used to train or guide non-experts. Finally, we believe that the
idea to combine heterogeneous sets of atlases, delineated with different protocols, is a
promising future direction. This strategy can both yield better accuracy by enriching the
training data and offer the ability to identify ROIs that were technically not part of any
single manual delineation protocol but can be defined by intersections .
Moreover, such an approach could also potentially minimize the impact of the variability of
the manual delineations (within or across experts) on the final segmentation, automatically
learning the biases of the annotations.
Crowdsourcing offers another attractive solution to the atlas generation problem of MAS.
Instead of high quality manual delineations from trained experts, one might consider using
lower quality data from non-experts . Alternatively, the non-expert
crowd can be used to correct or filter the segmentations. We expect that outsourcing certain
aspects of MAS, particularly those related to the offline stages of the pipeline, to nonexpert
and/or expert masses in an online community will be investigated in the near future.
While speeding up the registration step might be considered top priority for some
applications, many biomedical problems seek very high accuracy, even at high
computational cost. For such applications, one strategy is to improve registration accuracy
and the quality of propagated labels. The probabilistic modeling perspective offers a
complementary approach. From this viewpoint, registration is a nuisance parameter and thus
should be marginalized out, e.g., via variational techniques or a
sampling procedure such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo . In other
words, one should integrate over all possible registration results, rather than attempting to
find the most likely one and using that for the fusion step. Note that this approach would be
different from the latest algorithms that combine the registration and label fusion steps, as
done in . Currently, the
marginalization strategy might seem computationally prohibitive for MAS. However, the
recent successful applications of this idea in other biomedical image analysis scenarios
suggest that in the near future we can expect to see label fusion algorithms that integrate out
the unknown registrations.
Another direction of future work in MAS is to develop algorithms that are robust against
changes in image intensity profiles, e.g., MRI contrast, due to variation in acquisition
protocols, hardware, and other imaging parameters. Such robust methods will be invaluable
for large-scale multi-site studies and clinical applications, where the standardization of the
imaging protocol might be unrealistic. Although some existing label fusion algorithms have been developed to handle different modalities, they are
application-specific and make strong assumptions about the data (e.g., locally Gaussian
intensity distributions).
We believe that the fields of machine learning and computer vision have also a lot to
contribute to MAS. Recent years have witnessed dramatic technical advances in both of
these fields, such as unsupervised feature learning in vision and efficient
learning methods on deep architectures , which have
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
facilitated tremendous gains in performance. Recent developments suggest that researchers
are currently working on translating such ideas to biomedical image analysis problems,
including MAS.
The probabilistic perspective, with its flexibility and principled inference machinery, offers
another promising direction for future research. In particular, this approach enables the
derivation of methods that can handle missing labels, heterogeneous labels, variable imaging
modalities, estimate and utilize model uncertainty, and integrate domain knowledge, for
example about the anatomy or imaging physics. Furthermore, probabilistic algorithms offer
the capability to quantify the uncertainty in the final segmentation estimate, which can
further be utilized for obtaining more accurate measurements, for example of the volume of
structures .
Rather than segmenting each novel image independently, empirical evidence suggests that
solving the segmentations of multiple novel images simultaneously might yield improved
results . This can be a particularly promising approach for segmenting
serial scans. Longitudinal image analysis is an area of growing importance and the detection
of subtle longitudinal changes can call for highly accurate segmentation . Encouraged by some recent applications , we
believe MAS will be a critical tool for longitudinal biomedical image analysis.
So far, most of the applications of MAS have been in the domain of human brain MRI, in
which modern registration algorithms achieve good alignment and even the simplest fusion
algorithms (e.g., majority voting) yield good performance. Registration is however less
effective in other modalities and body parts, such as in abdominal imaging, in which the
sliding between organ walls (e.g., due to respiratory motion) is problematic for current
algorithms. We believe, though, that the development of registration methods that can cope
with these difficulties, along with the improvements in label fusion techniques (which will
make them more robust against misregistration), will make the use of the multi-atlas
approach ubiquitous in a growing number of novel biomedical image segmentation
Finally, it is important to note that there is no universally optimal segmentation algorithm.
Each application brings with it a unique set of constraints and objectives, making certain
types of methods more suitable than others. Yet, we believe that the large class of MAS
methods, with its rich set of instantiations that enable compromising between different
application tradeoffs and considering various objectives while exploiting different sources of
information, offer a framework that promises to yield effective and useful solutions for a
wide range of biomedical applications. That said, we can identify general trends that have
emerged. There seems to be a global tradeoff between computational efficiency and
segmentation accuracy. Incorporating domain knowledge and adopting realistic models that
are based on the physical and biological context, can yield significant improvements.
Complex, more advanced methods can pay off and should be something we continue to
work on. However, this endeavor critically depends on a proper evaluation of the methods,
as demonstrated in some recent efforts . Going forward, a grand challenge of biomedical image
Iglesias and Sabuncu
Med Image Anal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
segmentation will be to establish standardized datasets and performance evaluation metrics
to be used to objectively compare various segmentation algorithms, including MAS-based
techniques.
Acknowledgment
Juan Eugenio Iglesias is supported by the Gipuzkoako Foru Aldundia (Fellows Gipuzkoa Program). Mert R.
Sabuncu is supported by NIH NIBIB 1K25EB013649-01 and a Bright-Focus Alzheimer’s disease pilot research
grant (AHAF-A2012333).