Measures of Similarity Among
Fuzzy Concepts: A
Comparative Analysis*
Rami Zwick
Carnegie-Mellon University
Edward Caristein
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
David V. Budescu
University of Haifa
Many measures of similarity among fuzzy sets have been proposed in the
literature, and some have been incorporated into linguistic approximation proce-
dures. The motivations behind these measures are both geometric and set-theoretic.
We briefly review 19 such measures and compare their performance in a behavioral
experiment. For crudely categorizing pairs of fuzzy concepts as either "'similar" or
"'dissimilar, "" all measures performed well. For distinguishing between degrees of
similarity or dissimilarity, certain measures were clearly superior and others were
clearly inferior; for a few subjects, however, none of the distance measures
adequately modeled their similarity judgments. Measures that account for ordering
on the base variable proved to be more highly correlated with subjects" actual
similarity judgments. And, surprisingly, the best measures were ones that focus on
only one "'slice" of the membership function. Such measures are easiest to compute
and may provide insight into the way humans judge similarity among fuzzy
similarity measures, fuzzy concepts
*This research was supported by contract MDA 903-83-K-0347 from the U.S. Army Research
Institute. The views, opinions, and findings contained in this article are those of the authors and
should not be construed as official Department of the Army position, policy, or decision. This work
was also supported by a National Science Foundation Grant DMS 840-0602 to Edward Carlstein.
Address correspondence to Rami Zwick, Graduate School of Industrial Administration,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 1987; 1:221-242
© 1987 Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc.
52 Vanderbilt Ave., New York, NY 10017 0888-613X/87/$3.50
Rami Zwick et al.
INTRODUCTION
Giles has described the current character of research in fuzzy reasoning
as follows:
A prominent feature of most of the work in fuzzy reasoning is its ad hoc
nature .... If fuzzy reasoning were simply a mathematical theory there
would be no harm in adopting this approach; ... However, fuzzy
reasoning is essentially a practical subject. Its function is to assist the
decision-maker in a real world situation, and for this purpose the
practical meaning of the concepts involved is of vital importance (p.
Fuzzy set theory would benefit from becoming a behavioral science, having its
assumptions validated and its results verified by empirical findings (Kochen
 ). In particular, there has been virtually no experimental work comparing the
many measures of distance (between fuzzy sets) that have been proposed in the
literature. The major empirical works that have appeared in the fuzzy set
literature focus on measuring the membership function and evaluating the
appropriateness of operations on fuzzy sets. (See, for example, Hersh and
colleagues ; Kochen ; Norwich and Turksen ; Oden ; Rapoport and colleagues ; Thole and Zimmermann ; Wallsten and
colleagues ; Zimmer ; Zysno .) This article investigates experimen-
tally the question of selecting an appropriate distance index for measuring
similarity among fuzzy sets.
Several methods have been suggested for the process of linguistic approxima-
tion (Bonissone ; Eshragh and Mamdani ; Wenst6p ). Each of them
suggests a different measure of similarity. However, there is no serious attempt
to validate the techniques through behavioral experiments. Some authors have
mentioned that their techniques work very well but do not provide the
appropriate data to support their claim. For example, Bonissone in his
pattern recognition approach to linguistic approximation writes that "this new
distance reflects very well the semantic distance among fuzzy sets ....
distance has been applied in the implementation and has provided very good
results"; however, no results are reported, and it is not clear what criteria are
used to make such a statement. Similarly, no serious attempts have been made by
Wenst6p to validate details of his semantic model. Neither do Eshragh and
Mamdani behaviorally validate their approach. Although they claim that
"the results obtained from 'LAM5' are quite encouraging and also considering
the number of previous attempts and difficulties involved, one can say that
'LAM5' has proved workable," once again no supporting data are supplied.
More importantly, no attempt has been made to compare the performances of the
various different indexes of distance that could be used in these applications.
Overall, the lack of behavioral validation for any similarity index is disturbing
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
because of the crucial role (translation) that this index plays in any implementa-
tion of fuzzy reasoning theory, and the relative ease by which any proposed
index may be validated. Regarding the second point, any successful distance
measure should be able to account for and predict a subject's similarity judgment
among fuzzy concepts, based on his or her separate membership functions of
each concept.
The notion of similarity plays a fundamental role in theories of knowledge and
behavior and has been dealt with broadly in the psychology literature (Gregson
 ). Overall, the theoretical analysis of similarity relations has been dominated
by geometric models. These models represent objects as points in some
coordinate space such that the observed dissimilarity among objects corresponds
to the metric distance between the respective points.
The similarity indexes used in the linguistic approximation techniques adopt
this approach. Bonissone locates each concept initially in four-dimensional
space, where the dimensions are power, entropy, first moment, and skewness of
the membership function. He defines the distance between two concepts as the
regular weighted Euclidean distance between the points representing these
concepts. Wenst6p locates the concepts in a two-dimensional space. The
two dimensions are location (center of gravity) and imprecision (fuzzy scalar
cardinality) of the membership function. The distance between any two concepts
in this space is the regular Euclidean distance. The same geometrical distance
philosophy has been adopted by Eshragh and Mamdani and by Kacprzyk
Most conclusions regarding the appropriate distance metric have been based
on studies using judgment of similarity among stimuli that can be located a
priori along (objectively) distinguishable dimensions (such as color, tones,
etc.). The question of integral versus separable dimensions is crucial. Separable
dimensions remain subjectively distinct when in combination. By contrast,
integral dimensions combine into a subjectively nondecomposable whole. There
is an extensive literature supporting the idea that the Euclidean metric may be
appropriate for describing psychological distance relations among integral-
dimensions stimuli, while something more along the lines of the city-block
metric is appropriate for separable-dimensions stimuli (Attneave ).
As noted by Tversky , both dimensional and metric assumptions are open
to questions. It has been argued that dimensional representations are appropriate
for certain stimuli (those with a priori objective dimensions), but for others,
such as faces, countries, and personality, a list of qualitative features is
appropriate. Hence, the assessment of similarity may be better described as a
comparison of features rather than as a computation of metric distance between
points. Furthermore, various studies demonstrate problems with the metric
assumption. Tversky shows that similarity may not be a symmetric relation
(violating the symmetry axiom of a metric) and also suggests that all stimuli may
not be equally similar to themselves (violating the minimality axiom.)
Rami Zwick et al.
Therefore, similarity may be better modeled by a function that is not
conceptually a geometric distance (such as a set-theoretic function instead).
In this article we first review the various distance indexes suggested in the
literature, in the general case and as adapted to fuzzy sets. Next, we present our
experimental design. Finally, we discuss the results and implications of the
results for the process of linguistic approximation.
Geometric Distance Models
A particular class of distance functions that has been investigated by
psychologists is known as the Minkowski r-metric (Beckenbach and Bellman
 ). This metric is a one-parameter class of distance functions defined as
where x and y are two points in an n-dimensional space with components (xi, Yi)
i = 1, 2 .....
n. Let us consider some special cases that are of particular
interest. Clearly, the familiar Euclidean metric is the special case of r = 2. The
other special cases of interest are r = 1 and r = oo. The case of r = 1 is known
as the "city-block" model. As r approaches oo, equation (1) approaches the
"dominance metric" in which the distance between stimuli x and y is
determined by the difference between coordinates along only one dimension--
that dimension for which the value Ixi - Yil is greatest. That is,
doo(x, y)=max
Each of the three distance functions, r = 1, 2, and oo, are used in psychological
theory (Hull , Restle , Lashley ).
GENERALIZING THE GEOMETRIC DISTANCE MODELS TO FUZZY SUBSETS
Let E be a set and let A and B be two fuzzy subsets of E. Define the following
family of distance measures between A and B:
dr(A ,B) =
[#A (xi) - #B(Xi)[
or, if E = R,
dr(a, B):( S+: [I-I,A(X)--II,
B(X)[r dXl l/r
d~ (A, B) = sup I/Za (x) - #~(x) I
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
The cases r = 1 and 2 were studied by Kaufman . Kacprzyk proposed
the distance measure (dE) 2, and do, was proposed by Nowakowska . Our
empirical evaluation will consider dl, d2, (d2) 2, and d®.
HAUSDORFF METRIC The Hausdorff metric is a generalization of the distance
between two points in a metric space to two compact nonempty subsets of the
space. If U and V are such compact nonempty sets of real numbers, then the
Hausdorff distance is defined by
q(U, V)=max {sup inf d2(u, v), su~ inf d2(u, v)}
where d2 is as defined in equation (1).
In the case of real intervals A and B, the Hausdorff metric is described by
q(A, B)=max {lal-b,I, la2-b2[}
where A = [al, a2] and B = [bl, b2]
GENERALIZING THE HAUSDORFF METRIC TO FUZZY SUBSETS Let F(R) be
the set of all fuzzy numbers and fuzzy intervals of the real line (Dubois and
Prade ). There is no unique metric in F(R) that extends the Hausdorff
distance. Ralescu and Ralescu propose the following generalizations:
q(A,, B,~) dot
q~,(A, B)=sup q(A~,, B~,)
where A,, is the ot-level set of the fuzzy set A.
We propose the Hausdorff distance between the intervals with the highest
membership grade:
q.(A, B)= q(Al.o, Bi.o)
If A and B are real intervals, then
q~(A, B)=q~(A, B)=q.(A, B)=q(A, B)
Goetschel and Voxman suggest a different generalization of the
Hausdorff metric. Let A and B be two fuzzy numbers. (For the exact definition
of fuzzy numbers in this context, which is slightly different from the usual
definition, see Goetschel and Voxman ). Let supp A = [aA, bA] and supp B
= laB, bB], and let a = min {aA, aB} and b = max {bA, bB}, and set
A*={(x, Y)la<_x<_b, 0<y_</zA(x)}
B*={(x,y)la<x<_b,
O<y<#s(x)}
Rami Zwick et al.
Then their distance is
Q(A, B)=q(A*, B*)
DISSEMBLANCE INDEX Kaufman and Gupta start with distance between
intervals. Let A = [al, a2] and B = [bl, b2] be two real intervals contained in
[ill,/~2], and define
A(A, B)= (lal-b~l+ la2- b21)/2(B2- Bt)
GENERALIZING THE DISSEMBLANCE INDEX TO FUZZY SUBSETS Now let A
and B be two fuzzy numbers in R. For each level ol we can consider A(A,~, B,~),
where/~t and/32 are given by any convenient values that surround A, and B~ for
all ot E . Kaufman and Gupta now define
A(A,,, B~,) dot
As obvious analogies to qo. and q., we add
A~(A, B)=sup A(A., B.)
A,(A, B)=A(AI.o, Bl.o)
Set-Theoretic Approach
In his well-known paper entitled "Features of Similarity," Tversky 
describes similarity as a feature-matching process. Similarity among objects is
expressed as a linear combination of the measure of their common and distinct
features. Let D = {a, b, c .....
} be the domain of objects under study.
Assume that each object in D is represented by a set of features or attributes, and
let A, B, and C denote the set of features associated with objects a, b, and c,
respectively. In this setting Tversky derives axiomatically the following family
of similarity functions:
s(a, b)=Of(A NB)-~f(A-B)-Bf(B-A)
for some 0, c~,/3 _> 0
This model does not define a single similarity scale but rather a family of
scales characterized by different values of the parameters 0, o~, and/3, and by the
function f.
If or =/3 = 1 and 0 = 0, then -s(a, b) = f(A - B) + f(B - A), which is
the dissimilarity between sets proposed by Restle .
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
Another matching function of interest is the ratio model
s(a, b)=f( A NB)+otf(A-B)+/3f(B-A)
where similarity is normalized so that s lies between 0 and 1. Assuming thatfis
feature additive (i.e., f(A O B) = f(A) + f(B) for A N B = 0), then the
foregoing model generalizes several set-theoretic models of similarity proposed
in the literature. If a = /3 = 1, s(a, b) reduces to f(A N B)/f(A 13 B)
(Gregson ). If ~x = /3 = ½, then s(a, b) = 2f(A N B)/(f(A) + f(B))
(Eisler and Ekman ). If cx = 1 and/3 = O, s(a, b) = f(A N B)/f(A) Bush
and Mosteller ). Typically the f function is taken to be the cardinality
GENERALIZING THE SET-THEORETIC APPROACH TO FUZZY SUBSETS
Several authors have proposed similarity indexes for fuzzy sets that can be
viewed as generalizations of the classical set-theoretic similarity functions
(Dubois and Prade ). These generalizations rely heavily on the definitions of
cardinality and difference in fuzzy set theory. Definitions of the cardinality of
fuzzy subsets have been proposed by several authors. A systematic investigation
of this notion was performed by Dubois and Prade . For generalizing the set-
theoretic approach to a similarity index among fuzzy subsets, the scalar
cardinality measure will be adopted in the sequel. The scalar cardinality (power)
of a fuzzy subset A of U is defined as (DeLuca and Termini )
IAI = 2~ t~A(U)
When Support (A) is not finite, we define the power of A to be
Defining the following operations between fuzzy subsets,
Yx E U, #AnB(x)=min [/~A(X), /~B(X)]
VX E U, I~AuB(X)=max [/./,A(X), /£B(X)]
VX E U, #ADB(x)=max [min (#A(X), 1--#B(X)), min (1--/~a(X), #B(X))]
A [] B is the fuzzysubset of elements that approximately belong to A and not
to B, or conversely.
The following indexes have been proposed in the literature (Dubois and Prade
 ) as dissimilarity measures between fuzzy subsets:
SI(A, B)= 1-[A NBI/IA LIB I
Rami Zwick et al.
is analogous to Gregson's proposal for classical sets, and
S2(A, B)= IA DBI
is analogous to Restle's proposal for classical sets. Also,
$3 (A, B) = sup #A Ds(x)
and finally a disconsistency index ("degree of separation," Enta );
S4(A, B) = 1 - sup #An B(X)
A PATTERN RECOGNITION APPROACH In this approach (Bonissone ), the
efficiency of the linguistic approximation process is of major importance. The
process is composed of two stages. In the first stage the set of possible labels is
narrowed down by using a crude measure of distance that (it is hoped) performs
well on fuzzy sets that are far apart from each other. The idea is to represent
each fuzzy set by a limited number of features so that the distance computation is
simplified. Bonissone chooses four features. The first is the power of the set
(area under the curve), and the second is a measure of the fuzziness of the set
(nonprobabilistic entropy) defined by De Luca and Termini as
entropy (A) =
S(~A (x)) dx
where S(y) = -fin(y) - (1 - y) in (1 - y)
The third feature is the first moment (center of gravity of the membership
function) and is defined by
FMO(A)=(I~:X#A(X)dx)/power(A)
And finally, skewness, the fourth feature, is defined as
skew (A)= I~: (x-FMO (A))31XA(X) dx
Bonissone defines the distance between two fuzzy sets as the Euclidean
distance between the vectors (Power (A), Entropy (A), FMO (A), Skew (A))
and (Power (B), Entropy (B), FMO (B), Skew (B)). In what follows we will
denote this distance by VI(A, B). After narrowing down the set of possible
labels, the second stage starts, in which a modified Bhattacharyya distance is
computed. This distance should discriminate well between sets that are close to
each other. The Bhattacharyya distance is defined as (Kailath )
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
where the membership functions have been normalized, that is,
/z* (x) = #A (x)/Power (A)
and similarly for #B.
Wenst6p adopts a similar approach. He represents each fuzzy set as the
two-vector (Power (A), FMO (A)). The distance between two fuzzy sets is
defined to be the regular Euclidean distance between the two corresponding
vectors. We will denote this distance by V2(A, B).
Correlation Index
Murthy, Pal, and Majumder define a correlation-like index that reflects
the similarity in behavior of two fuzzy sets. The measure is actually a
standardized squared Euclidean distance between two fuzzy sets as defined by
and define
XA= fS~ (2pA(X)-- I)2 dx
CORR (A, B)= I-(xA~_XI~) (d2)2
In what follows we will use the index p(A, B) = 1 - CORR (,4, B).
Fifteen native speakers of English were recruited by placing notices in
graduate students' mailboxes in the business school and the departments of
anthropology, economics, history, psychology, and sociology at the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. We assumed that they would represent a
population of people who think seriously about communicating "degrees of
uncertainty" and who generally do so with nonnumerical phrases. The general
nature of the study was described, and subjects were promised $25 for three
sessions of approximately an hour and a half each.
General Procedure
Subjects were run for a practice session and then two data sessions. The
experiment was controlled by an IBM PC with the stimuli presented on a color
Rami Zwick et al.
monitor, and responses were made using a joystick. During the data session,
subjects worked through four types of trials: linguistic probability scaling trials,
similarity judgment trials, and two types of trials involved integrating two
probability terms connected by "and" and "or". (These two types of trials are
discussed in Wallsten and co-workers and will not be commented on here.)
LINGUISTIC PROBABILITY SCALING TRIALS The objective of these trials was
to establish the subject's membership function for various linguistic probability
phrases. A linguistic probability phrase is a value of the linguistic variable
"probability" (Zadeh ). In this study we adopted the direct magnitude
estimation technique (for instance, Norwich and Turksen , Rapoport and
colleagues ).
In these trials, probabilities were represented as relative areas on a radially
divided two-colored spinner (see Figure 1). On each trial a spinner and a
linguistic probability word (such as "doubtful") appeared on the screen. The
subject was asked to indicate how "close" the probability word is to the actual
probability represented by the dark area of the spinner. The subject's response
was given by placing the cursor along the horizontal axis (see Figure 1).
Six probability phrases were employed, three representing lower probabilities
and three representing higher probabilities: doubtful, slight chance,
improbable, likely, good chance, and fairly certain. In the direct estimation
task, each phrase was presented with 11 spinner probabilities: 0.02, 0.12, 0.21,
0.31, 0.40, 0.50, 0.60, 0.69, 0.79, 0.88, and 0.98.
Net et ell
Alm.l utol g
Figure 1. Direct Estimation Trim
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
Subjects judged each combination of phrase and probability number twice,
once in each session.
SIMILARITY JUDGMENT TRIALS In these trials two probability phrases were
printed on the screen. The subject then moved the cursor on a horizontal axis to
indicate how similar the phrases were to each other. The cursor could be moved
from not at all similar to absolutely similar. Each subject judged the similarity
between all possible pairs (15) (excluding a phrase and itself) twice in each
MEMBERSHIP FUNCTION EVALUATION We adopted the view that an
individual's membership function for a given fuzzy concept is not purely
deterministic. Rather, the value of the membership function at a point is itself a
random variable (Norwich and Turksen , Zwick ). Hence, in the
linguistic probability scaling trials, the subject's placement of the cursor yielded
a realization of this random variable. On the basis of previous research (Wallsten
and colleagues ; Rapoport and colleagues ), we concluded that a cubic
polynomial can accurately represent the expected value of the membership
function for a probability phrase. Note that a cubic polynomial resembles the
"S" and "H" functions that have been proposed in the literature in this context
(Eshragh and Mamdani ). A cubic polynomial was fit to the 22 points
representing each phrase within a subject, using the least squares technique.
Each equation was then normalized to attain the value 1 on the interval . In
defining the membership functions, any value less than zero was redefined to
equal 0, and similarly any value greater than 1 was redefined to equal 1. These
adjustments were generally quite minor. Examples of the membership functions
for the six phrases for one subject are shown in Figure 2. All membership
functions for all subjects were either nondecreasing, nonincreasing, or single
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For each subject and each pair of words, all 19 distance measures were
calculated. (At times it was necessary to discretize one axis, using a 100-point
grid, in order to calculate a distance measure.) To evaluate the performance of a
particular distance measure, we compared its computed values to the "true"
distance ratings as given directly by the subject in the similarity judgment trials.
This evaluation was done on two levels. First, we asked if the distance measure
correctly categorized a "similar" pair of words by returning a "small"
distance, and if it correctly categorized a "dissimilar" pair of words by
returning a "large" distance. This crude evaluation was in practice independent
of the subject-specific "true" distance rating, because the subjects generally
Rami Zwick et al.
Membership Functions from a Single Subject
Good chance
Fairly certain
Improbable
Slight chance
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
agreed that the pairs Pl = (doubtful, improbable), P2 ---- (doubtful, slight
chance), P3 = (improbable, slight chance), P4 = (fairly certain, good chance),
P5 -- (fairly certain, likely), and 17 6 = (likely, good chance) are each composed
of two "similar" words. Likewise, the subjects generally agreed that the pairs
ql = (doubtful, fairly certain), q2 = (doubtful, good chance), q3 = (doubtful,
likely), q4 = (improbable, fairly certain), q5 = (improbable, good chance), q6
= (improbable, likely), q7 = (slight chance, fairly certain), q8 = (slight
chance, good chance), and q9 -- (slight chance, likely) are each composed of
two "dissimilar" words. For this task of dichotomous categorization, essentially
all the distance measures were successful across all subjects (see Figure 3, for
example). This is testimony to the intuitive base upon which each distance
definition rests. They are designed to indicate gross differences between
membership functions, if and only if such differences actually exist. The
practical implication is simply that if linguistic approximation or concept
clustering is to be carried out in two stages, then any of these distance measures
may be used for the first stage.
The second level of our evaluation asked whether the distance measure
reflects the correct degree of similarity within "similar" pairs of words, and
whether the distance measure reflects the correct degree of dissimilarity within
"dissimilar" pairs of words. In answering this more subtle question, intersub-
ject variability must be acknowledged. Each subject has his or her own
membership functions for the words in pair Pi. These two membership functions
are "similar" in the gross sense, but the similarity between them is different
from the similarity between the subject's membership functions for the words in
pair pj. The degree of similarity within each pair is given, for that subject, by his
or her "true" distance rating. If the distance measure works well in the context
of fuzzy sets, it should yield distances for pairs Pi and pj that "agree" with the
corresponding "true" distance ratings given by the subject.
To quantify the amount of agreement between a particular distance measure
and the "true" distance, we computed the correlation between these two
quantities over all pairs {Pi: 1 <_ i <_ 6} for a given subject (see Figure 3).
Thus, our criterion for agreement was linear association. The same consider-
ations applied to the "dissimilar" pairs. Here we computed the correlation
between the particular distance measure and the "true" distance over all pairs
{qi" 1 <_ i <_ 9} for a given subject. By analyzing thepi's
and qi's separately,
we allowed for the possibility that a particular distance measure may be quite
accurate in modeling fine variations in similarity (i.e., small distances) but quite
inaccurate in modeling fine variation among pairs that are each composed of two
"dissimilar" words. Furthermore, in practical applications one may need to find
only a distance measure that is sensitive to the degree of similarity in pairs of
"similar" words (as in linguistic approximation). The separate analyses also
give a distance measure the opportunity to be linearly related to "true" distance
with two (locally) different slopes (see Figure 3).
Rami Zwick et al.
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
For each distance measure, its prcorrelations for the 15 subjects were
summarized by a line plot. The 19 line plots (one for each measure) appear in
Figure 4. Analogous line plots of the qi-correlations appear in Figure 5. It is
desirable for a measure to have high mean and median correlation, to have small
dispersion among its corelations (i.e., interquartile range), and to be free of
extremely low (i.e., negative) correlations.
Several trends are clear from these displays.
1. There is a great deal more variability between the performances of the
various distance measures on "dissimilar" pairs (Figure 5) than on
"similar" pairs (Figure 4): the means, medians, and interquartile ranges
are much more homogeneous in Figure 4 than in Figure 5. (Note that
statistical fluctuation would actually work in the opposite direction: the
correlations for the "dissimilar" pairs are calculated from nine data
points, while those for "similar" pairs are calculated from six data
points.) This immediately suggests that more caution must be exercised
when selecting a distance measure to distinguish between varying degrees
of dissimilarity.
2. On the "dissimilar" pairs (Figure 5), those measures which perform the
worst (d2, (d2) 2, dl, d~., $2, $3, p) are measures that ignore the ordering on
the x-axis (the base variable axis). Conversely, those measures which
perform the best (q,,, q., A®, A.) are measures that do account for the
distances on the x-axis by looking at c~-level sets. This distinction is quite
logical. When measuring the distance between words that are essentially
"dissimilar" (i.e., have nearly disjoint supports), it is the x-axis that
carries all the information regarding the degree of dissimilarity between
the membership functions. Distance measures that ignore the x-ordering
have the advantage of being unambiguously defined even for membership
functions over abstract (unordered) spaces, but such measures have the
disadvantage of being insensitive to varying degrees of dissimilarity (for
instance, as in pairs qi). In the "similar" pairs (Figure 4), the membership
functions within a pair (pi) have nearly identical supports. Hence the x-
distance is not critical, and we find both types of distance measures doing
well--those which look at t~-level sets (notably q., A**, A.), and those
which ignore the ordering on x (notably $4).
3. Among those measures accounting for x-ordering (ql, q~,, q., A1, A®,
A., Q), ql and Q are especially susceptible to having extremely poor
correlation with "true" similarity ratings. This occurs for both qi-
correlations and prcorrelations. Note that Q is conceptually different from
the other six such measures, possibly accounting for the difference in
performance.
4. Measure $2 is arguably the worst both for "similar" pairs and for
"dissimilar" pairs.
5. Measures Sl and $4 are clearly the best in terms of qrcorrelations, among
those measures which ignore the x-ordering. Their superiority in the
"dissimilar" setting is noteworthy because, again, x-distance is relevant in
~' ~ • ~ ~ # ' ~
~.~' ~.~ --d~ . ,,J~
~ -~ ~ -~ ~
~ ~ ~ o~._~
Rami Zwick et al.
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
E EE EEEEE
Rami Zwick et al.
this setting. Furthermore, measure $4 performs reasonably well (among all
measures) in the "similar" setting also.
6. Quite surprisingly, all the measures with consistently good performance
($4, q~., q., A~., A.) share the following property: they concentrate their
attention on a single value rather than performing some sort of averaging
or integration. In the case of $4, attention focuses on the particular x-value
where the membership function of A CI B is largest; in q~. and A~,
attention focuses on the c~-level set where the x-distance is largest; in q.
and A., attention focuses on the x-di,~tance at the highest membership
grade. Such measures are generally considered unstable (hence suspect) in
many mathematical analyses. Yet here is strong empirical evidence that
subjects actually behave this way: reduction of complicated membership
functions to a single "slice" may be the intuitively natural way for human
beings to combine and process fuzzy concepts.
7. The consistently good performance of q. and A. has significant practical
implications. These measures are trivial to compute, relative to other
distance measures, and have substantial intuitive appeal.
8. Distance measure R was proposed as a refinement of V~, where the latter is
used in the first stage of linguistic approximation and the former is used in
the second stage (Bonissone ). However, the empirical results show no
systematic evidence of R being superior in the "similar" word setting
(Figure 4) or of 1"1 being superior in the "dissimilar" word setting (Figure
9. For a given subject, the relative rank of his or her correlation (within a line
plot) tends to be consistent over all distance measures. (This fact is
revealed by examining the individual subjects' correlations within each
line plot.) For example, the qi-correlation of subject 6 is the highest or
second highest correlation within each of 18 line plots in Figure 5. At the
low end, subjects 15 and 2 are responsible for 17 of the "minimum" qi-
correlations in Figure 5. An analogous situation exists in Figure 4, but
interestingly, the particular subjects whose qi-correlations are consistently
the lowest (say) are not the same particular subjects whose pi-correlations
are consistently the lowest.
RECOMMENDATIONS
If one wants to select a distance measure that performs well in the long run on
a broad spectrum of subjects, the aggregated data of our study may be used as a
guide. Measures $4, q., A~., and A. consistently distinguished themselves with
good performance.
If, however, the objective is to accurately model the behavior of a specific
individual (for instance, in the linguistic approximation phase of an expert
Measures of Similarity/Fuzzy Concepts
system program), then the following problem must be acknowledged. For each
distance measure there existed some subject for whom that distance measure
performed quite poorly (note the "minimum" values on Figures 4 and 5).
Moreover, there were some subjects with consistently low (negative) correla-
tions, indicating that for them, none of the distance measures adequately models
their thought processes in judging degrees of similarity (or dissimilarity). (This
in no way detracts from the ability of all distance measures to successfully make
gross categorizations of word pairs as "similar" or "dissimilar" for all
subjects.) In contrast, for those subjects having consistently high (near 1.0)
correlations, there is evidently a certain robustness with respect to the choice of
a distance measure. In practice, then, it would be ideal to evaluate the
performances of the various distance measures on the individual of interest. This
could be accomplished by carrying out an experiment analogous to ours, but on
the specific individual and in the relevant context. (It is possible that the relative
performances of the distance measures could vary from one context to another,
even for a fixed individual.)
Having done this, one can determine which distance measure is the best for
the situation at hand. If the individual attains consistently high correlations, then
it does not matter which distance measure is used (perhaps computational
convenience should then indicate the choice). If the individual shows much
variability in his or her correlations, then of course the distance measure with the
highest correlation should be chosen. If the individual produces consistently
negative correlations, then this itself is an extremely important finding: it may be
quite difficult to quantify and mathematically model the mental process of
similarity judgment for such an individual.
In many cases the fuzzy concepts are unambiguously defined over a one-
dimensional space (such as in our study of probability words). When this is not
the case, then, in using those distance measures which do account for the
ordering on the base-variable axes, it is imperative that the fuzzy concepts be
correctly located in a space of the appropriate dimensionality.