Unsupervised Learning of Visual Representations using Videos
Xiaolong Wang, Abhinav Gupta
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Is strong supervision necessary for learning a good
visual representation?
Do we really need millions of
semantically-labeled images to train a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)? In this paper, we present a simple yet
surprisingly powerful approach for unsupervised learning
of CNN. Speciﬁcally, we use hundreds of thousands of unlabeled videos from the web to learn visual representations.
Our key idea is that visual tracking provides the supervision. That is, two patches connected by a track should have
similar visual representation in deep feature space since
they probably belong to the same object or object part. We
design a Siamese-triplet network with a ranking loss function to train this CNN representation. Without using a single image from ImageNet, just using 100K unlabeled videos
and the VOC 2012 dataset, we train an ensemble of unsupervised networks that achieves 52% mAP (no bounding box regression). This performance comes tantalizingly
close to its ImageNet-supervised counterpart, an ensemble
which achieves a mAP of 54.4%. We also show that our
unsupervised network can perform competitively in other
tasks such as surface-normal estimation.
1. Introduction
What is a good visual representation and how can we
learn it? At the start of this decade, most computer vision
research focused on “what” and used hand-deﬁned features
such as SIFT and HOG as the underlying visual
representation. Learning was often the last step where these
low-level feature representations were mapped to semantic/3D/functional categories. However, the last three years
have seen the resurgence of learning visual representations
directly from pixels themselves using the deep learning
and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) .
At the heart of CNNs is a completely supervised learning
paradigm. Often millions of examples are ﬁrst labeled using Mechanical Turk followed by data augmentation to create tens of millions of training instances. CNNs are then
trained using gradient descent and back propagation. But
one question still remains: is strong-supervision necessary
for training these CNNs? Do we really need millions of
semantically-labeled images to learn a good representation?
Learning to Rank
(First Frame)
(Last Frame)
(a) Unsupervised Tracking in Videos
𝐷: Distance in deep feature space
(b) Siamese-triplet Network
(c) Ranking Objective
Figure 1. Overview of our approach. (a) Given unlabeled videos,
we perform unsupervised tracking on the patches in them. (b)
Triplets of patches including query patch in the initial frame of
tracking, tracked patch in the last frame, and random patch from
other videos are fed into our siamese-triplet network for training. (c) The learning objective: Distance between the query and
tracked patch in feature space should be smaller than the distance
between query and random patches.
It seems humans can learn visual representations using little
or no semantic supervision but our approaches still remain
completely supervised.
In this paper, we explore the alternative: how we can exploit the unlabeled visual data on the web to train CNNs
(e.g. AlexNet )? In the past, there have been several attempts at unsupervised learning using millions of static images or frames extracted from videos .
The most common architecture used is an auto-encoder
which learns representations based on its ability to reconstruct the input images . While these approaches have been able to automatically learn V1-like ﬁlters given unlabeled data, they are still far away from supervised approaches on tasks such as object detection. So,
what is the missing link? We argue that static images themselves might not have enough information to learn a good
 
visual representation. But what about videos? Do they have
enough information to learn visual representations? In fact,
humans also learn their visual representations not from millions of static images but years of dynamic sensory inputs.
Can we have similar learning capabilities for CNNs?
We present a simple yet surprisingly powerful approach
for unsupervised learning of CNNs using hundreds of thousands of unlabeled videos from the web. Visual tracking is
one of the ﬁrst capabilities that develops in infants and often
before semantic representations are learned1. Taking a leaf
from this observation, we propose to exploit visual tracking for learning CNNs in an unsupervised manner. Speciﬁcally, we track millions of “moving” patches in hundreds of
thousands of videos. Our key idea is that two patches connected by a track should have similar visual representation
in deep feature space since they probably belong to the same
object. We design a Siamese-triplet network with ranking
loss function to train the CNN representation. This ranking
loss function enforces that in the ﬁnal deep feature space
the ﬁrst frame patch should be much closer to the tracked
patch than any other randomly sampled patch. We demonstrate the strength of our learning algorithm using extensive experimental evaluation. Without using a single image
from ImageNet, just 100K unlabeled videos and VOC 2012
dataset, we train an ensemble of AlexNet networks that
achieves 52% mAP (no bounding box regression). This performance is similar to its ImageNet-supervised counterpart,
an ensemble which achieves 54.4% mAP. We also show that
our network trained using unlabeled videos achieves similar performance to its completely supervised counterpart on
other tasks such as surface normal estimation. We believe
this is the ﬁrst time an unsupervised-pretrained CNN has
been shown so competitive; that too on varied datasets and
tasks. Speciﬁcally for VOC, we would like to put our results in context: this is the best results till-date by using
only PASCAL-provided annotations (next best is scratch at
2. Related Work
Unsupervised learning of visual representations has a
rich history starting from original auto-encoders work of
Olhausen and Field . Most of the work in this area
can be broadly divided into three categories.
class of algorithms focus on learning generative models
with strong priors . These algorithms essentially
capture co-occurrence statistics of features.
The second
class of algorithms use manually deﬁned features such as
SIFT or HOG and perform clustering over training data
to discover semantic classes . Some of these recent algorithms also focus on learning mid-level representations rather than discovering semantic classes them-
1 
selves . The third class of algorithms and more
related to our paper is unsupervised learning of visual representations from the pixels themselves using deep learning
approaches . Starting
from the seminal work of Olhausen and Field , the goal
is to learn visual representations which are (a) sparse and
(b) reconstructive. Olhausen and Field showed that using this criteria they can learn V1-like ﬁlters directly from
the data. However, this work only focused on learning a single layer. This idea was extended by Hinton and Salakhutdinov to train a deep belief network in an unsupervised manner via stacking layer-by-layer RBMs. Similar to
this, Bengio et al. investigated stacking of both RBMs
and autoencoders. As a next step, Le et al. scaled up
the learning of multi-layer autoencoder on large-scale unlabeled data. They demonstrated that although the network is
trained in an unsupervised manner, the neurons in high layers can still have high responses on semantic objects such
as human heads and cat faces. Sermanet et al. applied
convolutional sparse coding to pre-train the model layer-bylayer in unsupervised manner. The model is then ﬁne-tuned
for pedestrian detection. In a contemporary work, Doersch
et al. explored to use spatial context as a cue to perform
unsupervised learning for CNNs.
However, it is not clear if static images is the right way
to learn visual representations. Therefore, researchers have
started focusing on learning feature representations using
videos .
Early work
such as focused on inclusion of constraints via video
to autoencoder framework. The most common constraint is
enforcing learned representations to be temporally smooth.
Similar to this, Goroshin et al. proposed to learn autoencoders based on the slowness prior. Other approaches
such as Taylor et al. trained convolutional gated RBMs
to learn latent representations from pairs of successive images. This was extended in a recent work by Srivastava et
al. where they proposed to learn a LSTM model in an
unsupervised manner to predict future frames.
Finally, our work is also related to metric learning via
deep networks . For example,
Chopra et al. proposed to learn convolutional networks
in a siamese architecture for face veriﬁcation.
al. introduced a deep triplet ranking network to learn
ﬁne-grained image similarity. Zhang et al. optimized
the max-margin loss on triplet units to learn deep hashing
function for image retrieval. However, all these methods
required labeled data.
Our work is also related to ,
which used CNN pre-trained on ImageNet classiﬁcation
and detection dataset as initialization, and performed semisupervised learning in videos to tackle object detection in
target domain. However, in our work, we propose an unsupervised approach instead of semi-supervised algorithm.
3. Overview
Our goal is to train convolutional neural networks using
hundreds of thousands of unlabeled videos from the Internet. We follow the AlexNet architecture to design our base
network. However, since we do not have labels, it is not
clear what should be the loss function and how we should
optimize it. But in case of videos, we have another supervisory information: time. For example, we all know that the
scene does not change drastically within a short time in a
video and same object instances appear in multiple frames
of the video. So, how do we exploit this information to train
a CNN-based representation?
We sample millions of patches in these videos and track
them over time. Since we are tracking these patches, we
know that the ﬁrst and last tracked frames correspond to the
same instance of the moving object or object part. Therefore, any visual representation that we learn should keep
these two data points close in the feature space. But just using this constraint is not sufﬁcient: all points can be mapped
to a single point in feature space. Therefore, for training our
CNN, we sample a third patch which creates a triplet. For
training, we use a loss function that enforces that the
ﬁrst two patches connected by tracking are closer in feature
space than the ﬁrst one and a random one.
Training a network with such triplets converges fast since
the task is easy to overﬁt to. One way is to increase the
number of training triplets. However, after initial convergence most triplets satisfy the loss function and therefore
back-propagating gradients using such triplets is inefﬁcient.
Instead, analogous to hard-negative mining, we select the
third patch from multiple patches that violates the constraint
(loss is maximum).
Selecting this patch leads to more
meaningful gradients for faster learning.
4. Patch Mining in Videos
Given a video, we want to extract patches of interest
(patches with motion in our case) and track these patches to
create training instances. One obvious way to ﬁnd patches
of interest is to compute optical ﬂow and use the high magnitude ﬂow regions. However, since YouTube videos are
noisy with a lot of camera motion, it is hard to localize
moving objects using simple optical ﬂow magnitude vectors. Thus we follow a two-step approach: in the ﬁrst step,
we obtain SURF interest points and use Improved Dense
Trajectories (IDT) to obtain motion of each SURF
point. Note that since IDT applies a homography estimation
(video stabilization) method, it reduces the problem caused
by camera motion. Given the trajectories of SURF interest points, we classify these points as moving if the ﬂow
magnitude is more than 0.5 pixels. We also reject frames
if (a) very few (< 25%) SURF interest points are classiﬁed
as moving because it might be just noise; (b) majority of
SURF interest points (> 75%) are classiﬁed as moving as
(First Frame)
(Last Frame)
Sliding Window Searching
Small Motion
Camera Motion
Given the video about buses (the “bus” label are not
utilized), we perform IDT on it. red points represents the SURF
feature points, green represents the trajectories for the points. We
reject the frames with small and large camera motions (top pairs).
Given the selected frame, we ﬁnd the bounding box containing
most of the moving SURF points. We then perform tracking. The
ﬁrst and last frame of the track provide pair of patches for training
it corresponds to moving camera. Once we have extracted
moving SURF interest points, in the second step, we ﬁnd the
best bounding box such that it contains most of the moving
SURF points. The size of the bounding box is set as h × w,
and we perform sliding window with it in the frame. We
take the bounding box which contains the most number of
moving SURF interest points as the interest bounding box.
In the experiment, we set h = 227, w = 227 in the frame
with size 448 × 600. Note that these patches might contain
objects or part of an object as shown in Figure 2.
Given the initial bounding box, we perform
tracking using the KCF tracker . After tracking along 30
frames in the video, we obtain the second patch. This patch
acts as the similar patch to the query patch in the triplet.
Note that the KCF tracker does not use any supervised information except for the initial bounding box.
5. Learning Via Videos
In the previous section, we discussed how we can use
tracking to generate pairs of patches. We use this procedure
to generate millions of such pairs (See Figure 3 for examples of pairs of patches mined). We now describe how we
use these as training instances for our visual representation
5.1. Siamese Triplet Network
Our goal is to learn a feature space such that the query
patch is closer to the tracked patch as compared to any other
randomly sampled patch. To learn this feature space we design a Siamese-triplet network. A Siamese-triplet network
consist of three base networks which share the same param-
(First Frame)
(Last Frame)
(First Frame)
(Last Frame)
Figure 3. Examples of patch pairs we obtain via patch mining in the videos.
eters (see Figure 4). For our experiments, we take the image
with size 227 × 227 as input. The base network is based
on the AlexNet architecture for the convolutional layers. Then we stack two fully connected layers on the pool5
outputs, whose neuron numbers are 4096 and 1024 respectively. Thus the ﬁnal output of each single network is 1024
dimensional feature space f(·). We deﬁne the loss function
on this feature space.
5.2. Ranking Loss Function
Given the set of patch pairs S sampled from the video,
we propose to learn an image similarity model in the form
of CNN. Speciﬁcally, given an image X as an input for the
network, we can obtain its feature in the ﬁnal layer as f(X).
Then, we deﬁne the distance of two image patches X1, X2
based on the cosine distance in the feature space as,
D(X1, X2) = 1 −
f(X1) · f(X2)
∥f(X1)∥∥f(X2)∥.
We want to train a CNN to obtain feature representation
f(·), so that the distance between query image patch and the
tracked patch is small and the distance between query patch
and other random patches is encouraged to be larger. Formally, given the patch set S, where Xi is the original query
patch (ﬁrst patch in tracked frames), X+
i is the tracked patch
i is a random patch from a different video, we want
to enforce D(Xi, X−
i ) > D(Xi, X+
i ). Therefore, the loss
of our ranking model is deﬁned by hinge loss as,
i ) = max{0, D(Xi, X+
i ) −D(Xi, X−
where M represents the gap parameters between two distances. We set M = 0.5 in the experiment. Then our objective function for training can be represented as,
max{0, D(Xi, X+
i ) −D(Xi, X−
where W is the parameter weights of the network, i.e., parameters for function f(·). N is the number of the triplets of
samples. λ is a constant representing weight decay, which
is set to λ = 0.0005.
5.3. Hard Negative Mining for Triplet Sampling
One non-trivial part for learning to rank is the process of
selecting negative samples. Given a pair of similar images
i , how can we select the patch X−
i , which is a negative match to Xi, from the large pool of patches? Here we
ﬁrst select the negative patches randomly, and then ﬁnd hard
examples (in a process analogous to hard negative mining).
Random Selection:
During learning, we perform
mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). For each
i , we randomly sample K negative matches in the
same batch B, thus we have K sets of triplet of samples.
For every triplet of samples, we calculate the gradients over
three of them respectively and perform back propagation.
Note that we shufﬂe all the images randomly after each
epoch of training, thus the pair of patches Xi, X+
i can look
at different negative matches each time.
Hard Negative Mining: While one can continue to sample random patches for creating the triplets, it is more efﬁcient to search the negative patches smartly. After 10 epochs
of training using negative data selected randomly, we want
to make the problem harder to get more robust feature representations. Analogous to hard-negative mining procedure
in SVM, where gradient descent learning is only performed
on hard-negatives (not all possible negative), we search for
Shared Weights
Shared Weights
96 256 384
Siamese-triplet network. Each base network in the
Siamese-triplet network share the same architecture and parameter
weights. The architecture is rectiﬁed from AlexNet by using only
two fully connected layers. Given a triplet of training samples,
we obtain their features from the last layer by forward propagation
and compute the ranking loss.
Top response regions for the pool5 neurons of our
unsupervised-CNN. Each row shows top response of one neuron.
the negative patch such that the loss is maximum and use
that patch to compute and back propagate gradients.
Speciﬁcally, the sampling of negative matches is similar
as random selection before, except that this time we select
according to the loss(Eq. 2). For each pair Xi, X+
i , we calculate the loss of all other negative matches in batch B, and
select the top K ones with highest losses. We apply the loss
on these K negative matches as our ﬁnal loss and calculate
the gradients over them. Since the feature of each sample
is already computed after the forward propagation, we only
need to calculate the loss over these features, thus the extra
computation for hard negative mining is very small. For the
experiments, we use K = 4. Note that while some of the
negatives might be semantically similar patches, our embedding constraint only requires same instance examples to
be closer than category examples (which can be closer than
other negatives in the space).
5.4. Adapting for Supervised Tasks
Given the CNN learned by using unsupervised data, we
want to transfer the learned representations to the tasks with
supervised data. In our experiments, we apply our model
to two different tasks including object detection and surface normal estimation. In both tasks we take the base network from our Siamese-triplet network and adjust the fully
connected layers and outputs accordingly.
We introduce
two ways to ﬁne-tune and transfer the information obtained
from unsupervised data to supervised learning.
One straight forward approach is directly applying our
ranking model as a pre-trained network for the target task.
More speciﬁcally, we use the parameters of the convolutional layers in the base network of our triplet architecture
as initialization for the target task. For the fully connected
layers, we initialize them randomly. This method of transferring feature representation is very similar to the approach
applied in RCNN . However, RCNN uses the network
pre-trained with ImageNet Classiﬁcation data. In our case,
the unsupervised ranking task is quite different from object
detection and surface normal estimation. Thus, we need
to adapt the learning rate to the ﬁne-tuning procedure introduced in RCNN. We start with the learning rate with
ϵ = 0.01 instead of 0.001 and set the same learning rate
for all layers. This setting is crucial since we want the pretrained features to be used as initialization of supervised
learning, and adapting the features to the new task.
In this paper,
we explore one more approach to
transfer/ﬁne-tune the network. Speciﬁcally, we note that
there might be more juice left in the millions of unsupervised training data (which could not be captured in the initial learning stage).
Therefore, we use an iterative ﬁnetuning scheme. Given the initial unsupervised network, we
ﬁrst ﬁne-tune using the PASCAL VOC data. Given the new
ﬁne-tuned network, we use this network to re-adapt to ranking triplet task. Here we again transfer convolutional parameters for re-adapting. Finally, this re-adapted network is
ﬁne-tuned on the VOC data yielding a better trained model.
We show in the experiment that this circular approach gives
improvement in performance. We also notice that after two
iterations of this approach the network converges.
5.5. Model Ensemble
We proposed an approach to learn CNNs using unlabeled
videos. However, there is absolutely no limit to generating
training instances and pairs of tracked patches (YouTube
has more than billions of videos). This opens up the possibility of training multiple CNNs using different sets of data.
Once we have trained these CNNs, we append the fc7 features from each of these CNNs to train the ﬁnal SVM. Note
that the ImageNet trained models also provide initial boost
for adding more networks (See Table 1).
5.6. Implementation Details
We apply mini-batch SGD in training. As the 3 networks
share the same parameters, instead of inputting 3 samples
to the triplet network, we perform the forward propagation
for the whole batch by a single network and calculate the
loss based on the output feature. Given a pair of patches
i , we randomly select another patch X−
i ∈B which
is extracted in a different video from Xi, X+
i . Given their
features from forward propagation f(Xi), f(X+
we can compute the loss as Eq. 2.
For unsupervised learning, we download 100K videos
from YouTube using the URLs provided by . used
thousands of keywords to retrieve videos from YouTube.
Note we drop the labels associated with each video. By performing our patch mining method on the videos, we obtain
8 million image patches. We train three different networks
separately using 1.5M, 5M and 8M training samples. We
report numbers based on these three networks. To train our
siamese-triplet networks, we set the batch size as |B| = 100,
(a) Unsupervised Pre-trained
(b) Fine-tuned
Conv1 ﬁlters visualization. (a) The ﬁlters of the ﬁrst
convolutional layer of the siamese-triplet network trained in unsupervised manner. (b) By ﬁne-tuning the unsupervised pre-trained
network on PASCAL VOC 2012, we obtain sharper ﬁlters.
the learning rate starting with ϵ0 = 0.001. We ﬁrst train our
network with random negative samples at this learning rate
for 150K iterations, and then we apply hard negative mining based on it. For training on 1.5M patches, we reduce
the learning rate by a factor of 10 at every 80K iterations
and train for 240K iterations. For training on 5M and 8M
patches, we reduce the learning rate by a factor of 10 at every 120K iterations and train for 350K iterations.
6. Experiments
We demonstrate the quality of our learned visual representations with qualitative and quantitative experiments.
Qualitatively, we show the convolutional ﬁlters learned in
layer 1 (See Figure 6). Our learned ﬁlters are similar to V1
though not as strong. However, after ﬁne-tuning on PAS-
CAL VOC 2012, these ﬁlters become quite strong. We also
show that the underlying representation learns a reasonable
nearness metric by showing what the units in Pool5 layers
represent (See Figure 5). Ignoring boundary effects, each
pool5 unit has a receptive ﬁeld of 195 × 195 pixels in the
original 227 × 227 pixel input. A central pool5 unit has a
nearly global view, while one near the edge has a smaller,
clipped support. Each row displays top 6 activations for a
pool5 unit. We have chosen 5 pool5 units for visualization.
For example, the ﬁrst neuron represents animal heads, second represents potted plant, etc. This visualization indicates
the nearness metric learned by the network since each row
corresponds to similar ﬁring patterns inside the CNN. Our
unsupervised networks are available for download.
6.1. Unsupervised CNNs without Fine-tuning
First, we demonstrate that the unsupervised-CNN representation learned using videos (without ﬁne-tuning) is
reasonable.
We perform Nearest Neighbors (NN) using
ground-truth (GT) windows in VOC 2012 val set as query.
The retrieval-database consists of all selective search windows (more than 0.5 overlap with GT windows) in VOC
2012 train set. See Figure 7 for qualitative results. Our
unsupervised-CNN is far superior to a random AlexNet architecture and the results are quite comparable to AlexNet
trained on ImageNet.
Quantitatively, we measure the retrieval rate by counting
number of correct retrievals in top-K (K=20) retrievals. A
retrieval is correct if the semantic class for retrieved patch
and query patch are the same. Using our unsupervised-CNN
(Pool5 features) without ﬁne-tuning and cosine distance, we
obtain 40% retrieval rate. Our performance is signiﬁcantly
better as compared to 24% by ELDA on HOG and
19% by AlexNet with random parameters (our initialization). This clearly demonstrates our unsupervised network
learns a good visual representation compared to a random
parameter CNN. As a baseline, ImageNet CNN performs
62% (but note it already learns on semantics).
We also evaluate our unsupervised-CNN without ﬁnetuning for scene classiﬁcation task on MIT Indoor 67 .
We train a linear classiﬁer using softmax loss.
pool5 features from unsupervised-CNN without ﬁne-tuning
gives 41% classiﬁcation accuracy compared to 21% for
GIST+SVM and 16% for random AlexNet.
ImageNettrained AlexNet has 54% accuracy. We also provide object
detection results without ﬁne-tuning in the next section.
6.2. Unsupervised CNNs with Fine-tuning
Next, we evaluate our approach by transferring the feature representation learned in unsupervised manner to the
tasks with labeled data. We focus on two challenging problems: object detection and surface normal estimation.
Object Detection
For object detection, we perform our experiments on PAS-
CAL VOC 2012 dataset .
We follow the detection
pipeline introduced in RCNN , which borrowed the
CNNs pre-trained on other datasets and ﬁne-tuned on it with
the VOC data. The ﬁne-tuned CNN was then used to extract
features followed by training SVMs for each object class.
However, instead of using ImageNet pre-trained network as
initialization in RCNN, we use our unsupervised-CNN. We
ﬁne-tune our network with the trainval set (11540 images)
and train SVMs with them. Evaluation is performed in the
standard test set (10991 images).
At the ﬁne-tuning stage, we change the output to 21
classes and initialize the convolutional layers with our unsupervised pre-trained network. To ﬁne-tune the network, we
start with learning rate as ϵ = 0.01 and reduce the learning
rate by a factor of 10 at every 80K iterations. The network
is ﬁne-tuned for 200K iterations. Note that for all the experiments, no bounding box regression is performed.
(a) Random AlexNet
(b) Imagenet AlexNet
(c) Unsupervised AlexNet
Figure 7. Nearest neighbors results. Given the query object from VOC 2012 val, we retrieve the NN from VOC 2012 train via calculating
the cosine distance on pool5 feature space. We compare the results of 3 different models: (a) AlexNet with random parameters; (b) AlexNet
trained with Imagenet data; (c) AlexNet trained using our unsupervised method on 8M data.
Table 1. mean Average Precision (mAP) on VOC 2012. “external” column shows the number of patches used to pre-train unsupervised-CNN.
VOC 2012 test
external aero bike bird boat bottle
chair cow table
horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train
66.1 58.1 32.7 23.0
54.5 56.4 50.8
42.2 31.8 49.2
scratch (3 ensemble)
68.7 61.2 36.1 25.7
58.9 58.8 55.3
43.5 36.7 53.0
unsup + ft
68.8 62.1 34.7 25.3
57.7 59.6 56.3
42.6 33.8 52.3
unsup + ft
69.0 64.0 37.1 23.6
58.7 58.9 59.6
46.0 35.1 53.3
unsup + ft
67.6 63.4 37.3 27.6
58.7 59.9 59.5
46.3 37.6 54.8
unsup + ft (2 ensemble)
72.4 66.2 41.3 26.4
61.0 61.9 63.1
51.0 38.7 58.1
unsup + ft (3 ensemble)
73.4 67.3 44.1 30.4
63.3 62.6 64.2
51.1 40.6 60.8
unsup + iterative ft
67.7 64.0 41.3 25.3
58.8 60.3 60.2
46.7 34.4 53.6
72.7 62.9 49.3 31.1
56.2 53.0 70.0
49.0 38.0 69.5
RCNN 70K (2 ensemble)
75.3 68.3 53.1 35.2
59.6 54.7 73.4
53.0 42.2 73.1
RCNN 70K (3 ensemble)
74.6 68.7 54.9 35.7
61.0 54.4 74.0
53.6 43.0 74.0
RCNN 200K (big stepsize)
73.3 67.1 46.3 31.7
59.4 61.0 67.9
53.1 39.1 64.1
We compare our method with the model trained from
scratch as well as using ImagNet pre-trained network. Notice that the results for VOC 2012 reported in RCNN 
are obtained by only ﬁne-tuning on the train set without
using the val set. For fair comparison, we ﬁne-tuned the
ImageNet pre-trained network with VOC 2012 trainval set.
Moreover, as the step size of reducing learning rate in
RCNN is set to 20K and iterations for ﬁne-tuning is
70K, we also try to enlarge the step size to 50K and ﬁnetune the network for 200K iterations. We report the results
for both of these settings.
Single Model. We show the results in Table 1. As a
baseline, we train the network from scratch on VOC 2012
dataset and obtain 44% mAP. Using our unsupervised network pre-trained with 1.5M pair of patches and then ﬁnetuned on VOC 2012, we obtain mAP of 46.2% (unsup+ft,
external data = 1.5M). However, using more data, 5M
and 8M patches in pre-training and then ﬁne-tune, we can
achieve 47% and 47.5% mAP. These results indicate that
our unsupervised network provides a signiﬁcant boost as
compared to the scratch network. More importantly, when
more unlabeled data is applied, we can get better performance ( 3.5% boost compared to training from scratch).
Model Ensemble. We also try combining different models using different sets of unlabeled data in pre-training. By
ensembling two ﬁne-tuned networks which are pre-trained
using 1.5M and 5M patches, we obtained a boost of 3.5%
comparing to the single model, which is 50.5%(unsup+ft
(2 ensemble)). Finally, we ensemble all three different networks pre-trained with different sets of data, whose size are
1.5M, 5M and 8M respectively. We get another boost and
reach 52% mAP (unsup+ft (3 ensemble)).
Baselines. We compare our approach with RCNN 
which uses ImageNet pre-trained models. Following the
procedure in , we obtain 50.1% mAP (RCNN 70K) by
setting the step size to 20K and ﬁne-tuning for 70K iterations. To generate a model ensemble, the CNNs are ﬁrst
trained on the ImageNet dataset separately, and then they
are ﬁne-tuned with the VOC 2012 dataset. The result of
ensembling two of these networks is 53.6% mAP (RCNN
70K (2 ensemble)). If we ensemble three networks, we get
a mAP of 54.4%. For fair of comparison, we also ﬁnetuned the ImageNet pre-trained model with larger step size
(50K) and more iterations (200K). The result is 52.3% mAP
(RCNN 200K (big stepsize)). Note that while ImageNet
network shows diminishing returns with ensembling since
the training data remains similar, in our case since every
network in the ensemble looks at different sets of data, we
get huge performance boosts.
Exploring a better way to transfer learned representation. Given our ﬁne-tuned model using 5M patches in
pre-training (unsup+ft, external = 5M), we use it to re-learn
and re-adapt to the unsupervised triplet task. After that, the
network is re-applied to ﬁne-tune on VOC 2012. The ﬁnal
Table 2. Results on NYU v2 for per-pixel surface normal estimation, evaluated over valid pixels.
(Lower Better)
(Higher Better)
Median 11.25◦22.5◦30◦
unsup + ft
ImageNet + ft
UNFOLD 
Discr. 
3DP (MW) 
result for this single model is 48% mAP (unsup + iterative
ft), which is 1% better than the initial ﬁne-tuned network.
Unsupervised network without ﬁne-tuning: We also
perform object detection without ﬁne-tuning on VOC 2012.
We extract pool5 features using our unsupervised-CNN and
train SVM on top of it. We obtain mAP of 26.1% using our
unsupervised network (training with 8M data). The ensemble of two unsupervised-network (training with 5M and 8M
data) gets mAP of 28.2%. As a comparison, Imagenet pretrained network without ﬁne-tuning gets mAP of 40.4%.
Surface Normal Estimation
To illustrate that our unsupervised representation can be
generalized to different tasks, we adapt the unsupervised
CNN to the task of surface normal estimation from a RGB
In this task, we want to estimate the orientation of the pixels.
We perform our experiments on the
NYUv2 dataset , which includes 795 images for training and 654 images for testing. Each image is has corresponding depth information which can be used to generate
groundtruth surface normals. For evaluation and generating
the groundtruth, we adopt the protocols introduced in 
which is used by different methods on this task.
To apply deep learning to this task, we followed the same
form of outputs and loss function as the coarse network
mentioned in . Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst learn a codebook
by performing k-means on surface normals and generate 20
codewords. Each codeword represents one class and thus
we transform the problem to 20-class classiﬁcation for each
pixel. Given a 227 × 227 image as input, our network generates surface normals for the whole scene. The output of
our network is 20 × 20 pixels, each of which is represented
by a distribution over 20 codewords. Thus the dimension of
output is 20 × 20 × 20 = 8000.
The network architecture for this task is also based on
the AlexNet. To relieve over-ﬁtting, we only stack two fully
connected layers with 4096 and 8000 neurons on the pool5
layer. During training, we initialize the network with the
unsupervised pre-trained network (single network using 8M
external data). We use the same learning rate 1.0 × 10−6
as and ﬁne-tune with 10K iterations given the small
number of training data. Note that unlike , we do not
utilize any data from the videos in NYU dataset for training.
Figure 8. Surface normal estimation results on NYU dataset. For
visualization, we use green for horizontal surface, blue for facing
right and red for facing left, i.e., blue →X; green →Y; red →Z.
For comparison, we also trained networks from scratch
as well as using ImageNet pre-trained. For evaluation, we
report mean and median error (in degrees). We also report
percentage of pixels with less than 11.25, 22.5 and 30 degree errors. We show our qualitative results in in Figure 8.
and quantitative results in Table 2. Our approach (unsup +
ft) is signiﬁcantly better than network trained from scratch
and comes very close to Imagenet-pretrained CNN (∼1%).
7. Discussion and Conclusion
We have presented an approach to train CNNs in an unsupervised manner using videos. Speciﬁcally, we track millions of patches and learn an embedding using CNN that
keeps patches from same track closer in the embedding
space as compared to any random third patch. Our unsupervised pre-trained CNN ﬁne-tuned using VOC training data
outperforms CNN trained from scratch by 3.5%. An ensemble version of our approach outperforms scratch by 4.7%
and comes tantalizingly close to an Imagenet-pretrained
CNN (within 2.5%). We believe this is an extremely surprising result since until recently semantic supervision was
considered a strong requirement for training CNNs. We believe our successful implementation opens up a new space
for designing unsupervised learning algorithms for CNN
Acknowledgement: This work was partially supported by ONR MURI
N000141010934 and NSF IIS 1320083. This material was also based on
research partially sponsored by DARPA under agreement number FA8750-
14-2-0244. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of DARPA or
the U.S. Government. The authors would like to thank Yahoo! and Nvidia
for the compute cluster and GPU donations respectively.