Zurich Open Repository and
University of Zurich
University Library
Strickhofstrasse 39
CH-8057 Zurich
www.zora.uzh.ch
Year: 2009
Bayesian model selection for group studies
Stephan, K E ; Penny, W D ; Daunizeau, J ; Moran, R J ; Friston, K J
DOI: 
Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of Zurich
ZORA URL: 
Journal Article
Accepted Version
Originally published at:
Stephan, K E; Penny, W D; Daunizeau, J; Moran, R J; Friston, K J . Bayesian model selection for group
studies. NeuroImage, 46(4):1004-1017.
DOI: 
Bayesian model selection for group studies
BAYESIAN MODEL SELECTION FOR GROUP
Klaas Enno Stephan,1,2 Will D. Penny,1 Jean Daunizeau,1 Rosalyn J. Moran,1 and
Karl J. Friston1
1 Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University College London,
London, UK.
2 Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics,
University of Zurich, Switzerland.
Key words:
Random effects, variational Bayes, hierarchical models, model evidence,
Bayes factor, model comparison, dynamic causal modelling, DCM, fMRI,
EEG, MEG, source reconstruction
Address for correspondence:
Klaas Enno Stephan
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
Institute of Neurology, UCL
12 Queen Square, London, UK, WC1N 3BG
Tel (44) 20 7833 7472
Fax (44) 20 7813 1420
Email 
Bayesian model selection (BMS) is a powerful method for determining the most likely among
a set of competing hypotheses about the mechanisms that generated observed data. BMS has
recently found widespread application in neuroimaging, particularly in the context of dynamic
causal modelling (DCM). However, so far, combining BMS results from several subjects has
relied on simple (fixed effects) metrics, e.g. the group Bayes factor (GBF), that do not
account for group heterogeneity or outliers. In this paper, we compare the GBF with two
random effects methods for BMS at the between-subject or group level. These methods
provide inference on model-space using a classical and Bayesian perspective respectively.
First, a classical (frequentist) approach uses the log model evidence as a subject-specific
summary statistic. This enables one to use analysis of variance to test for differences in logevidences over models, relative to inter-subject differences. We then consider the same
problem in Bayesian terms and describe a novel hierarchical model, which is optimised to
furnish a probability density on the models themselves. This new variational Bayes method
rests on treating the model as a random variable and estimating the parameters of a Dirichlet
distribution which describes the probabilities for all models considered. These probabilities
then define a multinomial distribution over model space, allowing one to compute how likely
it is that a specific model generated the data of a randomly chosen subject as well as the
exceedance probability of one model being more likely than any other model. Using
empirical and synthetic data, we show that optimising a conditional density of the model
probabilities, given the log-evidences for each model over subjects, is more informative and
appropriate than both the GBF and frequentist tests of the log-evidences. In particular, we
found that the hierarchical Bayesian approach is considerably more robust than either of the
other approaches in the presence of outliers. We expect that this new random effects method
will prove useful for a wide range of group studies, not only in the context of DCM, but also
for other modelling endeavours, e.g. comparing different source reconstruction methods for
EEG/MEG or selecting among competing computational models of learning and decisionmaking.
INTRODUCTION
Model comparison and selection is central to the scientific process, in that it allows one to
evaluate different hypotheses about the way data are caused . Nearly all
scientific reporting rests upon some form of model comparison, which represents a
probabilistic statement about the beliefs in one hypothesis relative to some other(s), given
observations or data. The fundamental Neyman-Pearson lemma states that the best statistic
upon which to base model selection is simply the probability of observing the data under one
model, divided by the probability under another model . This is
known as a log-likelihood ratio. In a classical (frequentist) setting, the distribution of the loglikelihood ratio, under the null hypothesis that there is no difference between models, can be
computed relatively easily for some models. Common examples include Wilk’s Lambda for
linear multivariate models and the F- and t-statistics for univariate models. In a Bayesian
setting, the equivalent to the log-likelihood ratio is the log-evidence ratio, which is commonly
known as a Bayes factor . An important property of Bayes factors are
that they can deal both with nested and non-nested models. In contrast, frequentist model
comparison can be seen as a special case of Bayes factors where, under certain hierarchical
restrictions on the models, their null distribution is readily available.
In this paper, we will consider the general case of how to use the model evidence for analyses
at the group level, without putting any constraints on the models compared. These models
can be nonlinear, possibly dynamic and, critically, do not necessarily bear a hierarchical
relationship to each other, i.e. they are not necessarily nested. The application domain we
have in mind is the comparison of dynamic causal models (DCMs) for fMRI or
electrophysiological data that have been inverted
for each subject. However, the theoretical framework described in this paper can be applied
to any model, for example when comparing different source reconstruction methods for
EEG/MEG or selecting among competing computational models of learning and decisionmaking.
This paper is structured as follows. First, to ensure this paper is self-contained, particularly
for readers without an in-depth knowledge of Bayesian statistics, we summarise the concept
of log-evidence as a measure of model goodness and review commonly used approximations
to it, i.e. the Akaike Information Criterion , the Bayesian Information
Criterion , and the negative free-energy (F). These approximations
differ in how they trade-off model fit against model complexity. Given any of these
approximations to the log-evidence, we then consider model comparison at the group level.
We address this issue both from a classical and Bayesian perspective. First, in a frequentist
setting, we consider classical inference on the log-evidences themselves by treating them as
summary statistics that reflect the evidence for each model for a given subject. Subsequently,
using a hierarchical model and variational Bayes (VB), we describe a novel technique for
inference on the conditional density of the models per se, given data (or log-evidences) from
all subjects. This rests on treating the model as a random variable and estimating the
parameters of a Dirichlet distribution, which describes the probabilities for all models
considered. These probabilities then define a multinomial distribution over model space,
allowing one to compute how likely it is that a specific model generated the data of a subject
chosen at random.
We compare and contrast these random effects approaches to the conventional use of the
group Bayes factor (GBF), an approach for model comparison at the between-subject level
that has been used extensively in previous group studies in neuroimaging. For example, the
GBF has been used frequently to decide between competing dynamic causal models fitted to
fMRI and EEG data . While the GBF is a simple and
straightforward index for model comparison at the group level, it assumes that all subjects’
data are generated by the same model (i.e. a fixed effects approach) and can be influenced
adversely by violations of this assumption.
The novel Bayesian framework presented in this paper does not suffer from these
shortcomings: it can quantify the probability that a particular model generated the data for any
randomly selected subject, relative to other models, and it is robust to the presence of outliers.
In the analyses below, we illustrate the advantages of this new approach using synthetic and
empirical data. We show that computing a conditional density of the model probabilities,
given the log-evidences for all subjects, can be superior to both the GBF and frequentist tests
applied to the log-evidences. In particular, we found that our Bayesian approach is markedly
more robust than either of the other approaches in the presence of outlying subjects.
THE MODEL EVIDENCE AND ITS APPROXIMATIONS
The model evidence
is the probability of obtaining observed data y given a
particular model m. It can be considered the holy grail of any model inversion and is
necessary to compare different models or hypotheses. The evidence for some models can be
computed relatively easily (e.g., for linear models); however, in general, computing the model
evidence entails integrating out any dependency on the model parameters ϑ :
In many cases, this integration is analytically intractable and numerically difficult to compute.
Usually, it is therefore necessary to use computationally tractable approximations to the
model evidence (or the log-evidence1). A detailed description of some of the most common
approximations is contained by Appendix A.
A systematic evaluation of the relative usefulness of different approximations to the logevidence is not at the focus of this paper and will be presented in forthcoming work. This
article deals with a different question, namely: Given a particular approximation to the logevidence and a number of inverted models, how can we infer which of several competing
models is most likely to have generated the data from a group of subjects? In other words,
how can we make inference on model space at the group level, taking into account potential
heterogeneity across the group?
INFERENCE ON MODEL SPACE
In this section, we consider inference at the group level, using subject-specific modelevidences obtained by inverting a generative model for each subject. We will first describe a
classical approach, testing the null hypothesis that there are no differences among the relative
log-evidences for various models over subjects. We then move on to more formal Bayesian
1 Due to the monotonic nature of the logarithmic function, model comparisons yield equivalent results
regardless whether one maximises the model evidence or the log-evidence. Since the latter is
numerically easier, it is usually the preferred metric.
inference on model space per se. In contrast to the GBF, which, as described above,
represents a fixed effects analysis, both the classical and Bayesian approaches are random
effects procedures and thus consider inter-subject heterogeneity explicitly.
Classical (frequentist) inference
A straightforward random effects procedure to evaluate the between-subject consistency of
evidence for one model relative to others is to use the log-evidences across subjects as the
basis for a classical log-likelihood ratio statistic, testing the null hypothesis that no single
model is better (in terms of their log-evidences) than any other. This essentially involves
performing an ANOVA, using the log-evidence as a summary statistic of model adequacy for
each subject. This ANOVA then compares the differences among models to the differences
among subjects with a classical F-statistic. If this statistic is significant one can then compare
the best model with the second best using a post hoc t-test. Effectively, this tests for
differences between models that are consistent and large in relation to differences within
models over subjects. The most general implementation would be a repeated-measures
ANOVA, where the log-evidences for the different models represent the repeated measure.
At its simplest, the comparison of just two models over subjects reduces to a simple paired ttest on the log-evidences (or a one-sample t-test on the log-evidence differences). Logevidences tend to be fairly well behaved, and the residuals of a simple ANOVA model, or
tests of normality like Kolmogorov-Smirnoff, usually indicate that parametric assumptions
are appropriate. In those cases when they are not, e.g. due to outlier subjects, one can use
robust regression methods that are less sensitive to violations of normality or non-parametric tests that do not make any distributional
assumptions (e.g. a Wilcoxon signed rank test; see one of our examples below).
This classical random effects approach is simple to implement, straightforward and easily
interpreted. In this sense, there seems little reason not to use it. However, as shown in the
empirical examples below, this type of inference can be affected markedly by group
heterogeneity, even when the distribution of log-evidence differences is normal. A more
robust analysis obtains by quantifying the density on model space itself, using a Bayesian
approach as described in the next section.
Bayesian inference on model space
Previously, we have suggested the use of a group Bayes factor (GBF) that is simply the
product of Bayes factors over N subjects . This is equivalent to a fixed
effects analysis that rests on multiplying the likelihoods over subjects to furnish the
probability of the multi-subject data, conditioned on each model:
Here, the subscripts i,j refer to the models being compared, and the bracketed superscript
refers to the n-th subject. The reason one can simply multiply the probabilities (or add the
log-evidences) is that the measured data can be regarded as conditionally independent
samples over subjects. However, this does not represent a formal evaluation of the
conditional density of a particular model given data from all subjects. Furthermore, it rests
upon a very particular generative model for group data: first, select one of K models from a
multinomial distribution and then generates data, under this model, for each of the N subjects.
This is fundamentally different from a generative model which treats subjects as random
effects: here we would select a model for each subject by sampling from a multinomial
distribution, and then generate data under that subject-specific model. The distinction
between these two generative models is illustrated graphically in Figure 1.
In short, the GBF encodes the relative probability that the data were generated by one model
relative to another, assuming the data were generated by the same model for all subjects.
What we often want, however, is the density from which models are sampled to generate
subject-specific data. In other words, we seek the conditional estimates of the multinomial
parameters, i.e. the model probabilities
, that generate switches or indicator
variables,
for any given subject
only one of these switches is equal to one; i.e.,
. These indicator variables
prescribe the model for the n-th subject; where
. In the following, we
describe a hierarchical Bayesian model that can be inverted to obtain an estimate of the
posterior density over r.
A variational Bayesian approach for inferring model probabilities
We will deal with K models with probabilities
that are described by a Dirichlet
distribution
are related to the unobserved “occurrences” of models in the
population; i.e.
α -1 can be thought of as the effective number of subjects in which model k
generated the observed data. Given the probabilities r, the distribution of the multinomial
m describes the probability that model k generated the data of subject n:
For any given subject n, we can sample from this multinomial distribution to obtain a
particular model k. The marginal likelihood of the data in the n-th subject, given this model k,
is then obtained by integrating over the parameters of the model selected
The graphical model summarising the dependencies among r, m and y as described by
Equations 3-5 is shown in Figure 1B and 1C. Our goal is to invert this hierarchical model and
estimate the posterior distribution over r.
Given the structure of the hierarchical model in Figure 1, the joint probability of the
parameters and the data y can be written as:
p y m p m r p r
The log joint probability is therefore given by
The inversion of our hierarchical model relies on the following variational Bayesian (VB)
approach in which we assume that an approximate posterior density q can be described by the
following mean-field factorisation:
I r and ( )
I r are variational energies for the mean-field partition. The mean-field
assumption in Equation 8 means that the VB posterior will only be approximate but, as we
shall see, it provides a particularly simple and intuitive algorithm (c.f. Equation 14). This
algorithm provides precise estimates of the parameters α defining the approximate Dirichlet
posterior ( )
; this was verified by comparisons with a sampling method which is
described in Appendix B.
To obtain the approximate posterior
, we have to do two things: first,
I m and second, determine the normalising constant or partition function for
, which renders
a probability density. Making use of the log joint
probability in Equation 7 and omitting terms that do not depend on m, the variational energy
( )ln ( , ,
p y r m dr
and Ψ is the digamma function2
The next step is to obtain the approximate posterior,
is our (normalized)
posterior belief that model k generated the data from subject n, i.e.
Equation 9 tells us that
is the equivalent (non-normalized) belief and
nu is the partition function for
that ensures that the posterior probabilities sum to one.
We now repeat the above procedure but this time for the approximate posterior over r. By
substituting in the log joint probability from Equation 7 and omitting terms that do not depend
on r, we have
2 See Appendix B in Bishop concerning the use of the digamma function in Equation 10.
( )log ( , ,
p y r m dm
is the expected number of subjects whose data we believe were generated
by model k. Now, from Equation 8 we have log ( )
and from Equation 3 we see
that the log of a Dirichlet density is given by ln
comparing terms we see that the approximate posterior ( )
In short, Equation 13 simply adds the ‘data counts’, β , to the `prior counts’,
α . This is an
example of a free-form VB approximation, where the optimal form of the approximate
posterior (in this case a Dirichlet), has been derived rather than assumed before-hand . It should be stressed, however, that due
to the mean-field assumption used by our VB approach (see Equation 8), ( )
q r is only an
approximate posterior and the true posterior distribution
p r y does not have the exact
form of a Dirichlet distribution.
The above equations can be implemented as an optimisation algorithm which updates
estimates of α iteratively until convergence. By combining Equations 11, 12 and 13 we get
the following pseudo-code of a simple algorithm that gives us the parameters of the
conditional density we seek, i.e. ( )
Until convergence
We make the usual assumption that, a priori, no models have been “seen” (i.e. the Dirichlet
).3 Critically, this scheme requires only the log-evidences over models
and subjects (c.f. Equation 11):
Using the Dirichlet density ( | ; )
p r y α for model comparison
After the above optimization of the Dirichlet parameters, α, the Dirichlet density
can be used for model comparisons at the group level. There are several ways to report this
comparison that result in equivalent model rankings. The simplest option is to report the
estimates of the Dirichlet parameter estimates α . Another possibility is to use those
estimates to compute the expected multinomial parameters
and thus the expected
likelihood of obtaining the k-th model, i.e.
, for any randomly
selected subject: 4
A third option is to use the conditional model probability
p r y α to quantify an
exceedance probability, i.e. our belief that a particular model k is more likely than any other
model (of the K models tested), given the group data:
The exceedance probabilities
ϕ sum to one over all models tested. They are particularly
intuitive when comparing two models (or model subsets, see below). In this case, because the
3 Note that this choice of Dirichlet prior is a "flat" prior, assigning uniform probabilities to all models.
In contrast, a Dirichlet prior with elements below unity results in a highly concave probability density
that concentrates the probability mass around zero and one, respectively.
4 For the special case of "drawing" a single "sample" (model), the multinomial distribution of models
reduces to (
. Therefore, for any given subject,
represents the conditional
expectation that the k-th model generated the subject’s data.
conditional probabilities of the models
also sum to one, the exceedance probability of
one model, compared to another, can be written as
The analyses of empirical data below include several examples where two models are
compared; the associated exceedance probabilities are shown in Figures 3, 6, 9 and 13.
Either the Dirichlet parameter estimates α, the conditional expectations of model probabilities
or the exceedance probabilities
ϕ can be used to rank models at the group level. In the
next section, we present several practical examples of our method, applying it to both
synthetic and empirical data. In this paper, we focus on comparing two models (or two model
subsets) and largely rely on exceedance probabilities when discussing the results of our
analyses. However, for each analysis we also report the estimates of α and the conditional
expectations of model probabilities,
; these are shown in the figures.
Model space partitioning
A particular strength of the approach presented in this paper is that it can not only be used to
compare specific models, but also to compare particular classes or subsets of models,
resulting from a partition of model space. For example, one may want to compute the
probability that a specific model attribute, say the presence vs. absence of a particular
connection in a DCM, improves or reduces model performance, regardless of any other
differences among the models considered. This type of inference rests on comparing two (or
more) subsets of model space, pooling information over all models in these subsets. This
effectively removes uncertainty about any aspect of model structure, other than the attribute
of interest (which defines the partition). Heuristically, this sort of analysis can be considered
a Bayesian analogue of tests for "main effects" in classical ANOVA.
Within our framework this type of analysis can be performed by exploiting the agglomerative
property of the Dirichlet distribution. Generally, for any partition of model space into J
disjoint subsets,
N , this property ensures that
In other words, once we have estimates of the Dirichlet parameters
α for all K models, it is
easy to evaluate the relative importance of different model subspaces: For any given partition
of model space, a new Dirichlet density reflecting this partition can be defined by simply
α for all models k belonging to the same subset. The resulting Dirichlet can then be
used to compare different subsets of model space in exactly the same way as one compares
individual models, e.g. using exceedance probabilities. An example of this application is
shown in Figures 12 and 13.
In what follows, we compare classical inference, the GBF (fixed effects) and inference on
model space (random effects) using both synthetic and real data. These data have been
previously published and have been analysed in various ways, including group level model
inference using GBFs .
Synthetic data: nonlinear vs. bilinear modulation
To demonstrate the face validity of our method, we used simulated data, where the true model
was known. Specifically, we used one of the synthetic data sets described by Stephan et al.
 , consisting of twenty synthetic BOLD time-series that were generated using a threearea nonlinear DCM with fixed parameters and adding Gaussian observation noise to achieve
a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of two. Each time-series consisted of 100 data points that were
obtained by sampling the model output at a frequency of 1 Hz over a period of 100 seconds.
For each time-series, we fitted (i) a nonlinear DCM with the same model structure as the
model that generated the data ("correct model" in Fig. 2, model m1), and (ii) a second DCM
that was similar in structure but included a bilinear (instead of a nonlinear) modulatory
influence ("incorrect model" in Fig. 2, model m2). Using the negative free-energy
approximation to the log-evidence, the differences in log-evidences for all twenty time-series
are plotted in the lower part of Fig. 2. It can be seen that in 17 out of 20 cases the nonlinear
model was correctly identified as the more likely model. The overall GBF (9 × 1014) was also
clearly in favour of the correct model.
Here, we revisit this synthetic data set using random effects BMS procedures. We first used
classical inference, applying a paired t-test to the log-evidences of the two models. This test
rejected the null hypothesis of no difference in model goodness (t = 4.615, df = 19, p < 10-4).
Applying the novel hierarchical BMS approach gave an even clearer (and arguably also more
useful) answer: the exceedance probability φ1, i.e. the probability of m1 being a more likely
model than m2, was 100% (Figure 3). In other words, using the exceedance probability φ as a
criterion, the correct model was identified perfectly, given all twenty data sets and the chosen
level of noise. To further corroborate this result, we compared the result from our VB
algorithm to an independent method which estimates the parameters α by sampling from the
approximate Dirichlet posterior
. This comparison showed that the VB
estimate of α resulted in an estimate of the negative free-energy
was consistent with the results from the sampling approach (Figure 4). This provides an
additional validation of our VB technique. We used this sampling approach to verify the
correctness of our VB estimates in all subsequent analyses.
It should be noted that this simulation study concerned the extreme case that only one model
had generated all data, i.e. r1=100% and r2=0%, making it easy to intuitively understand the
performance of the proposed model selection procedure. However, this simulation did not
probe the robustness of our method when randomly sampling from a heterogeneous
population of subjects whose data had been generated by different models. We will revisit
this scenario in a later section of this paper once we have introduced and compared two
alternative DCMs of inter-hemispheric interactions using empirical data.
Comparing different six-area DCMs of the ventral visual stream
As a first empirical application, we investigated a case we had encountered in our previous
research and which had actually triggered our interest in developing
more powerful group level inference about models. This model comparison concerned DCMs
describing alternative mechanisms of inter-hemispheric integration in terms of contextdependent modulation of connections. In one of the analyses of the original report , competing DCMs had been constructed for the ventral stream of the visual
system by systematically changing which of the experimentally controlled conditions
modulated the intra- and/or the inter-hemispheric connections.
First, we focused on the six-area model of the ventral stream, comprising the lingual gyrus
(LG), middle occipital gyrus (MOG) and fusiform gyrus (FG) in both hemispheres, and revisit
the comparison of the best two models as indexed by the GBF. In the first model, m1, interhemispheric connections were modulated by a letter decision task, but conditional on the
visual field of stimulus presentation (LD|VF); intra-hemispheric connections were modulated
by LD alone (see right side of Figure 5). In the second model, m2, these modulations were
reversed: inter-hemispheric connections were modulated by LD and intra-hemispheric
connections were modulated by LD|VF (see left side of Figure 5). The distribution of logevidence differences is shown in the centre of Figure 5: Although m1 was robustly superior in 11 of the
12 subjects, a single outlier was so extreme that the GBF indicated an overall superiority of
m2 (GBF=15 in favour of m2). In contrast, model comparison using our novel Bayesian
method was not affected by this outlier: the exceedance probability in favour of m1 was very
high (φ1 = 99.7%), and the conditional expectation
that m1 generated the data of any
randomly selected subject was 84.3% (Figure 6). The estimates of our VB method were
confirmed by the sampling approach (Figure 7).
For comparison, we also applied frequentist statistics to the log-evidences as described above.
The single outlier subject made the distribution of the log-evidence differences non-normal
(Kolmogorov-Smirnov test: p < 10-7, DN = 0.822), and thus prevented detection of a
significant difference between the two models by a one-tailed paired t-test (t = 0.073, df = 11,
p = 0.471). Given this deviation from normality, we applied a nonparametric Wilcoxon
signed rank test which makes no distributional assumptions; this test was indeed able to find a
significant difference between the models (p = 0.034).
Comparing different four-area DCMs of the ventral visual stream
Next, we investigated a variant of the previous case where the distribution of log-evidences
across subjects was more heterogeneous. This model comparison was essentially identical to
the previous one, except that the models in question only contained four areas (LG and FG in
both hemispheres), instead of six. Visual inspection of the distribution of log-evidence
differences (Figure 8) shows that the same subject as in the previous example favoured m2,
albeit far less strongly; in addition three more subjects showed evidence in favour of m2,
albeit only weakly. Given this constellation, the original analysis by Stephan et al. 
only found a relatively weak superiority of m1 (GBF = 8). In contrast, the VB method gave a
exceedance probability of φ1 = 92.8% in favour of m1, indicating more clearly that m1 is a
superior model (Figure 9). As above, the estimates of our VB method were confirmed by
sampling (Figure 10).
When comparing this result to the frequentist random effects approach, a one-tailed paired ttest was unable to detect a significant difference between the two models (t = 0.165, df = 11, p
= 0.436). In contrast to the previous example, this failure was not due to outlier-induced
deviations from normality: a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test applied to the log-evidences was
unable to reject the null hypothesis that they were normally distributed (p = 0.743). Here, the
between-subject variability, while in accordance with normality assumptions, was simply too
large to reject the null hypothesis with the classical t-test. A nonparametric Wilcoxon signed
rank test did not fare any better (p = 0.266).
Synthetic data: randomly sampling from a heterogeneous population
In a second simulation study, we examined the robustness of our method when randomly
sampling from a heterogeneous population of subjects. Specifically, we dealt with a
population in which 70% of subjects showed brain responses as generated by model m1
shown in Figure 8, whereas brain activity in the remaining 30% of the population was
generated by model m2. We randomly sampled 20 subjects from this population and
generated synthetic fMRI data by integrating the state equations of the associated models with
fixed parameters and inputs5 and adding Gaussian observation noise to achieve an SNR of
two. Each synthetic data set had exactly the same structure as the empirical data described in
the previous section (700 data points, TR = 3 s). Both m1 and m2 were then fitted to all 20
synthetic data sets, and the resulting log-evidences were used to perform both fixed effects
BMS and random effects BMS, using the VB method described in this paper. This sampling
and data generation procedure was repeated 20 times, resulting in a total of 400 generated
data sets and 800 fitted models. For each of the 20 sets of 20 subjects, we computed the
different indices provided by random effects BMS (i.e., α , r , ϕ ) and fixed effects BMS
(log GBF). The means of these indices are plotted in Figure 11, together with 95%
confidence intervals (CI). If our random effects BMS method were perfect in uncovering the
underlying structure of the population we sampled from, one would expect to find the
following average estimates: (i)
for the Dirichlet
parameters, (ii)
for the posterior expectations of model probabilities,
as exceedance probabilities (note that the exceedance probability is
not the posterior model probability itself, but a statement of belief about the posterior
probability of one model being higher than the posterior probability of any other model). The
actual estimates of the BMS indices for the simulated data were (i)
(CI: 14.1 –
(CI: 5.3 – 7.9), (ii)
(CI: 0.64 – 0.76) and
5 The coupling parameters of all endogenous connections were set to 0.1 s-1, except for the inhibitory
self-connections whose strengths were set to -1 s-1. Furthermore, the strengths of all modulatory and
driving inputs were set to 0.3 s-1. The input functions were the same as in the empirical dataset
described above.
– 0.36), and (iii)
(CI: 0.83 – 0.96) and
(CI: 0.04 – 0.17). For
comparison, the average log GBF in favour of model m1 was 548.9 (CI: 446.2 – 651.6).
In conclusion, while our random effects BMS method provides a slightly overconservative
estimate of exceedance probabilities for the chosen sample size, it shows very good
performance overall, providing BMS indices that accurately reflect the structure of the
population we sampled from. In particular, the Dirichlet parameters and posterior
expectations of model probabilities (which represent the expected probability of obtaining the
k-th model when randomly selecting a subject) were estimated very precisely. This result not
only validates the results obtained for the empirical data set described above, but
demonstrates more generally that our BMS procedure is robust when randomly sampling
from a heterogeneous population of subjects.
Comparing different hemodynamic models by model space partitioning
Finally, we revisited a comparison of DCMs, which were identical in network architecture
(the same as m1 in Figure 8) but differed in the hemodynamic forward model employed
 . A three-factor design was used to construct 8 different models: (i)
nonlinear vs. linear BOLD equations, (ii) classical vs. revised coefficients of the BOLD
equation, and (iii) free vs. fixed parameter (ε) for the ratio of intra- and extravascular signal
changes. In the original analysis by Stephan et al. , the GBF (based on the negative
free-energy approximation) was used to establish the best among the eight models. The best
model, abbreviated as RBMN(ε) in Figure 12, was characterised by (i) a nonlinear BOLD
equation, (ii) revised coefficients of the BOLD equation, and (iii) free ε. The difference of its
summed log-evidence compared to the second-best model, its linear counterpart RBML(ε),
was 5.26, corresponding to a GBF of 192 in favour of the nonlinear model. The summed logevidences for all 8 models are shown in Figure 12A.
Here, we demonstrate how one can use the agglomerative property of the Dirichlet
distribution (Equation 18) to go beyond selective comparisons of specific models and instead
examine the relative importance of particular model attributes or model subspaces. Given the
three factors above, we focussed on the importance of nonlinearities: what is the posterior
probability that nonlinear BOLD equations improve the model compared to linear BOLD
equations, regardless of any other dimensions of model space (i.e., classical vs. revised
coefficients and free vs. fixed ε)?
Following Equation 18, this question is addressed easily. In a first step, the VB procedure
was applied to the entire set of eight models, yielding posterior estimates of the Dirichlet
parameters
(see Figure 12B). Subsequently, a new Dirichlet density reflecting the
partition of model space into nonlinear and linear subspaces was computed by summing
separately for the nonlinear and linear models (Figure 12C; for simplicity the ordering of the
models in Figure 12 has been chosen such that the first four models are nonlinear [left of the
dashed line], whereas the last four models are linear [right of the dashed line]) The resulting
Dirichlet can then be used to compare nonlinear and linear models in exactly the same way as
one compares two models; e.g. using exceedance probabilities. Figure 13 shows the result of
this comparison: the probability that nonlinear hemodynamic models are better than linear
models, regardless of other model attributes, was φ1 = 98.6%.
For comparison, we also used classical inference, applying a repeated-measure ANOVA (with
Greenhouse-Geisser correction for non-sphericity) to the log-evidences of the eight models.
The result of this test was compatible with the above analysis, rejecting the null hypothesis
that linear and nonlinear models were equal in log-evidence (F = 24.330, df = 1,11, p <
Discussion
In this paper, we have introduced a novel approach for model selection at the group level.
Provisional experience suggests that this approach represents a more powerful way of
quantifying one's belief that a particular model is more likely than any other at the group
level, relative to the conventional GBF. Critically, this variational Bayesian approach rests on
treating the model switches
m as a random variable, within a full hierarchical model for
multi-subject data (see Figure 1), and thus accommodates random effects at the betweensubject level. Notably, this inference procedure needs only the log-evidences for each model
and subject.
In the empirical examples above, we showed two cases where frequentist tests failed to
indicate clear differences between models, while the novel Bayesian approach succeeded. In
one case (the six-area ventral stream model), a strong outlier subject made the distribution of
log-evidences non-normal and thus rendered the t-test (but not a non-parametric test) unable
to find a significant difference between models. In another case (the four-area ventral stream
model), the distribution of log-evidences was normal, but with a between-subject variance
that was big enough to prevent significant results by frequentist tests (parametric or nonparametric). It should be noted, however, that the frequentist and Bayesian approaches do not
test the same thing. The frequentist approach tries to reject the null hypothesis that there are
no differences in log-evidence across models. In contrast, the Bayesian approach estimates
the models' probabilities, given the data, and enables inference in terms of exceedance
probabilities: the exceedance probability
ϕ is the probability that a given model k is more
likely than any other model (of the K models tested). Furthermore, we can compute the
posterior probabilities of the models themselves:
is the expected probability that the k-th
model generated the data for a randomly selected subject.
The exceedance probability of a model differs in a subtle but important way from the
conventional posterior probability of a model in Bayesian model comparison: Because we
have a hierarchical model, the posterior probability that any particular model caused the data
from a subject chosen at random, is itself a random variable (r in the derivations above). This
means that the exceedance probability is a statement of belief about the posterior probability,
not the posterior probability itself. So, for example, when we say that the exceedance
probability is 98%, we mean that we can be 98% confident that the favoured model has a
greater posterior probability than any other model tested. This is not the same as saying that
the posterior probability of the favoured model is 98%. The advantage of using exceedance
probabilities is that they are sensitive to the confidence in the posterior probability and easily
interpretable (since they sum to unity over all models tested).
As can be seen from Equations 9 and 11, our method is sensitive to both the distribution and
the magnitude of log-evidence differences. The same is true for frequentist tests applied to
log-evidence differences, e.g. t-tests. However, a critical difference between these frequentist
approaches and the VB method is that for the latter the influence of outliers has a natural
bound. There is a simple and intuitive reason for this nice property of the VB method: if we
keep increasing the log-evidence of model k for a particular subject n, our posterior belief that
k generated the data of subject n (that is,
; see Eq. 11) will asymptote to one.
Once it has reached unity (which corresponds to complete certainty), any further increase in
the log-evidence of model k for subject n has no further influence. This is because the model
probabilities
distributed
approximate
, where βk represents the conditional expectation of the number of
subjects whose data we believe were generated by model k and is simply the sum of the
subject-specific posterior probabilities that model k generated their individual data. In
contrast, frequentist tests like t-tests do not show this bounded behaviour with regard to
outliers. This is because the sample variance increases monotonically with the magnitude of
the outlier, leading to a monotonic decrease of the t-statistic. We demonstrated this difference
between frequentist approaches and our VB method by two empirical examples with outliers.
Another important advantage of the method proposed here is that it can go beyond the
selective comparison of specific models and enables one to assess the importance of changes
along any specific dimension of model space. This type of inference, which could be seen as
a Bayesian analogue of testing for "main effects" in classical ANOVA, rests on comparing
two (or more) subsets of models (i.e., model subspaces). These partitions would typically
reflect those components of model structure that one seeks inference about; e.g. whether a
specific connection should be included in the model or not, whether a particular connection is
modulated by one experimental condition or another, or whether certain effects are linear or
nonlinear. We used this approach to demonstrate that hemodynamic models with nonlinear
BOLD equations are superior to those with linear ones. This result is in accordance with
previous studies that highlight the importance of nonlinearities in the BOLD signal . However, in these earlier studies, this conclusion was based
on comparisons of specific and single instances of linear and nonlinear hemodynamic models.
The inferential advance achieved by the present method is that arbitrarily large set of models
can be considered together, allowing one to integrate out uncertainty over any aspect of model
structure, other than the one of interest.
At first glance, it may appear surprising that the hierarchical model described above has been
introduced as a generative model for the data y, given its inversion does not need the data but
the model evidence,
. This apparent contradiction could be resolved by noting that
the log-evidence is a function of the data and represents a sufficient ‘summary statistic’. To
generate data, one would need to introduce the model parameters
ϑ to the graphical model
shown in Figure 1B,C. In the context of DCM, for example, once one has drawn a model k
from the multinomial distribution for a specific subject n (i.e., generated a label mnk = 1), one
could generate fMRI time-series by drawing model parameters
ϑ from their prior
distributions and adding some observation error. However, because the model evidence
results from integrating out the influence of the parameters
ϑ on the data y (see
Equation 1), this component is unnecessary during inversion of the generative model.
One property of the method proposed in this paper is that for each subject n our posterior
beliefs about model k having generated their data sum to one over all models that are
considered, that is
(c.f. Equation 11). In other words, our posterior belief
about which model k is most likely to have generated the data for a given subject n is a
function of the entire set of models considered. This means that reducing or extending model
space can change our inference about which model is most likely at the group level.
Although this is a fairly trivial corollary, it should not be forgotten when using this method in
practice. In short, one should infer the most likely model by comparing the entire set of
plausible models at once, instead of selectively analysing subparts of model space.
To our knowledge, there has been relatively little work on group level methods for Bayesian
model comparison so far. In addition to the GBF , we had previously
suggested a metric called the "positive evidence ratio" .
Based on the conventional definition of "positive evidence" as a Bayes factor larger than three
 , the PER is simply the number of subjects where there is positive (or
stronger) evidence for model 1 divided by the number of subjects with positive (or stronger)
evidence for model 2. While the PER is insensitive to outliers, it is also insensitive to the
magnitude of the differences across subjects. More importantly, however, it is only a
descriptive index that does not allow for probabilistic inference in a straightforward manner.
In the approach described in this paper, the sufficient statistics for the model frequencies are
the posterior estimates of the Dirichlet parameters (α). When the differences in model
evidences are very strong, these simply boil down to the number of subjects with positive
(and more) evidence in favour of a particular model. In that case where for each subject there
is one highly superior model, the expected model frequencies become identical to the PER.
From this perspective, the present approach can be considered a (probabilistic) generalisation
of the PER.
The only other work on group level methods for Bayesian model comparison that we are
aware of is a recent paper by Li et al. who suggested a "group-level BIC score". This
score is derived by summing the BIC for each model across subjects. As explained earlier in
this paper, the BIC is a well-known approximation to the log-evidence . The
group-level BIC score by Li et al. thus approximates the sum of log-evidences and
simply corresponds to the log GBF. Effectively, the analysis by Li et al. thus used a
fixed effects analysis across models that is formally identical to that used in reports of DCM
studies .
Finally, it should be noted that a random effects model selection approach is not necessarily
preferable to a fixed effects approach. The choice between fixed and random effects BMS
depends on the specific scientific question addressed. In the context of basic mechanisms that
are unlikely to differ across subjects, the conventional GBF is both sufficient and appropriate.
For example, it is unlikely that subjects differ with regard to basic physiological mechanisms
such as the involvement of sodium ion channels in action potential generation or the presence
of certain types of connections in the brain. In this context, it is perfectly tenable to assume
that all subjects generate data under the same model; and the data from all subjects can be
pooled to select this model in the usual way. In contrast, whenever subjects can exhibit
different models or functional architectures, the random effects BMS technique presented in
this paper is a more appropriate method. For example, there is evidence that many higher
cognitive functions can rely on more than one neurobiological system .
Also, it is likely that in some mental diseases, e.g. schizophrenia, patients with identical
symptoms show heterogeneity with regard to the pathophysiological processes involved
 .
In summary, in contrast to the GBF and other established approaches for group-level model
comparison, the approach suggested in this paper rests on a hierarchical model for multi-
subject data that accommodates random effects at the between-subject level (Figure 1) and
thus provides a generic framework for hypothesis testing. We expect this method to be a
useful tool for group studies, not only in the context of dynamic causal modelling, but also for
a range of other modelling endeavours; for example, comparing different source
reconstruction methods for EEG/MEG at the group level , or selecting among competing computational models of
learning and decision-making, given data from a group of subjects .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust (KES, WDP, RJM, KJF) and the University
Research Priority Program “Foundations of Human Social Behaviour” at the University of
Zurich (KES). JD is funded by Marie Curie Fellowship. We are very grateful to Marcia
Bennett for helping prepare this manuscript, to the FIL Methods Group, particularly Justin
Chumbley, for useful discussions and to Jon Roiser and Dominik Bach for helpful comments
on practical applications. Finally, we would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for
their constructive comments which have greatly helped to improve this paper.
Software note
The method described in this paper is freely available to the community as part of the opensource
Statistical
Parametric
 
APPENDIX A: APPROXIMATIONS TO THE LOG MODEL EVIDENCE
With the exception of some special cases (e.g., linear models), the integral expression for the
model evidence (Equation 1) is analytically intractable and numerically difficult to compute.
Under these circumstances, people generally adopt a bound approach where, instead of
evaluating the integral above, one optimises a bound on the integral using iterative sampling
or analytic techniques. The most common approach of the latter kind is variational Bayes. In
this framework, one posits an approximating conditional or posterior density on the unknown
parameters,
, and optimises this density with respect to a free-energy bound, F, on the
log-evidence:6
Because of its relation to variational calculus and Gibb's free-energy in statistical physics, this
free-energy bound F is often referred to as the "negative free-energy" or "variational freeenergy" . Its second term is the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the approximating
posterior density
and the true posterior
, which is always positive (or zero
becomes identical to
). By iterative optimisation, the negative freeenergy F is made an increasingly tighter lower bound on the desired log-evidence,
; as a consequence, the KL divergence between the approximating and true
posterior is minimised. There are a number of approximations that are used when specifying
the form of
. These include the ubiquitous mean-field approximation, where various
sets of unknown parameters are assumed to be independent, so that the conditional density
can be factorised. A common example here would be a bipartition into the regression
coefficients of a general linear model and the parameters controlling random effects or error
variance. Another common approximation within the mean-field framework is to assume
that the conditional density is multivariate Gaussian. This is also known as the Laplace
approximation, a full treatment of which can be found in Friston et al. .
For any approximation to the conditional density, the free-energy bound on the log-evidence
can be re-written as a mixture of accuracy and complexity:
6 Because of the monotonic nature of the logarithm, one can maximise the model evidence or the logevidence; the latter, however, is numerically more convenient to deal with. Please note that for
simplicity and clarity we have removed constant terms from the definition of all approximations to the
log-evidence discussed in this paper.
The accuracy (first term) is simply the log-likelihood of the data expected under the
conditional density. The complexity (second term) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the approximating posterior and prior density. In other words, it reflects the amount
of information obtained about the model parameters, from the data. Clearly, model
complexity will increase with the number of parameters (provided that they can be estimated
precisely and that they diverge from their prior values). However, model complexity depends
on factors other than the mere number of parameters, e.g. how much these parameters are
dependent on each other, both a priori and a posteriori. This is seen easily under the Laplace
approximation, i.e. assuming that the conditional density is multivariate Gaussian. In this
case, the complexity can be written as follows :
are the determinants of the prior and posterior covariance matrices and
μ are the prior and posterior means, respectively. The first term shows that the
penalty conveyed by model complexity increases the more independent the parameters are a
priori;7 this is equivalent to saying that the penalty increases with the effective degrees of
freedom of the model. Conversely, additional parameters whose effects are redundant in
relation to existing parameters do not increase model complexity. The second term says that
complexity decreases with the degree of independence that the parameters have a posteriori.
This accords with the general notion that the parameter estimates of a good model should be
as precise and uncorrelated as possible. The final term shows that the complexity increases
with the distance between the prior and posterior means. In other words, model goodness
decreases if one makes bad assumptions about the parameter values a priori (i.e., using
suboptimal priors), thus forcing the posterior estimates to diverge markedly from the prior
In addition to the free-energy bound approximation, there are two other commonly used
approximations to the log-evidence, which appeal to the behaviour of the complexity term as
7 It is helpful to note that the determinant of a covariance matrix can be treated as a measure of the
volume spanned by a set of vectors . This volume increases with the degree of
independence amongst the vectors.
the number of observations becomes infinite. We will call these limit-approximations. These
include the AIC and BIC . The key difference between the free-energy
bound and these limit approximations is that the latter assume a much simpler approximation
to the complexity. Under Gaussian assumptions about the error:
It can be seen that the AIC and BIC approximate the complexity with the number of
parameters or the number of parameters p, scaled by the log of the number of observations, n.
These can be useful approximations when it is difficult to invert the model or optimise the
free-energy bound, because one only needs to compute the accuracy or fit of the model to
provide an estimate of the log-evidence. However, comparing the complexity terms in these
expressions to Equation A.3, shows that both the AIC and BIC will fail in various situations.
An obvious example is redundant parameterisation; the true complexity will not change when
we add a parameter whose effect is identical to another parameter in measurement space.
While the free-energy bound would take this redundancy into account, retaining the same
complexity, the AIC and BIC approximations would indicate that complexity has increased.
In practice, many models show partial dependencies amongst parameters, meaning that AIC
and BIC routinely over-estimate the effect that adding or removing parameters has on model
complexity.
APPENDIX B: SAMPLING APPROACH TO ESTIMATING THE DIRICHLET
PARAMETERS
In this appendix, we introduce a sampling procedure that provides an approximation to the
negative free energy
which is independent from the VB approach
described in the main text. This sampling procedure can be used to demonstrate the
correctness of the proposed VB procedure by verifying that the algorithm described by
Equation 14 provides an accurate solution for the variational energies in the mean-field
approximation of Equation 8. In this context, it should be noted that we are assuming that the
exact posterior
p r y can be adequately approximated by a Dirichlet density
therefore, the procedure proposed in this appendix samples from the approximate posterior
q r , not from the exact posterior ( | )
We seek the posterior density on the multinomial parameters
that generate
switches or indicator variables,
, prescribing the n-th subject’s model; i.e.,
. To simplify things, we will assume an approximating form,
this density, with sufficient statistics α . Specifically, we assume a Dirichlet density
where the expected multinomial parameters (i.e., conditional expectation that the k-th model
will be selected at random) are
Note that a Dirichlet form ensures that ∑
1. The normalising or partition coefficient in
We can now construct a free-energy bound in the usual way, assuming Dirichlet priors
(which would usually be
unless one had prior beliefs about which model is
more likely to be selected):
This can be decomposed into three terms:
The last two terms only depend on the priors
and the parameters α of the Dirichlet and
can thus be computed directly. The first term can be computed numerically by drawing a
large number of samples from
. In this paper, we gridded the possible range for
values of αk, i.e. [1 ... K+1], using a bin size of 0.1, and then drew 1,000 samples per bin,
exploiting a relationship between Gamma and Dirichlet distributions described by Ferguson
 . Given those samples, the Dirichlet parameters are those that maximise F:
As a final note, we would like to point out that one could also use Jensen’s inequality to
simplify the first term in B.5:
This effectively provides a lower-bound on a lower-bound, which can be simplified to give
Given the priors,
α , and the log-evidences ln (
for each subject and model,
F~ could be used as an alternative method to estimate the Dirichlet parameters α using
conventional nonlinear optimisation. In practice, however, we have found the VB method
described in the main text to be superior.