UC San Diego
UC San Diego Previously Published Works
Evaluating quality of compressed medical images: SNR, subjective rating, and diagnostic
 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 82(6)
Cosman, P. C.
Gray, R. M.
Olshen, R. A.
Publication Date
1994-06-01
10.1109/5.286196
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
Evaluating Quality of Compressed
Medical Images: SNR, Subjective Rating,
and Diagnostic Accuracy
PAMELA C. COSMAN, MEMBER, IEEE, ROBERT M. GRAY, FELLOW, IEEE,
AND RICHARD A. OLSHEN
Invited Paper
Compressing a digital image can facilitate its transmission,
storage, and processing. As radiology departments become
increasingly digital, the quantities of their imaging data are
forcing consideration of compression in picture archiving and
communication systems (PACS) and evolving teleradiology
systems. Significant compression is achievable only by lossy
algorithms, which do not permit the exact recovery of the original
image. This loss of information renders compression and other
image processing algorithms controversial because of the potential
loss of quality and consequent problems regarding liability, but the
technology must be considered because the alternative is delay,
damage, and loss in the communication and recall of the images.
How does one decide if an image is good enough for a specific
application, such as diagnosis, recall, archival, or educational
use? We describe three approaches to the measurement of medical
image quality: signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), subjective rating, and
diagnostic accuracy. We compare and contrast these measures
in a particular application, consider in some depth recently
developed methods for determining diagnostic accuracy of lossy
compressed medical images, and examine how good the easily
obtainable distortion measures like SNR are at predicting the
more expensive subjective and diagnostic ratings. The examples
are of medical images compressed using predictive pruned
tree-structured vector quantization, but the methods can be used
for any digital image processing that produces images different
from the original for evaluation.
I. COMPRESSION AND QUALITY
MEASUREMENT
The overall goal of compression is to represent an image
with the smallest possible number of bits, thereby speeding
transmission and minimizing storage requirements. Alter-
Manuscript received November 1, 1993; revised January 15, 1994.
This work was supported by the National Institutes for Health under
Grants CA49697-02 and 5 R01 CA55325, and by the National Science
Foundation under Grant DMS-9101528.
P. C. Cosman and R. M. Gray aie with the Information Systems
Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-4055, USA.
R. A. Olshen is with the Division of Biostatistics, Stanford University
School of Medicine, and the Department of Statistics, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
IEEE Log Number 9400793.
natively, the goal is to achieve the best possible fidelity
for an available communcation or storage bit rate capacity.
A compression system typically consists of one or more
of the following operations, which may be combined with
each other or with additional signal processing:
Sampling: The intensity of an analog image is mea-
sured on a regular grid of points called picture elements
or pixels.
Signal decomposition: The image is decomposed into
several images for separate processing, typically by
linear transformation by a Fourier or discrete cosine
transform or by filtering with a subband or wavelet
filter bank. The goal is to concentrate energy in a
few coefficients, to reduce correlation, or to provide
a useful data structure.
Quantization: Analog or high-rate digital pixels are
converted into a relatively small number of bits. This
operation is nonlinear and noninvertible; it is “lossy.”
The conversion can operate on individual pixels (scalar
quantization) or groups of pixels (vector quantization).
Quantization can include throwing away some of the
components of the signal decomposition step.
Lossfess compression: Further compression is achieved
by an invertible (lossless, entropy) code such as Huff-
man, Lempel-Ziv, or arithmetic code. The idea here is
to assign codewords with a few bits to likely symbols
and codewords with more bits to unlikely symbols so
that the average number of bits is minimized.
Decompression reverses the above process to the extent
possible. Shannon’s data transmission theorem and
experience argue that a good compression system can be de-
signed by focusing separately on each individual operation,
although simpler or better implementations may be obtained
by combining some operations. The code rate or bit rate of
the compression system is defined as the average number of
0018-9219/94$04.00 0 1994 IEEE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
bits produced per image pixel. If the original image has 12
bits per pixel (bpp) and the compression algorithm has rate
R bpp, then the compression ratio is 12 : R. Compression
ratios must always be taken with a grain of salt, however, as
they are strongly dependent on the image type, the original
bit rate, and the sampling density.
Lossless coding techniques are well understood, readily
available - , and typically yield compression ratios of
2: 1 to 3: 1 on still-frame medical images. Although scientists
and physicians prefer to work with uncorrupted data, the
modest compression offered by lossless coding is often
inadequate for storage or communication facilities. Lossy
coding, though it does not permit perfect reconstruction
of the original image, can provide excellent quality at
a fraction of the original bit rate , . Lossy cod-
ing is unavoidable if the original image is analog, as
is ordinary X-ray film. An advantage of a well-designed
lossy compression system is that it works to minimize
information loss or image distortion for a given allotted
storage space or communication rate. When bits are scarce,
good compression schemes devote the available bits to
the information of greatest importance. As a result, lossy
compression schemes are capable of enhancing specific
structures of importance to the viewer.
Utility depends critically on the quality of the processed
images, but quality is itself an attribute with many possible
definitions and interpretations, depending on the use to
which the images will be put. A "good" processed image
might be one that is perceptually pleasing or useful in a
specific application. No single approach to quality mea-
surement has gained universal acceptance, but three general
approaches have come to dominate:
Computable objective distortion measures such as
mean squared error or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR),
subjective quality as measured by psychophysical tests
or questionnaires with numerical ratings, and
simulation and statistical analysis of a specific applica-
tion of the images, e.g., diagnostic accuracy in medical
images measured by clinical simulation and statistical
The intent of this paper is to compare and contrast
these three types of distortion measures in a particular
application, lossy compression of medical images. The
application is a controversial one; the concern is often
expressed that radiologists will never accept lossy com-
pressed images because of liability issues or because of
fear of impaired quality. Many in the medical image
compression community argue that lossy compression is
both necessary and helpful in the long run - . It is
necessary in order to preserve rapid access for follow-up
and recall studies because the overwhelming quantity of
medical image data requires the remote storage of hard-
copy films, which frequently results in loss or damage and
always requires significant time to locate and transfer. It
is helpful because it permits efficient storage and rapid
communication of images among hospitals, clinics, and
radiologists' offices and homes. Image communication can
be within a local-area network or to remote locations using
satellite, ISDN, or ordinary phone links. The issue is not so
much whether lossy compression should be used, but rather
how many bits are needed to ensure sufficient accuracy for a
particular use. To answer this question one needs acceptable
quantitative measures of image quality and protocols for
careful studies of the tradeoffs of quality and bit rate in
specific applications.
11. IMAGE DISTORTION
AND QUALITY
A. Average Distortion and SNR
Suppose that one has a system in which an input pixel
block or vector X = (XO, XI . . . , Xk-I) is reproduced
as X = ( X o , X I , . . . , X k - 1 ) and that one has a measure
d(X,X) of distortion or cost resulting when X is repro-
duced as X . A natural measure of the quality or fidelity
(actually the lack of quality or fidelity) is then the average
distortion D = E[d(X,X)], where the average might be
with respect to a probability model for the images or,
more commonly, a sample or time-average distortion. It
is common to normalize the distortion in some fashion
to produce a dimensionless quantity DIDO, to form the
inverse Do/D as a measure of quality rather than distortion,
and to describe the result in decibels. One way to do this is
to normalize by the average distortion resulting by the best
possible 0 bit rate reproduction DO = min,E[D(X,y)].
With the usual squared error measure of distortion
d ( X , Y ) = I(X - Y112 =
IXi - yzl2
Do = E[llX - E(X)l12] = 05
the variance of the input vector, and we have the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR)
A common alternative normalization when the input is
itself an r-bit discrete variable is to replace the variance or
energy by the maximum input symbol energy (2' - l)2.
This is called the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR). For
the common case of 8-bpp input images this yields
PSNR = 10 10g,,255~/D.
A key attribute of useful distortion measures is ease of
computation, but other properties are also important. We
would like a distortion measure that reflects perceptual
quality or usefulness in a particular application. No easily
computable distortion measure such as squared error is
generally agreed to have this property. Common faults of
squared error are that a slight spatial shift of an image
causes a large numerical distortion but no visual distortion
and, conversely, a small average distortion can result in a
damaging visual artifact if all the error is concentrated in a
small important region. It is because of such shortcomings
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE. VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
that many other quality measures have been studied. The pi-
oneering work of Budrikus [ 171, Stockham [ 181, and Man-
nos and Sakrison [ 191 was aimed at developing computable
distortion measures that emphasized perceptually important
attributes of an image by incorporating knowledge of hu-
man vision. Their work and subsequent work has provided a
bewildering variety of candidate measures of image quality
or distortion - , - . Examples are general 1,
norms such as the absolute error (11). the cube root of the
sum of the cubed errors (Es), and maximum error (lm), as
well as variations on such error measures which incorporate
linear weighting. A popular form is the linearly weighted
quadratic distortion measures that attempt to incorporate
properties of the human visual system such as sensitivity to
edges, insensitivity to textures, and other masking effects.
The image and the original can be transformed prior to
forming the distortion, providing a wide family of spectral
distortions, which can also incorporate linear weighting
in the transform domain to reflect perceptual importance.
Alternatively, one can capture the perceptual aspects by
linearly filtering the original and reproduction images prior
to forming a distortion, which is equivalent to weighting
the distortion in the transform domain. A simple variation
of SNR that has proved popular in the speech and audio
field is the segmental SNR which is an average of local
SNR’s on a log scale , , effectively replacing the
arithmetic average of distortion by a geometric average.
In addition to easing computation and reflecting per-
ceptual quality, a third desirable property of a distortion
measure is tractability in analysis. The popularity of squared
error is partly owed to the wealth of theory and numerical
methods available for the analysis and synthesis of systems
which are optimal in the sense of minimizing mean squared
error. One might design a system to minimize mean squared
error because it is a straightforward optimization but then
use a different, more complicated, distortion measure to
evaluate quality because it does better at predicting subjec-
tive quality. Ideally, one would like to have a subjectively
meaningful distortion measure that could be incorporated
into the system design. There are techniques for incorporat-
ing subjective criteria into compression system design, but
these tend to be somewhat indirect. For example, one can
transform the image and assign bits to transform coefficients
according to their perceptual importance or use postfiltering
to emphasize important subbands before compression [ 181,
1471, 1481.
B. Subjective Ratings
Subjective quality of a reconstructed image can be judged
in many ways. A suitably randomized set of images can
be presented to experts or typical users who rate them,
often on a scale of 1 to 5. Subsequent statistical analysis
can then highlight averages, variability, and other trends
in the data. Such formalized subjective testing is common
in speech and audio compression systems as in the Mean
Opinion Score (MOS) and the descriptive rating called
the diagnostic acceptability measure (DAM) , [491,
 . These rating systems are common in speech research,
and some effort has been devoted to developing a rating
system for entertainment video , , but there has
been no standardization for rating still images. Consid-
erable variation exists in the allowed range of numerical
responses, in the decision of whether or not to provide a
corresponding descriptive phrase for each number, in the
choice of those descriptive phrases, and in the attempt to
have the subjective rating reflect image utility for a specific
application. Some ratings were for paired comparisons in
which a viewer assigns a number to the degree of similarity
or dissimilarity between two images.
A useful attribute of an objective quality measure such
as SNR would be the ability to predict subjective quality.
This is particularly important in applications such as digital
audio and entertainment video where subjective quality is of
paramount importance. For medical images, it may be more
important that a computable objective measure be able to
predict diagnostic accuracy rather than subjective quality.
Many methods have been considered for quantifying the
degree of correlation between two such quality measures
or the ability of one to predict another for audio, images,
and video , , . Among common methods are
to plot mean values of SNR against mean values of the
corresponding subjective quality and then fit a curve to
the resulting points. Many curves have been considered,
including polynomial splines, quadratics, and exponentials.
The residual sum of errors then provides an indication of the
goodness of the fit. Another popular method is to measure
the correlation coefficient between the fitted and actual data
A potential pitfall in relating objective distortion mea-
sures to subjective quality is the choice of image distortions
used in the tests. Some of the literature on the subject has
considered signal-independent distortions such as additive
noise and blurring, yet it has been implied that the results
were relevant for strongly signal-dependent distortions such
as quantization error. Experiments should imitate closely
the actual distortions to be encountered.
C. Diagnostic Accuracy
The most common means of measuring diagnostic accu-
racy for computer-processed medical images is based on
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis, which has
its origins in signal detection theory. A filtered version of
signal plus Gaussian noise is sampled and compared to a
threshold. If the sample is greater than the threshold, the
signal is declared to be there; otherwise, it is declared
absent. As the threshold is varied in one direction, the
probability of erroneously declaring a signal absent when
it is there goes down, but the probability of erroneously
declaring a signal there when it is not (a false alarm)
goes up. An ROC curve plots the variation of these two
quantities or, equivalently, of the tradeoffs between true
positive rate (sensitivity, the complement of the probability
of Type I error) and false positive rate (the false alarm
rate, the complement of specificity). A variety of summary
statistics such as the area under the ROC curve can be
COSMAN et al.: EVALUATING QUALITY OF COMPRESSED MEDICAL IMAGES
computed and interpreted to compare the quality of different
detection techniques.
Applications of ROC analysis to other fields require the
creation of some form of threshold whose variation allows a
similar tradeoff. For radiological applications, this involves
asking radiologists to provide a subjective confidence rating
of their diagnoses (typically on a scale of 1-5) which is then
used as if it were a threshold to adjust for detection accuracy
 , . Radiologists can be trained to use the rating scale
and the results can be combined with assumptions on the
nature of the data to produce summary statistics reflecting
the diagnostic accuracy [91-[ 141.
Although by far the dominant technique for quantifying
diagnostic accuracy in radiology, ROC analysis possesses
several shortcomings for this application. By and large,
the necessity for the radiologists to assign specific values
to their confidence departs from ordinary clinical prac-
tice. Further, as image data are non-Gaussian, methods
that rely on Gaussian assumptions are suspect. Modem
computer-intensive statistical sample reuse techniques can
help get around the failures of Gaussian assumptions.
Many clinical detection tasks are nonbinary, in which
case specificity does not make sense because it has no
natural or sensible denominator, as it is not possible to
say how many abnormalities are absent. This can be done
for a truly binary diagnostic task such as detection of a
pneumothorax, for if the image is normal then exactly one
abnormality is absent. Previous studies were able to use
ROC analysis by focusing on detection tasks which were
either truly binary or could be rendered binary. In these
studies, the specificity is defined for the entire image set as
the conditional average of these binary-valued specificities
that apply for individual images. Genuinely nonbinary
detection tasks (locating any and all abnormalities that
are present) are not amenable to ordinary ROC analysis
techniques. Extensions to ROC to permit consideration of
multiple abnormalities have been developed , but as
presented thus far, these require the use of confidence
ratings as well as Gaussian or Poisson assumptions on the
data. Finally, ROC analysis has no natural extension to the
evaluation of measurement accuracy in compressed medical
images. By means of specific examples we describe an
approach that closely simulates ordinary clinical practice,
applies to nonbinary and non-Gaussian data, and extends
naturally to measurement data.
111. COMPRESSION ALGORITHMS
Almost all of the previously referenced studies of lossy
compression of medical images performed the compression
using variations on the standard discrete cosine transform
(DCT) coding algorithm combined with scalar quantization
and lossless coding. (For treatments of DCT coding, see
the tutorial book by Rabbani and Jones [81 or [71, [451,
 - .) These are variations of the international stan-
dard ISOICCITT Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG)
compression algorithm . Some groups used full frame
transforms and differing algorithms for bit allocation and
noiseless coding. These algorithms are well understood
and have been tuned to provide good performance in
many applications. Alternative algorithms incorporating
vector quantization (VQ) can provide advantages in some
applications in terms of simplicity, speed, performance,
natural progressive reconstruction, and ease of combining
with additional signal processing such as enhancement and
classification. Furthermore, VQ can be used in combination
with traditional techniques by replacing the scalar quan-
tizers often used in transform and subband techniques by
vector quantizers. We emphasize that the clinical simula-
tion protocols and statistical methods considered here are
applicable to any compression algorithm.
Vector quantization is the conversion of vectors (typically
a block of pixel intensity values in the original image
such as a 2 x 2 square) into binary vectors that tell the
decompressor which reproduction template (or codeword)
from a limited set called a codebook should be used to
best approximate the original vector. The compression
or encoding is accomplished by a nearest neighbor or
minimum distortion matching of the input vector with the
available codewords, where the distortion or cost function
can be a simple squared error or a more complicated
measure which weights perceptual importance. Basic VQ
decompression is simply table lookup, yielding extremely
fast image reconstruction. To improve efficiency and per-
formance, the encoder is usually constrained to perform its
selection in a computationally efficient way and the decoder
is allowed to do some simple linear computation. Surveys
of the general approach and many of its variations may be
found in and in several tutorial articles - and
in the IEEE Reprint Collection .
Stated in this generality, VQ includes the common trans-
form coding techniques as a special case. More commonly,
however, the name is associated with a particular family
of design techniques based on information-theoretic and
statistical techniques such as clustering and classification
trees. The codebooks or collections of templates are often
designed using statistical clustering techniques which at-
tempt to find a small number of representatives for a large
data set that do a good job of representing the entire set
in the sense of minimizing the average distortion between
the original and the representative. A common example is
the generalized Lloyd algorithm (also called the Forgey or
k-means algorithm), which has a variety of forms. (See,
e.g., [681, WI.)
In order to make the codebook search low-complexity,
techniques from the design of statistical classification trees
can be extended to design codebooks with a tree structure,
thus codebooks that can be searched by a sequence of sim-
ple comparisons (hyperplane or correlation tests) instead of
a large number of distortion computations. The complexity
of tree-structured codes grows linearly in bit rate instead
of exponentially, as is the case with unstructured codes.
This approach combines ideas from the classification and
regression tree (CARTTM) design technique of Breiman,
Friedman, Olshen, and Stone with those of Clustering
to provide a class of compression codes called pruned
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE. VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
tree-structured VQ (PTSVQ) with several nice properties.
FTSVQ generally yields lower distortion than fixed-rate
full search VQ for a given average rate, has a simple
encoder and a simple design algorithm, has a natural
successive approximation (progressive) property, is well
matched to variable-rate environments such as storage or
packet communications, and can have its tree tailored by an
input-dependent importance weighting by using weighted
distortion measures. This latter attribute permits the op-
tional incorporation of enhancement or highlighting into
compression by using distortion measures that assign in-
creased importance to specified features, where the features
can be automatically classified or marked by a human expert
in a learning data set. Such enhancement can force the
compression algorithm to devote its bits and quality to
features of primary importance and can highlight regions of
an image that the computer finds suspicious because they
use codewords that had been usually used for pathologies
during the codebook design stage. F’TSVQ can be improved
by incorporating prediction. This technique first performs
a simple linear prediction of the current pixel block given
previously coded blocks, subtracts the prediction to form a
residual error vector, and then applies a tree-structured VQ
to the residual.
VQ alone provides a compression technique for sampled
images, but it can also be used as the quantization step in
a general compression system by combining it with signal
decomposition techniques such as transforms or subband
or wavelet filter banks and with lossless coding. Such
cascades can provide better performance at the cost of
added complexity.
IV. STUDY DESIGN
We now tum to compressed CT and MR chest scans
as specific examples for demonstrating the three quality
measures. Two CT image types were considered: medi-
astinal and lung images for diagnoses of lymphadenopathy
and lung nodules, respectively. Abnormally enlarged lymph
nodes (adenopathy) in the mediastinum (the central portion
of the chest containing the heart and major blood vessels),
can be caused by primary or metastatic cancer, tuberculosis,
and noninfectious inflammatory diseases. Radiologists can
usually locate lymph nodes in a CT chest scan. The
detection task is therefore to determine which of the located
nodes are enlarged. Lung nodules can be caused by fungal
and bacterial infections, and by malignancy, primary or
metastatic. The latter can cause multiple nodules in one
or both lungs. Nodules can be undetectably small or large
enough to fill an entire segment of the lung. In contrast
to the mediastinal task, both the presence and size of
lung nodules must be ascertained, although this study
has not yet considered size. This was the focus of the
MR study, in which blood vessel sizes were measured.
Such measurements are useful for detecting aneurysms and
assessing cardiovascular physiology.
Each study (CT lymph nodes, CT lung nodules, MR
blood vessels) used predictive F‘TSVQ with the prediction
Fig. 1. Original MR chest scan at 9 bpp.
Fig. 2. MR chest scan compressed to 0.56 bpp.
coefficients and residual quantizers designed on training
sets of representative images. The three training sets con-
sisted, respectively, of 20 CT mediastinum images, 20 CT
lung images, and 20 MR chest scans. All sets included
images containing pathology and normal images. For each
study, 30 test images were chosen. Patient studies repre-
sented in the training sets were not used as test images.
The SNR, subjective quality, and diagnostic results all are
based on test and not training images. Figure 1 shows an
original 9-bpp MR chest image. Figure 2 shows that image
compressed to 0.56 bpp.
The CT studies used 2 x 2 pixel blocks. The 12-
bpp original test images were encoded at 6 compression
levels: 0.57, 1.18, 1.33, 1.79, 2.19, and 2.63 bpp. The
compressed and original images were viewed by three
radiologists. For each of the 30 images in a study, each
radiologist independently viewed the original and 5 of the
6 compressed levels, so a total of 360 images were seen
by each judge. Images were seen on hardcopy film on a
lightbox, with a standard “windows and levels” adjustment
to the dynamic range applied to each image before filming.
The viewings were divided into three sessions, which were
at least two weeks apart. The judges marked abnormalities
directly on the hardcopy films with a grease pencil. No
constraints were placed on the viewing time, the viewing
distance, or the lighting conditions. As the task did not
differ from those encountered in daily work, the judges
were given no special training for this experiment. They
COSMAN et al.: EVALUATING QUALITY OF COMPRESSED MEDICAL IMAGES
bit rue (bpp)
Fig. 3. SNR for CT lung images.
were, however, constrained to view the 10 pages in the
predetermined order. At each session, each judge saw each
image at exactly 2 of the 7 levels of compression (7 levels
includes the original) with at least 3 pages separating them.
This was intended to reduce learning effects.
The MR study used 2 x 4 pixel blocks and 5 compression
levels: 0.36, 0.55, 0.82, 1.13, and 1.7 bpp. The test images
were taken at a level in the chest where the four major blood
vessels (ascending aorta, descending aorta, right pulmonary
artery (RPA), and superior vena cava (SVC)) appeared.
In a protocol similar to that of the CT studies, the six
levels of each test image were presented separately to three
radiologists. For each image, each radiologist marked the
axis of measurement and measured each blood vessel at
its widest diameter to the nearest millimeter using calipers.
Aortic diameters ranged from 10 to 60 mm and the SVC
and RPA from 15 to 40 mm.
QUALITY RESULTS
The traditional manner for comparing the performance
of different lossy compression systems is to plot distortion
rate or SNR versus bit rate curves. Figure 3 shows a scatter
plot of the rate-SNR pairs for the 24 images in the lung
CT study that had a consensus gold standard (as discussed
below). It includes a quadratic spline fit with a single knot at
1.5 bpp . Quadratic spline fits provide good indications
of the overall distortion-rate performance of the code family
on the test data. The SNR results for the CT mediastinal
images (not shown) were very similar to those for the lung
task. Figure 4 shows a scatter plot of the rate-SNR pairs
for the 30 images in the MR study. The quadratic spline
has a single knot at 1.0 bpp.
The assessment of subjective quality attempted to relate
subjective image quality to diagnostic utility. For the MR
study, each radiologist was asked at the time of measuring
the vessels to “assign a score of 1 (worst) to 5 (best) to each
image based on its usefulness for the measurement task.”
The CT subjective assessment was performed separately
from the diagnostic task by three different radiologists. The
subjective ratingbit rate pairs for the CT studies and MR
study are plotted in Figs. 5-7. Images compressed to lower
bit rate (bpp)
SNR for MR images.
bit rates received worse quality scores as was expected. The
data are fit with a quadratic spline with a single knot.
To measure diagnostic accuracy, we first needed to deter-
mine a “gold standard” that would represent the diagnostic
truth of each original image, and could serve as a basis of
comparison for the diagnoses on all versions of that image.
There are many possible choices for the gold standard:
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
bit rate (bpp)
Fig. 7. Subjective ratings versus bit rate for MR chest study.
A consensus gold standard is determined by the con-
sensus of the three judges on the original.
A personal gold standard uses each judge's readings on
an original (uncompressed) image as the gold standard
for the readings of that same judge on the compressed
versions of that same image.
An independent gold standard is formed by the agree-
ment of the members of an independent panel of
particularly expert radiologists.
A separate gold standard is produced by the results
of autopsy, surgical biopsy, reading of images from a
different imaging modality, or subsequent clinical or
imaging studies.
A separate standard is generally not available, as there
may be no further procedures or studies of that patient
made or available; for these studies, we did not have
records of further procedures. In the CT studies we used
both the consensus and personal gold standards; in the MR
study we used both the independent and personal standards.
In the cases where the initial CT readings disagreed in
the number or location of abnormalities, the judges were
asked separately to review their readings of that original.
If this did not produce agreement, the judges discussed the
image together. Six images in each CT study could not be
assigned a consensus gold standard due to irreconcilable
disagreement. This was a fundamental drawback of the
consensus gold standard and subsequent studies did not
use this method. Since the consensus was clearly more
likely to be attained for those original images where the
judges were in perfect agreement initially and thus where
the original images would have perfect accuracy relative
to that agreed gold standard, the original images have an
advantage when compared to the others. The consensus
gold standard for the lung determined that there were,
respectively, 4 images with 0 nodules, 9 with 1, 4 with
2, 5 with 3, and 2 with 4 among those images retained.
For the mediastinum, there were 3 images with 0 abnormal
nodes, 17 with 1, 2 with 2, and 2 with 3. The personal gold
standard is even more strongly biased against compression.
It defines a judge's reading on an original image to be
perfect, and uses that reading as the basis of comparison
for the compressed versions of that image. In the presence
of any random noise in the process of judging, with
compressed images performance is less good than with the
originals. Thus the personal and consensus gold standards
are most useful for comparing the various compressed
levels among themselves. Comparisons of the original
images with the compressed ones are conservative. One
argument for the personal standard is that in some clinical
settings a fundamental question is how the reports of a
radiologist whose information is gathered from compressed
images compare to what they would have been on the
originals, the assumption being that systematic biases of
a radiologist are well recognized and corrected for by
the referring physicians who regularly send cases to that
radiologist. The personal gold standard thus concentrates
on consistency of individual judges. The independent gold
standard has the advantage that it allows the diagnoses of
the judges on the originals to be compared against those
on the compressed images in an unbiased way, since in
both cases errors will be determined by reference to the
standard created by the independent panel. In the MR study,
the panel was composed of two senior radiologists who
first measured the vessels separately and then discussed
and remeasured in those cases where there was initial
disagreement.
A. Detection Accuracy (CT Study)
Once a gold standard is established, a value can be
assigned to the sensitivity, the probability that something
is detected given that it is present in the gold standard.
Sensitivity makes sense for nonbinary detection tasks, and
is a crucial statistic that quantifies results. However, a judge
who labels abnormalities everywhere in an image could
have perfect sensitivity. Predictive value positive (PVP),
the chance an abnormality is actually present given that it
is marked , fills the role of specificity in penalizing false
positive reporting. A judge who is too aggressive in finding
abnormality could have high sensitivity at the expense of
low PVP while a judge who is too stringent about what
defines abnormality could have a high PVP at the expense
of low sensitivity. As is the case with the ROC parameters
of true positives and false positives, both true positive and
PVP will be 1 if the decision is perfect. The plots below
show sensitivity and PVP relative to the consensus gold
Figures 8 and 9 display all data for lung sensitivity and
lung PVP for all 24 images, judges, and compressed levels.
There are 360x's: 360 = 3 judges x 24 images x 5
compressed levels seen for each image. Figures 10 and 11
are the corresponding figures for the mediastinum. The 0's
mark the average of the x 's for each bit rate. The values
of the sensitivity and PVP are simple fractions such as 1/2
and 2/3 because there are at most a few abnormalities in
each image. The curves are least squares quadratic spline
fits to the data with a single knot at 1.5 bpp, together
with the two-sided 95% confidence regions. In view of
the highly non-Gaussian nature of the data, the confidence
regions were obtained by a bootstrapping procedure ,
COSMAN ef a/ : EVALUATING QUALITY OF COMPRESSED MEDICAL IMAGES
bit rate (bpp)
8. Lung sensitivity: rms = 0.177.
bit rate (bpp)
Fig. 9. Lung PVP rms = 0.215.
 . Since the sensitivity and PVP cannot exceed 1, the
upper confidence curve was thresholded at 1. The residual
root mean square (rms) is the square root of the residual
mean square from an analysis of variance of the spline fits.
Sensitivity for the lung seems to be nearly as good at low
rates of compression as at high rates, but sensitivity for
the mediastinum drops off at the lower bit rates, driven
primarily by the results for one judge. PVP for the lung is
roughly constant across the bit rates, and the same for the
mediastinum.
Behrens-Fisher t-Statistic: The comparison of sensitivity
and PVP at different bit rates was carried out using a
permutation distribution of a two-sample t-test that is
sometimes called the Behrens-Fisher test [go], [til]. The
statistic takes account of the fact that the within group
variances are different. The test is exact and does not rely
on Gaussian assumptions that would be patently false for
this data set. The use of this statistic is illustrated by the
following example. Suppose Judge 1 has judged N lung
images at both levels A and B. These images can be
divided into 5 groups, according to whether the consensus
gold standard for the image contained 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4
abnormalities. Let Ni be the number of images in the ith
group. Let A, represent the difference in sensitivities (or
bit rate (bpp)
10. Mediastinum sensitivity: rms = 0.243.
bit rate (bpp)
Fig. 11. Mediastinum PVP rms = 0.245.
PVP) for the jth image in the ith group seen at level A and
at level B. Let Ai be the average difference:
C(Aij - A,)2
and then the Behrens-Fisher t statistic is given by
Our Aij are fractions with denominators not more than
4, so are utterly non-Gaussian. Therefore, computations of
attained significance (p values) are based on the restricted
permutation distribution of ~ B F . For each of the N images,
we can permute the results from the two levels [ A -+ B
& B + A] or not. There are 2N points possible in the
full permutation distribution, and we calculate t
one. The motivation for the permutation distribution is that
if there were no difference between the bit rates, then in
computing the differences Ai,, it should not,matter whether
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE. VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
we compute level A - level B or vice versa, and we
would not expect the “real” tgF to be an extreme value
among the 2N values. If k is the number of permuted
tgF values that exceed the “real” one, then ( k + l)/zN is
the attained one-sided significance level for the test of the
null hypothesis that the lower bit rate performs at least as
well as the higher one. The one-sided test of significance
is chosen to be conservative and to argue most strongly
against compression.
When the judges were evaluated separately, level A (the
lowest bit rate) was found to be significantly different at
the 5% level against most of the other levels for two
of the judges, for both lung and mediastinum sensitivity.
No differences were found among levels B through G.
There were no significant differences found between any
pair of levels for PVP. When judges were pooled, more
significant differences were found. Level A was generally
inferior to the other levels for both lung and mediastinal
sensitivity. Also levels B and C differed from level G
for lung sensitivity (p = 0.016 for both) and levels B and
C differed from level G for mediastinal sensitivity (p =
0.008 and 0.016, respectively). For PVP, no differences
were found against level A with the exception of A versus
E and F for the lungs (p = 0.039 and 0.012, respectively),
but B was somewhat different from C for the lungs (p
= 0.031), and C was different from E, F , and G for the
mediastinum (p = 0.016, 0.048, and 0.027, respectively).
The results indicate that level A (0.56 bpp) is unaccept-
able for diagnostic use. Since the blocking and prediction
artifacts became quite noticeable at level A, the judges
tended not to attempt to mark any abnormality unless they
were quite sure it was there. This explains the initially
surprising result that level A did well for PVP, but very
poorly for sensitivity. Since no differences were found
among levels D (1.8 bpp), E (2.2 bpp), F (2.64 bpp), and
G (original images at 12 bpp), despite the biases against
compression contained in our analysis methods, these three
compressed levels are clearly acceptable for diagnostic use
in our applications. The decision conceming levels B (1.18
bpp) and C (1.34 bpp) is less clear, and would require
further tests involving a larger number of detection tasks,
more judges, and use of an independent gold standard that
in principle should remove at least one of the biases against
compression that are present in this study.
We also compared compression levels using sensitivity
and PVP defined relative to the personal gold standard, we
used a Hotelling T2 statistic to compare the judges and the
images, and we used a McNemar statistic applied to paired
data (in which the first occurence of a given image in a
session was paired with the second occurence of that same
image, at a different compression level, in the same session)
to ascertain that learning effects were not significant at the
5% level , .
B. Measurement Accuracy (MR Images)
The measurement error for the MR images can be quan-
tified in several ways, the first being percent measurement
error, which is the difference between the gold standard
bit rate (bpp)
Fig. 12. Spline fit to percent measurement error versus bit rate.
bit rate (bm)
Fig. 13. Spline fit to absolute percent measurement error versus
measurement and that of the judge, scaled by the gold
standard. Though analyses of variance suggest that for
this task judges are not the same-indeed,
differences
among them may be the largest source of variability in the
measurements-we
could argue that differences in bit rates
are not confounded with differences in judges, and that for
present purposes nothing essential in our comparison of bit
rates is lost if we pool the judges. Figure 12 is a graph
of percent error versus bit rate for the independent gold
standard when all judges and images are pooled. The curve,
a quadratic spline with a single knot at 1.5 bpp, is nearly
flat. This could owe to some sort of cancellation, which
possibility is addressed by Fig. 13, where the outcome is
absolute percent measurement error. The displayed spline
fit is nearly flat. The corresponding figures for the personal
gold standards are similar. From these figures we tentatively
conclude that for this measurement task, error does not
seem to vary with bit rate.
We used two statistical tests of significance on the error
differences: a paired t test and a Wilcoxon signed rank
test. As the data are, the conclusions are identical up to
noise; the Gaussian assumption is close to but not exactly
confirmed (by a plot of data quantiles against correspond-
ing Gaussian ones, an empirical Shapiro-Wilk test). With
COSMAN et al.: EVALUATING QUALITY OF COMPRESSED MEDICAL IMAGES
the Wilcoxon, measurement seemed significantly better in
terms of percentage error at 1.7 bpp than at 0.82 or 1.13 bpp
for the independent gold standard 0, < 0.05), though in no
case was measurement at any of our levels of compression
different from that on the original images. With the personal
gold standard, images compressed all the way to 0.36 bpp
definitely seem not as good as the originals, and, further, bit
rates 0.36, 0.55, and 1.13 bpp seem different from 1.7 bpp.
Results are qualitatively similar for comparisons with the t
test. From these arguments and others, we assert confidently
that compression with our algorithms down to 0.55 bpp is
possible without significantly affecting the accuracy of this
vessel measurement task .
VI. RELATIONSHIPS
QUALITY MEASURES
As image quality can be quantified by diagnostic ac-
curacy, subjective ratings, or computable measures such
as SNR, one key question concems the degree to which
these different measures agree. Verifications of medical
image quality by perceptual measures require the detailed,
time-consuming, and expensive efforts of human observers,
typically highly trained radiologists. Therefore, it is desir-
able to find computable measures that strongly correlate
with or predict the perceptual measures. Our work suggests
that cross-validated fits to the data using generalized linear
models can be used to examine the usefulness of SNR (or
other computable measure) as a predictor for subjective
quality (or other perceptual measure).
In the classical linear regression model, the "predictor"
x is related to the outcome y by y = Ptz + E, where p is a
vector of unknown coefficients, and the error E at least has
mean zero and constant variance, or may even be normally
distributed. In the regression problem of using SNR to
predict subjective quality scores, the response variable y
takes on integer values between 1 and 5, and so the
assumption of constant variance is inappropriate because
the variance of y depends on its mean. Furthermore, y
takes on values only in a limited range, and the linear
model does not follow that constraint without additional
untenable assumptions. We tum to a generalized linear
model that is designed for modeling binary and, more
generally, multinomial data .
A generalized linear model requires two functions: a link
function that specifies how the mean depends on the linear
predictors, and a variance function that describes how the
variance of the response variable depends on its mean. If
+ . . , X , are independent Poisson variables, then
conditional upon their sum, their joint distribution is multi-
nomial. Thus the regression can be carried out with the
Poisson link and variance functions: Ptz = l n p and
var(y) = p in which case the mean of the response variable
is p = e@". The results of this approach are shown in Fig.
14. The predictors are a quadratic spline in SNR. In Fig.
14, the x symbols denote the raw data pairs (subjective
score, SNR) for the judges pooled, and the curve is the
regression fit. The model parameters were estimated using
the statistical software S, which uses iteratively reweighted
Fig. 14. Expected subjective score versus SNR (Permission for
reprint, courtesy Society for Information Display).
Fig. 15. Response probabilities versus SNR (Permission for
reprint, courtesy Society for Information Display).
least squares to generate a maximum-likelihood estimate.
The o symbols denote the 95% confidence intervals 
obtained from the bootstrapped BC, method .
Instead of fitting directly to the expectation of the re-
sponse, a second way to approach this problem looks for
the probability pi of obtaining the response i, for each of the
five possible responses (i = 1, . . . ,5). The expectation can
then be calculated from the probabilities. We can transform
the responses y into binary outcomes:
1, if y = i
Yi = 0, otherwise.
The binary response variables yi can then each be fitted
using the logit link, for which the mean of the response
variable is
which guarantees that p is in the interval [0, 11. The logit
link together with the binomial variance function p(1 - p)
defines the logistic regression model. For each yi the
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 82, NO. 6, JUNE 1994
Table 1 Comparison of Computable
Quality Measures
Block Size
analog of the multiple correlation. The results are presented
in Table 1.
It appears that segmental SNR at several different block
sizes outperforms conventional SNR. The best of these (on
8 x 8 blocks) produced a 48% reduction compared to
the 43% reduction for SNR. In ongoing research we are
examining the statistical significance of these differences
by sampling from the permutation distribution, and com-
paring SNR against perceptually based computable quality
predictor 2 was a quadratic spline in SNR, with the knots
located in each case at the mean value of the SNR’s which
produced that response (18.2, 20.12, 22.57, 24.61, 25.56).
The probabilities p; are shown in Fig. 15 with vertical off-
sets so they are not superimposed. As the five probabilities
have been determined from separate regressions, they are
scaled so that they add to one before calculating E(y) from
them. The expectation is almost indistinguishable from the
curve of Fig. 14, thereby validating the Poisson model.
Having established the appropriateness of the Poisson
model, we use it to compare SNR against segmental SNR in
their ability to predict subjective quality ratings. Segmental
SNR, often used in speech quality evaluation, compensates
for the under-emphasis of weak-signal performance in
conventional SNR. An image is divided into blocks, the
SNR is calculated for each block on a log scale, thresholded
below at 0 and above at 45, and the values are averaged.
By converting component SNR values to decibel values
prior to averaging, very high SNR values corresponding to
well-coded large-signal segments do not camouflage coder
performance with the weak segments, as in conventional
SNR. We examined block sizes of all powers of 2 between
2 x 2 and 256 x 256. Since the images are of size 256
x 256, the segmental SNR for that block size equals the
conventional SNR. The usefulness of the computable metric
in predicting subjective quality was examined as follows:
For n = 20 times, the 30 MR images were put in a different
random order. Each time, a ten-fold cross validation was
performed in which 3 images at a time were left out, and
the other 27 images were used to fit the model. All judges
and levels corresponding to those 27 images were used.
The 3 images not involved in determining the parameters
of the fit comprise 45 data points (3 images x 3 judges
x 5 compression levels). For these data we compute the
mean outcome and the sum of squared deviations from this
overall mean. This value is called SI.
Then we calculate
the fitted values for these data, and take the sum of squared
deviations of observed and fitted, called Sz. If the model is
good and the test set of 3 images is not unlike the set of 27
images used to fit the model, we expect Sa to be smaller
The percent reduction in mean-squared error that
owes to fitting the model (beyond fitting an overall constant)
is a statistic that summarizes the model’s predictive power:
M = 100 (1 -(&/SI))%. This statistic is a cross-validated
VII. DISCUSSION
AND CONCLUSION
There are many different perspectives from which these
different measures of image quality can be viewed. They
vary in the extent to which they explicitly consider the
application for which the images are used. At one extreme
are the computable measures such as SNR, which in no
way take account of the medical nature of the images.
Subjective ratings in which a radiologist is asked to rate
the medical usefulness of an image begin to address the
issue. ROC analysis, which includes both a (generally)
binary diagnostic decision and a subjective confidence
ranking associated with that diagnosis, are serious attempts
to capture the medical interest of the images through their
diagnostic value. Studies such as the CT detection task
and MR measurement task presented in this paper attempt
to reproduce very closely some actual clinical diagnostic
tasks of radiologists, and to ask the fundamental question
of whether a diagnosis made on a compressed image is as
good as one made on an original. By this measure, an image
has high quality if the number and locations of lesions
one finds there precisely match the number and locations
one finds on the original (or what the independent panel
finds on the original). But is that really the fundamental
question? A diagnosis is made on a patient’s scan in order
to make a decision about medical care for that patient, so
perhaps image quality could be defined in terms of medical
care. That is, an image has high quality if the decision
on medical care is unchanged from that determined upon
the original. So if the original image has 6 nodules and
the compressed one has 9, that may still be an extremely
high quality image according to this particular measure,
because the medical care decision may be unaltered in
the case of many tumors with a few more or less. One
can step back further to look at patient outcome rather
than medical care decision. Suppose hypothetically that
one designs a classification scheme to highlight suspected
tumors in an image. And perhaps, unbeknownst to the
designers, precancerous cells which have an overlapping
intensity distribution with that of cancerous cells also
tend to get highlighted, causing the surgeon to make a
wider resection and have lower recurrence rates. Then
the processed image might rate as poorer quality than an
original based on the previous measures (because both
diagnosis and medical care decision would be different
from those based on the original image), yet the processed
image would rate as top quality according to the measure
COSMAN er al.: EVALUATING QUALITY OF COMPRESSED MEDICAL IMAGES
of improved patient outcome. No one would seriously
propose these as measures of image quality. The decision
on medical care and the patient outcome both depend on
far too many factors other than just image quality. And
yet, if one considers the true measure of medical image
quality to be simply whether a diagnosis on the processed
image is unchanged from the diagnosis on the original,
one denies the possibility that the processing may in fact
enhance the image. This is not a worrisome consideration
with image compression, although there is some indication
that in fact slightly vector-quantized images are superior
to originals, because noise is suppressed by a clustering
algorithm. However, this may soon be a difficult issue in
evaluating the quality of digitally processed medical images
where the processing is, for example, a highlighting based
on pixel classification, or a pseudo-colored superposition of
images obtained from different modalities. There is a need
to develop image evaluation protocols for medical images
that explicitly recognize the possibility the processed image
can be better.
Such issues arise in the area of speech quality measure-
ment as well. Articulation tests score the percentage of
correct identification of the sounds, words, or sentences
in transmitted speech, and intelligibility tests look for
correct identification of the meaning conveyed by transmit-
ted speech [851. Although requiring the efforts of human
subjects, these tests are both objective and quantitative.
Even the communicability tests, which examine the effort
and level of attention required for understanding, can be
conducted in a way that does not involve the subjective
opinions of the listeners, for example by measuring the
length of time required for subjects to perform a specified
task that requires communicating over the system under
test. Analogous to the objective diagnostic accuracy tests
for image coding systems, these speech quality measures
address the fundamental issues of what makes a speech
communication system acceptable to the user-the
to extract correct meaning from the sounds, and the ease of
communication. However, the intelligibility and articulation
tests are only appropriate for systems that produce mod-
erate to severely degraded speech, since they are useless
for distinguishing between speech signals that are highly
intelligible. Communicability tests, while not completely
useless for good-quality systems, do have low resolving
power, and would require either a very large number of
subjects, or unpleasantly difficult tasks. They also suffer
from lack of reproducibility. All these tests also lack the
ability to provide insight to the researcher into the speech
perception process or the causes of unintelligibility. For all
these reasons, the speech-quality research community has
tended to prefer subjective measures such as the Diagnostic
Acceptability Measure and the Mean Opinion Score to
these intelligibility tests. However, for the reasons outlined
above, we believe that diagnostic accuracy tests, the “in-
telligibility” tests for medical images, are more useful for
evaluating medical image quality than are subjective tests.
In addition to the advantages which the evaluation proto-
col confers on the originals, physician training also provides
a bias for existing techniques. Radiologists are trained in
medical school and residency to interpret certain kinds
of images, and when asked to look at another type of
image (e.g., compressed or highlighted) they may not do
as well just because they were not trained on those. Highly
compressed images have lower informational content than
do originals, so even a radiologist carefully trained on those
could not do as well as a physician looking at original
images. But with image enhancement techniques or slightly
compressed images, perhaps a radiologist trained on those
would do better when reading those than someone trained
on originals would do reading originals.
We have presented several different ways of evaluating
medical image quality. Simple computable measures have
a role in the design algorithms and in the evaluation
of quality simply because they are quickly and cheaply
obtainable, and tractable in analysis. The actual diagnostic
quality is determined by various statistical protocols which
can evaluate diagnostic accuracy in the context of specific
detection and measurement tasks. The analysis of subjective
quality is of interest mostly for the fact that it shows a
different trend from actual diagnostic quality, which can
reassure physicians that diagnostic utility is retained even
when a compressed image is peceptually distinguishable
from the original. There is considerable future work to
be done both in evaluation studies of image quality for
different types of images and diagnostic tasks, and in
searching for computable measures of image quality which
can accurately predict the outcome of such studies, and
perhaps be incorporated into the code design algorithm to
yield better quality compression.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the assistance of the many
colleagues with whom the research surveyed here was
accomplished. In particular, they are grateful for the contri-
butions of C. Tseng, S . Perlmutter, K. C . P. Li, L. Moses,
H. C. Davidson, and C. Bergin.