Measures of semantic similarity and relatedness
in the biomedical domain
Ted Pedersen a,*, Serguei V.S. Pakhomov b, Siddharth Patwardhan c, Christopher G. Chute b
a Department of Computer Science, 1114 Kirby Drive, University of Minnesota, Duluth, MN 55812, USA
b Division of Biomedical Informatics, Mayo College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA
c School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Received 11 April 2006
Available online 10 June 2006
Measures of semantic similarity between concepts are widely used in Natural Language Processing. In this article, we show how six
existing domain-independent measures can be adapted to the biomedical domain. These measures were originally based on WordNet, an
English lexical database of concepts and relations. In this research, we adapt these measures to the SNOMED-CT ontology of medical
concepts. The measures include two path-based measures, and three measures that augment path-based measures with information content statistics from corpora. We also derive a context vector measure based on medical corpora that can be used as a measure of semantic
relatedness. These six measures are evaluated against a newly created test bed of 30 medical concept pairs scored by three physicians and
nine medical coders. We ﬁnd that the medical coders and physicians diﬀer in their ratings, and that the context vector measure correlates
most closely with the physicians, while the path-based measures and one of the information content measures correlates most closely with
the medical coders. We conclude that there is a role both for more ﬂexible measures of relatedness based on information derived from
corpora, as well as for measures that rely on existing ontological structures.
 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Semantic similarity; Path based measures; Information content; Context vectors; SNOMED-CT
1. Introduction
Semantic relatedness refers to human judgments of the
degree to which a given pair of concepts is related. Studies
 have shown that, surprisingly, most humans agree on
the relative semantic relatedness of most pairs of concepts.
Measures of relatedness are automatic techniques that
attempt to imitate human judgments of relatedness. Many
such techniques already exist in the realm of domainindependent Natural Language Processing. However, the
lack of domain-speciﬁc coverage of the resources used by
these measures makes them ineﬀective for use in domainspeciﬁc tasks. Because of the availability of numerous
ontologies and resources in the biomedical domain, it is
possible to adapt these measures and apply them to
domain-speciﬁc tasks.
The existence of semantic equivalence classes between
lexical items in English makes it highly desirable to use thesauri of synonymous or nearly synonymous terms for
information retrieval (IR) and document retrieval (DR)
applications. The issue is particularly acute in the medical
domain due to stringent completeness requirements on
such IR tasks as patient cohort identiﬁcation. We believe
that measures of semantic similarity and relatedness can
improve the performance of such systems, since they are
able to map a user’s speciﬁc search query to multiple equivalent formulations. For example, a user’s query for ‘‘congestive heart failure’’ could be expanded to include the
semantically similar terms of cardiac decompensation, pulmonary edema, ischemic cardiomyopathy and volume overload. Clearly, pulmonary edema does not denote the same
or even a similar disorder as congestive heart failure but
1532-0464/$ - see front matter  2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2006.06.004
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 218 726 8240.
E-mail address: (T. Pedersen).
www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin
Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
under the patient cohort identiﬁcation conditions it could
be considered as an equivalent search term.
In this research, we adapt a number of measures of similarity and relatedness to the biomedical domain. We
should emphasize that semantic relatedness and semantic
similarity are two separate notions. Semantic relatedness
is a more general notion of the relatedness of concepts,
while similarity is a special case of relatedness that is tied
to the likeness (in the shape or form) of the concepts. A
measure of semantic similarity takes as input two concepts,
and returns a numeric score that quantiﬁes how much they
are alike. Such a measure (e.g., ) is usually based on isa relations found in the underlying taxonomy or ontology
in which the concepts reside. For example, common cold
and illness are similar in that a common cold is a kind of illness. Likewise, common cold and inﬂuenza are similar in
that they are both kinds of illness. Of course, many ontologies include additional relations between concepts such as
has-part, is-a-way-of-doing, is-a-cause-of, is-a-symptom-of,
etc. that are not directly accounted for in measures of similarity. Thus, we view semantic similarity as a special case
of semantic relatedness, and we believe that developing
measures that take advantage of increasingly rich ontologies (particularly in the biomedical domain) which have a
wealth of relations beyond is-a is an important area of
future work. This is especially relevant in light of progress
in automatically identifying a wide range of semantic relations in medical text (e.g., ). We believe that the work in
this article provides a necessary stepping stone to tackling
the more general problem of identifying semantically related concepts.
Outside the biomedical domain, measures of semantic
similarity and relatedness have proven useful in a number
of NLP tasks. For example, Budanitsky and Hirst identify malapropisms using various measures of similarity
and relatedness. The premise of their approach is that a
word that is not semantically similar or related to its
neighbors may be a word that is misspelled but is accidentally a valid word, as in ‘‘The nights of the round table
rode again.’’ Resnik , Patwardhan et al. , and
McCarthy et al. carry out word sense disambiguation
based on the idea that a word should be used in the sense
that is most similar to or related to the sense of the words
that surround it.
However, all of this work has been domain-independent
and has been based on WordNet , which is a freely
available lexical database that represents an ontology of
approximately 100,000 general English concepts. In the
biomedical domain, there are a growing number of ontologies that organize medical concepts into hierarchies and
semantic networks, perhaps best exempliﬁed by the Uniﬁed
Medical Language System (UMLS) of the National
Library of Medicine (NLM). One of the largest and most
extensive sources included in UMLS is SNOMED-CT.
To date, relatively little work has been done on developing
and evaluating measures of conceptual similarity and relatedness for such resources. The premise of this article is that
some of the measures that have been found to be eﬀective
SNOMED-CT, thereby making it possible to automate
certain NLP tasks in the biomedical domain.
This article starts by describing other related work in the
biomedical domain as well as domain-independent techniques that implement or use measures of semantic similarity. The article then proceeds by introducing the various
resources that we use in measuring similarity and relatedness among concepts. This includes SNOMED-CT, the
Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes, and the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus. We then describe the ﬁve measures of similarity and one measure of relatedness (all based on WordNet)
that we have adapted to the biomedical domain.1 We also
introduce a new test bed for the evaluation of measures of
semantic similarity and relatedness in the biomedical
domain. Finally, we present our experimental results, and
suggestions for future work.
2. Related work
In the biomedical domain, measures of semantic similarity based on ontologies were developed as early as 1989.
Rada et al. devised a ‘‘semantic distance’’ measure
based on semantic networks. They used MeSH as their
semantic network, which consists of biomedical terms
organized in a hierarchy. Indeed, one of the measures
described in this paper was inspired by this work. Taking
a similar approach, Caviedes and Cimino developed
the CDist measure for ﬁnding path lengths in the UMLS
hierarchy. Two of the measures we compare in this paper
are path-based measures. Our work with these measures
primarily diﬀers in the ontology being used to compute
the paths and the path-lengths between concepts.
Recently, Lord et al. adapted WordNet-based measures of relatedness to the Gene Ontology , which is a
highly specialized ontology of the molecular functions
and biological processes of gene products. The hierarchy
also describes cellular components associated with gene
products. In this work, they ﬁnd that the semantic similarity of proteins based on the ontology has a high correlation
with ‘‘sequence similarity,’’ a separate measure based on
the protein sequences. Our work, in comparison, deals with
more general biomedical concepts, and provides a more
robust evaluation against a manually created data set.
In addition to adapting existing measures to the biomedical domain, there has been some work in creating new
techniques for measuring the similarity of terms and concepts. Work by Wilbur and Yang deﬁnes a strength
metric which is used to retrieve relevant articles using lexical techniques. The metric uses the correlation between the
occurrences of a term in documents with the subjects of the
documents to deﬁne the strength of the term. This metric is
1 All six of these measures were originally implemented in the Word-
Net::Similarity package, which can be found at 
dist/WordNet-Similarity.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
used by the PubMed service to index and retrieve relevant
biomedical documents. Research done by Spasic and Ananiadou , deﬁnes a new similarity metric based on a variation of edit distance applied at a word level. In short,
the semantic similarity of two terms is the cost associated
with converting one term to another, using insert, delete
and replace operations on words (instead of letters). This
method additionally uses the UMLS taxonomy to minimize the eﬀect of word variants. It also varies the costs
associated with the operations, based on the ‘‘semantic
load’’ of the word being edited. For example, deleting a
known term present in the UMLS has a higher cost than
deleting a conjunction.
Later in this paper, we describe a measure based on context vectors—inspired by Schu¨tze’s method for word
sense discrimination. This, in turn, is an adaptation of
Latent Semantic Indexing commonly used in Information Retrieval. Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) and Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA) have been shown to be useful in
the biomedical domain for indexing and retrieval of clinical
records , for classifying medical events and
for managing variations in medical terminology . In
our research, we use some LSA principles for the vectorbased measure.
In the realm of domain-independent Natural Language
Processing, semantic similarity has been recently used in
numerous tasks such as spelling correction , word sense
disambiguation , information extraction and
textual inference . All of these applications show that
semantic similarity and semantic relatedness have proven
useful in a domain-independent setting.
3. Knowledge sources
In this section, we describe the three biomedical information resources used by the measures. All of the measures
described later in this article were originally based on
WordNet. Since WordNet is a domain-independent lexical
resource, it has very little coverage in the biomedical
domain (as shown by ). To make the measures more
eﬀective in a domain-speciﬁc setting, we substituted the
underlying domain-independent knowledge sources with
resources from the biomedical domain. A description of
these resources follows.
3.1. SNOMED-CT
SNOMED-CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine, Clinical Terms) is an ontological/terminological
resource that has a wide coverage of the clinical domain.
It is produced by the College of American Pathologists
and is now distributed as part of the UMLS through
the National Library of Medicine. SNOMED-CT is used
for indexing electronic medical records, ICU monitoring,
clinical decision support, medical research studies, clinical
trials, computerized physician order entry, disease surveillance, image indexing and consumer health information
services. The version of SNOMED-CT we use in this
study is from 2004 and consists of more than 361,800
unique concepts with over 975,000 descriptions (entry
terms) .
The terminology is organized into 13 hierarchies at the
top level: clinical ﬁndings, procedures, observable entities,
body structures, organisms, substances, physical objects,
physical forces, events, geographical environments, social
contexts, context-dependent categories, and staging and
scales. There is one overarching root node that joins all
13 hierarchies together. The concepts and their descriptions
are linked with approximately 1.47 million semantic relationships including is-a, assists, treats, prevents, associated
etiology, associated morphology, has property, has specimen,
associated topography, has object, has manifestation, associated with, classiﬁes, has ingredient, mapped to, mapped from,
measures, clinically associated with, used by, anatomic structure is physical part of.
3.2. The Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes
This resource consists of 1,000,000 clinical notes collected over the year 2003 which cover a variety of major
medical specialties at the Mayo Clinic. Clinical notes have
a number of speciﬁc characteristics that are not found in
other types of discourse, such as news articles or even scientiﬁc medical articles found in MEDLINE. Clinical notes
are generated in the process of treating a patient at a clinic
and contain the record of the patient-physician encounter.
These notes are typically dictated and represent a kind of
quasi-spontaneous discourse where the dictations are
made partly from notes and partly from memory. More
often than not, the speech tends to be telegraphic which
challenges
Processing.
At the Mayo Clinic, the dictations are transcribed by
trained personnel and are stored in the patient’s Electronic
Medical Record. These transcriptions are then made available for health science research. The notes are semi-structured
subsections such as Chief Complaint (CC), History of Present Illness (HPI), Impression/Report/Plan (IP), Final
Diagnoses (DX), among others.
We are particularly interested in the CC, HPI, IP and
DX section of the clinical notes. The CC section records
the reason for visit; HPI section has information of what
other treatments/problems the patient has had in the
past; IP section contains the diagnostic and current treatment information, while the DX section is a summary of
the IP section – it contains only a list of diagnoses.
Other sections such as SI (Special Instructions) and
CM (Current Medications) are less interesting from the
standpoint of semantic relatedness measures, although
if we were to focus on computing semantic relatedness
between medications, then we may want to consider
the CM section as well. The SI section contains administrative information that is not relevant to the patient’s
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
condition. The CM section contains a list of medications
that were prescribed to the patient. The medications on
this list may or may not be related to the condition
described in the note; however, the relevant medications
tend to be repeated in the IP and HPI sections. We have
eliminated the CM section from consideration for now
because it may introduce spurious associations on the
one hand and may be redundant with the IP and HPI
sections on the other.
3.3. The Mayo Clinic Thesaurus
The Mayo Clinic Thesaurus is a rich source of clinical
problem descriptions that have been systematically collected at the Mayo Clinic since 1909. The Mayo Clinic Thesaurus
has its roots
indexing system,
introduced at Mayo to index clinical problem descriptions
in 1909; it was implemented using 5 · 8 inch index cards.
The index was substantially modiﬁed to a bi-axial nomenclature in the course of migrating the Mayo index to IBM
Hollerith cards around 1935, and expanded again during
our migration to electronic computing environments from
1960. Since 1996, short summaries of patient diagnoses
have been created, manually coded and stored in a database. At the time of this study, this resource contained over
16 million unique diagnostic phrases expressed through
natural language that are classiﬁed into over 21,000 diagnostic categories and represents an utterance level thesaurus.
phrase-category
5,167,428 unique phrases that represent diagnostic statements. Each diagnostic statement has been recorded by a
practicing physician at the Mayo Clinic as part of the
patient’s medical record, manually coded and cataloged
for subsequent retrieval using a Mayo Clinic modiﬁed Hospital International Classiﬁcation of Diseases Adaptation
(HICDA). The HICDA classiﬁcation is a hierarchy consisting of four levels. The top level is the most general and has
19 categories such as Neoplasms, Diseases of the Circulatory
System, etc. The next three levels group diagnoses into
more speciﬁc categories.
The Mayo Clinic Thesaurus is constructed on the
assumption that if several diagnostic phrases have been
classiﬁed to the same category in the HICDA hierarchy,
then these phrases can be considered as synonymous at
the level of granularity aﬀorded by HICDA. For example,
diagnostic phrases such as ‘‘primary localized hilar cholangiocarcinoma’’ and ‘‘cholangiocarcinoma of the Klatskin
variety’’ are linked in a thesaurus-like fashion because
these two statements have been manually classiﬁed the
same way. We consider these two phrases nearly synonymous and use them to generate quasi-deﬁnitions for terms
found in both SNOMED-CT and this utterance level thesaurus of diagnostic phrases.
We attempt to reduce the inevitable noise and redundancy in this collection by excluding those phrases that
occur 5 times or less and those phrases that are classiﬁed
as ‘‘Admission, diagnosis not given.’’ After these restrictions,
the original 5,167,428 diagnostic statements are reduced to
a vocabulary of 381,673 terms. Of these, 9951 (2.6%) are
also found on the list of SNOMED-CT descriptions via
simple string matching. The terms were placed in lowercase
prior to matching.2 After lowercasing, the list of descriptions from SNOMED-CT contained 798,168 unique
terms. The overlap of 9951 terms with the Mayo Clinic
Thesaurus constitutes 1.3% of the total number of unique
lowercased SNOMED-CT terms. Due to the simplicity
of the matching method, these data provide only a very
rough approximation to the actual intersection between
the three vocabularies. These data do suggest however that
incorporating SNOMED-CT into the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus would increase the coverage of either terminology
taken separately.
The Mayo Clinic Thesaurus is augmented by merging it
with the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) sub-hierarchy
of the UMLS (version 2003AB) and the 2003 version of
SNOMED-CT
incorporation
augmentation
SNOMED-CT concepts to clusters of terms in the Mayo
Clinic Thesaurus. If a term appeared in more than one
source, the duplicates were eliminated after the terms were
linked to a Mayo Clinic Thesaurus ID.
4. Measures of semantic similarity and relatedness
relatedness
humans regarding the relatedness of pairs of concepts.
Humans usually agree of the relative relatedness of concepts . For example, most humans would agree that
bird is more related to feather than it is to fork or to car.
Research has shown that humans use the context of words and concepts to build a mental semantic
representation of concepts. Over time humans encounter
similar contexts for diﬀerent concepts. Consequently,
humans tend to agree on the semantic relatedness of
Many ideas have been proposed to automatically calculate the semantic relatedness of words to correspond
closely to those by human subjects. Some of the commonly used methods derive statistical information from
text corpora and combine that information with a lexical
resource such as WordNet to make semantic relatedness
judgments that have been shown to have a high correlation with those of human subjects . Additionally,
these techniques have been shown to be useful for many
Natural Language Processing tasks such as word sense
disambiguation , spelling correction and information extraction . In this section, we describe several measures based on WordNet that attempt to quantify
the semantic relatedness of concepts. Additionally, we
2 Simple lowercasing was used to maximize the processing speed. A
more sophisticated approach to lexical normalization such as the Lexical
Variant Generator (LVG) developed at the National Library of Medicine
would result in improved matching.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
describe how these measures were adapted to make more
accurate judgments in the biomedical domain. The ﬁve
measures of semantic similarity all use SNOMED-CT,
while the three similarity measures based on information
content also use the Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical
Notes. The Context Vector measure of relatedness only
uses the Mayo Clinic Corpus and the Mayo Clinic
Thesaurus.
Before describing the measures, we would like to
emphasize the diﬀerence between semantic similarity and
semantic relatedness. Semantically similar concepts are
deemed to be related on the basis of their likeness.
Semantic relatedness, on the other hand, is a more general notion of relatedness, not speciﬁcally tied to the
shape or form of the concept. In other words, semantic
similarity can be considered a special case of semantic
relatedness.
similarity
described here are based on is-a relations that link concepts (directly or indirectly) found in a hierarchy. These
measures can simply be based on the path lengths
between concepts, or they may augment such structural
information with corpus based statistics. Measures of
semantic relatedness are more general, and can include
information about other relations, or may be based on
co-occurrence statistics from corpora. We describe several existing measures of similarity and relatedness in this
section, focusing particularly on those that we adapted
for use with SNOMED-CT. A general classiﬁcation of
the measures and their relative advantages and disadvantages is provided in Fig. 1.
4.1. Path ﬁnding measures
When concepts are organized in a hierarchy, where more
general concepts are near the root of the hierarchy, and
more speciﬁc ones near at the leaves, it is convenient to
measure similarity according to the path lengths between
concepts. In fact, there have been a variety of such
approaches proposed in both the biomedical domain and
in domain-independent NLP techniques.
Rada et al. developed a measure based on path
lengths between concepts in the Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH) ontology, which is distributed by the National
Library of Medicine. They relied on broader than relations,
which link to successively more or less speciﬁc concepts as
you travel from concept to concept. They used this measure
to improve information retrieval by ranking documents
retrieved from MEDLINE, a corpus made up of abstracts
of biomedical journal articles. More recently, Caviedes and
Cimino developed a measure called CDist which ﬁnds
the shortest path between two concepts in the UMLS.
Their evaluation relative to a small set of concepts and concept clusters drawn from a subset of the UMLS (consisting of MeSH, ICD-9-CM3 and SNOMED-CT) shows
that even such relatively simple approaches tend to yield
reliable results.
Wu and Palmer present a measure of similarity for
general English that relies on ﬁnding the most speciﬁc con-
Count of edges between concepts - Simplicity
- Requires a rich and consistent
hierarchy;
- no multiple inheritance
- WordNet nouns only
- IS-A relations only
Path length to subsumer, scaled
by subsumers path to root
- Simplicity
- WordNet nouns only
- IS-A relations only
Finds the shortest path between
concepts, and log smoothing
- Simplicity
- Corrects for depth of
- WordNet nouns only
- IS-A relations only
Relies on synsets in WordNet
- Measures relatedness
of all parts of speech
- more than IS-A
- WordNet specific
- Relies on synsets and relations not
available in UMLS
Information Content (IC) of the
least common subsumer (LCS)
- Uses empirical
information from
- Does not use the IC of individual
concepts, only that of the LCS
- WordNet nouns only
- IS-A relations only
Extensions of Resnik; scale LCS
by IC of concepts
-Accounts for the IC of
individual concepts,
only that of the LCS
- WordNet nouns only
- IS-A relations only
Patwardhan
& Pedersen
Creates context vectors that
represent the meaning of
concepts derived from cooccurrence statistics of corpora
- Measures relatedness
of all parts of speech
- No underlying
structure required
- Uses empirical
knowledge implicit in a
corpus of data
- Definitions can be short,
inconsistent
- Computationally intensive
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of measures of semantic similarity and relatedness and their relative advantages and disadvantages.
3 International Classiﬁcation of Diseases, 9th revision, Clinical
Modiﬁcation.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
cept that subsumes both of the concepts being measured.
The path length from this shared concept to the root of
the ontology is scaled by the sum of the distances of the concepts to the subsuming concept. Leacock and Chodorow
 deﬁne a similarity measure that is based on ﬁnding the
shortest path between two concepts and scaling that value
by twice the maximum depth of the hierarchy, and then taking the logarithm of the resulting score. In both of these
measures, the path length between concepts is scaled in some
way by the overall depth or size of the hierarchy, to avoid
reliance strictly on path lengths, which can be misleading
due to the fact that the semantic similarity between concepts
that is represented by a single link will vary depending on
where that link is found in the hierarchy. A link between
two very general concepts may imply a reasonably large difference between the concepts, while one between two very
speciﬁc concepts might represent a small diﬀerence.
There have been relatively few attempts to develop path
based measures that rely on relations beyond is-a. Given
the richness of relations found in resources such as
SNOMED-CT, we believe that this is a promising area
of future work, however, we have not included such measures in this study. One example of a possible candidate
for adaptation is the relatedness measure of Hirst and St-
Onge . Their measure, which is based on WordNet
determines the relatedness between two concepts by ﬁnding
the nature of the path that joins them. A path that is not
too long and has relatively few changes in direction represents a relatively higher degree of relatedness as compared
to a path which is long with many changes in direction.
For the experiments in this article, we developed two
path-based
path-length
SNOMED-CT, and an adaptation to SNOMED-CT
of a measure proposed by Leacock and Chodorow. The
path-length measure essentially computes the similarity
between two concepts by counting the numbers of nodes
on the shortest path between them in SNOMED-CT’s
is-a hierarchy. The shortest path includes both the concept
nodes. The inverse of the path length is deﬁned as the similarity of the two concepts. The adaptation of the Leacock
and Chodorow measure is very similar to the path-length
measure, except that the Leacock and Chodorow measure
scales this shortest path length by the depth of the taxonomy. Mathematically, the similarity of two concepts c1 and
c2 using the path-length measure (path) is deﬁned as:
simpathðc1; c2Þ ¼ 1=p;
where p is number of nodes on the shortest path between
the two concepts in SNOMED-CT. Similarly, the similarity of two concepts c1 and c2 using the Leacock and Chodorow measure (lch) is computed as
simlchðc1; c2Þ ¼  log
where p is number of nodes on the shortest path between
the two concepts in SNOMED-CT and depth is the maximum depth of the hierarchy.
Note that SNOMED-CT allows multiple inheritance,
i.e. a node in the hierarchy can have multiple parents (possibly in diﬀerent parts of the taxonomy). Thus multiple
possible paths can exist between any two concepts. However, we select only the shortest path among those, for both
the measures.
4.2. Information content measures
The limitation of purely path based measures is that the
degree of semantic similarity implied by a single link is not
consistent. Links found between very general concepts convey somewhat smaller amounts of similarity than do links
between very speciﬁc concepts.
Resnik attempts to address this problem by augmenting concepts with a corpus-based statistic known as information content, which is essentially a measure of the
speciﬁcity of a concept. The information content of each
concept in a hierarchy is calculated based on the frequency
of occurrence of that concept in a large corpus of text. A
concept with high information content is very speciﬁc,
while lower information content values are associated with
more general concepts.
The information content of a concept is estimated by
counting the frequency of that concept in a large corpus
of text. Note, however, that a single concept can be
mapped to multiple lexical terms in text, and conversely a
single lexical term can be mapped to multiple concepts.
Thus, to get frequency estimates for concepts, Resnik suggests distributing the frequency count of a term equally
over the concepts it maps to. But it has also been shown
 that assigning all of the concepts mapped to a single
term, the same frequency count as the term also works well.
In this research, the frequency count assigned to a concept
is the sum of the frequency counts of all the terms that map
to the concept.
Additionally, the deﬁnition of information content
requires that the frequency count of every concept include
the frequency counts of all subsumed concepts in an is-a
hierarchy. For example, the frequency count for the concept of disease would include frequency counts of tuberculosis and inﬂuenza (among others). Similarly, the concept
corresponding to the root node of the is-a hierarchy has
the maximum frequency count, since it includes the frequency counts of every other concept in the hierarchy.
Thus, the frequency counts associated with concepts higher
up in the is-a hierarchy is always greater than or equal to
those lower down in the hierarchy.
After obtaining the frequency counts of all concepts, the
information content of each concept c is computed as:
ICðcÞ ¼  log
freqðrootÞ
where freq(c) is the frequency of concept c and freq(root)
is the frequency of the root of the hierarchy.
Using this notion of information content, Resnik 
deﬁnes a measure of similarity that holds that two concepts
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
are semantically similar proportional to the amount of
information they share. The quantity of shared information is determined by the information content of the most
speciﬁc concept in the hierarchy that subsumes both the
given concepts, which is referred to as the Lowest Common
Subsumer. Mathematically, the Resnik measure (res) computes the similarity of concepts c1 and c2 as:
simresðc1; c2Þ ¼ ICðlcsðc1; c2ÞÞ;
where lcs(c1,c2) is the lowest common subsumer of concepts c1 and c2, and IC returns the information content
of the concept.
However, the Resnik measure may not be able to make
ﬁne grained distinctions since many concepts may share the
same Lowest Common Subsumer, and would therefore
have identical values of similarity. Jiang and Conrath 
and Lin developed measures that scale the information
content of the subsuming concept by the information content of the individual concepts. Lin does this via a ratio,
and Jiang and Conrath with a diﬀerence. The Jiang and
Conrath (jcn) measure computes the semantic distance
(inverse of similarity) of concepts c1 and c2 as:
distjcnðc1; c2Þ ¼ ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ  2  ICðlcsðc1; c2ÞÞ
and the Lin measure (lin) computes semantic similarity of
concepts c1 and c2 as:
simlinðc1; c2Þ ¼ 2  ICðlcsðc1; c2ÞÞ
ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ ;
where lcs(c1, c2) is the lowest common subsumer of concepts c1 and c2, and IC returns the information content
of the concept.
In our study, we have adapted all three of these measures (res, lin and jcn) to the biomedical domain by using
the the is-a hierarchy of SNOMED-CT. We used the
Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes as the source of
the frequency counts of the SNOMED-CT concepts,
required to derive their information content values.
4.3. Context Vector measure
Patwardhan developed a measure of semantic
relatedness that represents a concept as a Context Vector.
This is intended to be a more general representation than
similarity measurements, since the source of the information for the context vectors is a raw corpus of text, not
the paths found between concepts in an ontology. This
technique is an adaptation of Schu¨tze’s method of
word sense discrimination, which is in turn an adaptation
of Latent Semantic Indexing as practiced in Information Retrieval. In this technique, we build co-occurrence
vectors that represent the contextual proﬁle of concepts.
The cosine of the angle between vectors corresponding to
two given concepts then determines the relatedness of those
We start by creating Word Vectors, which are ﬁrst order
context vectors, for every content word w in our corpus of
text. The dimensions of these vectors are content words
from the same corpus of text (each dimension corresponding to one content word). The vector for a word w is created as follows:
1. Initialize the ﬁrst order context vector to a zero vector ~w.
2. Find every occurrence of word w in the given corpus.
3. For each occurrence of w, increment by 1 those dimensions of ~w which correspond to the words present in a
speciﬁed window of context around w.
The ﬁrst order context vector ~w, therefore, encodes the
co-occurrence information of word w and is called its word
vector. In this research, we use the Mayo Clinic Corpus of
Clinical Notes to create word vectors for all content words
occurring in the clinical notes. We used one line of text as
the window of context.
Having created a set of word vectors, we then use these
corresponding
SNOMED-CT concept whose frequency in the corpus
of clinical notes exceeds a predeﬁned threshold. We use
the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus to get a list of descriptor terms
for each concept. The word vectors corresponding to the
descriptor terms of a concept are then aggregated to get
the context vector for that concept. Thus, a SNOMED-
CT concept is represented as the resultant of descriptor
term word vectors, where word vector represents the
‘‘contextual proﬁle’’ of the term, as computed from the
SNOMED-CT concept ‘‘angina pectoris’’ (SNOMED-
CT ID: 367416001) maps to a cluster of terms in the
Mayo Clinic Thesaurus (Cluster ID: M00587016). This
cluster also contains terms such as ‘‘vasospastic angina,’’
‘‘CAD with exertional angina,’’ ‘‘angina functional class
2,’’ ‘‘ischemic heart disease with angina pectoris’’ that are
not originally part of SNOMED-CT but are associated
with a SNOMED-CT concept via the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus. Thus, the context vector for ‘‘angina pectoris’’ is
computed as the resultant of the word vectors for ‘‘vasospastic angina,’’ ‘‘CAD with exertional angina,’’ ‘‘angina
functional class 2’’ and ‘‘ischemic heart disease with angina
pectoris.’’
The semantic relatedness of two concepts c1 and c2 is
then computed as the cosine of the angle between their context vectors:
relvectorðc1; c2Þ ¼ ~v1 ~v2
jv1j  jv2j ;
where~v1 and~v2 are the context vectors corresponding to c1
and c2, respectively.
5. Experimental data
Measures of semantic similarity and relatedness can be
evaluated both directly and indirectly. The direct method
compares the results of the measures relative to human
judgments; common standards for domain-independent
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
English are provided by pairs of manually rated concepts
as created by Rubenstein and Goodenough and Miller and Charles . The indirect methods evaluate measures based upon the performance of an application
that relies on the measures. Spelling correction and
word sense disambiguation have both been used as
applications to evaluate measures. Both of these studies
found the similarity measure of Jiang and Conrath to
be most eﬀective at improving the results of their application, although the word sense disambiguation evaluation also reported that a measure based on ﬁnding
deﬁnitions
successful.
There are no existing sets of words for the biomedical
domain that have been manually scored for similarity by
human experts that could be used as a direct means of
evaluation. In this research, we created a test bed of pairs
of medical terms that were scored by human experts
according to their relatedness. A Mayo Clinic physician
(Alexander Ruggieri, MD) trained in Medical Informatics,
followed the methodology of Rubenstein and Goodenough
and generated a set of 120 term pairs that consists of 30
pairs in each of four broad categories of relatedness values
from not related at all (1) to very closely related (4). Subsequently, we had 13 medical coders annotate each pair
with a relatedness value on a scale of 1–10. A wider scale
was chosen for experimental purposes—it is easier to
collapse a wider scale than to expand a narrow one. We
Rubenstein
Goodenough’s.
A group of medical coders specially trained to classify
clinical diagnoses using the same HICDA classiﬁcation system as the one used to construct the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus annotated the test set for this study. These medical
coders had between ﬁve and 14 years of coding experience
at the time of the study. Although they do not have formal
training in medicine, by virtue of working with clinical
records and terminologies have had signiﬁcant exposure
to medical language and we considered them as good candidates for this annotation task.
We implemented two measures of semantic similarity
SNOMED-CT: the path-length measure and the Leacock
and Chodorow measure. We also implemented three measures that are based on a combination of information content statistics derived from the entire Mayo Clinic Corpus
of Clinical Notes, and the is-a relations provided by
SNOMED-CT. Finally, we implemented a Context Vector measure by ﬁnding co-occurrence vectors from the
Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes based on the
descriptor terms associated with concepts in the Mayo
Clinic thesaurus. As such the Context Vector measure
was the only measure that was not dependent on a hierarchical terminology or ontology in some way. We computed
the vectors in two diﬀerent ways, ﬁrst using the entire
Mayo Corpus of Clinical Notes, and then using just the
IP sections.
6. Experimental results
6.1. Inter-annotator agreement
As a control, we had 10 of the 13 medical coders4 annotate the 30 domain-independent English term pairs in the
tests sets of Rubenstein and Goodenough and of Miller
and Charles using a 10 point scale. This was done to make
sure the medical coders understood the instructions and the
notion of relatedness. The correlation of the medical coders’ judgments with those of the annotators used by Rubenstein and Goodenough was a relatively high value of 0.84.
Similarly, the correlation with the Miller and Charles’s test
set was 0.88. The correlation on the medical test set of 120
concept pairs was 0.51. To derive a more reliable test set we
extracted only those pairs whose agreement was high. This
resulted in a set of 30 concept pairs (displayed in Table 1)
that were then annotated by three physicians and a subset
of 9 medical coders from the 13 who annotated the original
120 pairs. All three physicians are specialists in the area of
rheumatology. The fact that all of them specialize in the
same sub-ﬁeld of medicine can be helpful in getting good
inter-rater agreement. Each pair was annotated on a 4
point scale: practically synonymous (4.0), related (3.0),
marginally related (2.0) and unrelated (1.0). We have listed
the term pairs and the averaged scores assigned by the physicians and the experts in Table 1. Term pair 20 (shown in
boldface) has been excluded from the test bed because the
term ‘‘lung inﬁltrates’’ was not found in the SNOMED-
CT terminology. Thus, the resulting test set consists of
29 pairs; however, we were able to calculate the inter-rater
agreement using all 30 pairs. The average correlation
physicians
correlation
between medical coders is 0.78. We also computed the correlation across the two groups after we averaged the scores
each member of the respective groups had assigned to each
pair in the test set. The correlation across groups is 0.85.
6.2. Comparison among measures
We scored each of the 29 test bed pairs using each of the
measures, and then computed the correlation between the
measures’ output and the human expert judgment scores
shown in Table 1. These correlations are shown in Table
2. The highest correlation is achieved by the Context Vector measure when it is derived only from the IP section of
the clinical notes. This is particularly true in the case of correlation with the physician judgments. The choice of corpora to use with Context Vector is clearly critical, since the
correlation attained by this measure when using the entire
Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes drops considerably.
4 Not all of the experts were always available to us at all times, so the
number of annotators changed from one set of annotations to the next.
No new experts were added, only subtracted based on their availability
and work load.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
In fact, the Context Vector measure based on all the clinical notes performs much like the Lin measure.
We also note that the Context Vector measure produces
a much closer correlation with physicians than with the
medical coders. For all other measures, this is reversed.
We hypothesize that this is due to the nature of the professional training and activities of the two groups—medical
coders are trained in the use of hierarchical classiﬁcations,
while physicians are trained to diagnose and treat patients.
One possible indication from this observation is that the
data contained in the clinical notes may reﬂect certain
kinds of semantic relations between medical concepts in
the mind of a physician better than a hand-crafted medical
ontology such as SNOMED-CT. By all means, more
experimentation is necessary to test this hypothesis.
The three information content measures occupied the
middle range of performance, with Lin showing a considerably higher level of correlation to be physicians and
medical coders. Both Jiang and Conrath, and Resnik performed at somewhat lower levels than Lin, and at identical levels to each other. This is in contrast to direct
evaluations made to the Miller and Charles test set in a
domain-independent setting, where both Budanitsky and
Hirst and Patwardhan et al. report that Jiang
and Conrath achieves much higher levels of correlation
than Lin or Resnik.
The overall success of the vector measure suggests that
an ontology-independent measure can perform at least as
well or better than ontology-based measures. However, in
the same way that the Context Vector measure is strongly
aﬀected by the corpora it is derived from, the same may be
true of the information content measures. An important
avenue for future work is to experiment with using diﬀerent
portions of the clinical notes and diﬀerent types of corpora
in arriving at information content estimates.
6.3. Impact of size and type of corpora on Context Vector
The Context Vector measure is the most ﬂexible of the
measures presented here, and as such requires that a number of informed choices be made in order for it to function
eﬀectively. Among the most critical is the amount and type
of corpora to derive the vectors. To determine if the section
types from the clinical notes had an impact on the performance of the Context Vector measure, we experimented
with the four section types when using a 100K word portion of the clinical notes. Table 3 displays the correlation
of the Context Vectors derived from these diﬀerent sections, sorted in order of correlation with the physicians.
The best correlation is achieved on the corpus compiled
from the IP sections, closely followed by DX. This is not
surprising as the IP section contains the diagnostic information pertinent to the patient’s condition and intuitively
should contain more closely related terms than other sections. The DX section is a summary of the IP section in
that it only contains the diagnoses without additional
descriptions. It is interesting to note that each of the subsections result in better performance than context vectors
derived from the entire corpus Table 4.
To evaluate the impact of the size of the corpora on the
Context Vector measure, we ran experiments with the Context Vector measure on varying amounts of the Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes ranging from 100,000 to 1
million words. For these experiments, we used data from
four sections of the clinical notes—Chief Complaint
Test bed of 30 medical term pairs; sorted in order of the averaged
physicians’ scores
Renal failure
Kidney failure
Myocardium
Miscarriage
Schizophrenia
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary edema
Metastasis
Adenocarcinoma
Calciﬁcation
Stomach cramps
Mitral stenosis
Atrial ﬁbrillation
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Lung inﬁltrates
Rheumatoid arthritis
Brain tumor
Intracranial hemorrhage
Carpel tunnel syndrome
Osteoarthritis
Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension
Antibiotic
Total knee replacement
Pulmonary embolus
Myocardial infarction
Pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Lung cancer
Cholangiocarcinoma
Colonoscopy
Lymphoid hyperplasia
Laryngeal cancer
Multiple sclerosis
Appendicitis
Osteoporosis
Rectal polyp
Xerostomia
Alcoholic cirrhosis
Peptic ulcer disease
Depression
Cellulites
Varicose vein
Entire knee meniscus
Hyperlidpidemia
Metastasis
The scores represent an averaged relatedness value (scale is 1–4) over all
participating physician and coder annotators.
Comparison of correlations across measures for physicians and coders
separately and combined
Vector (IP only, 1M notes)
Vector (All sect, 1M notes)
Jiang and Conrath
Leacock and Chodorow
Two types of the vector measure are presented—one trained on only the
Impression/Report/Plan section of clinical note and the other trained on
all sections.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
(CC), History of Present Illness (HPI), Impression/Plan
(IP) and Final Diagnosis (DX).
The number of words in each sized portion of the clinical notes is shown in Table 3. The number of words
(tokens) is found by excluding all words that occur less
than ﬁve times and more than 1000 times. The matrix size
indicates the number of unique words that are found given
those cutoﬀs. For example, there are 32,594 distinct word
types found in the 100,000 word portion of the clinical
notes. The co-occurrence matrix used in the Context Vector measure is symmetric, meaning that a word vector is
created for every word in the corpus that occurs in the designated frequency range, and two words are said to co-occur with each other when they are on the same line of text.
Test results relative to the test set of 29 term pairs are
shown in Fig. 2. The overall trend suggests that the correlation between relatedness judgments of the Context Vector measure and those of human experts improves with
larger amounts of data, where 300K size appears to be
the point where gains level oﬀ. Fig. 2 shows the correlation
of the Context Vector measure with the scores of the physicians and medical coders separately, as well as combined
scores averaged across both groups. The log line shows the
overall improvement with corpus size.
7. Limitations
Certain limitations of this work must be mentioned to
facilitate the interpretation of the results. The main limitation of this research is the relatively low inter-annotator
agreement on the initial set of 120 term pairs we compiled
to create the test set. To address this limitation, we focused
on the main goal of our project which was to compare several established measures of similarity and relatedness that
are based on manually compiled ontological knowledge
sources to an ontology-independent method. In the context
of these comparisons, we felt it was justiﬁed to take a subset of 30 of the 120 pairs that were agreed upon by the
majority of the annotators. Thus, this smaller set is more
reliable but is clearly biased towards ‘‘easy’’ term pairs.
The correlation values reported in this paper cannot be
interpreted in absolute terms; however, the reduced test
set can be used to establish relative performance of diﬀerent measures.
8. Conclusions and future work
In this article, we have shown the eﬃcacy of adapting
measures of semantic similarity and semantic relatedness
measures developed for domain-independent English to a
specialized subdomain of biomedicine represented by
SNOMED-CT. We have also shown that the ontology-independent Context Vector measure is at least as eﬀective
other ontology-dependent measures, provided that there
is a large enough corpus of unlabeled training data available. This ﬁnding is important because developing specialized ontologies such as WordNet, SNOMED-CT or
UMLS is a very labor intensive process. Also, there are
some indications that manually constructed ontology
may not fully reﬂect the reality of semantic relationships
in the mind of a practicing physician. The vector based
measure can help alleviate these problems in addition to
the beneﬁt of rapid adaptation to a new domain.
In the near future, we plan to extend the measures of
relatedness to use the UMLS as a source of the ontological relations for path-based measures, and to use the
UMLS deﬁnitions for the context vector measure. We also
would like to experiment with applications of semantic
relatedness measures to NLP tasks such as word-sense discrimination, information retrieval and spelling correction,
in the biomedical domain.
Correlation of the Context Vector measure derived from diﬀerent sections
of a 100K portion of the Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes
Physicians
10,883,117
21,593,156
Descriptive statistics (size and overall number of tokens) for varying sized
portions of Mayo Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes
# of Notes
Matrix size
# of Tokens
32594 · 32594
21,593,156
43179 · 43179
43,459,602
50928 · 50928
66,176,995
57328 · 57328
88,885,380
62733 · 62733
111,019,453
64910 · 64910
133,719,224
67382 · 67382
156,467,734
69883 · 69883
179,114,059
72911 · 72911
206,489,197
75195 · 75195
232,080,038
Corpus Size (X1000 notes)
Spearman rank correlation
Physicians
Log. (Physicians)
Fig. 2. Correlation of Context Vector measure with human experts across
diﬀerent training corpus sizes. The trendline is ﬁtted to the results obtained
by physicians on a logarithmic scale.
T. Pedersen et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 288–299
Acknowledgments
We thank the Mayo Clinic Medical Index staﬀas well as
Dr. Alexander Ruggieri, Dr. Peter Kent and Dr. Auethavekiat Paranee for their contribution to the annotation
of the test pairs. Dr. Ted Pedersen’s role in this work has
been partially supported by a National Science Foundation
Faculty Early CAREER Development Award (#0092784).
This work was also supported by the NLM Training Grant
in Medical Informatics (T15 LM07041-19) and the NIH
Multidisciplinary
Development Award Grant (K12/NICHD)-HD49078.