HAL Id: hal-00203752
 
Submitted on 14 Jan 2008
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Sampling strategies for bag-of-features image
classification
Emmanuel Nowak, Frédéric Jurie, Bill Triggs
To cite this version:
Emmanuel Nowak, Frédéric Jurie, Bill Triggs.
Sampling strategies for bag-of-features image classification.
9th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV ’06), May 2006, Graz, Austria.
pp.490-503, ￿10.1007/11744085_38￿. ￿hal-00203752￿
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features
Image Classiﬁcation
Eric Nowak1,2, Fr´ed´eric Jurie1, and Bill Triggs1
1 GRAVIR-CNRS-INRIA,
655 avenue de l’Europe,
Montbonnot 38330, France
{Eric.Nowak, Bill.Triggs, Frederic.Jurie}@inrialpes.fr
 
2 Bertin Technologie, Aix en Provence, France
Abstract. Bag-of-features representations have recently become popular for content based image classiﬁcation owing to their simplicity and
good performance. They evolved from texton methods in texture analysis. The basic idea is to treat images as loose collections of independent
patches, sampling a representative set of patches from the image, evaluating a visual descriptor vector for each patch independently, and using
the resulting distribution of samples in descriptor space as a characterization of the image. The four main implementation choices are thus how
to sample patches, how to describe them, how to characterize the resulting distributions and how to classify images based on the result. We
concentrate on the ﬁrst issue, showing experimentally that for a representative selection of commonly used test databases and for moderate to
large numbers of samples, random sampling gives equal or better classiﬁers than the sophisticated multiscale interest operators that are in
common use. Although interest operators work well for small numbers
of samples, the single most important factor governing performance is
the number of patches sampled from the test image and ultimately interest operators can not provide enough patches to compete. We also
study the inﬂuence of other factors including codebook size and creation
method, histogram normalization method and minimum scale for feature
extraction.
Introduction
This paper studies the problem of eﬀective representations for automatic image
categorization – classifying unlabeled images based on the presence or absence
of instances of particular visual classes such as cars, people, bicycles, etc. The
problem is challenging because the appearance of object instances varies substantially owing to changes in pose, imaging and lighting conditions, occlusions
and within-class shape variations (see ﬁg. 2). Ideally, the representation should
be ﬂexible enough to cover a wide range of visually diﬀerent classes, each with
large within-category variations, while still retaining good discriminative power
between the classes. Large shape variations and occlusions are problematic for
A. Leonardis, H. Bischof, and A. Prinz (Eds.): ECCV 2006, Part IV, LNCS 3954, pp. 490–503, 2006.
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
Fig. 1. Examples of multi-scale sampling methods. (1) Harris-Laplace (HL) with a
large detection threshold. (2) HL with threshold zero – note that the sampling is still
quite sparse. (3) Laplacian-of-Gaussian. (4) Random sampling.
rigid template based representations and their variants such as monolithic SVM
detectors, but more local ‘texton’ or ‘bag-of-features’ representations based on
coding local image patches independently using statistical appearance models
have good resistance to occlusions and within-class shape variations. Despite
their simplicity and lack of global geometry, they also turn out to be surprisingly discriminant, so they have proven to be eﬀective tools for classifying many
visual classes (e.g. , among others).
Our work is based on the bag-of-features approach. The basic idea of this is
that a set of local image patches is sampled using some method (e.g. densely, randomly, using a keypoint detector) and a vector of visual descriptors is evaluated
on each patch independently (e.g. SIFT descriptor, normalized pixel values).
The resulting distribution of descriptors in descriptor space is then quantiﬁed in
some way (e.g. by using vector quantization against a pre-speciﬁed codebook to
convert it to a histogram of votes for (i.e. patches assigned to) codebook centres) and the resulting global descriptor vector is used as a characterization of
the image (e.g. as feature vector on which to learn an image classiﬁcation rule
based on an SVM classiﬁer). The four main implementation choices are thus
how to sample patches, what visual patch descriptor to use, how to quantify the
resulting descriptor space distribution, and how to classify images based on the
resulting global image descriptor.
One of the main goals of this paper is to study the eﬀects of diﬀerent patch
sampling strategies on image classiﬁcation performance. The sampler is a critical
component of any bag-of-features method. Ideally, it should focus attention on
the image regions that are the most informative for classiﬁcation. Recently, many
authors have begun to use multiscale keypoint detectors (Laplacian of Gaussian,
F¨orstner, Harris-aﬃne, etc.) as samplers , but although
such detectors have proven their value in matching applications, they were not
designed to ﬁnd the most informative patches for image classiﬁcation and there
is some evidence that they do not do so . Perhaps surprisingly, we ﬁnd
that randomly sampled patches are often more discriminant than keypoint based
ones, especially when many patches are sampled to get accurate classiﬁcation
results (see ﬁgure 1). We also analyze the eﬀects of several other factors including
codebook size and the clusterer used to build the codebook. The experiments
are performed on a cross-section of commonly-used evaluation datasets to allow
us to identify the most important factors for local appearance based statistical
image categorization.
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
Related Work
Image classiﬁcation and object recognition are well studied areas with approaches
ranging from simple patch based voting to the alignment of detailed geometric
models. Here, in keeping with our approach to recognition, we provide only a
representative random sample of recent work on local feature based methods. We
classify these into two groups, depending on whether or not they use geometric
object models.
The geometric approaches represent objects as sets of parts whose positions
are constrained by the model. Inter-part relationships can be modelled pairwise
 , in terms of ﬂexible constellations or hierarchies , by co-occurrence 
or as rigid geometric models .
Such global models are potentially very
powerful but they tend to be computationally complex and sensitive to missed
part detections. Recently, “geometry free” bag-of-features models based purely
on characterizing the statistics of local patch appearances have received a lot of
attention owing to their simplicity, robustness, and good practical performance.
They evolved when texton based texture analysis models began to be applied to
object recognition. The name is by analogy with the bag-of-words representations
used in document analysis (e.g. ): image patches are the visual equivalents
of individual “words” and the image is treated as an unstructured set (“bag”)
Leung at al. sample the image densely, on each patch evaluating a bank of
Gabor-like ﬁlters and coding the output using a vector quantization codebook.
Local histograms of such ‘texton’ codes are used to recognize textures. Textons
are also used in content based image retrieval, e.g. . Lazebnik et al. take
a sparser bag-of-features approach, using SIFT descriptors over Harris-aﬃne
keypoints and avoiding global quantization by comparing histograms using
Earth Movers Distance . Csurka et al approach object classiﬁcation using
k-means-quantized SIFT descriptors over Harris-aﬃne keypoints . Winn et al.
 optimize k-means codebooks by choosing bins that can be merged. Fergus
et al. show that geometry-free bag-of-features approaches still allow objects
to be localized in images.
The above works use various patch selection, patch description, descriptor
recognition strategies. Patches are
 or densely . SIFT based , ﬁlter based
 and raw patch based representations are common. Both
k-means and agglomerative clustering are used to produce codebooks, and many diﬀerent histogram normalization techniques are in use. Our
work aims to quantify the inﬂuence of some of these diﬀerent choices on categorization performance.
We have run experiments on six publicly available and commonly used datasets,
three object categorization datasets and three texture datasets.
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
Fig. 2. Example of objects of Graz01 dataset: four images of the categories bike, car,
Object datasets. Graz01 contains 667, 640×480 pixel images containing
three visual categories (bicycle, car, person) in approximately balanced proportions (see ﬁgure 2). Xerox7 1 contains 1776 images, each belonging to exactly
one of the seven categories: bicycle, book, building, car, face, phone, tree. The
set is unbalanced (from 125 to 792 images per class) and the images sizes vary
 . Pascal-01 2 includes four categories: cars, bicycles, motorbikes and people. A 684 image training set and a 689 image test set
(‘test set 1’) are deﬁned.
Texture datasets. KTH-TIPS 3 contains 810, 200×200 images, 81 from each
of the following ten categories: aluminum foil, brown bread, corduroy, cotton,
cracker, linen, orange peel, sandpaper, sponge and styrofoam. UIUCTex 4 contains 40 images per classes of 25 textures distorted by signiﬁcant viewpoint
changes and some non-rigid deformations. Brodatz 5 contains 112 texture images, one per class. There is no viewpoint change or distortion. The images were
divided into thirds horizontally and vertically to give 9 images per class.
Experimental Settings
This section describes the default settings for our experimental studies. The multiscale Harris and LoG (Laplacian of Gaussian) interest points, and the randomly
sampled patches are computed using our team’s LAVA library6. The default parameter values are used for detection, except that detection threshold for interest
points is set to 0 (to get as many points as possible) and – for comparability with
other work – the minimum scale is set to 2 to suppress small regions (see §8).
1 ftp://ftp.xrce.xerox.com/pub/ftp-ipc/
2 
3 
4 grp
5 
6 
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
mean multi-class accuray
nb of points per image
Desc=GrayLevel
Fig. 3. Classiﬁers based on SIFT descriptors clearly out-perform ones based on normalized gray level pixel intensities, here for randomly sampled patches on the Graz
We use SIFT descriptors, again computed with the LAVA library with
default parameters: 8 orientations and 4×4 blocks of cells (so the descriptor
dimension is 128), with the cells being 3×3 pixels at the ﬁnest scale (scale 1).
Euclidean distance is used to compare and cluster descriptors.
We also tested codings based on normalized raw pixel intensities, but as
ﬁgure 3 shows, SIFT descriptor based codings clearly out-perform these. Possible
reasons include the greater translation invariance of SIFT, and its robust 3-stage
normalization process: it uses rectiﬁed (oriented) gradients, which are more local and hence more resistant to illumination gradients than complete patches,
followed by blockwise normalization, followed by clipping and renormalization.
Codebooks are initialized at randomly chosen input samples and optimized by
feeding randomly chosen images into online k-means (the memory required for
true k-means would be prohibitive for codebooks and training sets of this size).
Descriptors are coded by hard assignment to the nearest codebook centre,
yielding a histogram of codeword counts for each image. Three methods of converting histogram counts to classiﬁcation features were tested: raw counts; simple
binarization (the feature is 1 if the count is non-zero); and adaptive thresholding
of the count with a threshold chosen to maximize the Mutual Information between the feature and the class label on the training set. MI based thresholding
usually works best and is used as the default. Raw counts are not competitive
so results for them are not presented below.
Soft One-versus-one SVM’s are used for classiﬁcation. In multi-class cases the
class with the most votes wins. The SVM’s are linear except in §9 where Gaussian
kernels are used to make comparisons with previously published results based
on nonlinear classiﬁers. The main performance metric is the unweighted mean
over the classes of the recognition rate for each class. This is better adapted to
unbalanced datasets than the classical “overall recognition rate”, which is biased
towards over-represented classes. By default we report average values over six
complete runs, including the codebook creation and the category prediction. For
most of the datasets the recognition rates are estimated using two-fold cross
validation, but for Pascal-01 dataset we follow the PASCAL protocol and use
the speciﬁed ‘learning set’/’test set 1’ split for evaluation.
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
Inﬂuence of the Sampling Method
The idea of representing images as collections of independent local patches has
proved its worth for object recognition or image classiﬁcation, but raises the
question of which patches to choose. Objects may occur at any position and
scale in the image so patches need to be extracted at all scales (e.g. ).
Dense sampling (processing every pixel at every scale, e.g. ) captures the
most information, but it is also memory and computation intensive, with much
of the computation being spent on processing relatively featureless (and hence
possibly uninformative) regions. Several authors argue that computation can be
saved and classiﬁcation performance can perhaps be improved by using some
kind of salience metric to sample only the most informative regions. Examplebased recognition proceeds essentially by matching new images to examples so
it is natural to investigate the local feature methods developed for robust image
multi-class perf.
points per image
multi-class perf.
points per image
multi-class perf.
points per image
multi-class perf.
points per image
multi-class perf.
points per image
multi-class perf.
points per image
Fig. 4. Mean multi-class classiﬁcation accuracy as a function of the number of sampled
patches used for classiﬁcation. Reading left to right and top to bottom, the datasets
are: Brodatz, Graz01; KTH-TIPS, Pascal-01; UIUCTex and Xerox7.
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
matching in this context. In particular, many authors have studied recognition
methods based on generic interest point detectors . Such
methods are attractive because they have good repeatability and translation, scale, 2D rotation and perhaps even aﬃne transformation invariance .
However the available interest or salience metrics are based on generic low level
image properties bearing little direct relationship to discriminative power for
visual recognition, and none of the above authors verify that the patches that
they select are signiﬁcantly more discriminative than random ones. Also, it is
clear that one of the main parameters governing classiﬁcation accuracy is simply
the number of patches used, and almost none of the existing studies normalize
for this eﬀect.
We investigate these issues by comparing three patch sampling strategies.
Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG): a multi-scale keypoint detector proposed by 
and popularized by . Harris-Laplace (Harris): the (non-aﬃne) multi-scale keypoint detector used in . Random (Rand): patches are selected randomly from
a pyramid with regular grids in position and densely sampled scales. All patches
have equal probability, so samples at ﬁner scales predominate. For all datasets we
build 1000 element codebooks with online k-means and use MI-based histogram
encoding (see §7) with a linear SVM classiﬁer.
Figure 4 plots mean multi-class classiﬁcation rates for the diﬀerent detectors
and datasets. (These represent means over six independent training runs – for
typical standard deviations see table 1). Each plot shows the eﬀect of varying
the mean number of samples used per image. For the keypoint detectors this
is done indirectly by varying their ‘cornerness’ thresholds, but in practice they
usually only return a limited number of points even when their thresholds are
set to zero. This is visible in the graphs. It is one of the main factors limiting the
performance of the keypoint based methods: they simply can not sample densely
enough to produce leading-edge classiﬁcation results. Performance almost always
increases with the number of patches sampled and random sampling ultimately
dominates owing to its ability to produce an unlimited number of patches. For
the keypoint based approaches it is clear that points with small cornerness are
useful for classiﬁcation (which again encourages us to use random patches), but
there is evidence that saturation occurs earlier than for the random approach.
For smaller numbers of samples the keypoint based approaches do predominate
Table 1. The inﬂuence of codebook optimization. The table gives the means and standard deviations over six runs of the mean classiﬁcation rates of the diﬀerent detectors
on each dataset, for codebooks reﬁned using online k-means (KM), and for randomly
sampled codebooks (no KM).
Rand KM Rand no KM LoG KM LoG no KM H-L KM H-L no KM
74.2 ± 0.9
71.3 ± 0.9
76.1 ± 0.5
72.8 ± 0.9
70.0 ± 1.4
68.8 ± 2.0
KTHTIPS 91.3 ± 1.1
92.1 ± 0.4
88.2 ± 1.0
85.0 ± 1.8
83.1 ± 2.1
81.3 ± 1.1
80.4 ± 1.4
77.4 ± 0.9
81.7 ± 1.0
78.7 ± 2.3
73.6 ± 2.3
67.8 ± 2.8
81.3 ± 0.8
75.2 ± 1.4
81.0 ± 1.0
76.0 ± 0.8
83.5 ± 0.8
80.4 ± 0.8
88.9 ± 1.3
87.8 ± 0.5
80.5 ± 0.6
79.9 ± 0.9
66.6 ± 1.8
65.6 ± 1.5
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
in most cases, but there is no clear winner overall and in Xerox7 the random
method is preferred even for small numbers of samples.
Inﬂuence of the Codebook
This section studies the inﬂuence of the vector quantization codebook size and
construction method on the classiﬁcation results.
Codebook size. The number of codebook centres is one of the major parameters of the system, as observed, e.g. by , who report that performance improves
steadily as the codebook grows. We have run similar experiments, using online
(rather than classical) k-means, testing larger codebooks, and studying the relationship with the number of patches sampled in the test image. Figure 5 shows
the results. It reports means of multi-class error rates over 6 runs on the Xerox7
dataset for the three detectors. The other settings are as before. For each detector there are initially substantial gains in performance as the codebook size
is increased, but overﬁtting becomes apparent for the large codebooks shown
here. For the keypoint based methods there is also evidence of overﬁtting for
patches per image
Codebook size
patches per image
Codebook size
patches per image
Codebook size
Fig. 5. All but bottom right: The inﬂuence of codebook size and number of points
sampled per image for: random patches (top left); LoG detector (top right) and Harris
detector (bottom left). Bottom right: the inﬂuence of the images used to construct
the codebook, for KTH, Graz, and random SIFT vector codebooks on the KTH texture dataset and the Graz object dataset. The values are the means of the per-class
classiﬁcation error rates.
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
large numbers of samples, whereas the random sampler continues to get better
as more samples are drawn. There does not appear to be a strong interaction
between the inﬂuence of the number of test samples and that of the codebook
size. The training set size is also likely to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
results but this was not studied.
Codebook construction algorithm. §4 presented two methods for constructing codebooks: randomly selecting centres from among the sampled training
patches, and online k-means initialized using this. Table 1 compares these methods, again using 1000 element codebooks, MI-based normalization and a linear
SVM classiﬁer. 1000 patches per image are sampled (less if the detector can not
return 1000). Except in one case (KTH-TIPS with random patches), the online
k-means codebooks are better than the random ones. The average gain (2.7%) is
statistically signiﬁcant, but many of the individual diﬀerences are not. So we see
that even randomly selected codebooks produce very respectable results. Optimizing the centres using online k-means provides small but worthwhile gains,
however the gains are small compared to those available by simply increasing
the number of test patches sampled or the size of the codebook.
Images used for codebook construction. One can also ask whether it is
necessary to construct a dedicated codebook for a speciﬁc task, or whether a
codebook constructed from generic images suﬃces (c.f. ). Figure 5(bottom
right) shows mean error rates for three codebooks on the KTH-Tips texture
dataset and the Graz object dataset. Unsurprisingly, the KTH codebook gives
the best results on the KTH images and the Graz codebook on the Graz images.
Results are also given for a codebook constructed from random SIFT vectors
(random 128-D vectors, not the SIFT vectors of random points). This is clearly
not as good as the codebooks constructed on real images (even very diﬀerent
ones), but it is much better than random: even completely random codings have
a considerable amount of discriminative power.
Inﬂuence of Histogram Normalization Method
Coding all of the input images gives a matrix of counts, the analogue of the
document-term matrix in text analysis. The columns are labelled by codebook
elements, and each row is an unnormalized histogram counting the occurences of
the diﬀerent codebook elements in a given image. As in text analysis, using raw
counts directly for classiﬁcation is not optimal, at least for linear SVM classiﬁers
(e.g. ), owing to its sensitivity to image size and underlying word frequencies.
A number of diﬀerent normalization methods have been studied. Here we only
compare two, both of which work by rows (images) and binarize the histogram.
The ﬁrst sets an output element to 1 if its centre gets any votes in the image, the
second adaptively selects a binarization threshold for each centre by maximizing
the mutual information between the resulting binary feature and the class label
over the training set . As before we use 1000 element codebooks, online kmeans, and a linear SVM. Results for two datasets are shown in ﬁgure 6 – other
datasets give similar results.
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
multi-class perf.
points per image
rand binauto
log binauto
hl binauto
multi-class perf.
points per image
rand binauto
log binauto
hl binauto
Fig. 6. The inﬂuence of histogram normalization on mean classiﬁcation rate, for the
Pascal-01 (left) and Xerox7 (right) datasets. Histogram entries are binarized either with
a zero/nonzero rule (bin0) or using thresholds chosen to maximize mutual information
with the class labels (binauto). Adaptive thresholding is preferable for dense sampling
when there are many votes per bin on average.
Neither method predominates everywhere, but the MI method is clearly preferred when the mean number of samples per bin is large (here 10000 samples/image vs. 1000 centres). For example, on Xerox7, at 1000 samples/image
the input histogram density is 27%, rising to 43% at 10000 samples/image. MIbased binarization reduces this to 13% in the later case, allowing the SVM to
focus on the most relevant entries.
Inﬂuence of the Minimum Scale for Patch Sampling
Ideally the classiﬁer should exploit the information available at all scales at which
the object or scene is visible. Achieving this requires good scale invariance in the
patch selection and descriptor computation stages and a classiﬁer that exploits ﬁne
detail when it is available while remaining resistant to its absence when not. The
latter is diﬃcult to achieve but the ﬁrst steps are choosing a codebook that is rich
enough to code ﬁne details separately from coarse ones and a binwise normalization method that is not swamped by ﬁne detail in other bins. The performance of
descriptor extraction at ﬁne scales is critical for the former, as these contain most
of the discriminative detail but also most of the aliasing and ‘noise’. In practice,
a minimum scale threshold is usually applied. This section evaluates the inﬂuence
of this threshold on classiﬁcation performance. As before we use a 1000 element
codebook built with online k-means, MI-based normalization, and a linear SVM.
Figure 7 shows the evolution of mean accuracies over six runs on the Brodatz and Xerox7 datasets as the minimum scale varies from 1 to 3 pixels7. The
performance of the LoG and Harris based methods decreases signiﬁcantly as
the minimum scale increases: the detectors return fewer patches than requested
and useful information is lost. For the random sampler the number of patches is
7 The other experiments in this paper set the minimum scale to 2. SIFT descriptors
from the LAVA library use 4×4 blocks of cells with cells being at least 3×3 pixels,
so SIFT windows are 12×12 pixels at scale 1.
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
multi-class perf.
multi-class perf.
Fig. 7. The inﬂuence of the minimum patch selection scale for SIFT descriptors on the
Brodatz (left) and Xerox7 (right) datasets
constant and there is no clear trend, but it is somewhat better to discard small
scales on the Brodatz dataset, and somewhat worse on the Xerox7 dataset.
Results on the Pascal Challenge Dataset
The previous sections showed the usefulness of random sampling and quanti-
ﬁed the inﬂuence of various parameters. We now show that simply by sampling
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
True Positives
False Positives
rand4k 93.8
rand1k 90.3
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
True Positives
False Positives
rand4k 96.1
rand1k 94.9
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
True Positives
False Positives
rand4k 97.6
rand1k 96.4
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
True Positives
False Positives
rand4k 94.0
rand1k 91.0
Fig. 8. ROC curves for the 4 categories of the PASCAL 2005 VOC challenge: top-left,
bikes; top-right, cars; bottom-left, motorbikes; bottom-right, persons. The codebooks
have 1000 elements, except that rand4k has 4000. Equal Error Rates are listed for each
Sampling Strategies for Bag-of-Features Image Classiﬁcation
Table 2. A comparison of our Rand4k method with the best results obtained (by
diﬀerent methods) during the PASCAL challenge and with the interest point based
method of Zhang et al.
motorbikes bikes persons cars average
Ours (rand4k)
Best Pascal 
Zhang et al 
large enough numbers of random patches, one can create a method that outperforms the best current approaches. We illustrate this on the Pascal-01 dataset
from the 2005 PASCAL Visual Object Classiﬁcation challenge because many
teams competed on this and a summary of the results is readily available .
We use the following settings: 10 000 patches per image, online k-means, MIbased normalization, an RBF SVM with kernel width γ set to the median of
the pairwise distances between the training descriptors, and either a 1000 element (‘Rand1k’) or 4000 element (‘Rand4k’) codebook. Figure 8 presents ROC
curves for the methods tested in this paper on the 4 binary classiﬁcation problems of the Pascal-01 Test Set 1. As expected the method Rand4k predominates.
Table 2 compares Rand4k to the best of the results obtained during the PAS-
CAL challenge and in the study of Zhang et al . In the challenge (‘Best
Pascal’ row), a diﬀerent method won each object category, whereas our results
use a single method and ﬁxed parameter values inherited from experiments on
other datasets. The method of uses a combination of sophisticated interest
point detectors (Harris-Scale plus Laplacian-Scale) and a specially developed
Earth Movers Distance kernel for the SVM, whereas our method uses (a lot of)
random patches and a standard RBF kernel.
Conclusions and Future Work
The main goal of this article was to underline a number of empirical observations regarding the performance of various competing strategies for image representation in bag-of-features approaches to visual categorization, that call into
question the comparability of certain results in the literature. To do this we ran
head to head comparisons between diﬀerent image sampling, codebook generation and histogram normalization methods on a cross-section of commonly used
test databases for image classiﬁcation.
Perhaps the most notable conclusion is that although interest point based
samplers such as Harris-Laplace and Laplacian of Gaussian each work well in
some databases for small numbers of sampled patches, they can not compete
with simple-minded uniform random sampling for the larger numbers of patches
that are needed to get the best classiﬁcation results. In all cases, the number
of patches sampled from the test image is the single most inﬂuential parameter
governing performance. For small ﬁxed numbers of samples, none of HL, LOG
and random dominate on all databases, while for larger numbers of samples
E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs
random sampling dominates because no matter how their thresholds are set, the
interest operators saturate and fail to provide enough patches (or a broad enough
variety of them) for competitive results. The salience cues that they optimize
are useful for sparse feature based matching, but not necessarily optimal for
image classiﬁcation. Many of the conclusions about methods in the literature are
questionable because they did not control for the diﬀerent numbers of samples
taken by diﬀerent methods, and ‘simple’ dense random sampling provides better
results than more sophisticated learning methods (§9).
Similarly, for multi-scale methods, the minimum image scale at which patches
can be sampled (e.g. owing to the needs of descriptor calculation, aﬃne normalization, etc.) has a considerable inﬂuence on results because the vast majority
of patches or interest points typically occur at the ﬁnest few scales. Depending
on the database, it can be essential to either use or suppress the small-scale
patches. So the practical scale-invariance of current bag-of-feature methods is
questionable and there is probably a good deal of unintentional scale-tuning in
the published literature.
Finally, although codebooks generally need to be large to achieve the best
results, we do see some evidence of saturation at attainable sizes. Although
the codebook learning method does have an inﬂuence, even randomly sampled
codebooks give quite respectable results which suggests that there is not much
room for improvement here.
Future work. We are currently extending the experiments to characterize the
inﬂuence of diﬀerent clustering strategies and the interactions between sampling
methods and classiﬁcation more precisely. We are also working on random samplers that are biased towards ﬁnding more discriminant patches.