Biology in Bloom: Implementing Bloom’s Taxonomy
to Enhance Student Learning in Biology
Alison Crowe,*† Clarissa Dirks,†‡ and Mary Pat Wenderoth*†
*Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; ‡Scientific Inquiry,
The Evergreen State College, Olympia, WA, 98505
Submitted May 15, 2008; Revised August 1, 2008; Accepted August 8, 2008
Monitoring Editor: Marshall Sundberg
We developed the Blooming Biology Tool (BBT), an assessment tool based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, to assist science faculty in better aligning their assessments with their teaching activities
and to help students enhance their study skills and metacognition. The work presented here
shows how assessment tools, such as the BBT, can be used to guide and enhance teaching and
student learning in a discipline-specific manner in postsecondary education. The BBT was first
designed and extensively tested for a study in which we ranked almost 600 science questions
from college life science exams and standardized tests. The BBT was then implemented in three
different collegiate settings. Implementation of the BBT helped us to adjust our teaching to better
enhance our students’ current mastery of the material, design questions at higher cognitive skills
levels, and assist students in studying for college-level exams and in writing study questions at
higher levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy. From this work we also created a suite of complementary
tools that can assist biology faculty in creating classroom materials and exams at the appropriate
level of Bloom’s Taxonomy and students to successfully develop and answer questions that
require higher-order cognitive skills.
INTRODUCTION
Most faculty would agree that academic success should be
measured not just in terms of what students can remember,
but what students are able to do with their knowledge. It is
commonly accepted that memorization and recall are lowerorder cognitive skills (LOCS) that require only a minimum
level of understanding, whereas the application of knowledge and critical thinking are higher-order cognitive skills
(HOCS) that require deep conceptual understanding . Students often have difficulty performing at these
higher levels . In the past decade, considerable effort has been directed
toward developing students’ critical-thinking skills by increasing student engagement in the learning process . An essential component of this reform is the
development of reliable tools that reinforce and assess these
new teaching strategies.
Alignment of course activities and testing strategies with
learning outcomes is critical to effective course design
 . Students are motivated to perform well on examinations; therefore, the cognitive challenge of exam questions
can strongly influence students’ study strategies . If classroom activities focus on concepts requiring HOCS but faculty test only on factual recall,
students quickly learn that they do not need to put forth the
effort to learn the material at a high level. Similarly, if faculty
primarily discuss facts and details in class but test at a
higher cognitive level, students often perform poorly on
examinations because they have not been given enough
practice developing a deep conceptual understanding of the
material. Either case of misalignment of teaching and testing
leads to considerable frustration on the part of both instructor and student. Though considerable attention has been
given to changing our classrooms to incorporate more active-learning strategies, not enough attention has been
placed on how to better align assessment methods with
learning goals. Indeed, one of the most significant ways to
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.08–05–0024
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Address correspondence to: Alison Crowe ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 7, 368–381, Winter 2008
© 2008 by The American Society for Cell Biology
impact the quality of student learning is through the improvement of our assessments , hereafter referred to as “Bloom’s.” Bloom’s
is a well-defined and broadly accepted tool for categorizing
types of thinking into six different levels: knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. A
revised version of Bloom’s further subcategorizes the original taxonomy and converts the different category titles to their active verb counterparts:
remember, understand, apply, analyze, create, and evaluate. Bloom’s has been used widely since the 1960s in
K–12 education but has
seen only limited application in selected disciplines in
higher education , develop
formative assessment questions at the appropriate cognitive
level , and inform course design
 . Nonetheless, there is significant
need for more comprehensive assessment tools that undergraduate biology instructors can easily use to assess student
learning, guide development of teaching strategies, and promote student metacognition in the biological sciences.
We have developed the Blooming Biology Tool (BBT;
Table 1), which can be used to assess the Bloom’s Taxonomy
level of questions on biology-related topics. The BBT
evolved out of a study we were asked to participate in that
required us to rank more than 600 biology exam questions
from a wide variety of sources including MCAT, GRE, and
AP biology exams, as well as introductory biology and
first-year medical school courses . Here
we present a detailed description of the BBT and complementary materials for use by college and university faculty
and students. We also highlight how we implemented the
BBT and associated learning activities in a variety of educational settings. We found the BBT a useful guide for faculty
Table 1. Blooming Biology Tool
Knowledge1
Comprehension1
Application1
Evaluation
LOCS2 HOCS3
Key skills
RECALL, list,
recognize, or
DESCRIBE or explain
in your own words,
re-tell, or
PREDICT an outcome
using several pieces
of information or
concepts; use
information in a
new context
INFER; understand
how components
relate to each
other and to the
process as a
CREATE something
new using/
disparate sources
of information
DETERMINE/CRITIQUE
relative value;
determine merit
General examples
of biology
exam questions
Identify the parts
of a eukaryotic
cell; identify
the correct
definition of
Describe nuclear
transport to a lay
person; provide an
example of a cell
signaling pathway
Predict what happens
to X if Y increases
Interpret data,
graphs, or
figures; make a
diagnosis or
analyze a case
study; compare/
information
hypothesis,
experiment,
create a model
Critique an experimental
design or a research
proposal; appraise data
in support of a
hypothesis
Type of question
Fill-in-the-blank
True-false
Multiple-choice
Short answer
Characteristics of
multiple-choice
Question only
information
recall. Possible
answers do
not include
significant
distracters4
Question requires
understanding of
concept or terms.
Possible answers
include significant
distracters4
Question requires
prediction of the
most likely
outcome given a
new situation or
perturbation to the
Question requires
interpretation of
selection of best
conclusion
N/A: If provided
with choices,
students only
differentiate
between possible
answers rather
than synthesize a
novel response
Question requires
assessment of
information relative to
its support of an
1 The first three levels of Bloom’s are usually hierarchal; thus, to complete an analysis-level question, students must also demonstrate
knowledge-, comprehension- and application-level skills.
2 LOCS indicates lower-order cognitive skills.
3 HOCS indicates higher-order cognitive skills.
4 Significant distracters are those answers that represent common student misconceptions on that topic.
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
in diagnosing students’ aptitudes and creating new assignments to help students develop critical-thinking skills. Our
students used the BBT to create more challenging study
questions and self-identify the skill levels that they find the
most demanding.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE BLOOMING BIOLOGY
In developing the BBT, we first established a basic rubric
that drew extensively on previous interpretations of Bloom’s
as it relates to biology . Through research and discussion, we agreed that the first two levels of
Bloom’s (knowledge and comprehension) represent lower orders of cognitive skills . We considered the third
level of Bloom’s, application, to be a transition between LOCS
and HOCS. The three remaining categories (analysis, synthesis,
and evaluation) are true HOCS but are not necessarily hierarchical, meaning that a question categorized as evaluation does
not always require analytical and synthesis abilities, but may
require mastery of the lower three levels (knowledge, comprehension, and application). While ranking questions, we found
it helpful to “check-off” each level of Bloom’s required to
successfully answer the question. For example, a question
rated at the analysis level would require knowledge (facts),
comprehension (understanding of facts), application (predicting outcomes), and analysis (inference). Each question was
ranked at the highest level of Blooms’ taxonomy required for
its solution.
The level of Bloom’s that is assessed by a given type of exam
question depends highly on what information is provided to
the student and which inferences or connections the student
must make on his or her own. It is equally important to
consider the level of information previously provided through
classroom instruction i.e., if students are explicitly given an
answer to an analysis question in class and then given that
same question on an exam, then that question only requires
recall . We would argue that labeling
of diagrams, figures, etc., cannot assess higher than application-level thinking as this question-type, at most, requires students to apply their knowledge to a new situation. However,
fill-in the blank, true-false, and multiple-choice questions can
be designed to test analysis-level skills. It is nevertheless challenging to develop fill-in-the-blank questions that require
higher than application-level thinking, but we have provided
one such example (Supplemental Material A; Virology). Further, whereas multiple-choice questions can be designed to
assess evaluation skills if they require students to determine
relative value or merit (e.g., which data best support the following hypothesis), multiple-choice questions cannot assess
synthesis-level thinking as all the answers are provided, eliminating the need for students to create new models, hypotheses,
or experiments on their own. Many resources exist to assist
faculty in designing high-quality, multiple-choice questions
 , and we
have provided a list of some of these resources (Supplemental
Material B).
To differentiate between Bloom’s levels, we found it useful to take one particular topic (e.g., cell biology) and develop a series of increasingly challenging exam questions
representing the various levels of Bloom’s. In developing
these multi-level questions, we considered what a student
must know or be able to do in order to answer the question.
For example, if the student needed to recall factual information and then be able to describe a process in his/her own
words, we considered that question to test comprehension.
We have provided examples for three different subdisciplines of biology: cell biology, physiology, and virology,
(Supplemental Material A). A similar approach was taken by
Nehm et al. for the subdisciplines of ecology and evolution
 .
We also found that science questions posed unique challenges to our rubric as they dealt with science-specific skills
(e.g., graphing, reading phylogenetic trees, evaluating Punnett squares and pedigrees, and analyzing molecular biology data). To address this, we selected several of these
science-specific skills and created examples or descriptions
of question-types that would assess mastery at each level
(Table 2). Through this process and extensive discussion of
our work, we were able to better define and categorize the
different types of questions that are typically found on biology exams. To assist us in developing the rubric, we each
independently ranked approximately 100 life science exam
questions and then extensively discussed our analyses to
reach consensus. The BBT reflects the progression of our
insights into how to adapt a general assessment method to
the discipline-specific skills inherent to biology. We subsequently independently analyzed another 500 questions; statistical analysis of our rankings based on the BBT revealed
high interrater reliability .
The BBT is not meant to be an absolute or definitive
rubric; rather, the BBT is meant to be used as a general guide
to aid both faculty and students in developing and identifying biology-related questions representing the different
levels of Bloom’s. As with all assessment methods, we expect the BBT to continue to evolve through an iterative
process. Continuous feedback from students and faculty
using the tool will inform its evolution.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE BLOOM’S-BASED
LEARNING ACTIVITIES FOR STUDENTS
The BBT can also be used by students to help them identify the Bloom’s level of exam questions that pose the
greatest academic challenge. However, once these challenging areas have been identified, students also need
guidance on how to modify their study habits to better
prepare themselves to answer those types of questions.
We therefore created the Bloom’s-based Learning Activities for Students (BLASt; Table 3), a complementary student-directed tool designed to specifically strengthen
study skills at each level of Bloom’s. We determined
which study activities provided students with the type of
practice that would lead to success at each Bloom’s level.
For example, the first two levels of Bloom’s rely heavily
on memorization skills that can be reinforced by an individual student using flash cards and mnemonics. However, the remaining levels of Bloom’s that represent HOCS
are more readily achieved through both individual and
group activities. The BLASt incorporates a range of study
A. Crowe et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Table 2. Examples and descriptions of science-specific skills at different levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy
Knowledge1
Comprehension1
Application1
Evaluation
LOCS2 HOCS3
Calculations
Equation provided and
variables identified
plug and chug
Understand/define
components and variables
of a given equation
Solve word problems by
selecting correct
formula and
identifying
appropriate variables
Solve word problem and
infer biological
significance or
implication
Create an equation
that describes the
relationship
between variables
Evaluate a computational
solution to a problem
or assess the relative
merit(s) of using a
specific mathematical
tool to solve a
particular problem
Concept maps
Structure provided,
student fills in the
missing linking
phrases or concepts
that are provided
Structure provided with
concepts filled in, student
generates linking phrases
to describe relationships
Student creates the
structure, concepts
and linking phrases
Student creates
structure, concepts are
provided, student
generates linking
phrases to describe
relationships and must
link two different
domains or maps
Student creates
structure and
generates concepts
and linking terms,
map must be
sufficiently
Student evaluates
existing concept maps
based on established
criteria/rubric
Identify or list variables
found in patient
history, vital signs,
and/or clinical test
results. Know which
physiological
problem each named
disease represents
(e.g., Graves’ disease,
hyperthyroidism)
Define each variable. Define
the presenting signs and
symptoms of each disease
Given a set of clinical
variables, identify the
relevant variables and
make a diagnosis
Given a set of clinical
variables and a
diagnosis, determine
which other possible
diseases (differential
diagnoses) need to be
Given a set of clinical
variables and a
diagnosis,
determine the next
clinical test that
needs to be
performed to
confirm the
Given a set of clinical
variables and a
diagnosis, evaluate the
evidence supporting
the diagnosis and
provide the patient
with a second opinion
Identify the parts of
graphs and recognize
different types of
graphs (e.g., identify
the X axis, identify a
histogram)
Describe the data
represented in a simple
Draw a graph based on
a given set of data;
predict outcomes
based on data
presented in graph
Read and interpret a
complex graph having
multiple variables or
treatments and explain
biological implications
Create a graphical
representation of a
given biological
process or concept
Assess the relative
effectiveness of
different graphical
representations of the
same data or biological
Given the Hardy-
Weinberg (HW)
equation define
terms: p2, q2, 2pq; If
given pq  1 and p
 0.7, calculate q
Describe the assumptions of
the Hardy-Weinberg
equation and its use as a
null hypothesis What
does 2pq represent in the
Hardy-Weinberg
equation? (HW equation
not given)
Determine the expected
number of homozygous recessive
individuals in a
population if the
recessive allele is
represented in 30% of
that population (HW
equation not given)
Determine if the
following population
is in HW equilibrium:
100 individuals of
which 37 are SS, 8 are
ss, and 55 are Ss.
Defend your answer
Create a new version
of the Hardy-
Weinberg equation
that incorporates 3
Analyze Chi-square
resuts to weigh
predicted evolutionary
(Continued)
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
Table 2. (Continued)
Knowledge1
Comprehension1
Application1
Evaluation
techniques
Identify what is being
measured by a
molecular technique
(e.g., Northern
analysis measures
relative RNA levels
in a given cell or
Understand what the
results of a molecular
technique indicate (e.g.
the intensity of a band on
a Northern blot indicates
relative expression of a
specific mRNA in the cell
type or tissue from which
the RNA was obtained)
Draw the expected
results you would
obtain from a given
molecular technique
or state which
technique could be
used to solve a novel
problem (e.g., draw
the banding pattern
you would expect if
you analyzed a
protein complex
containing a 55 kDa
protein and a 35 kDa
protein by SDS-
Interpret the raw data
obtained from a
molecular technique,
including the
interpretation of
controls and how to
normalize data (e.g.
interpret the results of
a RT-PCR gel analysis
by comparing relative
expression of
experimental genes to
a standardized control
Design an experiment
using a given
molecular technique
to test a hypothesis
(e.g., design an
experiment using
Northern analysis to
test the hypothesis
that transcription
factor A regulates
expression of gene B)
Assess relative merit of
using two different
molecular approaches
to address a particular
hypothesis (e.g.,
discuss the relative
merits of using
immunoprecipitation
vs. electrophoretic
mobility shift assay to
test the hypothesis that
a protein binds directly
to the promoter of a
particular gene
Phylogenetic
tree/cladogram
Given a cladogram,
circle the root,
monophyletic groups
Describe the relationship of
sister taxa in a cladogram
Given four cladograms,
identify which one is
different and describe
the evolutionary
relationships that
make it different
Given a set of taxa for
which all but one in a
pictured tree exhibit a
synapomorphy, infer
the evolutionary
history of one of the
taxa. With respect to
synapomorphy,
discuss your
conclusions about the
most recent common
ancestor of the
pictured taxa
Given a variety of
synapomorphies
from different
organisms, create a
cladogram,
identifying where the
derived shared
characteristics were
Given a case study
showing that a group
of organisms have
different relationships
depending on the type
of data used to
construct the tree, use
new information
provided to evaluate
the collective data and
infer the best true
relationship of the
Punnett squares
and pedigree
Given a Punnett
square, identify
components
(genotypes or
phenotypes; parents
or offspring) of a
given genetic cross
Given parental genotypes,
make Punnett square to
show or describe
offspring’s genotypes and
phenotypes
Given parental genotypes
in a word problem,
student identifies
variables and makes
Punnett square to
determine genotypic or
phenotypic ratios of
offspring. Student is
provided with
information regarding
dominance, sex
linkage, crossing-over,
Given parental genotypes,
make Punnett square to
show or describe
offspring’s genotypes
and phenotypes, and
then solves a word
problem with the new
information. Student
must infer relationships
regarding dominance,
sex linkage, crossingover, etc.
Use pedigree analysis
to develop a
hypothesis for how a
certain disease is
transmitted
Weigh the relative value
of different pieces of
evidence (pedigree
chart, incomplete
transmission, linkage
analysis, etc.) and
determine the
probability that an
individual will develop
a certain disease
1 The first three levels of Bloom’s are usually hierarchal; thus, to complete an analysis-level question, students must also demonstrate knowledge-, comprehension-, and
application-level skills.
2 LOCS indicates lower-order cognitive skills.
3 HOCS indicates higher-order cognitive skills.
4 Significant distracters are those answers that represent common student misconceptions on that topic.
A. Crowe et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
methods and can be used by students to refine their study
skills to become more efficient and effective learners.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BBT IN OUR
CLASSROOMS
While developing the BBT, we found that the very process
of developing the BBT was strongly influencing our own
teaching in the classroom. The BBT was guiding us to ask
and write better questions, develop more appropriate
learning strategies, and assist our students in the development of their metacognitive skills. This tool provided
us with a means to consistently apply the principles of
Bloom’s to biology concepts and skills, thus allowing us to
better assess student-learning outcomes.
The following passages illustrate how we have applied
the BBT at either a research-one institution or a liberal arts
college in three different classroom contexts: (1) a small
inquiry-based laboratory, (2) a large lecture, and (3) a
medium-sized workshop setting. Table 4 presents the
timelines of implementation of each teaching strategy. To
facilitate a comparison of our different implementation
Table 3. Bloom’s-based Learning Activities for Students (BLASt)1
Bloom’s level
Individual activities
Group activities
Knowledge (LOCS)
• Practice labeling diagrams
• Check a drawing that another student labeled
• List characteristics
• Identify biological objects or components from
flash cards
• Quiz yourself with flash cards
• Take a self-made quiz on vocabulary
• Draw, classify, select, or match items
• Write out the textbook definitions
• Create lists of concepts and processes that
your peers can match
• Place flash cards in a bag and take turns
selecting one for which you must define a
• Do the above activities and have peers check
your answers
Comprehension (LOCS)
• Describe a biological process in your own words
without copying it from a book or another
• Provide examples of a process
• Write a sentence using the word
• Give examples of a process
• Discuss content with peers
• Take turns quizzing each other about
definitions and have your peers check your
Application (LOCS/HOCS)
• Review each process you have learned and then
ask yourself: What would happen if you
increase or decrease a component in the system
or what would happen if you alter the activity
of a component in the system?
• If possible, graph a biological process and create
scenarios that change the shape or slope of the
• Practice writing out answers to old exam
questions on the board and have your peers
check to make sure you don’t have too much
or too little information in your answer
• Take turns teaching your peers a biological
process while the group critiques the content
Analysis (HOCS)
• Analyze and interpret data in primary literature
or a textbook without reading the author’s
interpretation and then compare the authors’
interpretation with your own
• Work together to analyze and interpret data
in primary literature or a textbook without
reading the author’s interpretation and
defend your analysis to your peers
• Analyze a situation and then identify the
assumptions and principles of the argument
• Compare and contrast two ideas or concepts
• Create a map of the main concepts by defining
the relationships of the concepts using one- or
two-way arrows
• Work together to identify all of the concepts
in a paper or textbook chapter, create
individual maps linking the concepts together
with arrows and words that relate the
concepts, and then grade each other’s concept
Synthesis (HOCS)
• Generate a hypothesis or design an experiment
based on information you are studying
• Create a model based on a given data set
• Create summary sheets that show how facts and
concepts relate to each other
• Create questions at each level of Bloom’s
Taxonomy as a practice test and then take the
• Each student puts forward a hypothesis
about biological process and designs an
experiment to test it. Peers critique the
hypotheses and experiments
• Create a new model/summary sheet/concept
map that integrates each group member’s
Evaluation (HOCS)
• Provide a written assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses of your peers’ work or
understanding of a given concept based on
previously determined criteria
• Provide a verbal assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses of your peers’ work or
understanding of a given concept based on
previously described criteria and have your
peers critique your assessment
1 Students can use the individual and/or group study activities described in this table to practice their ability to think at each level of Bloom’s
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
strategies,
strengths and challenges of each approach (Supplemental
Material C).
Use of the BBT by a Faculty Member in a
Laboratory Course at a Research-One Institution
In a small, upper-division, inquiry-driven cell biology
laboratory class (two sections of 11 students each) at a
research-one institution, the BBT was used to evaluate
student performance and redesign course activities to
enhance student learning. The class was taught during
consecutive quarters with a new cohort of students each
quarter. The primary writing assignment in the course
(worth 1/3 of the total grade) was a National Institutes of
Health (NIH)-style research proposal. This was a challenging assignment for the students as none had written a
research proposal before this course and most (75%) had
no previous research experience. Over the course of the
quarter, groups of three or four students read primary
scientific literature on their topic of interest, formulated
new hypotheses, and designed and performed a pilot
study to gather preliminary data in support of their hypotheses (see Table 4 for timeline). Each student then
communicated his/her ideas and findings in the form of a
written research proposal in which the student posed a
hypothesis and described a set of specific aims (i.e., specific research objectives for the proposed study, as defined
Table 4. Timelines for implementing the BBT in three different environments
Faculty use of the BBT in an undergraduate cell biology laboratory course
1st Quarter
• Students read primary scientific literature on their topic of interest
• Students formulate new hypotheses
• Students design and perform pilot study to gather preliminary data
• Students write a research proposal and receive written feedback on each draft
Postquarter
• Instructor designs a grading rubric to evaluate student performance on research proposal
• Instructor uses BBT to classify Bloom’s level needed to achieve success with each criterion in grading rubric
• Instructor uses BLASt to develop new activities to help students master areas identified as weaknesses
2nd Quarter
• Students read primary scientific literature on their topic of interest
• Students are introduced to grading rubric
• Students peer-review previous quarter’s research proposals
• Students formulate new hypotheses
• Students design and perform pilot study to gather preliminary data
• Students write a research proposal
Postquarter
• Instructor uses grading rubric to evaluate student performance on research proposal
Faculty and student use of the BBT in an undergraduate physiology course
• Bloom’s is introduced
• Homework to develop a mnemonic for Bloom’s is assigned
• Discuss Bloom’s mnemonics generated by students
• Class is asked to Bloom the task of critiquing the mnemonics
• Class is asked to Bloom the task of creating the mnemonic
• Students are asked to rank all questions according to Bloom’s asked in class prior to answering the question
Prior to exam
• Students are given an old exam and told to Bloom each question and calculate the Bloom’s distribution for
the exam (i.e., what percent of points were given for questions at the level of knowledge, comprehension,
etc.) This helps students realize the cognitive challenge level of the upcoming exam
• Instructor uses BBT to Bloom the exam questions and produces a Bloom’s distribution. This helps the
instructor better align the challenge of exam to course objectives
• Students are shown the class average at each level of Bloom’s
• Bloom’s rank of each questions is included on the exam key
• Students enter scores for each of their exam questions into an on-line survey
• Instructor computes each student’s Bloom’s score, posts the score to grade book
• Students check their Bloom’s score and view pertinent parts of BLASt
Last day of class
• Students are asked to submit a 1–2 paragraph response to the question  How has using Bloom’s to analyze
exam performance changed your learning strategies?
Student use of the BBT in biology workshops at a liberal arts college
• Faculty gave formal lecture on Bloom’s Taxonomy
• Students practiced using Bloom’s by ranking 45 biology and chemistry questions
• Students worked in small groups to write questions about assigned primary literature papers; each group
wrote 2 questions at each level of Bloom’s for each paper (24 total)
• Groups exchanged questions, ranked the questions, and answered 2 questions
• Faculty generated 10 questions at different levels of Bloom’s
• Students worked in small groups to rank and answer questions
Weeks 6–10
• Each week a student group wrote 4 questions at each of the first 5 levels of Bloom’s and submitted them to
the faculty at the beginning of the week
• Faculty selected the 10 best questions for workshop
• Students worked in small groups to answer and rank questions using the BBT; the authors of the questions
acted as peer tutors during the workshop
A. Crowe et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
in NIH grant proposal guidelines) designed to further test
this hypothesis. The assignment also required students to
provide expected outcomes of their proposed experiments
and discuss possible alternate outcomes and limitations
inherent in their research design. The assignment was
designed to teach students how to synthesize their own
data with existing data from the literature and to build a
strong argument in support of a new hypothesis. Students
turned in one section of the proposal each week (e.g.,
Background and Significance) and received written feedback. Common difficulties were discussed with the class
as a whole; however, neither the grading criteria nor the
rubric were made explicit to the students.
To facilitate evaluation of the students’ research proposals, a grading rubric was developed . Students were scored from
1 to 4 for how well they fulfilled each of 12 criteria as well
as for overall presentation (Table 5). Student performance
was gauged both by looking at the percentage of students
who earned full credit on a given criterion (Table 5) and
also by determining the average percentage of possible
shown). In reviewing these results, it appeared that certain criteria were much more challenging for students
than other criteria. For example, whereas 41% of the students provided a well-thought-out and insightful discussion of their study’s broader societal and scientific impact,
10% of the students were able to design specific aims
that directly tested their hypothesis (Table 5). Others have
assessed students’ ability to write research proposals and
identified similar areas of weakness .
Subsequent to determining student proficiency in each
area, the BBT was used to categorize each criterion based on
the highest cognitive domain it demanded (Table 5). (Please
note that the section entitled “broader societal and scientific
significance” was ranked as knowledge/comprehension
rather than application/analysis as the instructor had explicitly discussed the significance of this general area of research
during lecture and students merely had to recall and focus
the information for their specific study rather than apply
knowledge to a new situation.) Not surprisingly, students
performed best on criteria that required only a knowledgeor comprehension-level of thinking. Those criteria that demanded an ability to synthesize new ideas or critically evaluate a technique or body of knowledge proved to be the
most challenging.
After assessing student performance on the research proposal and identifying the criteria that students found the
most challenging, the instructor designed new course activities that would provide students with an opportunity to
Table 5. Identification of students’ writing weaknesses
Research proposal grading criteria1
Percent of students fulfilling criterion2
Level of Bloom’s3
Hypothesis and specific aims
Context (logical development of
hypothesis)
Hypothesis
Synth/Eval
Specific aims designed to test hypothesis
Synth/Eval
Background & significance
Logical introduction of background
relevant to topic
Review of literature identifying gaps in
Synth/Eval
Broader societal and scientific
significance of study
Preliminary data
Presentation of pilot study results
Interpretation and relevance of pilot
Research design
Overall design (appropriate methods,
Alternate outcomes for proposed study
Limitations of proposed approach
Synth/Eval
Presentation
Overall organization, grammar, style,
1 Students’ research proposals were evaluated according to 12 different criteria as well as overall presentation.
2 The percentage of students fulfilling each criterion was determined by dividing the number of students receiving a perfect score on a
particular criterion by the total number of students in the class (n  22).
3 The highest level of Bloom’s cognitive domain required to successfully complete each criterion. Know/Comp indicates knowledge and
comprehension; App/Anal, application and analysis; Synth/Eval, synthesis and evaluation.
4 Presentation was not assigned a Bloom’s level.
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
practice skills needed to complete this complex research
assignment (i.e., better scaffold the assignment). Two major
changes were implemented when the course was taught
the subsequent quarter. First, the assessment methods
were made more transparent by introducing students to
the grading rubric at the beginning of the quarter. Students were also provided with numerical feedback, in
addition to written feedback, on each of their drafts indicating how well they had fulfilled each of the grading
criteria (e.g., on their hypothesis and specific aims section
they might receive 3 out of 4 for developing a clear
testable hypothesis, but only 2 out of 4 for designing
specific research objectives that tested this hypothesis).
Second, as suggested by the BLASt, students evaluated
their peers’ research proposals from the previous quarter.
This activity served three purposes: (1) to further familiarize students with the grading criteria that would be
used to assess their own proposals, (2) to build students’
confidence by placing them in the position of evaluator,
and (3) to provide students with student-created models
of research proposals that they could use to guide development of their own proposals.
To assist students in applying the grading rubric to
their peers’ proposals, all students were asked to evaluate
the same proposal from the previous quarter, and then a
“norming session” was held in which the students received the instructor’s ratings with further explanation as
to why a particular numerical value had been assigned.
Interestingly, students on average were harsher critics of
their peers than the instructor in areas where they felt
most confident (e.g., presentation style), whereas they
awarded higher scores than the instructor in areas where
they were less knowledgeable (e.g., research design). Students were then assigned a new set of three proposals that
they evaluated individually. After reviewing the proposals, students convened in groups of four to act as a “review panel” to discuss the relative strengths and weaknesses of the three proposals and come to consensus on a
rank order. These activities took a significant amount of
class time, but ensured that students understood each of
the criteria on which their own proposals would be scored
at the end of the quarter.
Comparison of research proposal scores between the second and first quarter revealed some interesting trends. Criteria requiring the most complex thinking skills showed
the most dramatic improvement (Figure 1). For example, the
second quarters’ students earned an average of 80% of the
total possible points for discussing inherent limitations to
their research design compared with only 61% in the previous quarter. Likewise, we observed a strong increase in
student ability to interpret their data and design their own
hypotheses, skills that require analysis and synthesis levels
of Bloom’s, respectively. As these data were derived from
two different populations of students (fall and winter quarter), the students’ scores were analyzed according to their
rank order using a nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test, which
does not assume that the two data sets possess a normal
distribution. Based on this analysis, all three of the most
dramatic increases were found to be statistically significant
(Figure 1).
Students’ scores on criteria requiring LOCS did not show
statistically significant differences between the two quarters,
indicating that the two groups of students were equivalently
matched in terms of their basal knowledge of cell biology.
This lack of increase in areas of knowledge and comprehension also suggests that the newly incorporated activities
primarily impacted students’ HOCS. Students in the second
quarter were less successful in describing experimental
methods than their peers from the previous quarter; however, this is most likely attributed to the fact that students in
the second quarter were asked to include methods that they
were proposing to use (but had not used in the laboratory)
whereas students in the first quarter were only required to
include methods they had used to obtain their preliminary
data (and were therefore very familiar with).
The large increases in student performance on some of the
most challenging aspects of the assignment occurred after
implementation of class activities designed to enhance
HOCS. However, the gains in student achievement could
also be attributable to unrelated factors including quarterto-quarter variation in student motivation or differences in
faculty performance. Future research will focus on distinguishing between these different possibilities.
As instructors, it is important that we recognize the complexity of the tasks that we are assigning students and
prepare students appropriately for difficult tasks that require higher levels of thinking. As illustrated in this example, different sections of a research proposal require different cognitive skills. By recognizing which parts of an
assignment are the most challenging, we can design specific
activities or tools to help students succeed in those areas.
Here, the faculty was able to use the BBT to identify areas in
which students struggle and focus on improving the learning in these areas. The grading criteria were explicitly discussed and students were provided with structured opportunities to act as evaluators of other students’ work. By
Increased student performance after implementation of
grading rubric and peer-review panel. Student research proposals
were evaluated based on 12 different criteria (1st quarter, n  22;
2nd quarter, n  24). The percentage increase in student performance (average % in 2nd quarter  average % in 1st quarter)/
(average % in 1st quarter)  100). A negative number indicates a
decrease in the average percentage students earned in the second
quarter relative to the first quarter. Asterisks indicate statistically
significant differences based on a nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis
test. The average score earned on the research proposal increased
from 76% to 82% in the second quarter.
A. Crowe et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
sharing other students’ work, it was possible to more clearly
illustrate what “success” with a given criterion would or
would not look like. These types of activities, based loosely
on the cognitive apprenticeship model ,
may help prepare students for challenging assignments
 .
Faculty and Student Use of the BBT in an
Undergraduate Physiology Course
Bloom’s Taxonomy of cognitive domains was introduced
during the second class period of a large (120 students)
upper-division undergraduate physiology course at a research-one university. Introduction of Bloom’s took only 15
minutes and focused on helping students learn the taxonomy and realize the potential it offered for enhancing their
learning. To reinforce the concept, students were assigned
the homework task of developing their own mnemonic for
the levels of Bloom’s (see Table 4 for timeline). For the first
10 minutes of the next class, a representative sample of
mnemonics was presented, and students were asked to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each mnemonic. Before
soliciting responses, the students were queried as to which
level of Bloom’s was required to complete these two tasks
(i.e., creating a mnemonic and identifying the strengths and
weaknesses of a mnemonic). In future classes, this activity
would be referred to as “Blooming” the question.
Throughout the quarter, three to four questions on course
content and concepts were asked during each class period,
and the students were always asked to “Bloom” each question before answering it. “Blooming” in-class questions not
only affords the students practice in using Bloom’s with
immediate feedback from the instructor but also allows the
students to gain insight into which level of question they are
having the most difficulty answering. This type of exercise
strengthens student metacognition as it helps them monitor
their mastery of the course concepts. Enhancing student
metacognition has been found to be critical to student learning .
Physiology is a challenging subject for students as it is
based on a mechanistic and analytical rather than descriptive understanding of organismal processes .
As such, the discipline requires students to work predominantly at the higher levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy. Few students enter the course prepared to use the HOCS required to
succeed on exams; therefore, it is necessary to raise awareness of the challenge level of the exam before the exam is
given. To this end, students were given a homework assignment of first categorizing each question on the previous
year’s exam according to Bloom’s and then calculating the
number of points on the exam associated with each Bloom’s
level. This exercise helped students gain an appreciation for
the Bloom’s distribution of the exam questions and allowed
them to adjust their studying accordingly.
During the quarter the instructor used the BBT to categorize the Bloom’s level of all exam questions. This allowed the
instructor to compute a Bloom’s distribution for each exam
(i.e., 16% points at the knowledge level, 38% at the comprehension level, and 46% at the application level), which in
turn indicated the cognitive challenge of the exam. Calculating the Bloom’s distribution allowed the instructor to
determine whether indeed the exam questions were aligned
with the course content and learning goals. Postexam, in
addition to the routine analysis of test performance (range,
means, SD) the instructor also showed how the class performed at each Bloom’s level. It was not surprising to find
that on the first exam students earned 80% of the knowledge
points, 70% of the comprehension points, and only 55% of
the application-level points.
As the quarter progressed, the instructor recognized that
it was important to provide students with their individual
Bloom’s scores. This was necessary as students frequently
did not consider the class average to reflect their own performance, and though the Bloom’s ranking of each exam
question was included on the exam key, few students actually calculated their own Bloom’s test score. Therefore, after
the second exam was returned to the students, the students
were instructed to enter their score for each exam question
into an online data-collection tool. This data were then used
to generate a Bloom’s analysis of each student’s test performance. The Bloom’s test score is the percentage of points an
individual student earns at each level of Bloom’s (e.g., if they
earned 10 of the 20 points assigned to application-level
questions they earn a 50% application score). Students accessed their Bloom’s test score through the grade-reporting
portion of the course website. By this point in the quarter,
the BLASt had been completed and made available to all
students. However, students who earned 75% of the points
at any Bloom’s level were specifically directed to appropriate learning activities of the BLASt and strongly encouraged
to incorporate those activities into their study and learning
strategies. As individual Bloom’s scores were not reported
and the BLASt was not available until midway through the
second half of the class, significant improvement in student
performance on the second midterm was not anticipated.
Research on human learning has found that developing
student’s ability to monitor their own learning (i.e., metacognition) is crucial to successful learning . By “Blooming” in-class questions, students
are provided with daily formative assessment of their learning while the Bloom’s analysis of test performance provides
the student with a more focused assessment of the type of
question with which they struggle. The technique of providing students with a Bloom’s test score in combination with
recommendations for alternative learning methods from the
BLASt gives students a simple and straightforward means to
monitor and change their learning strategies in biology.
Unfortunately, by the time the students received their personalized Bloom’s analysis of their second test performance,
only two weeks remained in the 10-week quarter, and there
was not enough time for students to make meaningful
changes to their existing study habits. As a result, it was not
possible to show significant changes to student learning
over the course of the quarter. In future quarters, the personalized Bloom’s analysis of test performance will be introduced at the start of the quarter, and greater emphasis
will be placed on devising methods to help students learn
how to implement study skills appropriate for the academic
challenge of the course.
After the quarter ended, students were asked what they
thought about adding Bloom’s to the course content. Below
are two representative student responses:
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
I think Bloom gives students an increased insight
into the different types of learning and application
of knowledge that students do for a class, it makes
explicit something that is maybe only understood at
a subconscious level. I think it gives students more
tools and increases the control they have when they
are studying.
I remember initially thinking, “Why are we wasting
valuable class time on Bloom’s taxonomy?” I felt
that Bloom’s taxonomy was a burden, but I now use
Bloom’s taxonomy unconsciously to attack many
problems. It is a method used to help organize my
thoughts before I act.
Student Use of the BBT in Biology Workshops at a
Liberal Arts College
Bloom’s was used to promote pedagogical transparency and
enhance students’ abilities to design and answer questions
in an upper-division interdisciplinary science program.
Throughout the year-long program, students participated in
weekly lectures, laboratories, seminars, and workshops cotaught by three different faculty who integrated topics in
organic chemistry, biochemistry, cell biology, virology, and
immunology. Workshops typically provided students with
an opportunity to practice their problem-solving skills by
answering faculty-generated questions in small groups.
The BBT was implemented in the immunology workshops. Thirty-six students received formal training in using
the BBT, and then worked collaboratively in the subsequent
10 wk of the quarter to develop questions representing all
different levels of Bloom’s for a variety of assigned readings
(Table 4). Students were first formally introduced to Bloom’s
in a half-hour lecture during which the faculty used biology
sample questions to exemplify the different levels. After the
lecture, small groups used the BBT to rank 45 biology and 20
organic chemistry questions from GRE subject tests and
faculty exams. The faculty provided assistance throughout
the activity, and students were required to submit their
ranked questions for credit. This process allowed students to
practice using the BBT for evaluating the different levels at
which questions can be written and helped them to engage
in discussion about the type of questions presented.
One wk after their initial training, students used the BBT
to create questions from the content presented in eight primary literature papers that the students had previously
read. Small groups of students were each assigned two
papers for which they created two questions at each of the
first five levels of Bloom’s. The groups exchanged papers
and associated questions, critiqued the level and design of
the questions, and attempted to answer them. With faculty
facilitation, each group presented their critique of and answer to one question to the entire class. The class then
engaged in an open discussion about the material presented.
These activities provided students with hands-on training
for designing questions at different levels of Bloom’s and set
the stage for the remaining 8 wk of immunology workshops.
During week three, the faculty generated 10 questions at
each level of Bloom’s covering assigned reading in an immunology textbook. In their scheduled workshop time, students met in small groups to discuss and answer the questions. For homework students were required to individually
answer and rank the questions according to Bloom’s. Students received credit for both their answers to the questions
and their completion of Bloom’s rankings.
During the last 5 wk of the program, students were responsible for generating and answering their own questions
based on assigned reading. Groups of five to seven students
were responsible for writing a total of 20 weekly questions
corresponding to the chapter that was being presented in
lecture. Each week, a group generated four questions at each
of the five levels of Bloom’s. The night before the workshop,
the questions were sent to the faculty and the best questions
were selected and arranged in random order with respect to
Bloom’s ranking; the designated rankings were excluded
from the final handout. In the workshop, authors of the
questions served as peer teaching assistants while the other
students worked to answer and rank questions. The authors
were instructed to withhold the Bloom’s ranking from the
other students and to assist them only with finding the
appropriate textbook material for answering the questions.
Students were required to individually type up their answers and rank the questions according to Bloom’s. These
weekly assignments were turned into the faculty for grading, but students were only graded for their responses to the
assigned questions and for completing the Bloom’s ranking.
Although exams and homework assignments given at The
Evergreen State College are graded and scored, the college
does not give cumulative numerical grades but rather narrative evaluations of a student’s course work. This pedagogical philosophy enhances learning communities and provides an environment for effective group work. Students
were held responsible for their participation in workshops
by grading their individual responses to the questions.
The goals of the course activities were to teach students
about Bloom’s and let them practice using the BBT to rank
and write good questions at different levels so that they
could independently assess the level of their understanding
of biology content in the future. Based on a show of hands in
class, only one student had heard of Bloom’s but did not feel
as though they understood it enough to use it. While students were first practicing ranking questions, the instructor
formatively assessed their knowledge of Bloom’s and confirmed that none of the students in the course had any
experience using it. However, by the end of the course, the
students were very consistent in their independent ranking
of the questions according to Bloom’s. For 31 of the 51
questions, greater than 80% of the students agreed on the
Bloom’s ranking (Figure 2). This indicates that students who
are trained to use the BBT are capable of writing and identifying questions at different levels of Bloom’s. Students can
apply this knowledge to their studying practices, evaluating
the levels at which they understand concepts and adjusting
their study skills to reach higher levels of Bloom’s. These
findings were highlighted by students in their final written
evaluations of the program; some indicated that these exercises also helped them develop better questions about material they were learning in other areas of the program. The
following are evaluation responses related to the use of
Bloom’s in the program:
Designing challenging questions proved to be often
more difficult than answering them. Studying via
question design is a skill that I will apply to new
material in the future.
A. Crowe et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
A huge part of this course was learning how to use
Bloom’s Taxonomy which is a ranking system for
formal questions. Throughout the quarter groups
were required to write questions as well as answer
questions based on this ranking system. Learning
Bloom’s Taxonomy showed me how much effort
assignment. I find myself wanting more.
All year long I engaged my peers in workshop and
problem set collaboration, and while I always learn
a significant amount in that setting, I was not
comfortable with being led through a quarter’s
worth of assignments by students that knew less
than me. However, I must add that [the faculty’s]
desire to instruct students in the art of thinking like
a teacher and asking questions on many different
levels of understanding was beneficial.
Learning the different levels of questions really
helped me to take tests better and increased my
capacity of grasping concepts.
Collectively, this suggests that formal training of students
to use the BBT in ranking science questions, followed by
substantive practice at writing and ranking questions at
different levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy, enhances their study
skills and metacognitive development.
IMPLICATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE
BIOLOGY EDUCATION
Assessment is the process of evaluating evidence of student
learning with respect to specific learning goals. Assessment
methods have been shown to greatly influence students’
study habits . We agree with
other educators who have argued that in the process of
constructing a course, assessment is second only to establishing course learning goals for guiding course design
 . Though many faculty
establish learning goals for their courses, they often struggle
with how to evaluate whether their formative and summative assessment methods truly gauge student success in
achieving those goals.
Most faculty would agree that we should teach and test
students for higher-cognitive skills. However, when faculty
are given training in how to use Bloom’s and practice ranking their own exam questions, they often realize that the
majority of their test questions are at the lower levels of
Bloom’s. For example, at a national meeting for undergraduate biology education, 97% of the faculty who attended
(n  37) and received a formal lecture on using Bloom’s to
rank exam questions agreed that only 25% of their exam
questions tested for higher-order cognitive skills (unpublished data). Therefore, most of the time we may not be
testing or providing students with enough practice at using
content and science process skills at higher cognitive levels,
even though our goals are that they master the material at all
levels. One explanation for this discrepancy may be that
biology faculty have not been given the tools and guidelines
that would help them to better align their teaching with
assessments of student learning. To further emphasize this
point, an analysis of exam questions from courses in medical
school that should be aimed at developing HOCS are instead predominantly testing at lower cognitive levels .
Developing strong assessment methods is a challenging
task, and limited resources have been allocated to support
faculty in this endeavor. Further, because of the current
trend of increasing class size and decreasing teaching assistant support, multiple-choice exams are becoming the most
practical assessment method. It is therefore increasingly important for faculty to invest the time necessary to create
multiple-choice exam questions that test at the higher levels
of Bloom’s , as well as to develop integrative
testing approaches such as requiring students to justify their
answers of a small subset of multiple-choice questions
 . However, in order to accurately gauge student performance, we strongly encourage
faculty to include short essay answer questions or other
types of questions that test HOCS on their exams. This shift
in assessment practice may require additional teaching support from departments and administrations, but we believe
this is very important to the cognitive development of our
Our aim in developing the BBT was to make an assessment tool for use by biology faculty and students alike. To
further facilitate this process, we have created a diverse
array of biology-focused examples, inclusive of both specific
skills (e.g., graphing) and subdiscipline content (e.g., physiology) that biology students typically encounter. These examples, in conjunction with the BBT, are designed to aid
biologists in characterizing questions according to their relative cognitive challenge and, therefore, develop assessment
methods that are more closely aligned with an instructor’s
learning goals. The BBT can also be used in conjunction with
BLASt to help students self-diagnose their learning challenges and develop new strategies to strengthen their critical-thinking skills.
Our implementation of the BBT enhanced teaching and
learning in a wide variety of instructional environments.
Using the BBT, we were able to identify the cognitive levels
of learning activities with which students struggle the most
and adjust our teaching practices accordingly. The BBT also
Instruction on Bloom’s assists students to agree on rankings. Thirty-four students ranked five sets of immunology questions
written by their peers in the class; there were a total of 51 questions.
For each question, the percentage of students who agreed on a
particular ranking was determined. The total number of times that
a percent agreement occurred is reported here. For all but one of the
questions, 50% of the students agreed on the same ranking.
Biology in Bloom
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
helped us to create pedagogical transparency and enhance
student metacognition. As always, there is a trade-off when
class time is used to develop metacognitive skills as opposed
to focusing exclusively on course content. However, in our
student-based
implementation
strategies
Bloom’s Taxonomy was fully integrated into the course
subject matter (e.g., designing exam questions at different
levels of Bloom’s); anecdotal evidence from our students
suggests that they continue to use Bloom’s to guide their
learning strategies in future classes. Given our experience
and the well-documented importance of metacognition in
disciplines,
D’Avanzo, 2003; Coutinho, 2007), we consider the potential
benefits students may gain from learning Bloom’s to far
outweigh any consequences of minimally decreasing course
We envision that the BBT could help faculty create
biology questions at appropriate cognitive levels and in
this way provide faculty with a means to (1) assess students’ mastery of both biological content and skills and (2)
better align their assessments and learning objectives. We
believe that use of the BBT by both faculty and students
will help students achieve a deeper understanding of the
concepts and skills that are required to become successful
biologists. On a broader scale, the BBT could aid in development of biology assessment tools that could then be
used to examine levels of academic challenge between
different types of standardized exams in the life sciences
and to facilitate departmental and interinstitutional comparisons of college biology courses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. Dorman, S. Freeman, and M. Withers for critical review
of the manuscript. We owe particular thanks to S. Freeman and his
two undergraduate coauthors for providing us
with the inspiration and the encouragement needed to pursue this
work. A.J.C. would like to thank T.S. Gross for help with statistical