September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
International Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making
© World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
DEEP LEARNING AND MACHINE LEARNING FOR MALARIA
DETECTION : OVERVIEW, CHALLENGES AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Faculty of Sciences and Technology of Sidi Bouzid,
University of Kairouan, Kairouan, Tunisia
GHAZALA HCINI
Faculty of Sciences and Technology of Sidi Bouzid,
University of Kairouan, Kairouan, Tunisia
HELA LTIFI
Faculty of Sciences and Technology of Sidi Bouzid,
University of Kairouan, Kairouan, Tunisia
Received Day Month Year
Revised Day Month Year
To have the greatest impact, public health initiatives must be made using evidence-based
decision-making. Machine learning Algorithms are created to gather, store, process, and
analyse data to provide knowledge and guide decisions. A crucial part of any surveillance
system is image analysis. The communities of computer vision and machine learning has
ended up curious about it as of late. This study uses a variety of machine learning and
image processing approaches to detect and forecast the malarial illness. In our research,
we discovered the potential of deep learning techniques as smart tools with broader
applicability for malaria detection, which beneﬁts physicians by assisting in the diagnosis
of the condition. We examine the common conﬁnements of deep learning for computer
frameworks and organizing, counting need of preparing data, preparing overhead, realtime execution, and explain ability, and uncover future inquire about bearings focusing
on these restrictions.
Keywords: Malaria Diagnosis; Machine Learning; Deep Learning; Convolutional Neural
Network; Hybrid Algorithms.
1. Introduction
1.1. Study Background
Malaria is one of the main global public health challenges 1, 2, 3. The origin of
malaria begins from the landmass of Africa. The intestinal sickness was begun from
the infection plasmodium falciparum infection which is the cause for this illness. The
malady has travelled through all around the world by the pathogen of mosquitoes.
The infection can survive in hot and gentle climate, but it cannot survive in excep-
 
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
tionally cold climate 4. In agreement with the World Health Organization (WHO),
there were 228 million occurrences of the disease all over the world in 2019 5 6.
Malaria is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium transferred by
bite of infected female Anopheles mosquitoes that infect red blood cells 7, 8, 9. The
method of diagnosing malaria involves in a centrifuge classifying white blood cells
and red blood cells so that only red blood cells can be used for analysis using a
blood smear 5. It is a parasitic disease that causes severe contamination of red blood
cells 10. It can be passed quickly through blood transfusions, syringes, and pregnant
women to their babies 9. Malaria is a curable disease, but the lack of prompt and
correct diagnosis and treatment can lead to serious health complications 11. It requires an early and accurate detection to control and eradicate this deadly disease
The Covid-19 widespread has aﬀected malaria sickness conveyance in numerous
settings for a few reasons. The eﬀorts to control the widespread draw from existing constrained budgetary assets, clearing out other administrations underfunded.
Moreover, reacting to pandemics requires an extra well-being workforce that was
as of now rare. Due to constrained individual defensive gear (PPE) and testing
capacity in a few settings, the accessible well-being suppliers are moreover likely to
be uncovered and/or tainted. Ensuing separation, isolate, or some of the time passing encourage compounds the issue of well-being supplier shortage. Also, Covid-19
relief measures such as lockdown in nations may aﬀect not as it were the worldwide
and neighbourhood supply chain—including commodities fabricating, obtainment,
shipping, and distribution—but moreover may aﬀect malaria. For occasion, patients
may not look for malaria sickness care due to constrained transportation alternatives or fear of contracting Covid-19. Patients may to look for care as well late,
when extremely sick, and in this way at expanded hazard of mortality. Later considers assessed that the number of passings from malaria may twofold if the world’s
consideration proceeds to be entirely on Covid-19 12.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
(a) Figure A
(b) Figure B
Fig. 1: Malaria Death Rates
If not appropriately treated, malaria can cause serious side eﬀects such respiratory distress, pneumonia, anemia, and kidney failures. If a pregnant woman contracts the infection, stillbirths, neonatal deaths, and miscarriages result. The organs
most impacted by malaria are the brain and lungs. Due to all of this, malaria is
regarded as a medical emergency and needs to be detected right away. Delay in
diagnosis causes fatalities. Finding malaria in infected patients is therefore crucial
13. In this paper, machine and deep learning will be used to identify malaria in its
preliminary stages.
1.2. Motivation
We have noted that the scope of the consider ought to cover the nature of features
representation and extraction, the achievability of diﬀerent deep learning strategies,
classiﬁcation of malaria disease, benchmark datasets, reasonableness of the procedures in application settings, activity acknowledgment and peculiarity investigation
yields, and assessment criteria in images. Our think about is spurred by a few viewpoints. Firstly, we stay on recognizing between conventional strategies based on
manual highlights and those based on deep learning to highlight later propels in
deep learning techniques for action recognition and malaria diagnosis in images.
Secondly, we distinguish issues amid image handlings. Too, we made a comparative study between the diverse strategies of machine learning and deep learning in
arrange to have the foremost proﬁcient.
1.3. Overview of key concepts
Machine Learning, Deep Learning and Convolutional Neural Network are all niche
terms that are increasingly existing in scientiﬁc presentations. Machine learning is a
ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence that attempts to create techniques capable of learning
how to solve a speciﬁc task such as regression, classiﬁcation, and clustering 14.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
Where the success of an approach is based on how accurately the algorithm can
make predictions about datasets.
1.3.1. Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) has recently gotten a lot of press for its ability to properly
forecast a wide range of complicated events. However, there is a growing recognition
that, in addition to predictions, machine learning models may provide knowledge
about domain relationships in data, which is referred to as interpretations 15.
ML trains computers to carry out tasks on their own by giving them instructions.
It is a technique for data analysis that involves creating and ﬁtting models and
enables computers to ”learn” via repetition and forecast future events. By analysing
the content of the input image and extracting distinctive features from it, machine
learning is used to diagnose malaria. These characteristics determine whether the
prediction of the input image is given as a normal case or as an infected case.
Machine Learning
Supervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning
Reinforcement Learning
Fig. 2: Types of Machine Learning
In the new millennium, reinforcement learning made a great amount of progress
and now performs in several areas at a level comparable to that of a homo sapiens.
Although model-based reinforcement learning is at the forefront of social robotics
development, the medical ﬁeld pays little attention to this idea. Most of the medical
decision-making is sequential. Understanding the type of illness, a patient has required various test ﬁndings and a practical diagnosis session. Most machine learning
models used in medicine frequently neglect the progressive progression of diseases,
and doctors also have limited understanding of the nature of the conditional progression of a disease, except from their own experience 16.
Unsupervised machine learning and supervised machine learning are the two
main types of machine learning. Unsupervised machine learning draws inferences
from datasets that contain input data without labelled replies, or in other words,
where the expected output is not provided 17. The goal of supervised machine learning techniques is to discover the relationship between input variables (independent
variables) and a target variable (dependent variable). Supervised approaches are
further divided into two groups: classiﬁcation and regression. The output variable
in regression accepts continuous values, whereas the output variable in classiﬁcation
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
takes class labels 18.
Regression Regression is a method that is used to test two theories. For starters,
regression analyses are commonly employed for forecasting and prediction, and their
use overlaps heavily with machine learning. Second, regression analysis can be used
to discover causal relationships between independent and dependent variables in
particular situations. Importantly, regressions alone reveal only relationships between a dependent variable and a set of ﬁxed variables in a dataset 19.
Clustering Clustering algorithms are unsupervised machine learning approaches
that are frequently used when labels are unavailable (such as resource allocation
problems) 20
21. Clustering aids in the analysis of unstructured and high-dimensional data such
as sequences, expressions, phrases, and images 22.
Classiﬁcation Classiﬁcation is a data mining (machine learning) technique for
predicting data instance group membership. Although there are a variety of machine
learning approaches available, classiﬁcation is the most extensively employed 23. In
machine learning, classiﬁcation is a well-liked task, particularly in future planning
and knowledge discovery. Researchers in the disciplines of machine learning and
data mining consider classiﬁcation to be one of the most studied challenges 18.
One of the most fundamental challenges in medical image analysis is classiﬁcation.
Disease diagnosis and prognosis, anomaly identiﬁcation, and survivorship prediction
are typical medical image classiﬁcation tasks. A label from one of the predeﬁned
classes would be assigned based on the information that was collected from the
image. Since many classiﬁcation techniques are completely supervised, a dearth of
excellent labelled data frequently causes these techniques to fall short in actual
clinical contexts 24.
Clustering
Regression
Classification
Hierarchical
Neural Networks
Linear Regression
Decision Trees
Random Forest
Neural Networks
Support Vector
Discriminant
Naive Bayes
Neural Networks
Fig. 3: The most popular algorithms for machine learning
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
Some studies chose to get these characteristics via a reliable technique like deep
learning as machine learning techniques require extracted features to fulﬁl the classiﬁcation tasks. Their models used CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) architectures to extract features, which were then input to one of the ML approaches. It
is a combination of the CNN and ML blocks, with one being utilized for feature
extraction and the other for classiﬁcation 25.
1.3.2. Deep Learning
Faced with the exponential growth of data, a new ﬁeld of machine learning has been
used named Deep Learning 17. It is the latest trend in ML for its superior performance on big data 14. Recently, deep learning is increasingly addressed in computer
aided diagnostic systems 26. They are widely used in medical image classiﬁcation 27
28. Particularly, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), a class of Deep Learning
models 29, have shown promising results in the tasks of classiﬁcation, recognition,
and localization of images 3031. We are interested in image classiﬁcation, the most
important task in image processing 32. Most of the proposed methods are employed
to solve the detection, segmentation, and classiﬁcation tasks, as it has been clariﬁed
in ﬁgure 2 below 33. Multilayer neural networks (NNs) try to learn representations
from input images, which allow us to achieve speciﬁc results such as segmentation
or classiﬁcation without handcrafted features 34.
Areas of research involving deep learning architectures for image treatment have
grown recently. One of the most popular deep neural networks architectures is the
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 35. It is a supervised deep learning architecture. CNN has multiple layers; namely the convolutional layer, the non-linearity
layer, the aggregation layer, and the fully connected layer 36. Most common CNN
architectures are (AlexNet 37, VGG16, VGG19 38, ResNet50, DenseNet201 39, and
Inception-v4) 40. To train these models of computer vision system, it is necessary
to reach a considerable number and a wide variety of images 38, below the most
popular architectures of CNN.
Inception-V1
Inception-V3
Inception-V4
Inception-ResNets
ResNeXt-50
Fig. 4: CNN Architectures Timeline 
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
• AlexNet: The ﬁrst deep CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) architecture, AlexNet , is regarded as having produced
ground-breaking outcomes for image classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation applications. Krizhevesky et al. proposed AlexNet, which deepened the CNN’s
learning capacity and applied several parameter optimization techniques 40
Fig. 5: AlexNet architecture
• VGGNet (Visual Geometry Group): VGGNet was a neural network
that did exceptionally well. It came in ﬁrst place for image localization and
second place for image classiﬁcation 4244, 43.
Fig. 6: VGGNet architecture
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
• ResNet (Residual Network): He et al. proposed ResNet, which is seen
as a continuation of deep networks . By introducing the
idea of residual learning in CNNs and developing an eﬀective approach for
deep network training, ResNet altered the CNN architectural race.
Fig. 7: ResNet architecture: ResNet 34
• DensNet (Densely Connected Network): Gao et al. created DenseNet
in 2017 45. The outputs of each layer relate to all successor levels in a dense
block, which is made up of densely connected CNN layers. As a result, it
has dense connectivity between the layers, earning it the moniker DenseNet.
This idea is eﬀective for feature reuse, resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in
network parameters. DenseNet is made up of dense blocks and transition
blocks that are positioned between two dense blocks 46.
Fig. 8: An illustration of the DenseNet model
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
• Inception: The basic idea behind the Inception architecture is to investigate how a convolutional vision network’s best local sparse structure might
be approximated and covered by conveniently available dense components.
In general, an Inception network is made up of modules of the types stacked
on top of each other, with occasional max-pooling layers of stride 2 to reduce the grid’s resolution 4950.
Fig. 9: Inception model
Unlike humans, deep-learning algorithms require a large library of high-quality,
annotated data to learn and make accurate decisions about future events. This may
be one of the reasons why the medical ﬁeld has been slow to adopt the modern
technology during its preliminary stages, as annotated training sets are diﬃcult
to come by and privacy concerns abound. Interestingly, using a technique called
as transfer learning, the trained deep-learning models may be utilized to address
issues in distinct purpose related applications. Deep learning has been used in the
medical profession to solve problems including facial recognition 51 52, accurate
skin burn classiﬁcation 53, and cancer diagnosis 54, as well as in ﬁnancial fraud
detection. Surprisingly, a similar strategy was recently used to distinguish between
blood-smear images with and without the Plasmodium parasite 55.
2. Malaria classiﬁcation using machine learning
The following search terms were used to ﬁnd papers on artiﬁcial intelligence and
malaria: ”deep learning,” ”machine learning,” ”hybrid algorithms,” ”malaria,” and
”cell images”.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
Machine learning
Deep learning
Hybrid algorithms
Fig. 10: Malaria diagnostic update: 2020-2022
Recently, there have been a growing number of studies devoted to the application
of machine learning technologies to automate and to accurate malaria diagnosis to
save human life. We have selected several recent works from 2018 until 2022.
2.1. Public Datasets
Starting with explanations corresponding to diﬀerent works used in the most famous and available databases (a public database containing 27,558 images) from
 
Fig. 11: Visualization of the dataset: parasitized and uninfected
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
Rajaraman et al. 56 have proposed feature extractors using pre-trained CNNbased deep learning models for the classiﬁcation of uninfected and parasitized blood
cells to allow the identiﬁcation of diseases. The proposed model has three convolutional layers which use 3 × 3 ﬁlters with 2-pixel steps, with 32 ﬁlters for the ﬁrst
and second convolutional layers and 64 ﬁlters for the third convolutional layer, and
two fully connected layers. The resolution of the model input constitutes segmented
cells is 100 × 100 × 3 pixels. They evaluated the performance of pre-trained CNNs,
speciﬁcally AlexNet, VGG-16, Xception, ResNet-50 and DenseNet-121 to extract
characteristics of parasitized and uninfected cells. These models were optimized for
hyper parameters with the Random Grid Search method.
Masud, Mehedi, et al. 57 proposed a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) model
composed of four convolutional blocks and two fully connected dense layers, applied
to classify 27,558 segmented cell images, the given segmented cell images have a
resolution of 224 × 224 × 3 pixels. The trainable parameters of their proposed
model have a smaller size (409 K) compared to other complex models; its simplicity
will be the ﬁrst step while dealing with the problem of overﬁtting.
In 58, Convolutional neural network models (InceptionV3 networks, GoogleNet,
AlexNet, Resnet50, Vgg16) that have diﬀerent depth architectures, were trained
through BEKTAS¸, Jale by exploiting a cross validation by six were applied. the
performance evaluation of these models was carried out via Support Vector Machine
(SVM.). The choice of SVM is based on its performance because it is one of the
most popular image recognition and classiﬁcation machine learning algorithms 59.
Alqudah, A. M., & Qazan, S. 60 proposed a new CNN model using transfer
learning to classify red blood cells into two classes infected and Uninfected.
Umer, Muhammad, et al. 61 implemented a novel model to detect malaria applied to 27, 558 cell images, collected from the National Institute of Health. Going
through the main step which is pre-processing to set the image size of 120 × 120
pixels. In addition, they applied the normalization of the spots to preserve the
characteristic image. The stacked model was designed from 22 layers in total, 5
convolution layers, 2 max-pooling layers, 4 dense layers, 1 mid-layer pooling, 1 ﬂattened layer, 8 layers with 20% abandonment and 1 fully connected layer. And as
activation function, they used linear rectiﬁed (ReLU). To get a dimension of 120 ×
120 from the ﬁrst step, the image must be resembled by 200 × 200 pixels to make
ﬁnal decision, with Batch size value 32, continued for 13 epochs, and as optimizer
they used ADAM.
QANBAR, M. M., & Tasdemir, S. 62 developed a deep learning model named
Residence Attention Network (RAN). The residual attention network (RAN) is
structured by combining several attention modules. Such as each attention module
is divided into two branches: the mask branch and the trunk branch; the mask
branch and the trunk branch. This approach applied on a dataset contained a total
27.558 cell images (20.658 images for training, 6.900 images for the test).
Sinha, Shruti, et al. 63 in his paper proposed a deep learning approach. This
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
model uses two diﬀerent components of CNN (Sequential and ResNet). Indeed, the
diﬀerence between the two architectures is that ResNet uses more hidden layers
rather than sequential ones. Applied on a dataset which contains 27,558 cell images
with 80% for training and 20% for testing.
Sandhya, Y., Sahoo, P. K., & Eswaran, K. 64 proposed an automated system
based on deep learning the Convolutional Neural Network following these steps
(1) Image Processing used to get the quality image then the application of CNN
algorithm which contains the following layers; Convolution layer, Pooling layer,
ReLU layer and fully connected layer. This model applied to classify 27,558 images
with 30*30 pixels.
Bhansali, R., & Kumar, R. 65 developed a deep learning approach. Starting with
the ﬁrst step Image Pre-processing then the use of CNN architecture which contains
seven-layer (two convolution layers, two pooling layers, a ﬂattening layer, and two
fully connected dense layers). They used as optimizer Adaptive Moment Estimation
(Adam). And to avoid the problem of overﬁtting networks, they carried out the
early stopping, such as the number of parameters equal to 2,177,185 parameters
were trained and optimized.
In 2021, Irmak, E. 66 proposed a novel CNN architecture designed to detect
malaria from 27,558 thin blood cell images resized to 44 × 44 × 3. This model contained four convolution layers, four ReLU layers, four normalization layers, four max
pooling layers, one fully connected layer, one Softmax layer, and one classiﬁcation
Engelhardt, E., & J¨ager, S. 67 proposed 3 diﬀerent model architectures. The
ﬁrst model was used to evaluate training loss and accuracy as the number of trainable parameters 1 212 513. The second sequential model has 9 841 025 trainable
parameters, and the third model has 15 924 289 trainable parameters.
Maqsood, Asma, et al. 68 oﬀered a customized CNN model (5 convolutional layers, 5 max-pooling layers, and 2 fully connected layers) that beats all deep learning
models currently available. Data pre-processing, feature extraction, and classiﬁcation are the three aspects of the suggested method.
Elangovan, P., & Nath, M. K. 69 proposed a CNN model with four convolutional layers (C1, C2, C3, C4), two max pooling layers (P1, P2), and one fully
connected layer (FC), using thin smear blood pictures to detect malaria parasites.
Pre-processing, feature extraction, and classiﬁcation are all stages of the proposed
technique.
C¸inar, A., & Yildirim, M. 70 used a deep learning algorithm to identify the
presence or absence of malaria parasites, applied to dataset contains 3730 parasitic
data and 3000 healthy data. Without a Gaussian ﬁlter, the precision value is 94.33%,
More successful results were obtained with Gaussian ﬁlter applied data is value of
In malaria blood sample images of balanced class dataset generated from the
Kaggle dataset, a novel deep learning model dubbed a data augmentation convo-
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
lutional neural network (DACNN) was developed by Oyewola, David Opeoluwa, et
Magotra, V., & Rohil, M. K. 72 presented a bespoke CNN with six convolutional
layers and ﬁlter sizes ranging from 16 to 128 followed by an activation function called
”Relu” and six max-pooling layers. We employed a dropout function three times at
diﬀerent points in the training process to reduce overﬁtting and make the model
more durable in real-world applications. The custom CNN has a total of 332,577
parameters, including 332,161 trainable parameters (which are optimized and updated during training) and 416 nontrainable parameters (which are not optimized
and updated during training).
2.2. Private Datasets
Salamah, Umi, et al. 73 proposed a robust segmentation technique going through
the following stages of pre-processing, blood component segmentation, classiﬁcation
of blood components and parasite candidate formation. The performance was examined on 30 microscopic images of thick blood smears collected from various endemic
places in Indonesia. While varying the cut oﬀfrom 55 to 75 using 15 examples from
each training and test data.
PARDEDE, JASMAN, et al. 74 introduced RetinaNet object detection approach
for solving this problem. Data labelling is done with LabelImg in each erythrocyte
object for normal and infected erythrocytes, subsequently saved in xml format, and
converted to .csv ﬁle. In the training phase, they used Keras image data generator
function like random ﬂip, rotate and dilate to make preprocessing. Then, to extract
the erythrocytes object they applied CNN model (the ResNet 101 and ResNet50)
backend at 100 epochs. In the system test phase, pre-processing is ﬁrst performed
with each test image by clearing the ImageNet average. The RetinaNet architecture
was applied to 25 images for testing and 2 images for training from ex vivo samples
from P. vivax infected patients in Brazil , 75 images for testing and 4 images for
training from Dr. Yani Triyani.
Salamah, Umi, et al. 75 proposed a method which is formed of four steps; (1)
pre-processing (image ﬁltering and image enhancement), (2) Otsu thresholding (to
separate the object and background), (3) determine region minima (this step is
taken from a point which satisﬁes the condition, in which the collection point will
establish a watershed.) and (4) segmentation in which the performance of the proposed method is measured as a function of its accuracy value.
Mustafa, Wan Azani, et al. 76 implemented an image segmentation approach
via morphological approach applied to processed images with dimension of 808
× 608 pixels and 24-bit depth prepared by Medical Microbiology & Parasitology
Department. It is a combination of ﬁltering (mean ﬁlter and Gaussian ﬁlter) and
morphological operator.
In 2018, Roy, Kishor, et al. 77 proposed as an approach to detect malaria parasite accurately a model based on two segmentation procedures that are watershed
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
segmentation and HSV segmentation. The procedure HSV (Hue, Saturation and
Value) is divided into multiple steps which are discussed below; (1) converting the
image to HSV form and measuring parasite indices, (2) enhancing the Image, and
(3) binary image conversion. Regarding Watershed Segmentation is used to solve
the problem of HSV with it all the parasites cannot be detected because of some
color distortion of the input images. Before the application of this technique, it is
necessary to go through the following steps; (1) grayscale conversion, (2) morphological transformation, (3) adjustment of the image, (4) converting into black &
white image, (5) Finding the distance and nearest nonzero values, and watershed
segmentation.
In 2020, Pattanaik, P. A., Mittal, M., & Khan, M. Z. 78 constructed a computeraided diagnosis (CAD) scheme used to identify the existence of malaria parasites
in thick blood smear images, trained with a dataset of 1182 Field-stained malariainfected blood smear microscopic images are collected from an Android smartphone
at a Brunel SP150 microscope by a group of data scientists from Makerere University
AI Research Group. The resolution of each image is 750 × 750 pixel. Three evaluation metrics highlighted to assess performance including K-Fold cross-validation,
Class Performance (to measure the eﬃciency, they used the level of root mean square
error and the ROC curve) and Baselines for Comparisons process. Going
through the following steps (1) Image Enhancement Results, (2) Binarization, (3)
Region of Interest (ROI) by automatic cropping, and (4) ROI Image of Malaria
Parasites.
Kurtuldu, H¨useyin, et al.83 implemented an intelligent system a hyperspectral
microscope capable of measuring the intensity of light reﬂected or sent by illuminated materials in a wide range of wavelengths from visible to infrared, applied on a
dataset of images were passed through a Gaussian ﬁlter with a 7x7 scan window to
reduce noise. For the step of Classiﬁcation, a supervised machine learning method
was used to determine the optimal level of separation between the regions.
Kudisthalert, W., Pasupa, K., & Tongsima, S. 84 implemented a computer-aided
automated diagnosis system. Red blood cell counts, and parasite life-cycle stage
classiﬁcation are the two fundamental components of the proposed framework. It
is divided into eight steps: the ﬁrst four were image pre-processing stages, the next
two were RBCs segmentation stages, and the ﬁnal two were classiﬁcation tasks.
Nugroho, Hanung Adi, et al. 85 proposed an automated system for the detection of Plasmodium Ovale and Malaria Species on Microscopic Thin Blood Smear
Images. Adaptive thresholding, color segmentation between the green (G) and hue
(H) channels in the HSV color space, and morphological operation techniques were
Madhu, Golla.86 developed a classiﬁcation strategy using Extremely Randomized Trees classiﬁer applied on a private dataset contained 400 images, through
several steps such as image denoising using modiﬁed K-SVD, segmentation using
fuzzy type-2 functions, feature extraction by local and global features, feature selection by Extra Trees Classiﬁer, classiﬁcation using Extra Trees Classiﬁer, and
diagnosis.
We can see in the ﬁgure below the summary of diﬀerent computer studies that
have been conducted for malaria while emphasizing their performance. Image processing, machine learning and deep learning techniques are among them.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
DenseNet201 + Gaussian ﬁltered, 6730 images
Inception3, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
Segmented method, 30 images
ResNet101, 25 images
Watershed + Thresholding, 22 images
Morphological approach, 24 images
(HSV + Watershed) segmentation, 300 images
CAD scheme, 1182 images
Software-based diagnostic, 92 images
U-Net, 30 images
Residual Attention Network, 27,558 images
ResNet, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
MalariaNet, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 10000 images
Convolutional Neural Networks, 27,558 images
ORI, 150 images
Hyperspectral microscopic imaging, 13 images
Customized CNN model, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
CAD system, 23,248 images
Automated detection method, 108 images
Extremely Randomized Trees, 400 images
Data augmentation CNN, 27,558 images
Convolutional Neural Network, 27,558 images
% Accuracy
Fig. 12: Malaria diagnosis using deep learning 2018-2022, Private datasets, , Public
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
3. Hybrid Machine Learning Models for Malaria Classiﬁcation
The challenge of selection (and thus of understanding) and the developing issues of
robustness lead to the got to reconsider the artiﬁcial intelligence approaches to the
straightforwardness, interpretability or explainability of fake insights calculations.
As well as the require for secure brilliantly frameworks.
In response to the increased demand for explainability, new algorithms are developing that oﬀer precision, explainability, speed, and optimization of the amount
of calculation required.
The hybrid model, which uses both machine learning techniques, produces outcomes
that are better optimized 87. Recently, some research on fusing machine learning
techniques into diverse hybrid approaches has become known. Further research is
needed because this study is still in its initial stages 88.
For the image classiﬁcation of malaria cells, Diker, A. 89 built a machine learning
model based on Deep Residual CNN features Bayesian optimization method. The
malaria cell images were classiﬁed using residual CNN, k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN),
and Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁers. There are 27558 images of malaria
cells in the public database that the National Institutes of Health (NIH) maintains.
A deep learning model using Canonical Correlation Analysis was proposed by
Patil, A., et al 90. The CCA approach extracts, learns, and trains many nuclei
patches at once to view the impacts of overlapping nuclei. Because blood cell pictures overlap, classiﬁcation time is shortened, input image dimensions are compressed, and the network converges more quickly with more precise weight values.
12,442 blood cell images make up the dataset, with 9957 serving as training images
and 2487 serving as test images. Eosinophil, Lymphocyte, Monocyte, and Neutrophil are the four diﬀerent blood cell classes into which these picture samples are
categorized. Compared to the testing dataset, which has 623 Eosinophil, 623 Lymphocyte, 620 Monocyte, and 624 Neutrophil photos, the training dataset contains
2496 Eosinophil, 2484 Lymphocyte, 2477 Monocyte, and 2498 Neutrophil images.
Initially, RGB images with dimensions of 320 x 240 x 3 were used by the entire
neural network.
A malaria disease detection algorithm was put forth by Soomro, Aqeela, et al.
91. Along with the Naive Bayes Classiﬁer, they applied image processing ﬁlters and
methods to detect the malaria disease. The dataset used in their research is one of
27,558 images from the Kaggle online datasets pool. Images in the dataset range in
size, thus it is important to resize them all to the same standard size of 300x300.
To prevent inaccurate results brought on by human error, Marada Amrutha
Reddy et al. 92 developed a transfer learning model using inception-v3 and an SVM
classiﬁer applied to 27,560 cell images.
A model was created by H. Mohamed, E. et al. 93 that combines the deep models’
advantage of automatically extracting features with the standard machine learning
classiﬁers’ greater classiﬁcation accuracy. Logistic regression was used as a classiﬁer
and the pre-trained model MobileNet-224 as a feature extractor on 9,760 images.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
A color-texture feature (YCrCb HOG) was introduced by M. K. Bashar 94 using
an unbalanced dataset of 46,978 single-cell thin blood smear images and an SVM
classiﬁer.
VGGNet was used by Sahlol, A. T. et al. 95 to extract characteristics from WBC
images. A statistically enhanced Salp Swarm Algorithm (SESSA) is then used to
ﬁlter the retrieved features on 50,000 images for validation and 100,000 images for
The Salp Swarm Algorithm and the Cat Swarm Optimization (SSPSO)
algorithm-based optimized Convolutional neural networks (SSPSO-CNN) approach
were combined, according to Kumar, R. et al. 96. Five types of peripheral blood
cells, including eosinophils, basophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, and neutrophils,
were categorized by it in the past. Their approach outlines the process of developing a classiﬁer that has been ﬁne-tuned using 10,674 images gathered from medical
An algorithm based on the pretrained Alexnet and Google Net designs was
proposed by A. Nar et al. 97. Both CNN designs’ ﬁnal pooling layer’s feature vector
has been combined, and the resulting feature vector is classiﬁed by the SVM (Google
Jha, K. K. et al. 98 created a leukemia detection module using deep learning and
blood smear images. Pre-processing, segmentation, feature extraction, and classi-
ﬁcation are performed during the detection phase. The segmentation outcomes of
the active contour model and fuzzy C means method are combined in the suggested hybrid model based on mutual information (MI). The statistical and Local
Directional Pattern (LDP) features are then retrieved from the segmented pictures
and fed into the suggested Chronological Sine Cosine Algorithm (SCA) based Deep
CNN classiﬁer.
A two-step process was used by Abbas, S. S., et al. 99, beginning with image
segmentation and ending with life stage classiﬁcation. To segment and label 3000
images of Plasmodium falciparum parasites, scientists used a random forest classiﬁer
to determine whether each pixel was a parasite or not.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
Deep Residual CNN + Bayesian, 27558 images
CNN+LSTM+CCP, 12,442 images
Image Processing+Na¨ıve Bayes, 27,558 images
InceptionV3 and SVM, 27,560 images
MobileNet-224+ logistic regression, 12,500 images
color-texture feature+SVM, 46,973 images
VGGNet+Swarm Optimization, 50,000 images
CNN-SSPSO, 10,674 images
Alexnet-GoogleNet-SVM, 12,500 images
SCA-based Deep CNN, 108 images
 annotated data.
4.3. Scarcity of imaging data in big data area
An important consideration, Data Dependent, is that deep learning models work
well on large data sets. Indeed, training and testing these models on a small dataset
becomes impractical, so they are unable to learn from limited datasets. Therefore,
these methods could prove to be eﬀective with more training data.
According to several studies, data augmentation will be a solution to having a
large amount of data. However, it may introduce noise into the images or necessitate
the sampling of overlapping image patches. However, the augmented samples can
be highly associated with one another, leading to overﬁtting. Overﬁtting is a common machine learning and statistical modelling problem in which a learning model
memorizes the training data and is unable to generalize to new data. Furthermore,
local patches are unable to include the image’s global and spatial context, resulting
in mistakes.
4.4. Public dataset (Benchmark: Standard reference)
If this study takes the route of a comparison of methods, to decide which is the
most eﬀective, it is suggested to compare these techniques by applying it to public
databases and not to private ones collected from clinics and hospitals. A hassle associated with the datasets accrued from hospitals which cannot be used as input for
deep learning techniques. Leveraging data from other hospitals can be challenging
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Deep learning and Machine learning for Malaria detection : Overview, challenges and future directions
due to institutional diﬀerences with patients and data coding and collection. So,
these models are not ﬂexible. Here we are talking about normalization problem.
The main conclusion from this consideration is that Deep Learning models are not
generalized.
4.5. Explainability of deep learning models
In the two main phases of treatment; the learning phase and the testing phase, it is
important to consider the complexity and time trade-oﬀs that some methodologies
radically include. A challenge associated with the use of deep learning models in
medicine is that they use many parameters, which makes it diﬃcult to determine
the speciﬁc variables that give rise to predictions and worsens the traditional understanding of model overﬁtting. More complicated models are almost impossible
to understand and explain. Often Machine learning algorithms can be used to make
decisions about a situation, but they are unable to explain what factors inﬂuenced
the algorithm’s decision. Most Machine learning and deep learning methods lack
the ability to explain. For these reasons, control will be extremely limited over the
Deep Learning algorithms. The main objective is to achieve simpliﬁcation. Some
studies suggested the combination of ﬁltering (mean ﬁlter and Gaussian ﬁlter) to
reduce noise.
4.6. What would it take for radiologists to accept deep learning
tools in their everyday practice?
Radiologists should be able to upload new data into the training system using realworld apps. However, it is unclear how each piece of uploaded data may be trained
again, either from scratch or as a pre-trained network, and how training time and
overﬁtting can be dealt with by regular training with slightly updated data sets.
Finally, transferring these systems to a virtual cloud environment and making them
available always would be a helpful feature.
5. Conclusion and Outlook
Machine learning and deep learning are signiﬁcant technologies that have changed
the medical history. These paradigms have signiﬁcantly changed how people store,
process, and analyse data to make better decision. These have also led to research
in developing technology that changes drastically with time. Machine learning techniques can be used to solve complicated real-world problems. The relevance of machine learning especially Deep learning in resolving the diﬃcult issues of malaria
detection and classiﬁcation is highlighted in this article. This paper has presented
a detailed review of all these new paradigms by particularly illustrating their contributions to the healthcare system. We provided some details about the diﬀerent
architectures of deep learning especially convolutional neural network. Also, we presented challenges that militate against the performance of Deep learning models.
September 28, 2022
WSPC/ws-ijitdm
Imen JDEY, Ghazala HCINI and Hela LTIFI
We will strongly recommend in this paper that artiﬁcial intelligence-based drug program primarily deep learning would signiﬁcantly beneﬁt in the ﬁght against malaria
in terms of saving human lives in less time and less cost.
In future studies, for best results, a pre-trained algorithm customized and modiﬁed on a dataset benchmark may need to be developed to reduce the complexity
of the default models. Clinicians’ performance on the newly created system (CAD)
should be compared to their performance on an existing tool, if appropriate, for
clinical assessment. We expect to see more CAD systems for malaria detection and
diagnosis as the adoption of deep learning algorithms, hardware support, and compelling qualities of deep learning methods such as robustness, generalizability, and
expert-level accuracies rise.