ZeroQ: A Novel Zero Shot Quantization Framework
Yaohui Cai∗,1, Zhewei Yao∗,2, Zhen Dong,∗,2
Amir Gholami2, Michael W. Mahoney2, Kurt Keutzer2
1Peking University;
2University of California, Berkeley
{zheweiy, zhendong, amirgh, mahoneymw, and keutzer}@berkeley.edu 
Abstract—Quantization is a promising approach for reducing
the inference time and memory footprint of neural networks.
However, most existing quantization methods require access to
the original training dataset for retraining during quantization.
This is often not possible for applications with sensitive or
proprietary data, e.g., due to privacy and security concerns. Existing zero-shot quantization methods use different heuristics to
address this, but they result in poor performance, especially when
quantizing to ultra-low precision. Here, we propose ZEROQ, a
novel zero-shot quantization framework to address this. ZEROQ
enables mixed-precision quantization without any access to the
training or validation data. This is achieved by optimizing for
a Distilled Dataset, which is engineered to match the statistics
of batch normalization across different layers of the network.
ZEROQ supports both uniform and mixed-precision quantization.
For the latter, we introduce a novel Pareto frontier based method
to automatically determine the mixed-precision bit setting for
all layers, with no manual search involved. We extensively test
our proposed method on a diverse set of models, including
ResNet18/50/152, MobileNetV2, ShufﬂeNet, SqueezeNext, and
InceptionV3 on ImageNet, as well as RetinaNet-ResNet50 on the
Microsoft COCO dataset. In particular, we show that ZEROQ can
achieve 1.71% higher accuracy on MobileNetV2, as compared to
the recently proposed DFQ method. Importantly, ZEROQ
has a very low computational overhead, and it can ﬁnish the
entire quantization process in less than 30s (0.5% of one epoch
training time of ResNet50 on ImageNet). We have open-sourced
the ZEROQ framework1.
I. INTRODUCTION
Despite the great success of deep Neural Network (NN)
models in various domains, the deployment of modern NN
models at the edge has been challenging due to their prohibitive memory footprint, inference time, and/or energy consumption. With the current hardware support for low-precision
computations, quantization has become a popular procedure
to address these challenges. By quantizing the ﬂoating point
values of weights and/or activations in a NN to integers, the
model size can be shrunk signiﬁcantly, without any modiﬁcation to the architecture. This also allows one to use reducedprecision Arithmetic Logic Units (ALUs) which are faster and
more power-efﬁcient, as compared to ﬂoating point ALUs.
More importantly, quantization reduces memory trafﬁc volume, which is a signiﬁcant source of energy consumption .
However, quantizing a model from single precision to lowprecision often results in signiﬁcant accuracy degradation. One
way to alleviate this is to perform the so-called quantizationaware ﬁne-tuning to reduce the
∗Equal contribution.
1 
performance gap between the original model and the quantized model. Basically, this is a retraining procedure that is
performed for a few epochs to adjust the NN parameters
to reduce accuracy drop. However, quantization-aware ﬁnetuning can be computationally expensive and time-consuming.
For example, in online learning situations, where a model
needs to be constantly updated on new data and deployed
every few hours, there may not be enough time for the ﬁnetuning procedure to ﬁnish. More importantly, in many realworld scenarios, the training dataset is sensitive or proprietary,
meaning that it is not possible to access the dataset that was
used to train the model. Good examples are medical data, biometric data, or user data used in recommendation systems.
To address this, recent work has proposed post-training
quantization , which directly quantizes NN
models without ﬁne-tuning. However, as mentioned above,
these methods result in non-trivial performance degradation,
especially for low-precision quantization. Furthermore, previous post-training quantization methods usually require limited
(unlabeled) data to assist the post-training quantization. However, for cases such as MLaaS (e.g., Amazon AWS and Google
Cloud), it may not be possible to access any of the training
data from users. An example application case is health care
information which cannot be uploaded to the cloud due to
various privacy issues and/or regulatory constraints. Another
shortcoming is that often post-quantization methods 
only focus on standard NNs such as ResNet and InceptionV3 for image classiﬁcation, and they do not consider
more demanding tasks such as object detection.
In this work, we propose ZEROQ, a novel zero-shot quantization scheme to overcome the issues mentioned above.
In particular, ZEROQ allows quantization of NN models,
without any access to any training/validation data. It uses a
novel approach to automatically compute a mixed-precision
conﬁguration without any expensive search. In particular, our
contributions are as follows.
• We propose an optimization formulation to generate Distilled Data, i.e., synthetic data engineered to match the
statistics of batch normalization layers. This reconstruction
has a small computational overhead. For example, it only
takes 3s (0.05% of one epoch training time) to generate 32
images for ResNet50 on ImageNet on an 8-V100 system.
• We use the above reconstruction framework to perform
sensitivity analysis between the quantized and the original
model. We show that the Distilled Data matches the sensitivity of the original training data (see Figure 1 and Table IV
 
Fig. 1: Illustration of sensitivity computation for ResNet18 on ImageNet. The ﬁgure shows how we compute the sensitivity
of the 8-th layer when quantized to 4-bit (Ω8(4)) according to Eq. 2. We feed Distilled Data into the full-precision ResNet18
(top), and the same model except quantizing the 8-th layer to 4-bit (bottom) receptively. The sensitivity of the 8-th layer when
quantized to 4-bit Ω8(4) is deﬁned as the KL-divergence between the output of these two models. For simplicity, we omit the
residual connections here, although the same analysis is applied to the residual connections in ZEROQ.
for details). We then use the Distilled Data, instead of
original/real data, to perform post-training quantization. The
entire sensitivity computation here only costs 12s (0.2% of
one epoch training time) in total for ResNet50. Importantly,
we never use any training/validation data for the entire
• Our framework supports both uniform and mixed-precision
quantization. For the latter, we propose a novel automatic
precision selection method based on a Pareto frontier optimization (see Figure 4 for illustration). This is achieved by
computing the quantization sensitivity based on the Distilled
Data with small computational overhead. For example, we
are able to determine automatically the mixed-precision
setting in under 14s for ResNet50.
We extensively test our proposed ZEROQ framework on a wide
range of NNs for image classiﬁcation and object detection
tasks, achieving state-of-the-art quantization results in all
tests. In particular, we present quantization results for both
standard models (e.g., ResNet18/50/152 and InceptionV3) and
efﬁcient/compact models (e.g., MobileNetV2, ShufﬂeNet, and
SqueezeNext) for image classiﬁcation task. Importantly, we
also test ZEROQ for object detection on Microsoft COCO
dataset with RetinaNet . Among other things, we
show that ZEROQ achieves 1.71% higher accuracy on MobileNetV2 as compared to the recently proposed DFQ 
II. RELATED WORK
Here we provide a brief (and by no means extensive)
review of the related work in literature. There is a wide range
of methods besides quantization which have been proposed
to address the prohibitive memory footprint and inference
latency/power of modern NN architectures. These methods are
typically orthogonal to quantization, and they include efﬁcient
neural architecture design , knowledge
distillation , model pruning , and hardware
and NN co-design . Here we focus on quantization , which compresses the model
by reducing the bit precision used to represent parameters
and/or activations. An important challenge with quantization
is that it can lead to signiﬁcant performance degradation,
especially in ultra-low bit precision settings. To address this,
existing methods propose quantization-aware ﬁne-tuning to
recover lost performance . Importantly, this requires
access to the full dataset that was used to train the original
model. Not only can this be very time-consuming, but often
access to training data is not possible.
To address this, several papers focused on developing
post-training quantization methods (also referred to as postquantization), without any ﬁne-tuning/training. In particular,
 proposes the OMSE method to optimize the L2 distance
between the quantized tensor and the original tensor. Moreover, proposed the so-called ACIQ method to analytically
compute the clipping range, as well as the per-channel bit
allocation for NNs, and it achieves relatively good testing
performance. However, they use per-channel quantization for
activations, which is difﬁcult for efﬁcient hardware implementation in practice. In addition, proposes an outlier
channel splitting (OCS) method to solve the outlier channel
problem. However, these methods require access to limited
Sensitivity for quantizing to 4-bit: Ωi(4) →
Distilled Data
Training Data
Sensitivity for quantizing to 2/4/8-bit: Ωi(2/4/8) →
Fig. 2: (Left) Sensitivity of each layer in ResNet50 when quantized to 4-bit weights, measured with different kinds of data (red
for Gaussian, blue for Distilled Data, and black for training data). (Right) Sensitivity of ResNet50 when quantized to 2/4/8-bit
weight precision (measured with Distilled Data).
data to reduce the performance drop .
The recent work of proposed Data Free Quantization (DFQ). It further pushes post-quantization to zero-shot
scenarios, where neither training nor testing data are accessible during quantization. The work of uses a weight
equalization scheme to remove outliers in both weights
and activations, and they achieve similar results with layerwise quantization, as compared to previous post-quantization
work with channel-wise quantization . However, their
performance signiﬁcantly degrades when NNs are quantized to
6-bit or lower.
A recent concurrent paper to ours independently proposed
to use Batch Normalization statistics to reconstruct input
data . They propose a knowledge-distillation based method
to boost the accuracy further, by generating input data that
is similar to the original training dataset, using the so-called
Inceptionism . However, it is not clear how the latter
approach can be used for tasks such as object detection or
image segmentation. Furthermore, this knowledge-distillation
process adds to the computational time required for zero-shot
quantization. As we will show in our work, it is possible to
use batch norm statistics combined with mixed-precision quantization to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy, and importantly
this approach is not limited to image classiﬁcation task. In
particular, we will present results on object detection using
RetinaNet-ResNet50, besides testing ZEROQ on a wide range
of models for image classiﬁcation (using ResNet18/50/152,
MobileNetV2, ShufﬂeNet, SqueezeNext, and InceptionV3),
We show that for all of these cases ZEROQ exceeds state-ofthe-art quantization performance. Importantly, our approach
has a very small computational overhead. For example, we
can ﬁnish ResNet50 quantization in under 30 seconds on an
8 V-100 system (corresponding to 0.5% of one epoch training
time of ResNet50 on ImageNet).
Directly quantizing all NN layers to low precision can lead
to signiﬁcant accuracy degradation. A promising approach to
address this is to perform mixed-precision quantization , where different bit-precision is used for different
layers. The key idea behind mixed-precision quantization is
that not all layers of a convolutional network are equally “sensitive” to quantization. A na¨ıve mixed-precision quantization
method can be computationally expensive, as the search space
for determining the precision of each layer is exponential in
the number of layers. To address this, uses NAS/RLbased search algorithm to explore the conﬁguration space.
However, these searching methods can be expensive and are
often sensitive to the hyper-parameters and the initialization
of the RL based algorithm. Alternatively, the recent work
of introduces a Hessian based method, where the
bit precision setting is based on the second-order sensitivity of
each layer. However, this approach does require access to the
original training set, a limitation which we address in ZEROQ.
III. METHODOLOGY
For a typical supervised computer vision task, we seek to
minimize the empirical risk loss, i.e.,
f(M(θ; xi), yi),
where θ ∈Rn is the learnable parameter, f(·, ·) is the loss
function (typically cross-entropy loss), (xi, yi) is the training
input/label pair, M is the NN model with L layers, and N
is the total number of training data points. Here, we assume
that the input data goes through standard preprocessing normalization of zero mean (µ0 = 0) and unit variance (σ0 = 1).
Moreover, we assume that the model has L BN layers denoted
as BN1, BN2, ..., BNL. We denote the activations before the
i-th BN layer with zi (in other words zi is the output of the
i-th convolutional layer). During inference, zi is normalized
by the running mean (µi) and variance (σ2
i ) of parameters in
the i-th BN layer (BNi), which is pre-computed during the
training process. Typically BN layers also include scaling and
bias correction, which we denote as γi and βi, respectively.
We assume that before quantization, all the NN parameters
and activations are stored in 32-bit precision and that we have
no access to the training/validation datasets. To quantize a
tensor (either weights or activations), we clip the parameters
to a range of [a, b] (a, b ∈R), and we uniformly discretize the
space to 2k −1 even intervals using asymmetric quantization.
That is, the length of each interval will be ∆=
As a result, the original 32-bit single-precision values are
mapped to unsigned integers within the range of [0, 2k −1].
Some work has proposed non-uniform quantization schemes
which can capture ﬁner details of weight/activation distribution . However, we only use asymmetric uniform
quantization, as the non-uniform methods are typically not
suitable for efﬁcient hardware execution.
The ZEROQ framework supports both ﬁxed-precision and
mixed-precision quantization. In the latter scheme, different
layers of the model could have different bit precisions (different k). The main idea behind mixed-precision quantization
is to keep more sensitive layers at higher precision, and more
aggressively quantize less sensitive layers, without increasing
overall model size. As we will show later, this mixed-precision
quantization is key to achieving high accuracy for ultra-low
precision settings such as 4-bit quantization. Typical choices
for k for each layer are {2, 4, 8} bit. Note that this mixedprecision quantization leads to exponentially large search
space, as every layer could have one of these bit precision
settings. It is possible to avoid this prohibitive search space
if we could measure the sensitivity of the model to the
quantization of each layer . For the case of posttraining quantization (i.e. without ﬁne-tuning), a good sensitivity metric is to use KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between
the original model and the quantized model, deﬁned as:
KL(M(θ; xj), M(˜θi(k-bit); xj)).
where Ωi(k) measures how sensitive the i-th layer is when
quantized to k-bit, and ˜θi(k-bit) refers to quantized model parameters in the i-th layer with k-bit precision. If Ωi(k) is small,
the output of the quantized model will not signiﬁcantly deviate
from the output of the full precision model when quantizing
the i-th layer to k-bits, and thus the i-th layer is relatively
insensitive to k-bit quantization, and vice versa. This process
is schematically shown in Figure 1 for ResNet18. However,
an important problem is that for zero-shot quantization we do
not have access to the original training dataset xj in Eq. 2.
We address this by “distilling” a synthetic input data to match
the statistics of the original training dataset, which we refer
to as Distilled Data. We obtain the Distilled Data by solely
analyzing the trained model itself, as described below.
A. Distilled Data
For zero-shot quantization, we do not have access to any of
the training/validation data. This poses two challenges. First,
we need to know the range of values for activations of each
layer so that we can clip the range for quantization (the [a, b]
range mentioned above). However, we cannot determine this
range without access to the training dataset. This is a problem
for both uniform and mixed-precision quantization. Second,
another challenge is that for mixed-precision quantization, we
need to compute Ωi in Eq. 2, but we do not have access
to training data xj. A very na¨ıve method to address these
challenges is to create a random input data drawn from a
Gaussian distribution with zero mean and unit variance and
feed it into the model. However, this approach cannot capture
the correct statistics of the activation data corresponding to the
original training dataset. This is illustrated in Figure 2 (left),
where we plot the sensitivity of each layer of ResNet50 on
ImageNet measured with the original training dataset (shown
in black) and Gaussian based input data (shown in red). As one
can see, the Gaussian data clearly does not capture the correct
sensitivity of the model. For instance, for the ﬁrst three layers,
the sensitivity order of the red line is actually the opposite of
the original training data.
Fig. 3: Visualization of Gaussian data (left) and Distilled Data
(right). More local structure can be seen in our Distilled Data
that is generated according to Algorithm 1.
To address this problem, we propose a novel method to
“distill” input data from the NN model itself, i.e., to generate
synthetic data carefully engineered based on the properties
of the NN. In particular, we solve a distillation optimization
problem, in order to learn an input data distribution that best
matches the statistics encoded in the BN layer of the model.
In more detail, we solve the following optimization problem:
where xr is the reconstructed (distilled) input data, and
i are the mean/standard deviation of the Distilled Data’s
distribution at layer i, and µi/σi are the corresponding
mean/standard deviation parameters stored in the BN layer
at layer i. In other words, after solving this optimization
problem, we can distill an input data which, when fed into
the network, can have a statistical distribution that closely
matches the original model. Please see Algorithm 1 for a
description. This Distilled Data can then be used to address
the two challenges described earlier. First, we can use the
Algorithm 1: Generation of Distilled Data
Input: Model: M with L Batch Normalization layers
Output: A batch of distilled data: xr
Generate random data from Gaussian: xr
Get µi, σi from Batch Normalization layers of M,
i ∈0, 1, . . . , L
// Note that µ0 = 0, σ0 = 1
for j = 1, 2, . . . do
Forward propagate M(xr) and gather intermediate
activations
Get ˜µi and ˜σi from intermediate activations,
i ∈1, . . . , n
Compute ˜µ0 and ˜σ0 of xr
Compute the loss based on Eq. 3
Backward propagate and update xr
Distilled Data’s activation range to determine quantization
clipping parameters (the [a, b] range mentioned above). Note
that some prior work address this by using limited
(unlabeled) data to determine the activation range. However,
this contradicts the assumptions of zero-shot quantization, and
may not be applicable for certain applications. Second, we can
use the Distilled Data and feed it in Eq. 2 to determine the
quantization sensitivity (Ωi). The latter is plotted for ResNet50
in Figure 2 (left) shown in solid blue color. As one can see,
the Distilled Data closely matches the sensitivity of the model
as compared to using Gaussian input data (shown in red). We
show a visualization of the random Gaussian data as well as
the Distilled Data for ResNet50 in Figure 3. We can see that
the Distilled Data can capture ﬁne-grained local structures.
B. Pareto Frontier
As mentioned before, the main challenge for mixedprecision quantization is to determine the exact bit precision
conﬁguration for the entire NN. For an L-layer model with m
possible precision options, the mixed-precision search space,
denoted as S, has an exponential size of mL. For example
for ResNet50 with just three bit precision of {2, 4, 8} (i.e.,
m = 3), the search space contains 7.2 × 1023 conﬁgurations.
However, we can use the sensitivity metric in Eq. 2 to reduce
this search space. The main idea is to use higher bit precision
for layers that are more sensitive, and lower bit precision for
layers that are less sensitive. This gives us a relative ordering
on the number of bits. To compute the precise bit precision
setting, we propose a Pareto frontier approach similar to the
method used in .
The Pareto frontier method works as follows. For a target
quantized model size of Starget, we measure the overall
sensitivity of the model for each bit precision conﬁguration
that results in the Starget model size. We choose the bitprecision setting that corresponds to the minimum overall
sensitivity. In more detail, we solve the following optimization
Ωi(ki) s.t.
Pi ∗ki ≤Starget,
Model Size (MB)
Overall Sensitivity: PL
i=1 Ωi(ki)
Mixed 6-bit conﬁguration
Mixed 4-bit conﬁguration
Fig. 4: The Pareto frontier of ResNet50 on ImageNet. Each
point shows a mixed-precision bit setting. The x-axis shows
the resulting model size for each conﬁguration, and the y-axis
shows the resulting sensitivity. In practice, a constraint for
model size is set. Then the Pareto frontier method chooses a
bit-precision conﬁguration that results in minimal perturbation.
We show two examples for 4 and 6-bit mixed precision
conﬁguration shown in red and orange. The corresponding
results are presented in Table Ia.
where ki is the quantization precision of the i-th layer, and
Pi is the parameter size for the i-th layer. Note that here
we make the simplifying assumption that the sensitivity of
different layers are independent of the choice of bits for other
layers (hence Ωi only depends on the bit precision for the i-th
layer).2 Using a dynamic programming method we can solve
the best setting with different Starget together, and then we
plot the Pareto frontier. An example is shown in Figure 4 for
ResNet50 model, where the x-axis is the model size for each
bit precision conﬁguration, and the y-axis is the overall model
perturbation/sensitivity. Each blue dot in the ﬁgure represents
a mixed-precision conﬁguration. In ZEROQ, we choose the
bit precision setting that has the smallest perturbation with a
speciﬁc model size constraint.
Importantly, note that the computational overhead of computing the Pareto frontier is O(mL). This is because we
compute the sensitivity of each layer separately from other
layers. That is, we compute sensitivity Ωi (i = 1, 2, ..., L) with
respect to all m different precision options, which leads to the
O(mL) computational complexity. We should note that this
Pareto Frontier approach (including the Dynamic Programming optimizer), is not theoretically guaranteed to result in
the best possible conﬁguration, out of all possibilities in the
exponentially large search space. However, our results show
2Please see Section A where we describe how we relax this assumption
without having to perform an exponentially large computation for the sensitivity for each bit precision setting.
that the ﬁnal mixed-precision conﬁguration achieves state-ofthe-art accuracy with small performance loss, as compared to
the original model in single precision.
TABLE I: Quantization results of ResNet50, MobileNetV2,
and ShufﬂeNet on ImageNet. We abbreviate quantization bits
used for weights as “W-bit” (for activations as “A-bit”), top-1
test accuracy as “Top-1.” Here, “MP” refers to mixed-precision
quantization, “No D” means that none of the data is used to
assist quantization, and “No FT” stands for no ﬁne-tuning (retraining). Compared to post-quantization methods OCS ,
OMSE , and DFQ , ZEROQ achieves better accuracy.
ZEROQ† means using percentile for quantization.
(a) ResNet50
No D No FT W-bit A-bit Size (MB) Top-1
(b) MobileNetV2
No D No FT W-bit A-bit Size (MB) Top-1
Integer-Only 
RVQuant 
(c) ShufﬂeNet
No D No FT W-bit A-bit Size (MB) Top-1
IV. RESULTS
In this section, we extensively test ZEROQ on a wide
range of models and datasets. We ﬁrst start by discussing
the zero-shot quantization of ResNet18/50, MobileNet-V2, and
ShufﬂeNet on ImageNet in Section IV-A. Additional results
for quantizing ResNet152, InceptionV3, and SqueezeNext on
ImageNet, as well as ResNet20 on Cifar10 are provided in
Appendix C. We also present results for object detection using
RetinaNet tested on Microsoft COCO dataset in Section IV-B.
We emphasize that all of the results achieved by ZEROQ are
100% zero-shot without any need for ﬁne-tuning.
We also emphasize that we used exactly the same hyperparameters (e.g., the number of iterations to generate Distilled
Data) for all experiments, including the results on Microsoft
COCO dataset.
A. ImageNet
We start by discussing the results on the ImageNet dataset.
For each model, after generating Distilled Data based on Eq. 3,
we compute the sensitivity of each layer using Eq. 2 for
different bit precision. Next, we use Eq. 4 and the Pareto
frontier introduced in Section III-B to get the best bit-precision
conﬁguration based on the overall sensitivity for a given model
size constraint. We denote the quantized results as WwAh
where w and h denote the bit precision used for weights and
activations of the NN model.
We present zero-shot quantization results for ResNet50
in Table Ia. As one can see, for W8A8 (i.e., 8-bit quantization for both weights and activations), ZEROQ results
in only 0.05% accuracy degradation. Further quantizing the
model to W6A6, ZEROQ achieves 77.43% accuracy, which
is 2.63% higher than OCS , even though our model
is slightly smaller (18.27MB as compared to 18.46MB for
OCS).3 We show that we can further quantize ResNet50 down
to just 12.17MB with mixed precision quantization, and we
obtain 75.80% accuracy. Note that this is 0.82% higher than
OMSE with access to training data and 5.74% higher
than zero-shot version of OMSE. Importantly, note that OMSE
keeps activation bits at 32-bits, while for this comparison our
results use 8-bits for the activation (i.e., 4× smaller activation
memory footprint than OMSE). For comparison, we include
results for PACT , a standard quantization method that
requires access to training data and also requires ﬁne-tuning.
An important feature of the ZEROQ framework is that it can
perform the quantization with very low computational overhead. For example, the end-to-end quantization of ResNet50
takes less than 30 seconds on an 8 Tesla V100 GPUs (one
epoch training time on this system takes 100 minutes). In terms
of timing breakdown, it takes 3s to generate the Distilled Data,
12s to compute the sensitivity for all layers of ResNet50, and
14s to perform Pareto Frontier optimization.
We also show ZEROQ results on MobileNetV2 and compare
it with both DFQ and ﬁne-tuning based methods ,
as shown in Table Ib. For W8A8, ZEROQ has less than 0.12%
accuracy drop as compared to baseline, and it achieves 1.71%
higher accuracy as compared to DFQ method.
Further compressing the model to W6A6 with mixedprecision quantization for weights, ZEROQ can still outperform Integer-Only by 1.95% accuracy, even though
ZEROQ does not use any data or ﬁne-tuning. ZEROQ can
achieve 68.83% accuracy even when the weight compression is
3Importantly note that OCS requires access to the training data, while
ZEROQ does not use any training/validation data.
8×, which corresponds to using 4-bit quantization for weights
on average.
We also experimented with percentile based clipping to
determine the quantization range (please see Section D for
details). The results corresponding to percentile based clipping
are denoted as ZeroQ† and reported in Table I. We found that
using percentile based clipping is helpful for low precision
quantization. Other choices for clipping methods have been
proposed in the literature. Here we note that our approach is
orthogonal to these improvements and that ZEROQ could be
combined with these methods.
We also apply ZEROQ to quantize efﬁcient and highly
compact models such as ShufﬂeNet, whose model size is only
5.94MB. To the best of our knowledge, there exists no prior
zero-shot quantization results for this model. ZEROQ achieves
a small accuracy drop of 0.13% for W8A8. We can further
quantize the model down to an average of 4-bits for weights,
which achieves a model size of only 0.73MB, with an accuracy
of 58.96%.
TABLE II: Object detection on Microsoft COCO using RetinaNet. By keeping activations to be 8-bit, our 4-bit weight
result is comparable with recently proposed method FQN ,
which relies on ﬁne-tuning. (Note that FQN uses 4-bit activations and the baseline used in is 35.6 mAP).
No D No FT W-bit A-bit Size (MB) mAP
We also compare with the recent Data-Free Compression
(DFC) method. There are two main differences between
ZEROQ and DFC. First, DFC proposes a ﬁne-tuning method
to recover accuracy for ultra-low precision cases. This can
be time-consuming and as we show it is not necessary. In
particular, we show that with mixed-precision quantization one
can actually achieve higher accuracy without any need for ﬁnetuning. This is shown in Table III for ResNet18 quantization
on ImageNet. In particular, note the results for W4A4, where
the DFC method without ﬁne-tuning results in more than 15%
accuracy drop with a ﬁnal accuracy of 55.49%. For this reason,
the authors propose a method with post quantization training,
which can boost the accuracy to 68.05% using W4A4 for
intermediate layers, and 8-bits for the ﬁrst and last layers.
In contrast, ZEROQ achieves a higher accuracy of 69.05%
without any need for ﬁne-tuning. Furthermore, the end-to-end
zero-shot quantization of ResNet18 takes only 12s on an 8-
V100 system (equivalent to 0.4% of the 45 minutes time for
one epoch training of ResNet18 on ImageNet). Secondly, DFC
method uses Inceptionism to facilitate the generation of
data with random labels, but it is hard to extend this for object
detection and image segmentation tasks.
TABLE III: Uniform post-quantization on ImageNet with
ResNet18. We use percentile clipping for W4A4 and W4A8
settings. ZEROQ† means using percentile for quantization.
No D No FT W-bit A-bit Size (MB) Top-1
Integer-Only 
RVQuant 
We include additional results of quantized ResNet152,
InceptionV3, and SqueezeNext on ImageNet, as well as
ResNet20 on Cifar10, in Appendix C.
B. Microsoft COCO
Object detection is often much more complicated than
ImageNet classiﬁcation. To demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our
approach we also test ZEROQ on an object detection task on
Microsoft COCO dataset. RetinaNet is a state-of-the-art
single-stage detector, and we use the pretrained model with
ResNet50 as the backbone, which can achieve 36.4 mAP.4
One of the main difference of RetinaNet with previous NNs
we tested on ImageNet is that some convolutional layers in
RetinaNet are not followed by BN layers. This is because of
the presence of a feature pyramid network (FPN) , and it
means that the number of BN layers is slightly smaller than
that of convolutional layers. However, this is not a limitation
and the ZEROQ framework still works well. Speciﬁcally, we
extract the backbone of RetinaNet and create Distilled Data.
Afterwards, we feed the Distilled Data into RetinaNet to
measure the sensitivity as well as to determine the activation
range for the entire NN. This is followed by optimizing for
the Pareto Frontier, discussed earlier.
The results are presented in Table II. We can see that for
W8A8 ZEROQ has no performance degradation. For W6A6,
ZEROQ achieves 35.9 mAP. Further quantizing the model
to an average of 4-bits for the weights, ZEROQ achieves
33.7 mAP. Our results are comparable to the recent results
of FQN , even though it is not a zero-shot quantization
method (i.e., it uses the full training dataset and requires ﬁnetuning). However, it should be mentioned that ZEROQ keeps
the activations to be 8-bits, while FQN uses 4-bit activations.
V. ABLATION STUDY
Here, we present an ablation study for the two components
of ZEROQ: (i) the Distilled Data generated by Eq. 3 to help
4Here we use the standard mAP 0.5:0.05:0.95 metric on COCO dataset.
sensitivity analysis and determine activation clipping range;
and (ii) the Pareto frontier method for automatic bit-precision
assignment. Below we discuss the ablation study for each part
separately.
A. Distilled Data
In this work, all the sensitivity analysis and the activation
range are computed on the Distilled Data. Here, we perform
an ablation study on the effectiveness of Distilled Data as
compared to using just Gaussian data. We use three different
types of data sources, (i) Gaussian data with mean “0” and
variance “1”, (ii) data from training dataset, (iii) our Distilled
Data, as the input data to measure the sensitivity and to
determine the activation range. We quantize ResNet50 and
MobileNetV2 to an average of 4-bit for weights and 8-bit for
activations, and we report results in Table IV.
For ResNet50, using training data results in 75.95% testing
accuracy. With Gaussian data, the performance degrades to
75.44%. ZEROQ can alleviate the gap between Gaussian
data and training data and achieves 75.80%. For more compact/efﬁcient models such as MobileNetV2, the gap between
using Gaussian data and using training data increases to
2.33%. ZEROQ can still achieve 68.83%, which is only
0.23% lower than using training data. Additional results for
ResNet18, ShufﬂeNet and SqueezeNext are shown in Table VIII.
TABLE IV: Ablation study for Distilled Data on ResNet50
and MobileNetv2. We show the performance of ZEROQ with
different data to compute the sensitivity and to determine the
activation range. All quantized models have the same size as
models with 4-bit weights and 8-bit activations.
W-bit A-bit ResNet50 MobileNetV2
Training Data
Distilled Data
B. Sensitivity Analysis
Here, we perform an ablation study to show that the bit
precision of the Pareto frontier method works well. To test this,
we compare ZEROQ with two cases, one where we choose a
bit-conﬁguration that corresponds to maximizing Ωsum (which
is opposite to the minimization that we do in ZEROQ), and
one case where we use random bit precision for different
layers. We denote these two methods as Inverse and Random.
The results for quantizing weights to an average of 4-bit and
activations to 8-bit are shown in Table V. We report the best
and worst testing accuracy as well as the mean and variance in
the results out of 20 tests. It can be seen that ZEROQ results
in signiﬁcantly better testing performance as compared to
Inverse and Random. Another noticeable point is that the best
conﬁguration (i.e., minimum Ωsum) can outperform 0.18%
than the worst case among the top-20 conﬁgurations from
ZEROQ, which reﬂects the advantage of the Pareto frontier
method. Also, notice the small variance of all conﬁgurations
generated by ZEROQ.
TABLE V: Ablation study for sensitivity analysis on ImageNet
(W4A8) with ResNet50. Top-20 conﬁgurations are selected
based on different sensitivity metric types. We report the
best, mean, and worst accuracy among 20 conﬁgurations.
“ZEROQ” and “Inverse” mean selecting the bit conﬁgurations
to minimize and maximize the overall sensitivity, respectively,
under the average 4-bit weight constraint. “Random” means
randomly selecting the bit for each layer and making the total
size equivalent to 4-bit weight quantization.
Top-1 Accuracy
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced ZEROQ, a novel post-training quantization method that does not require any access to the
training/validation data. Our approach uses a novel method
to distill an input data distribution to match the statistics
in the batch normalization layers of the model. We show
that this Distilled Data is very effective in capturing the
sensitivity of different layers of the network. Furthermore,
we present a Pareto frontier method to select automatically
the bit-precision conﬁguration for mixed-precision settings. An
important aspect of ZEROQ is its low computational overhead.
For example, the end-to-end zero-shot quantization time of
ResNet50 is less than 30 seconds on an 8-V100 GPU system.
We extensively test ZEROQ on various datasets and models.
This includes various ResNets, InceptionV3, MobileNetV2,
ShufﬂeNet, and SqueezeNext on ImageNet, ResNet20 on
Cifar10, and even RetinaNet for object detection on Microsoft
COCO dataset. We consistently achieve higher accuracy with
the same or smaller model size compared to previous posttraining quantization methods. All results show that ZEROQ
could exceed previous zero-shot quantization methods. We
have open sourced ZEROQ framework .