Imaging human connectomes at the macroscale
R. Cameron Craddock1,2, Saad Jbabdi3,*, Chao-Gan Yan1,2,4,*, Joshua Vogelstein1,5,6,7, F.
Xavier Castellanos2,4, Adriana Di Martino4, Clare Kelly4, Keith Heberlein8, Stan Colcombe2,
and Michael P. Milham1,2
1Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY
2Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY
3FMRIB Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
4The Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York
University Child Study Center, New York, NY
5Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC
6Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC
7Institute for Data Intensive Engineering and Sciences, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
8Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Charlestown, MA
At macroscopic scales, the human connectome is composed of anatomically distinct brain areas,
the structural pathways connecting them, and their functional interactions. Successful annotation
of phenotypic associations with variation in the connectome and cataloguing of neurophenotypes
promise to transform our understanding of the human brain. This review provides a survey of
magnetic resonance imaging-based measurements of functional and structural connectivity. We
highlight emerging areas of development and inquiry, and emphasize the importance of integrating
structural and functional perspectives on brain architecture.
Introduction
First introduced in 20051, the term “connectome” embodies the advances of over a century
of neuroscientific innovation and reflects an agenda for a new era. Initially defined as a
complete map of neural connections within the brain, the connectome is a multiscale
construct that can be examined at varying resolutions. At the extremes are the microscale,
which focuses on the study of individual neurons and their synaptic connections, and the
macroscale, which examines areas of cortical tissues (commonly ~1cm3or larger).
Corresponding authors: Stan Colcombe, Ph.D., Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 140 Old Orangeburg Road,
Orangeburg, NY 10962, Tel: +1 845 398 5514, and Michael P. Milham, M.D., Ph.D., Center for the
Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, 445 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10022, Tel: +1 646 625 4256, Fax: +1 646 625 4348,
 .
*These two authors contributed equally
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
Keith Heberlein, Ph.D. is a full time employee of Siemens Medical Solutions USA, and owns shares in Siemens, AG.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
 
Nat Methods. 2013 June ; 10(6): 524–539. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2482.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Intermediate is the mesoscale, which, in humans, attends to vertical columns of 80–120
neurons (commonly referred to as micro- or mini-columns)1, 2. Although intimately
associated, each resolution provides unique perspectives on the connectome. At the
macroscale, and particularly in studies of the human brain, conceptualizations of the
connectome have grown to also include information about function3. In this review we will
use the term connectome to refer to brain areas, their anatomical connections, and their
functional interactions.
Currently, macroscale methodologies are best positioned for mapping and annotating human
connectomes with cognitive and behavioral associations. The higher-order, albeit lowerresolution representations, captured at the macroscale most directly relate to regulatory,
cognitive, and affective processes. Interpretation of macroscale findings is most amenable to
guidance from lesion and brain imaging studies. Further, comprehensive mapping and
annotation of the connectome is most achievable at the lower-resolution macroscale, due to
reduced computational and analytical demands. Moreover, non-invasive tools for in vivo
imaging the human connectome are only available at the macroscale; in vivo microscale
studies are currently limited to model organisms and neurosurgical patients.
Among the modalities used for macroconnectomics, MRI is dominant, partly because of
widespread availability, safety, and spatial resolution. Diffusion-weighted MRI (dMRI) and
functional MRI (fMRI) are especially popular for inferring structural and functional
connectivity, respectively4. Diffusion-weighted MRI provides cubic-millimeter-resolution
portrayals of white matter tracts, and insights into organizing principles guiding their
orientation and trajectories; fMRI reveals a universal functional architecture, with variations
among individuals meaningfully related to phenotypic variables5(e.g., behavioral,
psychiatric).
The present review focuses on the mapping, characterization and analysis of macroscale
connectomes. We structure our presentation in terms of a mathematical perspective that
treats the connectome as a graph of interactions among brain areas. Nodes in the graph are
abstract representations of brain areas and edges represent pairwise relationships between
nodes. We first review approaches and challenges to parcellating the brain into discrete
subunits represented by nodes, and then review the imaging and analytic methodologies
used to map and quantify patterns of structural and functional connectivity that are
represented by edges in the connectome.
Defining Nodes
Defining the nodes of a macroscale connectome is a complex task as we lack agreement on
how best to define the constituent brain units. Depending on the scope of the investigation,
the specific brain subunits represented by nodes can range from the small patches of cortex
contained in individual MRI voxels to larger brain areas (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex). Early parcellation efforts utilized post-mortem architectonic measurements (e.g. cell
morphology) of single individuals. Although these resulting atlases are central to
neuroscience, no functional or structural connectivity-based information was used in their
construction, thus limiting their ability to accurately represent connectomes. For example,
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
despite being represented as a single area in anatomical atlases6, the anterior cingulate
region contains a number of subregions, each of which are characterized by dramatically
different functional7and structural8connectivity patterns. As demonstrated in figure 1, while
the large-scale pattern captured by different parcellation strategies may bear a gross
similarity to one another, the specific details conveyed vary substantially (Fig. 1).
Ideally, information from brain function and structural connectivity should be exploited to
delineate brain areas. Meta-analytic approaches can define nodes based on task-based fMRI
(T-fMRI) studies9. Alternatively, data-driven clustering techniques can subdivide the brain
into areas based on homogeneity of functional time series10, 11, or functional or structural
connectivity profiles8, 11, 12. Blind source separation techniques can also define network
nodes using spatial independence13. These methods commonly pool information across
individuals, and most can enforce specific properties on resulting brain areas11. One
drawback is the need for pre-specification of the number of areas to be generated, which can
be estimated based upon homogeneity, accuracy, reproducibility, or stability of the brain
areas10, 11. Optimal comparison of connectomes is likely to require parcellation strategies
that incorporate information across individuals and modalities, potentially at the cost of
quality of fit for single subjects and modalities.
Estimating Structural Connectivity
Structural connectivity encompasses the collection of axonal and dendritic connections
among neurons1. Despite definitional simplicity, structural connectivity is difficult to
measure with non-invasive, in vivo imaging approaches. Prior to dMRI, our knowledge was
primarily derived from lesions and blunt dissection in humans, or invasive tracing in nonhumans. These methodologies remain the gold standard for establishing connectivity, but the
non-invasive nature of dMRI makes it the de facto standard for human structural
connectivity.
Acquisition
The basic principle underlying the inference of structural connectivity from dMRI is that
water diffusion in white matter is hindered, occurring primarily along the path of axons. In
contrast, water diffusion in grey matter and cerebral spinal fluid occurs (almost) equally in
all directions. By following the motion of water, it is possible to map the orientation(s) of
fibers passing through each white matter voxel. In dMRI, a series of images are acquired,
each sensitive to diffusion along a specific direction. The number of unique directions
acquired varies from six into the hundreds. When combined, these images contain the
information necessary to estimate the orientation(s) of fibers passing through each voxel;
this information is used to reconstruct large-scale white matter tracts (tractography). See
Box 1 for further information about dMRI acquisition.
Preprocessing
Following acquisition, dMRI data must be preconditioned before directional information can
be extracted, and tractography performed. Little debate exists regarding dMRI data
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
preprocessing (see14for an exception), though this may reflect the difficulties of
preprocessing and its complex impact rather than field consensus.
Correcting image distortions—In vivo dMRI data are plagued with spatial distortions,
which are a central focus of preprocessing. In particular, magnetic field inhomogeneities are
a major contributor. Areas where materials that differ with respect to magnetic susceptibility
(i.e., degree of magnetization achieved in the MRI) interface with one another (e.g. air-tissue
interfaces) are particularly prone to such inhomogeneities. These local variations in the
magnetic field generate spatial distortions, which can be reduced through parallel imaging
techniques or mathematically corrected using estimates of the field variations15. Another
cause of spatial distortion is the interaction between the static magnetic field and currents
induced by the rapid switching of gradients with the magnetic field, known as eddy-currents.
These artifacts can be reduced using bipolar gradients16. Image coregistration, i.e. spatial
alignment of brain scans, is commonly employed in preprocessing to correct for eddy
current distortions and subject head motion17. However, this method fails for images
acquired using very strong diffusion gradients. Model-based approaches that explicitly
account for the effects of eddy-currents during image acquisition are emerging as the
preferred option18.
Overlooked Issues—The above preprocessing steps, combined with visual inspection,
constitute standard preprocessing. A few important details are often overlooked (see14for
more examples). First, modern scanners are often equipped with antennas that acquire data
in parallel through multiple-channels that are subsequently combined. Such parallel imaging
techniques can elevate noise levels if the data are submitted to standard reconstruction19.
This can artifactually lower diffusivity estimates along the axons, which increases the
tendency of tractography approaches to overfit and generate false positive connections. An
alternative reconstruction method has recently been proposed to address this important
issue19. Second, any distortion correction must account for voxel-wise compression or
expansion during image coregistration. This is particularly important for dMRI, where
distortions vary in direction and magnitude between different gradient orientations, but is
largely ignored by current software packages. Finally, image coregistrations contain a
rotation component that is applied to each volume, and must therefore be applied to the
concurrent gradient orientation20.
Estimating fiber orientation—Prior to delineating tracts and bundles via tractography,
fiber orientation(s) must be inferred for white matter voxels individually. The dMRI signal’s
sensitivity to water diffusion properties (i.e., rate, direction) enables the estimation of fiber
orientation at each voxel. Importantly, each voxel contains thousands of axonal fibers, not
just one. Thus, the goal of dMRI analysis is to infer a probability function for each voxel,
which captures the different fiber orientations present, and their relative proportions21.
Referred to as the fiber orientation density function (fODF), estimation of this function at
each voxel is the first step in estimating structural connectivity.
The diffusion tensor is a simplistic but viable model for the diffusion profile that provides a
simple approximation to the fODF22. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) uses a 3×3 matrix to
provide an abstract ellipsoid representation of the water diffusion profile for a given voxel.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mathematical decomposition of this matrix yields information regarding the directions (x, y,
z) of maximum and minimum water motion (eigenvectors), as well as the amount of
diffusion that occurs along each direction (eigenvalues). The direction of maximal diffusion,
referred to as the principal diffusion direction, is taken as the best estimate of fiber
orientation within a voxel. Formally speaking, in the case of DTI, the fODF is approximated
using a delta function or peak aligned with the principal diffusion direction.
The diffusion tensor provides a good estimate of fiber orientations when axons are
homogeneously aligned within a voxel. However, this is not always the case. Fibers are
known to disperse (i.e., fan), cross, merge, and kiss (i.e., temporarily run adjacent to one
another) – all of which can happen within a single voxel and lead to heterogeneity not
accounted for by a simple delta function. More complex fODF approximations can account
for such heterogeneity within a voxel, though require higher angular coverage23, 24(i.e.,
more directions) and models that either explicitly or implicitly account for interactions
between fiber orientation and the diffusion signal (See21for example methods). Complex
fODF models better estimate fiber trajectories, particularly when several white matter tracts
intersect, and allow recovery of non-dominant pathways invisible to DTI25.
Estimating Edges
Following estimation of voxel-wise fiber orientations, tractography approaches are used to
establish structural connectivity between connectome nodes. Three-dimension trajectories,
referred to as “streamlines”, are used to trace putative white matter paths. Local fiber
orientation information guides the construction of streamlines along the fODF, allowing us
to trace major white matter bundles26. Results are typically visualized as 3D renderings of
thin curves grouped into bundles (Fig. 2), reminiscent of post-mortem dissection
photographs. Importantly, the individual streamlines do not represent actual axons; they
depict estimates of the average trajectories of axon bundles, given our assumption that
diffusion is least hindered along axons.
The specific process by which streamlines are developed varies depending on the
complexity of the fODF approximations available. With diffusion tensor modeling, the
principal diffusion direction at each voxel guides the formation of the streamline;
specifically, it provides a candidate for the tangent to the streamline at each voxel. For more
complex fODF models, streamlining follows the same principle, though with multiple peak
orientations available at each voxel, rather than a single principal diffusion direction. This
allows streamlines with differing orientations to pass through the same voxel – which is
crucial when heterogeneous fibers are present. While traditional tractography approaches are
deterministic, probabilistic approaches account for uncertainty in estimates of local fiber
orientations, allowing for estimation of probabilities for any given streamline.
Using streamlining methodologies, it is theoretically possible to measure all connections
between grey matter areas. We can estimate both the trajectories and the end points of
anatomical pathways. In practice, however, inference of point-to-point connectivity using
streamlining is imprecise and error-prone27; improvements in both data quality and
modeling are needed to yield more accurate structural connectomes.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Ideally, we should not only be able to infer the existence or absence of connections between
nodes, but estimate connection (edge) strengths as well. Anatomical connections are made
up of axons; features of these axons, such as density, size, length, and myelination, have
important consequences on the propagation of action potentials, and hence information
transfer. Measures of microstructural features based on more complex diffusion MRI
experiments are emerging28, and may become an important constituent of connectomics.
Related measures, such as fractional anisotropy and diffusivity, serve as common proxies for
these microstructural complexities, but are extremely sensitive to confounding factors such
as partial volume (e.g. voxels containing a mixture of white matter and grey matter) and
axonal dispersion27, 29. Accordingly, these measures should be used cautiously to quantify
connection strength. Other anatomical factors such as dendrite and spine densities, number
of synapses at axon terminals, and synaptic efficacy are much harder to determine
noninvasively, though potentially more relevant.
Unfortunately, tractography does not quantify any of the above properties. Often,
probabilistic tractography, which estimates the uncertainty of the streamline trajectories, is
used to quantify connection strength. Strong connections are expected to have a more
significant trace in the diffusion data, and therefore lower uncertainty in their trajectories.
This approximation, however, can easily break. For instance, locally non-dominant
pathways (e.g., those that cross larger bundles), have higher uncertainty. Uncertainty is also
affected by non-relevant factors such as signal-to-noise and partial volume effects. Another
issue specific to streamlining is that uncertainty in the streamline’s path increases with the
length of tract. Because streamlining operates by propagating uncertainty spatially,
connection probabilities inevitably decrease with distance. As a result, tractography-based
structural connections are difficult to quantify, threshold, compare between groups, and use
for other types of statistical analyses27, 29.
Interpretation and considerations
Tractography pitfalls can be divided into two categories: accuracy (correctness) and
precision (reproducibility)14. Accuracy refers to our ability to infer axonal organization from
measurement of water diffusion. In the ideal case, there is no instrumental or physiological
noise, yet we can still make erroneous inferences regarding microstructure due to inaccurate
modeling. A white matter voxel contains hundreds of thousands of axons, which do not
necessarily align30. Fiber ODF models, which account for multiple directions within a voxel
(crossing fibers) are replacing tensor models for tractography. However, the sub-voxel
organization of axons can be more complex than a simple crossing, and may not always be
easily recovered from the diffusion profile. For instance, a collection of axons that bend
within a voxel will create a diffusion pattern that may not be easily distinguishable from that
of fiber dispersion. One can easily imagine even more complex situations where all these
configurations (e.g., bending, dispersion, crossing) happen within the same voxel. Diffusion
data from a single voxel cannot unambiguously resolve these complexities. Future
approaches may benefit from semi-global models that aggregate diffusion data across
multiple adjacent voxels to infer sub-voxel features.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Regarding precision, measurement noise (e.g., instrumental or physiological) and inadequate
water diffusion modeling can compromise tensor and fODF estimation, inducing spurious
variations in the generated streamlines. Additionally, use of a fixed step size in the
generation of streamlines (despite local variations in anatomy), and the discrete nature of
voxels (when tracts are continuous) increase measurement error. Probabilistic tractography
algorithms try to quantify these errors by estimating the uncertainty in the entire process.
Uncertainty in voxel wise fiber orientation can be quantified31and propagated into
uncertainties regarding the location of streamlines. This process turns 3D point estimates of
streamline trajectories into spatial histograms of their locations (Fig. 2c).
Beyond concerns regarding accuracy and precision, identification of fibers in their entirety
requires knowledge of where tracts terminate throughout cortex. This remains a challenge
for tractography algorithms, which are very good at estimating the location of bundles in
deep white matter, but not so good (yet) at identifying where they project into grey matter27.
These difficulties result from a lack of detail in white matter architecture modeled through
diffusion and biases in cortical projections.
Estimating Functional Connectivity
While the concept of structural connectivity is relatively intuitive given the presence of
physical connections between brain areas, its functional counterpart can be more challenging
to define. The macroconnectomics field has adopted a neurophysiological perspective of
functional connectivity, defining it as the synchronization of neurophysiological events
between spatially remote brain areas32. First quantified in early electroencephalography
(EEG) and multiunit recordings studies, functional connectivity analyses were adopted by
positron emission tomography (PET) and fMRI in 199332. Although functional connectivity
can be measured using a variety of neuroimaging modalities (e.g., PET, fMRI,
magnetoencephalography) and different indices related to physiological function (e.g., blood
oxygenation level dependent [BOLD], cerebral blood flow, glucose metabolism), BOLDbased fMRI is the most popular technique for inferring functional connectivity.
Functional connectivity studies may be dichotomized based upon the presence or absence of
a task (i.e., task-based fMRI [T-fMRI] vs. task-free or “resting state” [R-fMRI]). Task-based
approaches focus on the detection of synchronous responses to extrinsic stimulation or tasks,
referred to herein as evoked functional connectivity (eFC) or coactivation33. Evoked
functional connectivity can be quantified across the entire period of task performance, or in
response to specific event types. Approaches using R-fMRI focus on the detection of
synchronized spontaneous activity occurring in the absence of experimenter controlled tasks
or stimuli, referred to as intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC)34. Although iFC and eFC
patterns can be strikingly similar, especially when eFC is assessed using meta-analytic
techniques35or broad comparisons (e.g., task vs. rest), these analyses probe different aspects
of the functional architecture33. Importantly, eFC patterns obtained using one task will not
necessarily generalize to another, and aspects of iFC obtained during one state (e.g.,
wakefulness) may not necessarily generalize to another (e.g., sleep) (see Box 2 for a
discussion of states other than wakeful rest).
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Acquisition
BOLD is the predominant fMRI technique in functional connectivity (see36for alternative
cerebral blood flow-based technique). BOLD is measured using ultra-fast imaging
sequences that are sensitive to relative concentrations of deoxyhemoglobin, which is
paramagnetic (i.e., dephases the MR signal) in contrast to oxyhemoglobin, which is
diamagnetic37; the resulting measurement is an indirect measure of neural activation.
Datasets for functional connectivity analysis using fMRI are typically obtained in 5–30
minutes, as a participant either performs an experimental task (T-fMRI), or rests quietly in
the scanner (typically while awake; R-fMRI). See Box 1 for a discussion of determinants of
BOLD imaging acquisition quality.
Preprocessing
Preprocessing aims to remove confounding variation from data and facilitate comparison
across subjects. Structured nuisance signals and anatomical variation can obscure functional
connectivity measurements if left unaccounted for. Despite considerable effort, we lack
consensus regarding the optimal set of preprocessing steps, their ordering and their
implementation. Most preprocessing steps originated with task activation approaches.
However, their usage and implications are greater for functional connectivity approaches
due to the increased risk of spurious findings given that the independent and dependent
variables can be contaminated by the same noise signals (e.g., motion, respiration).
Comprehensive comparison of preprocessing strategies and their implications for eFC and
iFC analyses remain elusive, in part due to lack of objective benchmarks. The preprocessing
steps described below are post-hoc corrections. However, optimization of acquisition
strategies to minimize the impact of noise sources is preferred (see Box 1).
Slice Timing Correction—The slices of an fMRI volume are acquired at different times,
creating effective shifts in time-series obtained at different slices. Although some question
its necessity38, correction by temporal-interpolation is recommended to avoid the potential
for deleterious impact of these lags on signal denoising and time-series extraction from brain
Motion Correction—Head motion results in a misalignment of brain areas between
volumes typically accounted for using 3D image registration techniques. Additionally, head
motion induces artifactual fMRI signal fluctuations due to changes in slice tissue
composition (partial voluming), and residual magnetization from prior slice excitations (spin
history effects)39. These motion artifacts are typically modeled and removed in a regression
framework, containing predictors calculated from motion parameters estimated during
coregistration40. Although effective, modeling based approaches do not completely remove
motion-related fluctuations in the fMRI signal41–43. To address this issue, the “scrubbing” of
offending volumes via removal41or spike regression44has been proposed. Importantly,
excluding time-points alters the temporal structure of the data, thereby compromising
analyses that rely on this structure (e.g., temporal dynamics, spectral analysis, estimating
temporal autocorrelation). Regardless of the motion correction scheme employed, it is
necessary to account for motion in group level analyses42, 45.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Physiological Noise Correction—Cardiac pulsation and respiration can induce fMRI
signal fluctuations, which led to early criticisms attributing iFC to these physiological
signals rather than neural signals46. The cardiac cycle generates pulsatile motion throughout
the brain47. Respiratory movement of the chest and abdomen induce changes in the
magnetic field, producing intensity fluctuations in fMRI images47. Additionally, changes in
cardiac rhythm as well as rate and depth of breathing create longer-term effects. Respiration
and pulse can be recorded to model and subsequently remove their impact47. Although
accepted as ideal, this is not commonly performed. Instead, signals present in white matter
and cerebrospinal fluid are taken as surrogates for respiration and cardiac effects, and
regressed from the fMRI time-series. Incorporating spatial variation in the noise captured by
the white matter signal provides superior denoising (e.g., ANATICOR48). Blind source
separation techniques provide another means of physiological correction (e.g., Corsica49).
Global Signal Regression (GSR)—The mean time-series across the whole brain is
commonly regressed from the data. In this model, the global signal is considered a nonspecific measure of noise whose removal improves the specificity of iFC50, decreases
motion-effects44, and removes inter-session and inter-site effects. However, awareness that
GSR centers the correlation distribution at zero, and thus introduces negative
connections51and can alter inter-individual differences52, has made its use controversial. In
this regard, it is important to note that functional correlation coefficients obtained after GSR
are relative values, not absolute. Additionally, electrophysiological demonstrations of
globally synchronous neural signals in grey matter53call into question the interpretation of
the global signal as simply noise.
Temporal Filtering—Bandpass filtering (0.001<f<0.08) is usually included. This
frequency range targets removal of low frequency scanner drift and frequencies above those
traditionally associated with functional connectivity34, 54. However, complete removal of
physiological noise is unlikely, due to artifacts induced by the low temporal resolution of
fMRI (e.g. aliasing)46. Concerns about temporal filtering include reductions in the degrees
of freedom for the time-series and recent demonstrations of functional connectivity at
frequencies higher than 0.1 Hz for several brain areas, suggesting that low-pass filtering is
removing valuable signal55. Thus, despite historical precedent, inclusion of low-pass
filtering merits further consideration.
Spatial Normalization and Smoothing—Another aspect of preprocessing is
conditioning the data for comparison across subjects. Spatial normalization addresses
morphological variation across individuals by transforming them to a common stereotactic
space; population- and study-specific templates are increasingly used to optimize
correspondence. Spatial smoothing further improves the correspondence of brain areas
across individuals, and increases the signal-to-noise ratio56.
Estimating Edges
Several mathematical modeling techniques can be used to define functional relationships,
differing primarily in the stringency with which they define functional connectivity.
Functional connectivity simply implies a statistical dependency between activities observed
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
in brain areas, and is an umbrella term for a wide range of dependency measures, each
providing a different perspective32. For example, mutual information measures statistical
dependency from the joint probability distribution function and is sensitive to linear and
non-linear relationships, whereas Pearson’s correlation is primarily sensitive to linear
relationships57. Effective connectivity, on the other hand, requires a mathematically precise
(directional) description of the interactions between brain areas58. Importantly, this leads to
a plurality of graphs that can be derived from functional connectivity, each characterizing
functional interactions from a different perspective.
Estimating iFC from R-fMRI typically begins with extraction of the mean time-series across
voxels in each brain node (i.e., parcellation-defined brain area). Intrinsic functional
connectivity is commonly estimated from bivariate tests for statistical dependency (e.g.,
Pearson’s correlation, mutual information, spectral coherence) between every possible
pairing of time-series59. Although these approaches perform well in simple simulations59,
the limited number of observations results in noisy estimates of statistical relationships,
which can be reduced using regularization (shrinkage) methods60. A limitation of bivariate
approaches is that they do not take into account multiple brain areas simultaneously. Hence
they cannot distinguish direct from indirect interactions (mediated by shared relationships
with other areas). Partial correlation (related to the inverse covariance matrix) estimates the
conditional linear dependency between two brain areas, after accounting for interactions
with every other area61. Although considered preferential to bivariate approaches, the
number of brain areas commonly exceeds the degrees of freedom, preventing unique
specification of partial correlations. In these cases, regularization techniques (e.g., graphical
lasso, elastic net) can assist in finding a solution59. Additionally, information can be pooled
across individuals to optimize estimation parameters62. Note that some, but not all, of these
approaches enforce symmetry; in other words, one can obtain dependency in one direction
but not the other (see Box 3).
A number of approaches exist for estimating eFC. Several authors have borrowed
approaches from iFC, assuming the time-series spans the entire task63or from concatenated
blocks of specific task conditions64. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI)39analyses
directly model interactions between patterns of functional connectivity and the experimental
stimulus design, potentially offering greater specificity of findings. Others have measured
eFC from “coactivation” using a series of fitted regression coefficients65or binarized (by
applying a threshold to regression coefficients) time-series66generated from a first level task
analysis. Regression coefficient-series are then compared using correlation or partial
correlation33, 65. Binarized time-series can be compared from the joint distribution of the
two values using measures akin to mutual information66. Finally, meta-analytical
approaches provide a means of measuring eFC across studies and often tasks, detecting
patterns of coactivation across statistical maps generated from the literature35, 67.
A variety of data-driven techniques are also used for identifying iFC and eFC patterns.
Examples include self-organizing maps68, principal component analysis, normalized cut
clustering69, and independent component analysis70. These methods are more appropriate
for identifying nodes of connectome graphs (see node section) than edges, although
exceptions exist59.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Once functional connectivity is estimated, some applications require it to be thresholded or
binarized (i.e., a connection is present or not). Threshold selection is not straightforward, but
can be accomplished by applying a test of statistical significance to each edge. When using
parametric statistics, care must be taken to adjust the degrees of freedom for temporal
autocorrelation. Alternatively, this can be addressed using non-parametric tests of
significance such as wavestrapping71or circular block bootstrap72. Sparse covariance
estimation methods can also be employed.
Interpretations and Considerations
A common pursuit of T-fMRI and R-fMRI studies is to fractionate the connectome into a set
of spatially and functionally distinct networks that can each be annotated in terms of the
specific functional (e.g. cognitive, affective, or visceral) domain they subserve.
Impressively, they have converged on similar definitions of 8–20 spatially and functionally
distinct networks - though numerous studies have suggested the actual number of networks
is substantially greater13. The concordance of T-fMRI and R-fMRI findings suggests the
brain's intrinsic functional architecture provides a framework for moment-to-moment
responses to the external world. As summarized by Smith et al.67, it appears that “the full
repertoire of functional networks utilized by the brain in action is continuously and
dynamically ‘active’ even when at ‘rest’.”
When considering the visualization of functional connectivity (Fig. 3), an important question
is: “what are we missing?” While functional connectivity is often represented with static
graphs, neurophysiological models have long asserted the transient nature of many
functional interactions. Specifically, distributed neural assemblies appear to change their
patterns of interaction with one another from one cognitive act or state to another. Consistent
with this notion, eFC studies have noted significant task-dependency in their findings, even
when looking at the same regions33, 39. Perhaps most exciting, recent iFC studies have
observed dynamic changes in iFC patterns over a 5–minute scan73. These findings suggest
that commonly employed metrics of iFC are incomplete, only capturing the “mean”
connectivity over time. If true, the implications would be multifold: 1) findings of hypo- or
hyper-connectivity in population studies would need to be reassessed, as they may reflect a
different distribution of time spent in the various iFC configurations between populations, 2)
the detection of changing eFC patterns over the course of task performance may prove to be
a means of explaining observed behavioral variability. Of note, an increasing number of
studies are highlighting the potential value of examining transition zones between functional
areas in the brain5. Examination of temporal dynamics may inform such efforts, by mapping
changes in the boundary over time and providing greater clarity for findings.
In addition to naturally occurring variations in iFC over time, studies have suggested that
iFC can be systematically impacted by cognitive demands prior to R-fMRI data acquisition.
By comparing iFC during R-fMRI scans collected before and after task performance74,
studies have shown that iFC strength within and between networks is altered in a taskdependent manner. For example, R-fMRI based functional connectivity between the inferior
frontal gyrus and visual areas was found to vary depending on the category of stimuli
viewed prior to the R-fMRI scan75. Further, across participants, the degree to which iFC was
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
modulated correlated with subsequent memory for the stimuli. In addition to exhibiting
plasticity related to tasks performed close in time to the measurements, iFC is modulated by
direct stimulation protocols including median nerve stimulation76, heat pain77, transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS)78and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)79. This
suggests that R-fMRI may have utility in identifying targets for stimulation protocols as well
as assessing their efficacy (e.g., in the context of the treatment of depression80).
This iFC-based evidence of experience-induced plasticity provide strong support for the
hypothesis that iFC reflects a history of coactivation among areas. However, they also
suggest a corollary - correlated intrinsic activity plays a role in learning and memory
consolidation81. The demonstration of brain-behavior correlations between task-related
modulations of iFC and subsequent behavior (e.g., recall) supports this hypothesis. If shortterm iFC alterations reflect experience-induced plasticity, then enduring changes would be
expected following extended practice or training. Several studies suggest this is the case82.
Studies of long-term training-induced plasticity have the potential to inform our
understanding of mechanisms involved in remediation-based recovery of function, or even
to index the efficacy of treatment interventions. For example, in a preliminary retrospective
study, differences in iFC were observed between children with dyslexia who were
successfully remediated by reading interventions versus children who had received no
treatment83.
Statistical analysis of the connectome
Once connectomes graphs are estimated, the next goal is to annotate them in terms of their
relevance to higher order cognitive processes, neuropsychiatric diagnoses, or other
phenotypic variables5. These associations are most often inferred by performing a
categorical or dimensional statistical analysis that compares connectivity across a population
of individuals, or within an individual across time or treatments84. Many of the same
statistical approaches are appropriate for the analysis of connectome graphs regardless of
whether they were constructed with functional or structural datasets. However, the
interpretation of the results must always consider the idiosyncratic differences between
structural and functional connectivity. For example, functional connections are typically
weighted, and can be positive or negative. Structural connectivity graphs tend to be
unweighted and are strictly non-negative27. Additionally, structural connections can be
thought of as pathways along which information can flow, but functional connections cannot
be interpreted in the same manner85.
A Bag of Edges
The simplest approach to comparing graphs is to treat them as a bag, or collection of edges,
and perform statistical analyses at each edge one at a time, without taking into account
interactions or relationships between them (i.e., edgewise statistics)84. Such univariate
approaches (e.g., T-tests, F-tests, or regression) allow researchers to identify easily
interpretable relationships between categorical or dimensional variables and edge weights.
However, this approach results in a large number of statistical tests, which require correction
for multiple comparisons to adequately control for the number of false positives. Standard
correction techniques such as false discovery rate86that do not model the dependencies
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
between edges may result in overly liberal or conservative corrections87. Alternate
correction techniques such as the network-based statistic88or group Benjamini-
Hochberg89leverage information about the group structure of connectome graphs to increase
statistical power, while maintaining control of false positives.
Alternatively, multivariate regression and classification techniques evaluate the relationship
between the entire connectome graphs and their associated phenotypic variables with a
single statistical test90, 91. Although powerful for connectome-phenotype relationships, they
obscure information about the involvement of individual edges. Extracting this information,
if desired, requires a return to edge-specific tests, and the need for multiple comparison
correction90. Of note, while these multivariate techniques tend to be applied to bag-of-edges
representations, which ignore graph structure, they can also be performed using graph
distance measures that preserve topological information when comparing graphs92.
Node and graph-level statistics: Invariants
Graphical representations of connectomes contain a wealth of information about brain
architecture beyond the presence and strength of bivariate connections, which can be
described using a variety of node-level and graph-level statistics. These measures are called
invariants in graph theory parlance, or topological measures in network theory, because they
are not unique to particular representations of the graph. The most commonly employed
node invariants are centrality measures that indicate a node’s relative influence in a graph.
Several different centrality metrics are available that measure a node’s importance based on
the number and strength of direct connections (degree centrality93), the importance of
neighboring nodes (eigenvector94or Page Rank95centrality), and their role in connecting
other pairs of nodes (betweenness85). The various measures provide different perspectives
on a node’s role in the graph, and when combined can provide a more holistic understanding
of connectome-phenotype relationships95.
Similarly, a range of graph-level invariants is employed for studying structural and
functional connectivity. In particular, graphs are commonly assessed in terms of their local
and global efficiency. Local efficiency assesses the degree to which neighbors are densely
interconnected, while global efficiency captures the number of connections that must be
traversed to connect any two nodes93. The relationships of these two measures to what
would be obtained from random graphs with similar properties can be combined to assess
the small-worldness of a graph93. Small-world graphs balance integration and segregation to
obtain fast and cost-efficient propagation of information through the graph, as well as
robustness to single-node failures96. The cost-efficiency of a graph can be inferred from the
difference between global efficiency and the number of edges in the graph93. An additional
invariant is modularity, which quantifies the degree to which a graph can be segregated into
densely intraconnected but sparsely interconnected modules and allows direct comparison of
module membership between graphs85.
Each of the previously described node and graph invariants can be statistically evaluated to
identify relationships with categorical and dimensional phenotypes. Although invariants can
increase statistical power by decreasing the number of multiple comparisons, the resulting
relationships can be more difficult to interpret. When comparing invariants between graphs
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
it is important to consider the impact of potential differences in graph properties (e.g.
number of edges) that can systematically differ between individuals or groups and confound
interpretation of findings93. Additionally, since the distributional properties of most
invariants are poorly characterized, non-parametric statistical tests are preferred93.
Finally, researchers frequently aim to identify connectivity patterns predictive of a
phenotypic variable (e.g., diagnosis90, age91or brain state97). Predictive modeling directly
assesses the ability of a connectivity pattern to predict the phenotype of an individual, in
contrast to inferential statistics, which evaluate improbability of a set of relationships arising
by chance98. Predictive modeling is typically supervised, with the training set consisting of
connectivity graphs and their associated phenotypes99. One can assess the predictive
accuracy via cross-validation99or other model selection techniques. Predictive modeling has
primarily focused on invariants and bags-of-edges90, 100style approaches.
Translational Connectomics
MRI-based approaches to connectomics research are rapidly transforming neuroscience in
animal models as well, by removing barriers to longitudinal examinations associated with
invasive techniques (e.g., animal sacrifice, injection of toxic chemicals). The recent Mouse
BIRN initiative ( provides an initial
demonstration of the potential to complement cross-sectional atlases of the developing brain
generated using histological approaches with longitudinal atlases obtained using dMRI.
Simultaneously, R-fMRI is emerging as a powerful tool for comparative functional
neuroanatomy studies. Initial work has demonstrated impressive correspondence between
the iFC observed in humans and macaques for homologous functional networks supporting
an array of functions, including those that are putatively “human” (e.g., language, selfreferential, cognition)101. Evidence of homologies with patterns of iFC in lower mammals,
such as rats, further underscores this translational potential102. Armed with increasingly
powerful imaging-based tools, macroscale connectomic studies in animal models are poised
to provide a mechanistic understanding of brain function through the combination of noninvasive imaging with direct structural, pharmacological, molecular, and genetic
manipulations that are impossible in humans.
Despite the rich promise of translational connectomics, methodological issues must also be
addressed. For example, iFC can be examined in awake rats that have been habituated to
restraint in the loud MRI environment103. However, most studies are conducted under
anesthesia – in particular, using the general anesthetic isoflurane104which can confound
findings due to its effects on neural excitability. The sedating alpha-2 adrenergic agonist
medetomidine may be preferable, as it avoids such confounds105. Dose-response studies are
few104and are essential. Initial translational studies in monkeys, rats and mice have relied on
preprocessing and analytical approaches identical to those developed in humans103. While
their success is encouraging, differences in physiological (e.g., cardiac, respiration) and
imaging parameters must be explored to arrive at optimal strategies. Finally, we note that the
many questions raised regarding the interpretation of dMRI and R-fMRI techniques in
humans also apply to animal studies.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Towards Neurophenotypes and Clinical Applications
An overarching goal of the connectomics era is the derivation of “neurophenotypes”106, a
concept that remains poorly specified despite increasing investigator enthusiasm. An
individual’s macroscale connectome and its subgraphs contribute to the specification of their
neurophenotype. A central goal of connectomics is to catalog neurophenotypes and relate
them to phenotypic profiles4. This can be accomplished through data-driven approaches
focused on the detection of commonalities and distinctions in connectomes, or that can be
reverse-engineered from phenotypic profiles. The breadth of phenotyping can vary
depending on the application, though it typically consists of some combination of cognitive,
affective, behavioral, neurological or psychiatric variables. When cataloging
neurophenotypes based upon macroscale connectomes, the specificity of findings will
depend on their nature, granularity of node definitions and quality of neuroimaging data
employed. Similarly, when sorting neurophenotypes based on phenotypic profiles,
specificity will be determined by the precision and comprehensiveness (i.e., number and
breadth of independent features) of the phenotyping available to statistical analysis.
Importantly, future work will need to find a balance between categorical and dimensional
perspectives of neurophenotypes.
Beyond the derivation of a fundamental understanding of brain architecture and its
implications for behavior and cognition, a major reason for the excitement surrounding
connectomics is the promise of clinical utility because of the ability to obtain individuallyrelevant reliable brain indices (see Table 1 for initiatives that are accelerating the pace of
macroconnectomics research). Recent years have witnessed an explosion in the number of
neurological and psychiatric disorders studied with dMRI and R-fMRI (see Table 2). Hopes
of attaining clinically useful diagnostic tools are increasingly espoused in the literature.
However, leaders in the field have recently suggested that the attainment of tools capable of
stratifying individuals based upon disease risk, prognosis and treatment response may prove
to be a more fruitful goal than focusing on diagnosis107. Regardless, a key requirement
remains: attaining large-scale datasets representative of the human population. In this regard,
the macroconnectomics community has supported several large-scale data-sharing initiatives
dedicated to rapidly aggregating the necessary data108.
Conclusion
The connectomics era is the culmination of more than a century of conceptual and
methodological innovation. MRI-based approaches to mapping and annotating the
connectome at the macroscale are transforming basic, translational and clinical neuroscience
research by overcoming barriers to progress faced by more traditional invasive
methodologies. This review has broadly surveyed the many challenges that remain at hand
in the acquisition, preprocessing and analysis of brain-imaging data. Failure to consider the
many complexities could jeopardize this burgeoning field through the introduction of
spurious, irreproducible findings associated with suboptimal methodologies. Conversely,
increased attention to the acquisition of high quality data, combined with optimized
preprocessing and analytic methodologies can serve to accelerate the pace at which
connectomes can be meaningfully annotated, and their variations catalogued.
Craddock et al.
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health (BRAINS R01MH094639 to
M.P.M. and K23MH087770 to A.D.M.), the Stavros Niarchos Foundation (M. P. M), the Brain and Behavior
Research Foundation (R.C.C.), and the Leon Levy Foundation (C.K. and A.D.M).. J.T.V. receives funding from the
London Institute for Mathematical Sciences HDTRA1-11-1-0048 and NIH R01ES017436. Additional support
provided by a gift from Joseph P. Healey to the Child Mind Institute (M.P.M.). Thanks to Daniel Lurie for his
assistance in the preparation of the manuscript and references, as well as to Zarrar Shehzad, Zhen Yang and
Sebastian Urchs for their helpful comments. We would additionally like to acknowledge our colleagues who have
allowed us to re-use their figures, and the helpful suggestions of the reviewers.