ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 26 February 2018
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00323
Edited by:
Octavio Luiz Franco,
Universidade Católica de Brasília,
Reviewed by:
William Farias Porto,
Universidade Católica Dom Bosco,
Gill Diamond,
University of Florida, United States
*Correspondence:
Gajendra P. S. Raghava
 ;
 
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work.
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Antimicrobials, Resistance
and Chemotherapy,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Microbiology
Received: 08 October 2017
Accepted: 12 February 2018
Published: 26 February 2018
Agrawal P, Bhalla S, Chaudhary K,
Kumar R, Sharma M and
Raghava GPS In Silico
Approach for Prediction of Antifungal
Peptides. Front. Microbiol. 9:323.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00323
In Silico Approach for Prediction of
Antifungal Peptides
Piyush Agrawal1†, Sherry Bhalla1†, Kumardeep Chaudhary1, Rajesh Kumar1,
Meenu Sharma1 and Gajendra P. S. Raghava1,2*
1 Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh, India, 2 Center for
Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, New Delhi, India
This paper describes in silico models developed using a wide range of peptide features
for predicting antifungal peptides (AFPs). Our analyses indicate that certain types of
residue (e.g., C, G, H, K, R, Y) are more abundant in AFPs. The positional residue
preference analysis reveals the prominence of the particular type of residues (e.g., R, V,
K) at N-terminus and a certain type of residues (e.g., C, H) at C-terminus. In this study,
models have been developed for predicting AFPs using a wide range of peptide features
(like residue composition, binary proﬁle, terminal residues). The support vector machine
based model developed using compositional features of peptides achieved maximum
accuracy of 88.78% on the training dataset and 83.33% on independent or validation
dataset. Our model developed using binary patterns of terminal residues of peptides
achieved maximum accuracy of 84.88% on training and 84.64% on validation dataset.
We benchmark models developed in this study and existing methods on a dataset
containing compositionally similar antifungal and non-AFPs. It was observed that binary
based model developed in this study preforms better than any model/method. In order
to facilitate scientiﬁc community, we developed a mobile app, standalone and a userfriendly web server ‘Antifp’ ( 
Keywords: antimicrobial peptides, antifungal peptides, amino acid composition, support vector machine, motifs
INTRODUCTION
Despite tremendous advances in the ﬁeld of antibiotics; the morbidity and mortality are quite
high due to invasive fungal infections . The major fungal species
like Candida, Aspergillus, Pneumocystis, and Cryptococcus spp. are responsible
for causing 1.4 million deaths worldwide per year . Drug or antibiotic
resistance is one of the major causes of millions death per year due to antifungal infections
 . In order to overcome the problem of drug resistance,
researchers are exploring alternatives to antibiotics (small molecules). One of the alternates to small
chemical-based drugs is peptide-based therapeutics. It is safer and more eﬀective than traditional
therapeutics and provides eﬀective arms to researchers ﬁght against fungus. One can understand
importance of peptide-based therapeutics from the fact that in the last one decade, number of
peptide resources has been developed .
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
One of the major classes of peptide-based therapeutics comes
from the antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). AMPs can be classiﬁed
into diﬀerent kinds of peptides like antibacterial, antiviral,
antifungal, antiparasitic, etc. In past, extensive eﬀorts have
been made to the study and development of novel AMPs.
More than 2300 AMPs are reported in the diﬀerent AMP
databases. It includes more than 100 peptide-based drugs that
are present in the market and approximately 600 are in preclinical stage . Though AMPs can be used
to treat fungal infection but lack of speciﬁcity reduces their
potential. Thus, there is a strong need to design antifungal
peptides (AFPs) to treat fungal infections as existing drugs
(e.g., Amphotericin B deoxycholate, Voriconazole, Fluconazole,
Itraconazole, Terbinaﬁne, Posaconazole) fail due to drug
resistance. AFPs have the ability to kill fungus as it disrupts
membrane physiology of fungus . AFPs have been found to be very
eﬀective in several cases, for example, in the case of azole-resistant
Candida species, Brevinin-1BYa is a highly eﬀective α-helical
peptide . P113 is one of the histidine variants,
which has shown eﬃcacy against C. albicans in vitro .
Numerous methods have been developed in past for predicting
and designing AMPs (antibacterial, antiviral, etc.) such as
template-based method ,
docking simulations , hidden Markov model (HMM) and sequence-based methods .
Recently, existing methods developed for predicting/designing
antimicrobial have been evaluated and reviewed in depth . In comparison to AMPs, limited
attempts have been made to understand and develop methods
for predicting AFPs. ClassAMP is one of the methods which
predicts the given peptide as Antibacterial, Antiviral, Antifungal,
etc. with a probability score . Another
such method is iAMP-2L which ﬁrst predicts the antimicrobial
activity and then classiﬁes them into speciﬁc antimicrobial class
 . In the current study, an attempt has been
made to develop models using machine learning techniques for
discriminating AFPs from natural peptides and other AMPs
 . The machine learning
techniques derive rules from experimentally validated antifungal
and non-AFPs to discriminate two classes of peptides. These
rules are used to predict antifungal properties of a peptide.
One of the challenges for designing any prediction method is
the compilation of negative dataset . Therefore, in our study for
designing negative dataset, we selected those AMPs as negative
peptides, which do not show any antifungal activity, since there
is no dedicated database that maintains non-AFPs. In addition,
we also generated random peptides from proteins in SwissProt
database and used them as non-AFPs. The overall objective
of this study was to develop an in silico prediction method
which can discriminate AFPs from non-AFPs with high accuracy,
similar to Chou’s ﬁve-step rule . We also developed
a mobile app and standalone software to facilitate users in
predicting AFPs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Datasets Preparation
We extracted 1585 exclusive AFPs from the AMP-maintaining
database DRAMP . Peptides containing nonnatural amino acids (BJOUZX) and repeated sequences were
removed which led to the 1459 unique AFPs. We created three
datasets, ﬁrst is our main dataset termed as “Antifp_Main”
and two alternate datasets termed as “Antifp_DS1” and
“Antifp_DS2.” During dataset creation, the range of peptide
length was kept same in both positive and negative datasets. We
generated diﬀerent bins (e.g., 0-10, 11-20, 20-30, etc. till 90-100)
and ensured that same number of peptides are present in the bin
of both datasets. Details about three diﬀerent datasets used in the
study are described below.
(i) Antifp_Main
Our main dataset consists of 1459 positive peptides, which
are exclusive AFPs, and 1459 negative peptides, which
were generated mixing peptides possessing antimicrobial
function other than antifungal and peptides generated
randomly from SwissProt.
(ii) Antifp_DS1
This ﬁrst alternate dataset consists of 1459 exclusive AFPs
as the positive dataset and an equal number of peptides,
which possess antimicrobial activity other than antifungal
(e.g., antibacterial, antiviral, etc.) as the negative dataset.
(iii) Antifp_DS2
We also developed a second alternate dataset in which
exclusive AFPs were taken as positive peptides and keeping
in mind the similar length distribution, an equal number of
negative peptide sequences was generated randomly from
SwissProt. This kind of approach has been used earlier
 .
Internal and External Validation
The datasets were randomly divided into two parts (i) training
dataset, which comprises of 80% data (1168 positive and negative
sequences) and (ii) validation dataset with 20% data (291 positive
and negative sequences). In case of internal validation, we
developed and evaluate prediction models using ﬁvefold crossvalidation techniques. Here, sequences present in the dataset are
divided randomly into ﬁve diﬀerent sets, out of which any four
sets out of ﬁve are used for training and the remaining ﬁfth
set is used for testing. In the process, each set is used once for
testing by repeating the process ﬁve times, and the ﬁnal result is
calculated by averaging the performance of all the ﬁve sets. The
validation of any prediction method plays a very signiﬁcant role
in its evaluation. We evaluated the performance of all the models
on validation dataset, termed as external validation.
Dataset for Additional Benchmarking
Previous studies have shown that discriminating between the
peptides with the same composition but diﬀerent activity is a
big challenge . In order to
evaluate the performance of models developed in this study and
methods developed in the past, we create a dataset Antifp_hard
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
that contain compositionally similar antifungal and non-antifungal peptides. The positive set of Antifp_hard dataset contains
exclusive AFPs used in the validation set. The negative set or non-
AFPs in Antifp_hard is obtained from AMPs, which have highest
compositional similarity with exclusive AFPs. In order to identify
compositionally similar peptides, we compute Euclidean distance
between composition of two peptides and
identify peptides having minimum Euclidean distance.
Positional Residues Preference in AFPs
We calculate positional preferences of all types of residues at
diﬀerent positions in both the terminus (N and C) in the
form of quantitative matrices (QMs). This kind of approach
has been used in previous studies also for computing positional
preferences . It shows the propensity of each
amino acid at each position in both the dataset, positive as well
as negative. We generated the QM for ﬁrst 15 residues from
N-terminal and ﬁrst 15 residues from the C-terminal generating
matrix of dimension 20 × 15.
MERCI Motifs Analysis
We also looked for various common patterns or motifs present
in AFPs and non-AFPs and to identify those patterns/motifs;
we have used MERCI program . The default
criteria were set while running the program. The motifs were
extracted from all the datasets, i.e., Antifp_Main, Antifp_DS1,
and Antifp_DS2. This program compares both the positive and
negative peptides for extracting motifs. In order to know motifs,
present in AFPs and non-AFPs, we used two-step strategy. In
this method, we ﬁrst provided AFPs as positive input and non-
AFPs as a negative input. In the next step, we reversed the order
of input where non-AFPs were given as positive input and AFPs
were given as negative input. The same procedure was followed
for all the datasets. Finally, we obtained several numbers of motifs
present in AFPs and non-AFPs, which can be utilized further to
scan peptides for the presence of AFP-speciﬁc motif.
Input Features for Prediction
(i) Amino acid composition-based model
In earlier studies, people have shown that amino acid
composition can be used for classifying various peptides
and for developing prediction methods using machinelearning techniques . The amino
acid composition tells us about the fraction of each amino
acid type within a peptide. The vector of dimension 20
was obtained when the amino acid composition for both
AFPs and non-AFPs was calculated by using the following
Composition(i) = Ri
Here, Composition (i) is the percent composition of amino
acid (i); Ri is the number of residues of type i, and N
represents the total number of peptide’s residues.
(ii) Dipeptide composition-based model
The dipeptide composition provides the composition of
the residues present in a pair (e.g., A-A, A-L, etc.) in the
peptide, and used to convert the variable length of peptides
to ﬁxed length feature vector size of 400. It summarizes
information about the amino acid’s fraction as well as
their local order. Dipeptide composition is calculated using
following equation:
Dipeptide fraction(i) =
Total number of Dipeptide (i)
Total number of all possible dipeptides∗100
Where dipeptide (i) is 1 out of 400 dipeptides.
(iii) Split composition-based model
We also compute amino acid and dipeptide composition
of N-terminus and C-terminus residues; ﬁrst 5, 10, and
15 residues from N-terminus and the last 5, 10, and 15
residues from the C-terminus. Also, we joined the terminal
residues like N5C5, N10C10, and N15C15 and checked the
performance of combination.
(iv) Binary proﬁle based model
In this study, length of antifungal and non-AFP is variable,
thus it is diﬃcult to generate ﬁxed length pattern. Thus
we extract ﬁxed length segment from either N-terminus
or C-terminus of the peptide to generate ﬁxed length
binary proﬁle . A vector of dimension
20 represented each amino acid in segment obtained from
terminal residues. We generated binary proﬁles for ﬁrst 5,
10, and 15 N-terminus residues and for the last 5, 10, and 15
residues from the peptide C-terminus. We also created the
binary proﬁle for the N5C5, N10C10, and N15C15 residues
of peptides by combining N- and C-terminus residues. The
binary proﬁle has been used heavily in a number of studies
for predicting functional properties of peptides .
(v) Calculation of Mass, Charge, and pI value of peptide
Mass, charge, and pI value of peptide were calculated
using R package “peptides” , which is
speciﬁcally designed for the quick and easy calculation of
diﬀerent AMPs features. This would help in their better
classiﬁcation and design. Default parameters were used
for calculation of mass, charge, and pI values and the
values were used as features along with the amino acid
composition on which the best performance was found. We
wanted to check whether adding these properties would
help in further increasing the performance of a model.
Thus, the dimension of our composition based model
increased from 20 to 23 to adjust above three properties.
Machine Learning Approaches
We used diﬀerent machine learning techniques for developing
prediction models. The approaches are as follows:
Support Vector Machine
We used SVMlight Version 6.02 package of SVM for
building the prediction models, which is a highly successful
machine learning classiﬁer . This
package consists of various kernels and machine learning
was performed using these kernels where each input dot
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
is transformed into non-linear kernel function. SVM’s RBF
kernel was used here at various parameters; g € [10−4–10],
c € , j € for optimizing the SVM performance
to obtain the best performances. RBF kernel is squared
exponential kernel which provides more functional space
and is more ﬂexible than a linear or polynomial kernel and
hence provides much better results. Sets of input features
with a ﬁxed length are required for training, thus imposing
a strategy for encapsulating the overall information about
proteins/peptides of ﬁxed length format. Diﬀerent features
like the binary proﬁle, diﬀerent composition methods
(amino-acid, dipeptide) are used to get ﬁxed length format
from protein/peptide sequences of variable length. After
training, learned models could be employed for the
prediction of unknown examples.
WEKA Classiﬁers
We used diﬀerent classiﬁers incorporated in WEKA suite
for building training models, which could be used for the
prediction of unidentiﬁed examples. The diﬀerent classiﬁers
we used include Random Forest, J48, SMO, and Naïve
Bayes . Parameters were tuned while
performing the diﬀerent machine learning techniques and
the results obtained on best parameters were reported.
Performance Measure
Broadly, the performance of any classiﬁcation is measured using
two type measures call threshold-dependent and thresholdindependent. In this study, we used both types of measure
to evaluate the performance of models. In case of thresholddependent parameters, we compute performance of a model
in following terms; Sensitivity (Sen), Speciﬁcity (Spc), Accuracy
(Acc), and Matthews correlation coeﬃcient (MCC). Following
equations are commonly used for computing, thresholddependent measures.
Sensitivity = TP
Speciﬁcity = TN
Accuracy = TP + TN
PS + NS × 100
q 1 + FP−FN
 1 + FN−FP
Where TP represents correctly predicted positive, TN represents
the negative examples, PS represents total sequences in positive
set, NS represents total sequences in negative set, FP represents
actual negative examples which have been wrongly predicted as
positive and FN represents wrongly predicted positive examples.
This is a well-established method of measuring performance and
has been used earlier in many studies .
Case Study
Although we validated our model on the independent dataset,
we also checked the performance of our model on the recently
discovered AFPs.
We obtained peptides from diﬀerent study performed by
Datta et al. , Li et al. , and Garrigues et al. .
Therefore, to prevent biases we have taken peptides from diﬀerent
studies and checked the performance of our model on these
Analysis of Residues Composition
It is important to analyze AFPs to understand their nature before
we develop in silico models for prediction. As all peptides are
made of 20 types of residues, it is important to examine the
frequency of each type of residues in AFPs. Thus, we computed
and compared the amino acid composition of AFPs and non-
AFPs of our main dataset, Antifp_Main. The analysis showed
that certain residues like C, G, H, K, R, and S, are more
abundant or frequent in AFPs whereas non-AFPs are dominated
by residues like A, D, E, I, L, V, and W (Figure 1). Presence of
residues like C, K, R makes AFPs positively charged and cationic
in nature. These peptides are divided in two diﬀerent classes
(i) membrane traversing peptides, which forms a pore or act
on speciﬁc target like chitin synthesis, and (ii) non-membrane
traversing peptides, which interacts with the negatively charged
fungal membrane and carry out cell lysis (Neelabh et al.,
Likewise, in Antifp_DS1, residues like C, G, H, K, R, S,
and T were signiﬁcantly abundant in AFPs and can be used to
discriminate AFPs with other AMPs which are predominant with
residues like D, E, I, L, V, and W (Supplementary Figure S1A). In
case of Antifp_DS2, we found the abundance of residues like C,
H, K, and R whereas non-AFPs contain mainly A, D, E, I, L, and V
(Supplementary Figure S1B).
First 15 N and C-terminal residues amino acid composition
calculated
Antifp_DS1,
Antifp_DS2, and Antifp_Main dataset and has been shown
in Supplementary Figures S2A, S3A, S4A and for C-terminal
residue composition in Supplementary Figures S2B, S3B, and
S4B, respectively.
Positional Residues Preference in AFPs
The probability of residue R is highest at 1st position followed
by V and K at the 2nd and 3rd position in AFPs. Similarly, at
C-terminus, residue C was highly preferred at the 1st and 3rd
position and H at 2nd position in AFPs (Figure 2A) as compared
to non-AFPs (Figure 2B). Likewise, positional residue preference
from the QM for Antifp_DS1 and Antifp_DS2 positive and
negative data is given in Supplementary Figures S5A,B and S6A,B,
respectively.
Motif Analysis Using MERCI
In order to identify pattern/motifs present in AFPs or non-
AFPs, we used software MERCI suite. Sequence analysis of
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
FIGURE 1 | Comparison of percent average amino acid composition of the AFPs- and non- AFPs in Antifp_Main dataset.
Antifp_Main dataset revealed 13 exclusive motifs for positive
and 11 for the negative dataset. Some of the exclusive motifs
that are present only in AFPs are “CFCT,” “RCFC,” “NCAS,”
“CASV,” etc. whereas motifs present exclusively only in non-AFPs
are “CGNTK,” “GNTK,” “NTKH,” etc. (Supplementary Table S1).
Similarly, we also extracted exclusive motifs present in positive
and negative peptides for Antifp_DS1 (Supplementary Table S2)
and Antifp_DS2 (Supplementary Table S3).
Performance of Various Machine
Learning Techniques
Diﬀerent machine learning approaches like SVMlight, Random
Forest (RF), Naïve Bayes, J48, and SMO were used in the study
to generate models on diﬀerent input features for distinguishing
AFPs from non-AFPs. The results are explained in detail in the
following sections.
Amino Acid Composition Based SVM
We developed the prediction model using diﬀerent classiﬁers
like SVM, Random Forest, SMO, Naïve Bayes and J48 on amino
acid composition as an input feature. For Antifp_Main, the
highest accuracy of 88.27%, MCC of 0.77 and ROC of 0.94
was obtained for training dataset and for validation dataset
the accuracy of 86.25%, MCC of 0.73 and ROC of 0.94 was
achieved (Table 1). In the case of Antifp_DS1, the accuracy of
86.26% with MCC and ROC values 0.73 and 0.93 respectively
for the training dataset and accuracy of 85.91%, MCC of
0.72 and ROC of 0.93 for the validation dataset was observed
(Supplementary Table S4). For Antifp_DS2 (best dataset obtained
after repeating 100 times prediction) we achieved the accuracy
of 92.81% and MCC and ROC value 0.86 and 0.97 respectively
for the training dataset and accuracy of 90.38%, MCC value
0.81 and ROC of 0.96 for the validation dataset (Supplementary
Table S5).
The performance on the ﬁrst 5, 10, and 15 residues of N and
C-terminus as well as their combined form (N5C5, N10C10, and
N15C15) of SVM based model is summarized in Figure 3 and
Supplementary Table S6 for Antifp_Main. Similarly, results on
diﬀerent terminus residues obtained by the SVM based model for
Antifp_DS1 and Antifp_DS2 has been shown in Supplementary
Tables S7 and S8, respectively.
Dipeptide Composition Based SVM
The dipeptide is a comprehensive feature as compared to
amino acid composition alone because it encloses the overall
information of the amino acids fraction and their local order.
This feature has been used in previous studies to discriminate
two types of proteins and peptides Thus, SVM
model was developed based utilizing dipeptide composition
as an input feature. In Antifp_Main, maximum accuracy of
86.77%, MCC of 0.74 and ROC of 0.94 was achieved for
training dataset and for validation dataset we achieved the
accuracy of 88.66%, MCC of 0.77 and ROC of 0.95 (Table 2).
In Antifp_DS1, we observed the maximum accuracy of 87.20%
with MCC and ROC values 0.74 and 0.94 respectively for
the training dataset and accuracy of 86.60%, MCC value 0.73
and ROC of 0.94 for the validation dataset (Supplementary
Table S9). In the case of Antifp_DS2, we found the maximum
accuracy of 91.87%, MCC of 0.84 and ROC of 0.96 for the
training dataset and accuracy of 92.10%, MCC value 0.84
and ROC of 0.96 for the validation dataset (Supplementary
Table S10).
Binary Proﬁle Based SVM Model
An SVM based model was developed using the binary
proﬁle as an input feature. In the case of a binary proﬁle
based model developed using N15C15 achieved maximum
accuracy of 84.88% with MCC of 0.70 and ROC of 0.92 on
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
FIGURE 2 | Heat map illustrating the positional preference of each type of residue at (ﬁrst 15 positions) N and C-terminus (A) positive and (B) negative data of
Antifp_Main dataset.
training dataset. This model achieved an accuracy of 84.64%
with MCC of 0.69 and ROC of 0.92 on validation dataset
(Table 3). It is important to note that performance of this
model is nearly same for training and validation dataset. All
these models were developed on Antifp_Main dataset that
contains AFPs and negative set of peptides (random and
AMPs). We also developed and evaluate models on dataset
Antifp_DS1 and achieved maximum accuracy (N15C15) of
84.44% with MCC of 0.69 and ROC of 0.92 for training
dataset and accuracy of 81.63% with MCC of 0.63 and ROC
of 0.92 on for validation dataset (Supplementary Table S11).
In case of Antifp_DS2, we achieved maximum accuracy
(N15C15) of 92.32% with MCC of 0.85 and ROC of 0.97
for training dataset and accuracy of 92.70% with MCC of
0.85 and ROC of 0.97 for validation dataset (Supplementary
Table S12).
Amino Acid Composition along with
Mass, Charge, and pI Value Based SVM
In order to check whether the addition of mass, charge, and pI
values of peptides would help in achieving better performance,
we run SVM and other machine learning classiﬁers on the all
the three datasets and developed model in order to classify AFPs
from non-AFPs. We found the addition of extra three features
increased the performance of MCC up to 0.01% compared to
that obtained from the simple amino acid composition. We
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
TABLE 1 | The performance of different machine learning techniques based models on Antifp_Main dataset developed using amino acid composition of peptides.
Main Dataset
Validation Dataset
g = 0.01, c = 5, j = 4
Random Forest
Ntree = 130
g = 0.001, c = 2
c = 0.1, m = 7
Naïve Bayes
Sen, Sensitivity; Spc, Speciﬁcity; Acc, Accuracy; MCC, Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient; ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic.
obtained accuracy of 88.78% with MCC of 0.78 on the training
dataset and for validation dataset accuracy of 83.33% with MCC
of 0.67 was obtained in the case of Antifp_Main (Figure 4 and
Supplementary Table S13). Similarly, results for Antifp_DS1 and
Antifp_DS2 were also calculated and is given in Supplementary
Tables S14, S15. However, in case of Antifp_DS2, we repeated the
machine learning prediction 100 times using Scikit learn method
 . This is a common practice when we
handle data generated randomly from SwissProt . The mean accuracy, MCC, and ROC obtained after the
process was 89.17%, 0.79 and 0.96 respectively for the training
dataset and on the validation dataset mean accuracy of 90.75%,
mean MCC of 0.82 and mean ROC of 0.97 was achieved. The
mean standard deviation reported for accuracy, MCC and ROC
were 1.01, 0.017 and 0.004 respectively. The prediction process
was repeated 100 times on this particular feature because this
feature was giving the best result in Antifp_DS1 and after the
process was completed, we selected the dataset giving the best
result and used it further for rest of the prediction process.
FIGURE 3 | The performance of models on Antifp_Main dataset in term of
ROC curves, models were developed using composition features of peptides.
Additional Benchmarking
Porto et al. evaluate the performance of methods
developed for predicting AMPs on a unique type of dataset that
contains 40 designed and 38 shuﬄed sequences . This dataset had compositionally
similar antimicrobial and non-AMPs, the only order of residues
has been changed. Existing AMP prediction methods fails on
this dataset as most of these methods are based on composition.
In order to repeat similar type of benchmarking for models
developed in this study, we also created an Antifp_hard dataset
that contains compositionally similarly AFPs and Non-AFPs (see
section “Materials and Methods”). In this dataset Antifp_hard,
negative sequences were compositionally quite similar to positive
sequences but have entirely diﬀerent activity (as explained in
methods). The new dataset contained 291 AFPs and 291 non-
AFPs. The accuracy obtained from the benchmarking dataset
for the amino acid composition based model was decreased
from 86.25% to 62.20% as compared to the validation dataset.
The N15C15 binary proﬁle feature-based model performed
well as compared to composition based model. It shows the
accuracy of 75.43%, as compared to 84.64% on validation dataset
(Table 4). The results showed that model based on binary
proﬁle based feature were able to classify the sequences having
compositionally similarity but diﬀerent activity much better
compared to composition based model.
We also evaluate the performance of methods developed in
past for predicting AFPs (i.e., ClassAMP and iAMP-2L). In case
of ClassAMP, there are two types of models; one based on
Random Forests and other on SVM. Positive sequences which
were predicted as antifungal were labeled as true positives and
not predicted as an antifungal but as other classes, were labeled as
false negatives. Similarly, negative sequences predicted as other
classes than antifungal were labeled as true negatives and the
peptides predicted as antifungal were labeled as false positives.
SVM classiﬁer of ClassAMP showed the accuracy of 48.45%
whereas random forest classiﬁer of the same method showed the
accuracy of 45.18% (Table 4).
In case of iAMPL-2L, any AFP predicted as antifungal, even
if it is predicted to belong to any other class were labeled
as true positive. Rest positive peptides are labeled as false
negatives. Similarly, any negative dataset peptide predicted as
non-antifungal is labeled as true negative and rest negative
peptides are labeled as false positives. The iAMPL-2L method
showed the accuracy of 21.56% (Table 4).
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
In addition, we compiled the sequences from the diﬀerent
study and submitted them to our server to check the performance
of our model. We observed that our binary proﬁle based model
was able to predict three peptides correctly out of four peptides.
Here, we are providing the screenshot of the result page of the
binary proﬁle based model below (Figure 5).
Implementation of Web Server
We have tried to develop a class-speciﬁc prediction web
server for the prediction of AFPs, exclusively. Thus, to
assist the scientiﬁc community, we have implemented our
three best models trained on three diﬀerent datasets. An
overall prediction approach of Antifp is shown in Figure 6.
‘Model 1,’ developed on the Antifp_DS1 N15C15 binary
proﬁle feature will be useful for those users who wish to
check whether their peptides possess exclusively antifungal
activity and no other antimicrobial activity. Second model
‘Model 2,’ developed on the Antifp_DS2, found to performing
best on N15C15 binary proﬁle feature will be useful for
those users who do not have any previous knowledge of
their peptide and want to check whether their peptide
possess antifungal property or not. This peptide may have
antimicrobial
properties
‘Model 3’ developed on the Antifp_Main and performing
best on the same feature as of ‘Model 1,’ will be helpful
exclusively
antifungal
implemented in a user-friendly web server ‘Antifp’ by the name
“Antifp_DS1_binary_model1,”
“Antifp_DS1_binary_model 2,”
and “Antifp_Main_binary_model 3,” respectively.
Predict Page
This page provides the option to check whether the submitted
query is AFP or non-AFP. This page takes the sequence in FASTA
format as an input and displays the prediction as output along
with the prediction score at the chosen threshold cut-oﬀvalue
by the user. Here, a user can submit either single sequence or
number of sequences at a time. In addition, the server also
provides facility to calculate important physiochemical properties
of the submitted query sequence.
Mutational Series Page
‘Antifp’ web server along with the facility to predict peptides,
as AFPs or non-AFPs also provides an opportunity to design
analogs with enhanced antifungal properties. All possible mutant
of given peptides with the single mutation can be obtained by
giving single letter code of peptide sequence (no FASTA format
required) as input to the design module of the web server.
TABLE 2 | The performance of SVM based models on Antifp_Main dataset, where models were developed using dipeptide composition of whole peptide and part of
Main Dataset
Validation Dataset
TABLE 3 | The performance of SVM based model on Antifp_Main dataset developed using binary proﬁle/pattern of peptide segments obtained from terminals.
Main Dataset
Validation Dataset
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
FIGURE 4 | ROC curves show performance of models on Antifp_Main dataset
developed using composition features along with mass, charge, and pI value.
For all mutant peptides, the server will give a result, which
constitutes an SVM score and prediction status of AFPs and
non-AFPs according to threshold cut-oﬀselected by the user.
As a provision for selecting the threshold is provided in the
server, the user is suggested to select a higher value to get high
speciﬁcity. Therefore, the feature as mention above will be useful
for users in designing new and highly eﬀective AFP analogs. In
this page, original input peptide will be shown along with all
generated analogs, and sorting option is also provided in the
table, which can be used to sort the peptide analogs based on
preferred properties and ultimately to choose the best peptide
Sliding Window Prediction Page
Another information tool is the protein-scanning tool for the
discovery of putative AFPs. Here, a user may give the protein
sequence as input and select the window length to generate
overlapping peptides of window length, where each of the
peptides will be ranked according to its score. This will help
in determining the possible regions in protein sequence, which
could be antifungal. We have also provided a download module
from where the user can download the dataset used in this study.
Antifp is freely accessible at 
Antifp Standalone Software
The standalone software was also developed in order to let
the users predict and analyze the peptide sequences even in
the absence of Internet. The standalone was developed for
Linux, Mac as well as Windows 64-bit operating systems. The
software was developed using Python (v2.7.11) and wxPython
(v.3.0.0) platform. The standalone is implemented with our
best model which takes FASTA sequence of peptides as
input. It provides comparable results to that of the online
server. The software is bundled with all the required ﬁles
and libraries in the zip ﬁle format and can be downloaded
‘Download’
‘Antifp’1.
Anitfp Mobile App
We have also developed a mobile app of Antifp for the android
users where the user can use this service by downloading
and installing the app. The app was developed using Python
(v2.7.11) and kivy (v1.9.2). The app is implemented with
our best model which takes both sequences as well as
the ﬁle as input. The minimum length of the sequence
should be 15 or more. The app consists of the following
(i) Predict: This module will be helpful in predicting the
antifungal property of the given peptide sequence as input.
A user can either give raw peptide sequence or multiple
sequences in FASTA format.
(ii) Mutational Series: This module will produce mutant
analogs of the given peptide sequence and predict the
antifungal property for each of them.
(iii) Sliding Window Prediction: This module scans
the protein sequence given as an input and will create
overlapping peptides of the particular window size given by
the user. The module will also provide result whether the
generated peptides are antifungal or not.
The ‘Antifp Mobile App’ is provided in the standard “apk” ﬁle
format and can be freely downloaded from the ‘Download’ menu
of the online server ‘Antifp’1.
1 
TABLE 4 | The performance of different models developed in this study and existing methods on Antifp_hard dataset contains compositionally similar peptides.
Benchmarking Dataset
Composition-based model
Binary proﬁle based model
Random Forest
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
FIGURE 5 | Screenshot of the “Antifp” predict page showing the result of the sequences taken in case study.
FIGURE 6 | Schematic representation of procedure used to create datasets and building models in this study.
DISCUSSION
pronounced
therapeutic
applications
identiﬁcation and designing of the novel and highly eﬃcient AFPs
is need of the hour but it is a very tedious and time-consuming
task for the biologists. One has to scan the whole protein in
overlapping windows patterns, and every peptide has to be tested
for the possible antifungal activity. An in silico method, which
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 323
Agrawal et al.
In Silico Antifungal Peptide Prediction
can predict in advance whether a peptide sequence can be
AFP or not, would deﬁnitely help experimental biologists for a
speedy screening of AFPs before synthesis and thus, fasten the
AFP based research. Development of a computational method
for AFP prediction is challenging due to various reasons since
(i) AFPs have a lot of ﬂexibility in size (4–100 amino acids)
and ﬁxed length pattern is required as input by machine
learning methods to develop a model (ii) due to lack of
experimentally validated AFPs. Till date, a very limited study
has been done in this area and currently; there are no web
services available exclusively for prediction and designing of
AFPs. In the last few years, a vast number of AMPs have been
reported which might act as AFPs and this vast amount of
data inspired us to develop a computational method on the
larger dataset of 1459 AFPs. In order to discriminate AFPs
from non-AFPs with higher precision, we have developed SVM
models based on features like amino acid composition, dipeptide
composition, amino acid composition along with mass, charge
and pI value, binary proﬁle, N and C-terminal residue hybrid.
The performance of the models developed was found to be
quite impressive when features like amino acid composition,
amino acid composition along with mass, charge, and pI value
and dipeptide composition were used as input. We have also
developed SVM models based on a binary proﬁle of patterns,
which integrates information on both amino acid order and its
composition. It was observed that this feature performed better
than the composition-based model. In Antifp_DS2, hybrid of
N15C15 binary proﬁle feature outperformed other features based
Discriminating two sequences with high identity but diﬀerent
activity is a challenging task for most of the prediction methods.
To address this issue, we calculated the euclidean distance
between our positive and negative peptides and selected the
negative peptides with minimum distance. We tested the
performance of our composition based model as well as N15C15
binary proﬁle based model and observed that composition
model didn’t perform well in discriminating two sequences very
accurately. However, our binary proﬁle based model was able to
discriminate the two sequences with good accuracy, suggesting
that binary proﬁle feature can be used in discriminating such
sequences where sequences are very similar to each other but
possess diﬀerent activity. We also tested the performance of two
previous methods ClassAMP and iAMP-2L on this dataset, where
they failed to discriminate the two sequences. In comparison to
the above-mentioned methods, our method performed better.
Preliminary composition analysis has shown that AFPs are
rich in cationic residues like C, G, H, K, and R in comparison
to non-AFPs. Presence of the positively charged residues allows
the peptide to interact with negatively charged membrane and
carry out cell lysis. Positional residue preference studies showed
that residues like R, V, and K are mostly preferred at N-terminal
positions whereas residues like C and H are highly preferred at
C-terminus in AFPs. In addition, we have also looked out for
motifs, which could potentially be a part of AFPs using MERCI
software. We were able to ﬁnd out various motifs. Furthermore,
to help biologists and serve scientiﬁc community, best models are
implemented in a user-friendly web server ‘Antifp,’ mobile app
and standalone where a user can predict whether their peptide or
series of peptides are AFP or non-AFP in nature.
Antifp, though has certain limitations like the method
modiﬁcations
post-translational
modiﬁcations) and other topological aspects during model
development. Secondly, our method cannot predict in advance
that putative peptides designed using the design tool, will show
broad-spectrum activities or not. However, our method is likely
to help biologists in designing a better peptide-based drug.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PA and KC collected the data and created the datasets. PA, SB,
and KC analyzed the results, developed the computer programs,
implemented SVM, and other techniques. RK, SB, and PA
developed the front-end user interface and created the back-end
server. MS developed the standalone and mobile apps. PA, RK,
and KC wrote the manuscript. GPSR conceived the idea and
coordinated the project.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are thankful to funding agencies J. C. Bose National
Fellowship (DST), Department of Science and Technology (DST-
INSPIRE), Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Council
of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research (CSIR) (project Open
GENESIS BSC0121), Department of Biotechnology (project
BTISNET) for fellowships and ﬁnancial support.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
 
2018.00323/full#supplementary-material