Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) integrates billions of
smart devices that can communicate with one another with
minimal human intervention. It is one of the fastest developing
fields in the history of computing, with an estimated 50 billion
devices by the end of 2020. On the one hand, IoT technologies play
a crucial role in enhancing several real-life smart applications that
can improve life quality. On the other hand, the crosscutting
nature of IoT systems and the multidisciplinary components
involved in the deployment of such systems have introduced new
security challenges. Implementing security measures, such as
encryption, authentication, access control, network security and
application security, for IoT devices and their inherent
vulnerabilities is ineffective. Therefore, existing security methods
should be enhanced to secure the IoT ecosystem effectively.
Machine learning and deep learning (ML/DL) have advanced
considerably over the last few years, and machine intelligence has
transitioned from laboratory curiosity to practical machinery in
several important applications. The ability to monitor IoT devices
intelligently provides a significant solution to new or zero-day
attacks. ML/DL are powerful methods of data exploration for
learning about ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’ behaviour according to
how IoT components and devices perform within the IoT
environment. Consequently, ML/DL methods are important in
transforming the security of IoT systems from merely facilitating
secure communication between devices to security-based
intelligence systems. The goal of this work is to provide a
comprehensive survey of ML methods and recent advances in DL
methods that can be used to develop enhanced security methods
for IoT systems. IoT security threats that are related to inherent
or newly introduced threats are presented, and various potential
IoT system attack surfaces and the possible threats related to each
surface are discussed. We then thoroughly review ML/DL
methods for IoT security and present the opportunities,
advantages and shortcomings of each method. We discuss the
opportunities and challenges involved in applying ML/DL to IoT
security. These opportunities and challenges can serve as potential
future research directions.
Index Terms— Deep Learning, Machine Learning, Internet of
Things Security, Security based Intelligence, IoT Big Data.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE recent progress in communication technologies, such as
the Internet of Things (IoT), has remarkably transcended
the traditional sensing of surrounding environments. IoT
technologies can enable modernisations that improve life
quality and have the capability to collect, quantify and
understand the surrounding environments. This situation
Mohammed Ali Al-garadi, Amr Mohamed, Abdulla Al-Ali, are with Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar. E-mails:
{mohammed.g, abdulla.alali, amrm}@qu.edu.qa Xiaojiang Du is with Department
of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia. E-mail:
simplifies the new communication forms among things and
humans and thus enables the realisation of smart cities . IoT
is one of the fastest emerging fields in the history of computing,
with an estimated 50 billion devices by the end of 2020 .
On the one hand, IoT technologies play a crucial role in
enhancing real-life smart applications, such as smart healthcare,
smart homes, smart transportation and smart education. On the
other hand, the crosscutting and large-scale nature of IoT
systems with various components involved in the deployment
of such systems have introduced new security challenges.
IoT systems are complex and contain integrative
arrangements. Therefore, maintaining the security requirement
in a wide-scale attack surface of the IoT system is challenging.
Solutions must include holistic considerations to satisfy the
security requirement. However, IoT devices mostly work in an
unattended environment. Consequently, an intruder may
physically access these devices. IoT devices are connected
normally over wireless networks where an intruder may access
private information from a communication channel by
eavesdropping. IoT devices cannot support complex security
structures given their limited computation and power resources
 . Complex security structures of the IoT are due to not only
limited computation, communication and power resources but
also trustworthy interaction with a physical domain,
particularly the behaviour of a physical environment in
unanticipated and unpredictable modes, because the IoT system
is also part of a cyber-physical system; autonomously, IoT
systems must constantly adapt and survive in a precise and
predictable manner with safety as a key priority, particularly in
settings where threatening conditions, such as in health
systems, might occur . Moreover, new attack surfaces are
introduced by the IoT environment. Such attack surfaces are
caused by the interdependent and interconnected environments
of the IoT. Consequently, the security is at higher risk in IoT
systems than in other computing systems, and the traditional
solution may be ineffective for such systems .
A critical consequence of the extensive application of IoT is
that IoT deployment becomes an interconnected task. For
example, IoT systems should simultaneously consider energy
efficiency, security, big IoT data analytics methods and
interoperability with software applications during the
deployment stage. One aspect cannot be ignored when
considering advances in another . This integration provides
 . Mohsen Guizani is with Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering,
University
 .
A Survey of Machine and Deep Learning
Methods for Internet of Things (IoT) Security
Mohammed Ali Al-Garadi, Amr Mohamed, Abdulla Al-Ali, Xiaojiang Du, Mohsen Guizani
a new opportunity for researchers from interdisciplinary fields
to investigate current challenges in IoT systems from different
perspectives. However, this integration also introduces new
security challenges due to the distribution nature of IoT devices,
which provide a large and vulnerable surface. This
characteristic of IoT devices presents many security issues.
Moreover, the IoT platform generates a large volume of
valuable data. If these data are not transmitted and analysed
securely, then a critical privacy breach may occur.
IoT systems are accessible worldwide, consist mainly of
constrained resources and constructed by lossy links .
Therefore, crucial modifications of existing security concepts
for information and wireless networks should be implemented
to provide effective IoT security methods. Applying existing
defence mechanisms, such as encryption, authentication, access
control, network security and application security, is
challenging and insufficient for mega systems with many
connected devices, with each part of the system having inherent
vulnerabilities. For example, ‘Mirai’ is an exceptional type of
botnets that has recently caused large-scale DDoS attacks by
exploiting IoT devices . Existing security mechanisms
should be enhanced to fit the IoT ecosystem . However, the
implementation of security mechanisms against a specified
security threat is quickly conquered by new types of attacks
created by attackers to circumvent existing solutions. For
example, amplified DDoS attacks utilise spoofed source IP
addresses for the attack location to be untraceable by defenders.
Consequently, attacks that are more complex and more
destructive than Mirai can be expected because of the
vulnerabilities of IoT systems. Moreover, understanding which
methods are suitable for protecting IoT systems is a challenge
because of the extensive variety of IoT applications and
scenarios . Therefore, developing effective IoT security
methods should be a research priority .
As shown in Figure 1, having the capability to monitor IoT
devices can intelligently provide a solution to new or zero-day
attacks. Machine learning and deep learning (ML/DL) are
powerful methods of data exploration to learn about ‘normal’
and ‘abnormal’ behaviour according to how IoT components
and devices interact with one another within the IoT
environment. The input data of each part of the IoT system can
be collected and investigated to determine normal patterns of
interaction, thereby identifying malicious behaviour at early
stages. Moreover, ML/DL methods could be important in
predicting new attacks, which are often mutations of previous
attacks, because they can intelligently predict future unknown
attacks by learning from existing examples. Consequently, IoT
systems must have a transition from merely facilitating secure
communication amongst devices to security-based intelligence
enabled by DL/ML methods for effective and secure systems.
Figure 1 Illustration of the potential role of ML/DL in IoT security
Although essentially DL is a branch of ML, this paper
discusses them in two separate sections to provide the readers
with in-depth review, inclusive comparisons, and potential
applications of both traditional ML and DL methods for IoT
security. The main differences between traditional ML and DL
methods has been discussed in previous literature .
Similarly, in this paper ML refers to traditional ML methods
that require engineered features, while DL methods refer to
recent advances in learning methods that utilise several nonlinear processing layers for discriminative or generative feature
abstraction and transformation for pattern analysis .
Figure 2 shows a thematic taxonomy of ML/DL for IoT
security. The remaining parts of the paper adopt the
classification presented on the thematic taxonomy. The present
survey comprehensively reviews ML/DL algorithms for IoT
security that can provide researchers and developers a manual
guide to developing an effective and end-to-end security
solution based on intelligence. This survey also aims to
highlight the list of challenges of using ML/DL to secure IoT
systems. Section II provides an overview of general IoT
systems, but the purpose of such an overview is to summarise
the method used by the IoT model and its characteristics for
increasing security risk. The summary points are provided at the
end of Section II. Section III presents the IoT security properties
and threats and discusses the potential vulnerabilities and attack
surfaces of IoT systems (IoT attack surfaces are categorised into
physical device, network service, cloud service and web and
application interfaces). Moreover, we discuss a new attack
surface caused by the IoT environment. In Section IV, we
discuss the most promising ML and DL algorithms, their
advantages, disadvantages and applications in the IoT security
and then present the comparison and summary table for the
reviewed ML/DL methods at the end of each section. Section V
discusses and comprehensively compares the application of
ML/DL methods in securing each IoT layer, and a summary
table of the studies that used ML and DL for IoT security is
presented. In this section, we also present the enabling
technology of ML/DL deployment for IoT security. In Section
VI, the issues, challenges and future directions in using ML/DL
for effectively securing IoT systems are presented and
classified; the challenges are related to IoT data issues, learning
strategies, operations under the interdependent, interconnected
and interactive environments, possible misuse of ML and DL
algorithms by attackers, inherent privacy and security issues of
ML and DL and inherent properties of an IoT device. These
challenges prevent the implementations of effective ML/DL
methods for IoT system security (i.e. computational complexity
or security vs. other trade-offs) and are presented as future
directions. Furthermore, we present other future directions,
such as integrating ML/DL with other technology (e.g. edge
computing and blockchain) to provide reliable and effective IoT
security methods. Section VII presents the conclusions drawn
from this survey.
The key contributions of this survey are listed as follows:
Comprehensive
discussion
vulnerabilities and attack surfaces of IoT systems: We
discuss various threats and attack surfaces in IoT
systems. The attack surfaces are categorised into
physical device, network service, cloud service and
web and application interfaces, with several examples
of security threat and potential vulnerabilities for each
attack surfaces. We also discuss a new attack surface
caused by the interdependent, interconnected and
interactive environments of IoT systems.
In-depth review of the ML and recent advances in DL
methods for IoT security: The most promising ML and
DL algorithms for securing IoT systems are reviewed,
and their advantages, disadvantages and applications
discussed.
Furthermore,
comparisons and summary tables for ML and DL
methods are presented to provide learned lessons.
Application of ML/DL for each IoT layers: The
application of ML/DL for securing perception,
network and application layers is reviewed. The works
reviewed are compared on the basis of the type of
learning method used, the type of attack surfaces
secured and the type of threats detected. The enabling
technologies of ML/DL deployment for IoT security
are discussed.
Challenges and future directions: Several potential
research challenges and future directions of ML/DL
for IoT security are presented.
The following subsection discusses related works to
highlight the major differences of this survey from the previous
survey on IoT security.
A. Related Work
Several researchers have conducted surveys on the IoT
security to provide a practical guide for existing security
vulnerabilities of IoT systems and a roadmap for future works.
However, most of the existing surveys on IoT security have
not particularly focused on the ML/DL applications for IoT
security. For example, Surveys reviewed extant
research and classified the challenges in encryption,
authentication, access control, network security and application
security in IoT systems. Granjal, Monteiro and Silva 
emphasised the IoT communication security after reviewing
issues and solutions for the security of IoT communication
systems. Zarpelão et al. conducted a survey on intrusion
detection for IoT systems. Weber focused on legal issues
and regulatory approaches to determine whether IoT
frameworks satisfy the privacy and security requirements.
Roman, Zhou and Lopez discussed security and privacy in
the distributed IoT context. These researchers also enumerated
several challenges that must be addressed and the advantages of
the distributed IoT approach in terms of security and privacy
concerns. Survey reviewed evolving vulnerabilities and
threats in IoT systems, such as ransomware attacks and security
concerns. Xiao et al. briefly considered the ML methods
for protecting data privacy and security in the IoT context. Their
study also indicated three challenges in future directions of ML
implementation in IoT systems (i.e. computation and
communication overhead, backup security solutions and partial
state observation). Other survey papers such as focused
on the uses of data mining and machine learning methods for
cybersecurity
detection.
surveys mainly discussed the security of the cyber domain
using data mining and machine learning methods and mainly
reviewed misuse and anomaly detections in cyberspace [26,
However, in contrast to other surveys, our survey presents a
comprehensive review of cutting-edge machine and recent
advances in deep learning methods from the perspective of IoT
security. This survey identifies and compares the opportunities,
advantages and shortcomings of various ML/DL methods for
IoT security. We discuss several challenges and future
directions and present the identified challenges and future
directions on the basis of reviewing the potential ML/DL
applications in the IoT security context, thereby providing a
useful manual for researchers to transform the IoT system
security from merely enabling a secure communication among
IoT components to end-to-end IoT security-based intelligent
approaches.
Figure 2 Thematic Taxonomy of ML/DL for IoT Security
II. OVERVIEW OF THE IOT SYSTEM
This section provides an overview of the general IoT
systems. However, the objective of this section is to highlight
the characteristics of IoT systems that may increase security
risk. The summary points are provided at the end of this section.
IoT converts a physical object from a conventional object to
a smart object by utilising technologies, such as communication
technologies, Internet protocols and applications, sensor
networks and ubiquitous and pervasive computing . The
implementation of a flawless IoT system is crucial in the
academe and industry due to the wide range of applications that
can enable the execution of smart city concepts through billions
of connected smart devices . The IoT model can be defined
as the interconnection of massive heterogeneous devices and
systems in diverse communication patterns, such as thing-tothing human-to-human or human-to-thing . The IoT
architecture consists of physical objects that are integrated into
a communication network and supported by computational
equipment with the aim of delivering smart services to users.
The IoT architecture generally has three layers, namely,
​IoT System
Perception
Appliaction
IoT Security
​New attack
introduced
​Physical-
Application
Learning Methods
for IoT securtiy
Security ​
Issues, Challenges
and Future Directions
Perception
Layer Security
Network Layer
Appliaction
Supervised
Approaches
Unsupervised
Approaches
Supervised
Approaches
Unsupervised
Approaches
Approaches
Learning Strategies
for Effective IoT
ML/DL for Securing IoT
Interdependent,Interconnected
and Social Environments
Challenges
Integrating DL/ML with
Other Technology for
IoT Security
Security vs Tradeoffs in IoT
Applications
IoT Security related Data
Learning to secure IoT
from low-quality data
Augmentation IoT security
Learning zero-day attacks
Lifelong Learning for
Learning IoT threats
Transfer learning
Misuse of ML/DL
Algorithms by Hackers
Privacy of ML/DL Methods
Security of ML/DL Methods
Insight DL Architecture
Synergic Integration of ML/DL
with Blockchain
Implementation ML and DL
Taxonomy of ML/DL for IoT Security
Computation complexity
technology for
deployment for
IoT security
application, network and perception . This architecture can
be further taxonomized for simplicity and improved analysis, as
shown in Figure 3. Each level is described in the following
subsections.
Figure 3 IoT architecture
A. Physical objects
The physical object level involves IoT physical sensors. The
main function of physical objects is to sense, collect and
possibly process information. This level adopts sensors and
actuators, such as temperature, humidity, motion and
acceleration
functionalities. The plug-and-play mechanism must be
applicable at this level to configure heterogeneous sensors . IoT sensors are resource-constrained devices because
they have limited battery capacity and computation capability.
Understanding the sensor data delivered by these objects is a
key step in achieving a context-aware IoT system . A
large part of the big data of IoT is generated at this level. The
increase in the number of IoT devices and the extensive
increment in data volume indicate a positive correlation
between the growth of big data and the growth of IoT devices.
Effective analysis of the big data of IoT can result in improved
decision making for a highly secure IoT implementation.
B. Connectivity
One of the main objectives of the IoT platform is to connect
heterogeneous sensors cooperatively and subsequently provide
smart services . The sensors implemented in the IoT
platform are resource-constrained because they are powered by
batteries and have a limited computation and storage capability
 . Therefore, IoT sensors must work with low-power
resources under a lossy and noisy communication environment
 . The following connectivity challenges are encountered in
the deployment of IoT devices.
The first one is providing unique IPs to billions of
devices connected to the Internet. This challenge can
be mitigated by incorporating 6LoWPAN that uses
The second challenge is developing low-power
communication for transmitting data generated by
The third challenge is implementing effective routing
protocols that consider the limited memory of sensors
and support the flexibility and mobility of smart
The recent communication technologies employed in IoT
are 6LoWPAN, Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4, WiFi, ultra-wide
bandwidth, RFID and near-field communication (NFC) .
C. Middleware
A middleware aims to effectively represent the complexities
of a system or hardware, thus allowing developers to focus only
on the issue to be solved without interruption at the system or
hardware level . These complexities are commonly
related to communication and computational issues. A
middleware offers a software level amongst applications, the
operating system and the network communication levels; it
enables cooperative processing. From the computational
perspective, a middleware offers a level between an application
and the system software . Its main functions can be
summarised as follows. First, it enables cooperation between
heterogeneous IoT objects so that the diverse categories of IoT
can interact with one another effortlessly through middleware
assistance . One of key roles of middleware is to
provide interoperability between the IoT devices. Second, a
middleware must provide scalability amongst several devices
that are likely to interact in the IoT realm. The future growth of
IoT devices should be handled by the middleware by providing
vital modifications when the organisation scales . The third
function is device discovery and context awareness, which
should be provided by a middleware to support the objects’
awareness of all other surrounding IoT objects. A middleware
should provide context-aware computing to understand sensor
data. Sensor data can be utilised to obtain the context, and the
obtained context can be used to provide smart services to users
 . The last function is to provide security and privacy to IoT
devices because the data collected by IoT devices are generally
related to humans or an industry. Security and privacy concerns
must be addressed in such circumstances. A middleware must
construct mechanisms to provide a secure IoT system .
D. Big Data Analytics
The huge amounts of data produced or captured by IoT are
extremely valuable. ML can play an analytical role in building
intelligent IoT systems to deliver smart services in the IoT
realm . Big data are created by several physical objects
that are used in various IoT applications. However, physical
devices produce volumes of data that should be analysed in real
time to acquire useful knowledge. To obtain insights from these
data, researchers have discussed different methods of
integrating big data analytical methods with IoT design. Unlike
traditional analytical methods, ML and DL can effectively
derive unobserved insights from big data and convert big data
into useful data with minimal human assistance . Analytical
methods can be categorised into three: descriptive, predictive
and perspective analytics . Descriptive analytics is used for
analysing data to describe current or past events. Predictive
analytics is used for analysing data to predict the future based
on the patterns that occur in current events. Prescriptive
analytics is used for analysing data to make decisions by
examining various real scenarios and providing a set of
recommendations to decision makers. The big data related to
the behaviour of IoT systems are vital in building ML/DL to
secure IoT systems.
E. Applications
IoT has several applications. The commonly known
applications include smart healthcare, smart transportation,
smart grid and smart building. These applications are briefly
discussed in the following subsections.
1) Smart healthcare
IoT devices have become popular in health applications in
recent years. The IoT system is rapidly becoming a key
instrument in healthcare . IoT devices are used in healthcare
sectors to closely observe and record patient conditions and
send warnings to the concerned healthcare system in critical
circumstances to provide a rapid and timely treatment to
patients. Internet of medical things (IoMT) devices have been
adopted in approximately 60% of the healthcare sector .
IoMT is believed to have a significant role in transforming the
healthcare field by empowering the evolution from
disorganised healthcare to synchronised healthcare. In 2015,
30.3% of 4.5 billion IoT devices are IoMT devices. This
number is estimated to rise to 20–30 billion IoMT devices by
However, in contrast to other applications, the IoT in
healthcare systems must be secured whilst providing flexible
access to devices to save lives in emergency cases. For example
 , an individual who has an implanted IoT-based medical
device has experienced an emergency situation where he/she
suddenly must be admitted into a hospital rather than only
regularly visiting. In this case, the staff at the new hospital must
be able to access the implanted IoT-based medical device
easily. Therefore, a complex security requirement may be not
acceptable, and the security method must consider and balance
between security and flexible access during emergency
situations.
Moreover, IoT sensors are widely used to monitor daily
health-related activities. A smartphone is usually employed to
monitor health-related activities, such as daily activity (number
of steps, walking and running distance and cycling distance),
and sleep analysis. IoT has prodigious opportunities to
potentially advance healthcare systems and a wide range of
applications . The recent development in traditional
medical devices towards interactive environment medical
devices can be further advanced by the IoT system by
connecting implanted, wearable and environmental sensors
collaboratively within the IoT system to monitor users’ health
effectively and ensure real-time health support . However,
securing IoT systems remains a critical issue , and
further investigation is required to securely implement IoT
devices in healthcare.
2) Smart transportation
Smart or intelligent transport systems have become attainable
with the help of IoT systems. The main objective of smart
transport is to manage daily traffic in cities intelligently by
analysing data from well-connected sensors located in different
places and implementing data fusion (data from CCTV, mobile
devices, GPS, accelerometers, gyroscope-based applications
and weather sensors). The data are then explored and integrated
to provide smart choices to users . Moreover, the data
analytics of smart transport can implicitly enhance shipment
schedules, advance road safety and improve delivery time .
3) Smart governance
IoT can facilitate smart governance. Integrating data from
different governmental sectors can provide authorities with
abundant information from a wide range of sensor data (from
weather-related data to security-related data). The huge amount
of data generated by IoT sensors can overcome the limitations
of conventional monitoring systems in an exceptional manner,
thereby presenting a knowledge-based system from information
fusion sources that compiles and correlates data from different
sectors to deliver an optimal decision considering multiple
perspectives.
4) Smart agriculture
IoT systems can be applied to improve the agriculture sector.
IoT sensors can be implemented to enable real-time monitoring
of the agriculture sector. IoT sensors can collect useful data on
humidity level, temperature level, weather conditions and
moisture level. The collected data can then be analysed to
provide important real-time mechanisms, such as automatic
irrigation, water quality monitoring, soil constituent monitoring
and disease and pest monitoring .
5) Smart grid
The latest development in power grids was achieved by using
the IoT platform to construct a smart grid in which the
electricity between suppliers and consumers is handled smartly
to improve efficiency, safety and real-time monitoring .
The IoT platform plays a significant role in effective grid
management. Applying IoT technology in a smart grid can help
prevent disasters, decrease power transmission to enhance the
reliability of power transmission and minimise economic losses
 . Moreover, analysing the data generated by IoT sensors can
help decision makers select a suitable electricity supply level to
deliver to customers.
6) Smart homes
IoT components are used to realise smart homes. Home IoTbased machines and systems (e.g. fridge, TV, doors, air
conditioner, heating systems and so on) are now easy to observe
and control remotely . A smart home system can
understand and respond to surrounding changes, such as
automatically switching on air conditioners based on weather
predictions and opening the door based on face recognition.
Intelligent homes should consistently collaborate with their
internal and external environments . The internal
environment involves all home IoT devices that are managed
internally, and the external environment involves objects that
are not managed by the smart home but play important roles in
the construction of the smart home, such as smart grids .
7) Smart supply chain
An important application of IoT technology in real life is the
development of easier and more flexible business processes
than before. The development in IoT-embedded sensors, such
as RFID and NFCE, enables the interaction between IoT
sensors embedded on the products and business supervisors.
Therefore, these goods can be tracked throughout production
and transportation processes until they reach the consumer. The
monitoring process and the data generated through this process
are crucial in making appropriate decisions, which can in turn
improve machine uptime and the service provided to customers
F. Collaboration and Business Objective
At this level, IoT service is delivered to users, and the data
captured and analysed at the lower levels are integrated into the
business objective. This level mainly involves human
interaction with all of the levels of the IoT model. The aim at
this level is to effectively utilise the data captured, transmitted
and analysed at different levels of the IoT model to improve
social and economic growth. The analysis of big data generated
by IoT devices can be incorporated into the business objective
at this stage to identify factors that can improve the business
outcome and create optimal strategic business plans.
From the above discussions of the IoT system, we can
conclude that the nature of IoT systems can increase security
risks because of the following reasons:
By nature, the IoT is a multipart model with various
applications with diverse requirements. This nature
demonstrates the huge complexity of such systems
through extensive IoT applications, from smart home,
smart car to smart healthcare. Such drivers and various
IoT applications can be a challenge whilst developing
an effective security scheme, in which, the effective
security method proposed for a specific application or
requirement may be unsuitable for other applications
with different requirements.
IoT systems are vastly heterogeneous in protocols,
platforms and devices that are accessible worldwide,
consist mainly of constrained resources, constructed
by lossy links and lack standardization. Such
features of IoT systems become bottlenecks that
prevent the development of effective and generalised
security schemes for such systems.
IoT devices can be designed to autonomously adapt to
the surrounding environment. Consequently, IoT
devices can be controlled by other devices . In such
cases, an effective IoT security must not only be
proposed to secure each device independently but also
to provide an end-to-end security solution.
The data generated by the IoT is valuable, and such
data can be analysed to understand the behaviour of
individuals and their daily activities. Therefore, such
information can be used by policymakers to adjust
their products smartly to satisfy the preferences and
requirements of individuals. However, this result can
turn IoT devices into eavesdropping devices that
capture user information including biometric data,
such as voices, faces and fingerprints, that can aid in
IoT device intrusion.
Physical attacks can increase by implementing IoT
systems because most of the physical things of IoT
(e.g. sensors) may be ubiquitously and physically
reachable . Physical threats may also be caused
by unintended damage from natural disasters, such as
floods or earthquakes, or disasters caused by humans,
such as wars . Therefore, an effective security
solution must be context-aware by considering such
characteristics of IoT systems.
IoT systems do not have exact boundaries and are
constantly adjusted whilst new devices are added or
due to user mobility. Such characteristics allow the
IoT model to continually expand attack surfaces and
introduce several vulnerabilities.
Therefore, methods that can comprehensively understand
and gain knowledge on the behaviour of things and other IoT
components within such large systems are required. However,
ML/DL methods can predict the expected behaviour of a system
by learning from previous experiences. Therefore, applying
ML/DL methods can significantly advance the security
methods by transforming the security of IoT systems from
simply facilitating secure communication between devices to
security-based intelligence systems.
III. IOT SECURITY THREATS
IoT integrates the Internet with the physical world to provide
an intelligent interaction between the physical world and its
surroundings. Generally, IoT devices work in diverse
surroundings to accomplish different goals. However, their
operation must meet a comprehensive security requirement in
cyber and physical states . IoT systems are complex and
contain multidisciplinary arrangements. Therefore, maintaining
the security requirement with the wide-scale attack surface of
the IoT system is challenging. To satisfy the desired security
requirement,
considerations. However, IoT devices mostly work in an
unattended environment. Consequently, an intruder may
physically access these devices. IoT devices are normally
connected over wireless networks where an intruder might
expose private information from the communication channel by
eavesdropping. IoT devices cannot support complex security
structures because of their limited computation and power
resources . Therefore, securing the IoT system is a complex
and challenging task. Given that the main objective of the IoT
system is to be accessed by anyone, anywhere and anytime,
attack vectors or surfaces also become accessible to attackers
 . Consequently, causing potential threats to become
more probable. A threat is an act that can exploit security
weaknesses in a system and exerts a negative impact on it .
Numerous threats, such as passive attacks (e.g. eavesdropping)
and active threats (e.g. spoofing, Sybil, man-in-the-middle,
malicious inputs and denial of service (DoS)), might affect the
IoT system. Figure 4 shows the potential attacks that can affect
the main security requirements (authentication, integrity nonrepudiation, confidentiality availability and authorisation).
Figure 4 Potential threats in the IoT system
The following main security properties should be considered
while developing an effective IoT security methods.
Confidentiality:
Confidentiality
characteristic of IoT systems. IoT devices may store and
transfer sensitive information that should not be revealed by
unauthorised individuals. Medical (patient related), personal,
industry and military data are highly confidential and must be
secured against unauthorised access . However, in
specific scenarios, such as IoT medical devices, although
communications are encrypted and data are confidentially
stored and transferred, attackers can still sense the existence of
the physical device and can even track the holder. In such a
situation, the location confidentiality of the holder is exposed
and put at risk .
Integrity: Data from IoT devices are generally transferred
through wireless communication and must be changed only by
authorised entities. Integrity features are thus fundamental in
ensuring an effective checking mechanism to detect any
modification during communication over an insecure wireless
network. Integrity features can secure the IoT system from
malicious inputs that might be used to launch structured query
language (SQL) injection attacks . A deficiency in integrity
inspection can allow for modification of the data stored on the
memory of IoT devices, which can affect the main operational
functions of the physical devices for a long time without being
detected easily.
various integrity
requirements. For example, IoT implantable medical devices
require effective integrity checking against random errors
because they affect human lives directly. Loss, errors or
modification of information in several circumstances can lead
to loss of human lives .
Authentication: The identity of entities should be perfectly
established prior to performing any other process. However,
due to the nature of IoT systems, authentication requirements
differ from system to system. For example, authentication
should be robust in an IoT system where a service needs to offer
robust security rather than high flexibility. Trade-offs are a
major challenge in developing an effective authentication
scheme. For example, the trade-off between security and safety
in IoT medical devices is that both security and safety must be
balanced when designing an authentication scheme. Similarly,
the trade-off can be between an effective authentication scheme
and battery-based devices or between privacy and security .
Therefore, an IoT system requires an effective authentication
that can balance system constraints and provide robust security
mechanisms .
Authorisation: Authorisation includes granting users access
rights to an IoT system, such as a physical sensor device. The
users may be machines, humans or services. For example, the
data collected by sensors should only be delivered to and
accessed by authorised users (authorised objects and service
requesters) . In other words, an action must be
performed only if the requester has satisfactory authorisation to
command it. The main challenge in authorisation in IoT
environments is how to grant access successfully in an
environment where not only humans but also physical sensors
(things) should be authorised to interact with the IoT system
 . In addition, in handling huge amounts of data in such a
heterogeneous environment, the data must be protected
throughout the sensing and transmission process and should be
made available only to authorised parties .
Availability: The services delivered by IoT systems must
always be available to authorised entities. Availability is a
fundamental feature of a successful deployment of IoT systems.
However, IoT systems and devices can still be rendered
unavailable by many threats, such as DoS or active jamming.
Therefore, ensuring the continuous availability of IoT services
to users is a critical property of IoT security.
Non-repudiation: The non-repudiation property is meant to
provide access logs that serve as evidence in situations where
users or objects cannot repudiate an action. Generally, nonrepudiation is not considered a key security property for many
IoT systems . However, non-repudiation can be an important
security property in specific contexts, such as payment systems
where both parties cannot repudiate a payment transaction .
For an effective IoT security scheme, the security properties
above should be considered. However, these properties can be
exploited by several security threats, as shown in Figure 4. In
the following subsection, we briefly discuss potential security
threats to understand how different security properties should
be maintained in a secure IoT environment.
A. Threats in IoT
Security threats can be categorised as cyber and physical.
Cyber threats can be further classified as passive or active. The
following subsection provides a brief discussion of these
1) Cyber Threats
Passive threats: A passive threat is performed only by
eavesdropping through communication channels or the
network. By eavesdropping, an attacker can collect information
from sensors, track the sensor holders, or both. Currently,
collecting valuable personal information, particularly personal
health data, has become rampant on the black market . The
value of personal health information on the black market is $50
compared with $1.50 for credit card information and $3 for a
social security number . Moreover, an attacker can
eavesdrop on communication channels to track the location of
the IoT device holder if its communication channel is within
range , thus causing a violation of privacy.
Active threats: In active threats, the attacker is not only
skilful in eavesdropping on communication channels, but also
in modifying IoT systems to change configurations, control
communication, deny services and so on. Attacks may include
a sequence of interventions, disruptions and modifications. For
example, potential attacks on an IoT system (shown in Figure
4) may involve the following active attacks: impersonation (e.g.
spoofing, Sybil and man-in-the-middle), malicious inputs, data
tampering and DoS. An impersonation attack is intended to
impersonate an IoT device or authorised users. If an attack path
exists, active intruders can attempt to partially or fully
impersonate an IoT entity . Malicious input attacks are
intended to insert malicious software into the targeted IoT
system. This software will run a code injection attack. The
injected malicious software has a dynamic nature, and new
types of attacks are constantly introduced to violate IoT
components remarkably because IoT systems have a naturally
large, well-connected surface . Meanwhile, data
tampering is the act of intentionally changing (deleting,
manipulating
information
unauthorised operations. Data are commonly transmitted or
stored. In both situations, data might be captured and tampered,
which might affect the significant functions of IoT systems,
such as changing the billing price in the case of an IoT-based
smart grid . Many types of DoS attacks can be utilised
against IoT. These types range from conventional Internet DoS
attacks that are established to deplete the resources of the
service provider and network bandwidth to signal jamming that
targets wireless communication. Distributed DoS (DDoS) is a
severe DoS where several attacks are launched with different
IPs, which makes discriminating it from normal traffic of
normal devices challenging compared with the attack with a
huge traffic form signal or limited number of devices that is
easier to discriminate from normal traffic and devices.
Although different forms of DoS attacks exist, they have a
common aim: to interfere with the availability of IoT services
 . IoT systems have billions of connected devices that can
be exploited through destructive DDoS, such as Mirai. Mirai is
an exceptional type of botnets that has recently caused largescale DDoS attacks by using IoT devices .
2) Physical Threats
Physical threats can be in terms of physical destruction. In
these threats, the attacker generally does not have technical
capabilities to conduct a cyber-attack. Therefore, the attacker
can only affect the reachable physical objects and other
components of IoT that lead to terminating the service. By
adopting IoT systems, these types of attacks may become widescale because most of the physical objects of IoT (sensors and
cameras) are expected to be everywhere and physically
accessible . Physical threats may also be caused by
unintended damage from natural disasters, such as floods or
earthquakes, or disasters caused by humans, such as wars [60,
B. Attack Surfaces
In this section, we discuss possible IoT system attack
surfaces and the potential threats related to each surface. As
shown in Figure 5, IoT attack surfaces can be categorised into
physical device, network service, cloud service, web and
application interface. The new IoT environment introduces
threat surfaces.
Figure 5 IoT attack surfaces
1) Physical Device Surface
Physical devices, such as RFID, are a main part of IoT
systems. In an embedded communication system, RFID plays a
significant role in implementing microprocessors for wireless
communication . The key characteristic of RFID tags is
automatic identification through a unique identifier that
involves fast information transmission between tags (RFID is
tagged to an object that can be anything, from human to animal)
and readers . The main function of RFID technology is to
supervise the process of objects in real time; this bridges the
interaction between virtual and actual worlds. Consequently,
these tiny physical devices can be expended in an exceptionally
wide range of applications . However, most physical
devices suffer from many security-related issues. Another unit
of physical device surface is the sensor node. Sensor nodes
mainly consist of sensors used for sensing and actuators used
for actuating devices in accordance with specified instructions.
Sensors nodes commonly have high latency.
Most physical devices are resource-constrained and contain
valuable information, which makes them a potential surface for
attackers; for example, they can be exploited to track their
holders, flooding them with many access requests that cause
DoS or other attacks, such as eavesdropping, spoofing and
counterfeiting . Moreover, this surface is highly
vulnerable to physical threats because it is the most physically
accessible surface for an attacker.
2) Network Service Surface
The IoT system contains physical objects (sensors and
actuators) that are connected through wired and wireless
technologies. Sensor networks (SNs) are significant resources
for realising IoT systems. SNs can be constructed without an
IoT system. However, an IoT system cannot be constructed
without SNs . An IoT system consists of SNs and a
wired network, thus creating a large-scale network surface.
Such a wide network surface can be potentially vulnerable.
Moreover, IoT systems face new security threats that are
inherited from wired and wireless SNs. These new threats are
introduced when traditional networks are directly integrated
into IoT networks. The direct integration of a wireless SN into
an IoT network poses several issues because traditional
networks are no longer secure within IoT environments; for
example, the resilience of WSNs (the sensors within a WSN
openly provide its information to external parties) makes this
network completely vulnerable to attacks in IoT environments
Other threats can be designed by attackers to target the
routing protocol that may lead to network failure. Accordingly,
designing a secure routing protocol is important to IoT system
security . Attacks can also be launched at a port by
searching and examining open ports. Detection of open ports
can encourage attackers to launch an attack on the services
operating on these open ports. Such an attack can extract
detailed information about the network, such as IP address,
MAC address, router and gateway .
IoT has expanded network connectivity, mobility and
collaboration between users. Such features increase network
service surfaces, leading to frequent security risks and attacks,
such as hacking, interruption, acknowledgement spoofing,
DoS, man-in-the-middle attack protocol tunnelling and
interception . Furthermore, the Internet network, which is a
key component that connects IoT devices, has different players
ranging from business subscribers to individual subscribers and
from a local network area (LAN) to a worldwide network area
(WAN), thereby connecting a wide range of devices and servers
 . On the one hand, the Internet can provide a wide range of
services and applications that can work in synergy with the
information collected from sensors to achieve a fully functional
IoT system for providing intelligent services. On the other hand,
the continuous use of traditional Internet protocol (TCP/IP) to
connect billions of objects and devices worldwide is highly
vulnerable to numerous security and privacy threats, such as
viruses, intrusion and hacking, replay attack and identity theft
 .
3) Cloud Service Surface
Cloud computing provides a set of innovative services that
are introduced to offer access to stores and processes for
obtaining information from anywhere and at any time;
accordingly, the requirement for hardware equipment is either
limited or eliminated . Cloud computing can be defined as
enabling remote access to shared service resources .
Cloud computing can serve as a platform that can be used as a
base technology to realise the vision of IoT . Cloud
computing has significant characteristics that can benefit IoT
systems, such as computational and energy efficiencies and
storage, service and application over the Internet . The
integration of cloud and IoT offers great opportunities for IoT
systems. IoT can benefit from the unrestrained resources of the
cloud, thereby overcoming the main constraints of IoT, such as
computational and energy capabilities . The integration of
cloud and IoT offers opportunities for the cloud as well. The
cloud can use an IoT device as a bridge to be integrated into
real-life applications through a dynamic and distributed means,
consequently supplying cloud services to a large consumer base
 . However, with the integration of cloud and IoT
systems, several security concerns arise because such a
distributed system is vulnerable to numerous attacks, such as
(1) malicious attacks that can manipulate flaws in data security
to obtain unauthorised access (e.g. cross-site scripting (XSS),
SQL injection flaws, cross-site request forgery (CSRF) and
insecure storage ); (2) insufficient integrity controls at the
data level that can result in security threats by avoiding the
authorisation process to directly access the database ;
and (3) a security threat may exist in all virtualisation software
which can be utilised by intruders (e.g. the vulnerability of a
virtual server might allow a guest OS to run codes on the host).
Consequently, the vulnerability of the virtual server could be
exploited to allow the elevation of privileges .
Cloud computing
substantial
consequences
information
confidentiality.
confidentiality risks differ significantly according to the terms
and conditions between the cloud service provider and the cloud
service consumers. However, the integration of IoT devices
with cloud computing introduces several privacy concerns,
such as exposing highly confidential data (e.g. personal medical
data of the holder or home-based sensor data). Privacy is a vital
factor that prevents users from adopting IoT devices. Therefore,
development should be accompanied with effective privacy
protection for a successful IoT system deployment .
Moreover, multi-tenancy, which is one of the main features of
cloud computing, can cause security threats that may lead to
private information leakage. Multi-tenancy allows multiple
users to store their data using the cloud via the application
interface (API). In such a condition, the data of several users
can be stored at the same locality, and data in such an
environment can be accessed by one of these users. By either
hacking through the loop holes in API or inserting the client
code into the cloud system, an unauthorised operation attack
can be launched against the data . Authorised cloud users
might also misuse their permissible access to gain unauthorised
privileges and launch attacks, such as internal DoS. Such
attacks can be called insider attacks , which can introduce
a critical trust issue when the cloud is integrated with IoT.
4) Web and Application Interface
Most services provided by IoT systems provide users remote
access via the Web or mobile applications. For example, in a
smart home, the smart things that are connected to home
appliances are designed to be controlled by users using their
mobile applications or by webpage interfaces in a few cases.
Mobile applications have also been developed for smart cars,
watches, belts, shoes, glasses, lights, parking and other things
that are becoming IoT-based devices controlled by mobile
applications. With the rapid development of IoT, virtual and
real worlds are being integrated, and soon the difference
between the two worlds will become undefinable. IoT devices
can interact with one another in real time. This scenario can be
ultimately achieved with the help of smartphone applications
 . Smartphones have become ubiquitous because of the
extensive services they provide to users through their
applications. Android-based devices are among the popular
smart devices. They have captured a massive market because of
their open architecture and the popularity of their application
programming interface (APIs) among developer groups . However, the open nature of mobile operating systems
permits users to download diverse applications involving
malicious applications that are uploaded by a third-party to
online application stores without thorough security checks . The growing popularity of Android-based devices and
other operating system devices has attracted malware
developers, followed by a huge increase in Android malware
 . Malware developers can control smartphones by utilising
platform vulnerabilities, extracting private user information or
constructing botnets. Furthermore, Android applications may
release private information carelessly or maliciously.
Consequently, their functioning behaviours, operational models
and usage patterns should be recognised to develop practical
security methods for mobile devices . Mobile devices are
exposed to risks and threats, such as bluesnarfing, bluejacking,
eavesdropping, tracking and DoS .
5) New attack surfaces introduced by IoT
In this section, we discuss new attack surfaces introduced by
the IoT environment.
Threats caused by IoT interdependent environment
With the rapid growth of IoT objects, the collaboration
between objects has become more automated and require less
human involvement. IoT objects no longer merely interact with
one another like devices within a network. Many IoT devices
nowadays are designed to achieve the vision of a smart city,
such that many of these devices are controlled by other devices
or depend on the operational condition of other devices or the
surrounding environment. For example, if a GPS sensor is
aware of the traffic situation in a different road from the user’s
home to work and the user’s health condition (asthma) is
known, then the GPS should select the route from the user’s
home to work that is most suitable for his health condition (less
traffic and air pollution) based on the health information and
traffic and pollution sensors. Similarly, provided another
example where a sensor senses that the indoor temperature is
raised and a smart plug senses that the air cooler is turned off;
then, the windows automatically open. Such interdependent
processes are common in applications that utilise IoT devices
to achieve a fully automated process. In this environment, the
targeted IoT device may be unreachable by an attacker, but the
attacker could modify the operation mode of another device or
its sensing parameter through the environment that has direct
interdependence to launch a threat . Therefore, attacking
one surface, such as reducing the temperature or manipulating
pollution data, can cause severe effects on other sensors whose
operations depend on the information from these sensors. In
such an interdependent environment, the attacker can select the
weakest nodes in the systems to interrupt the entire systems.
Interconnected environment
IoT systems connect billions of devices. This architecture
does not only expend the surface of the attack but also the
magnitude of the attack. With these densely interconnected
devices, an infected thing can become a destructive attack that
infects numerous things at a large scale, thus affecting a large
part of a city. This situation of nuclear destruction of technology
can be described as ‘IoT goes nuclear’ . Research 
shows that IoT devices, even with secured industry-standard
cryptographic methods, may be exploited by attackers to
produce a new-fangled category of security risks that can be
circulated from one IoT device to all its physically connected
devices through the IoT medium. Consequently, an attacker can
launch rapid and destructive attacks that may not be easy to
control. To illustrate the impact of this scenario, an
experimental case was conducted in , where an infection
attack was launched by exploiting the popular Philips Hue
smart lamps. The malware was diffused by moving directly
from one lamp to the adjacent lamp through wireless
connectivity provided by the built-in ZigBee and physical
proximity. The researchers found that the global AES-
CCM key can be used to encrypt and authenticate new firmware
without knowing any real updates on smart lamps by using
cheap available equipment. This situation shows how
vulnerable such devices are, even the devices produced by a
well-known company that applies reliable cryptographic
methods for security. Such attacks can start at a single point at
any location and may end up infecting the entire city, thereby
allowing the attackers to control the lights of the city or use IoT
lamps in DDoS attacks . Consequently, an infection attack
may spread rapidly to large-scale devices and components due
to the interconnected nature of IoT systems.
Social IoT environment
The Social Internet of Things (SIoT) was introduced recently to
integrate social networking into IoT. The basis of such
integration is that each thing (object) can obtain preferred
services through its social objects called friends in a distributed
manner with just local information .
Consequently, the threats caused by this IoT environment can
be related to privacy concerns that may cause exposing
sensitive information about the objects when integrated into a
social network of IoT devices .
IV. REVIEW OF MACHINE LEARNING AND DEEP LEARNING
APPLICATIONS IN IOT SECURITY
Learning algorithms have been widely adopted in many realworld applications because of their unique nature of solving
problems. Such algorithms handle the construction of machines
that progress automatically through experience . Recently,
learning algorithms have been widely applied in practice. The
current advancement of learning algorithms has been driven by
the development of new algorithms and the availability of big
data, in addition to the emergence of low-computation-cost
algorithms . ML and DL have advanced considerably over
the past few years, starting from laboratory curiosity and
progressing to practical machinery with extensive, significant
applications . Even though DL is a ML sub-field, in this
paper ML refers to traditional ML methods that require
engineered features, while DL methods refer to recent advances
in learning methods that utilise several non-linear processing
layers for discriminative or generative feature abstraction and
transformation for pattern analysis . The purpose of
discussing ML and DL in two sections is to provide the readers
with in-depth review of both of them.
Generally, learning algorithms aim to improve performance
in accomplishing a task with the help of training and learning
from experience. For instance, in learning intrusion detection,
the task is to classify system behaviour as normal or abnormal.
An improvement in performance can be achieved by improving
classification accuracy, and the experiences from which the
algorithms learn are a collection of normal system behaviour.
Learning algorithms are classified into three main categories:
supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning (RL).
Supervised learning methods form their classification or
prediction model on the basis of a learnt mapping and
produce by observing the input parameters. In other words,
these methods capture the relationships between the input
parameters (features) and the required output. Therefore, at the
initial stage of supervised learning, learning examples are
needed to train the algorithms, which are then used to predict or
classify the new input . Recent prodigious advancement in
supervised learning engages deep networks. These networks
can be viewed as multilayer networks with threshold units
 , each of which calculates the function of its input [108,
Although many practical realisations of DL have originated
from supervised learning methods for learning representations,
recent works have achieved progress in improving DL systems
that learn important representations of the input without the
necessity of pre-labelled training data . These learning
algorithms are unsupervised learning methods, which are
generally intended to analyse unlabelled data. The objective of
an unsupervised learning algorithm is to categorise the input
data into distinctive groups by examining the similarity
between them.
The third common type of ML is RL . RL
algorithms are trained by the data from an environment. RL
aims to understand an environment and discover the best
approaches to a given agent in different environments .
The training data in RL are halfway between those of
supervised and unsupervised learning. In place of the training
samples in which the right output is provided for a specified
input, the training data in RL are assumed to indicate whether
an action is right or not; if an action is not right, then the
problem remains until the right action is discovered .
Thus, RL is trial-and-error learning.
In this section, we discuss the most promising ML and DL
algorithms in IoT security perspective. Firstly, we discuss the
traditional ML algorithms, their advantages, disadvantages and
applications in IoT security. Secondly, we discuss DL
algorithms, their advantages, disadvantages and applications in
IoT security.
A. Machine learning (ML) methods for IoT security
In this subsection, we discuss the common ML algorithms
(i.e. decision trees (DT), support vector machines (SVM),
Bayesian algorithms, k-nearest neighbour (KNN), random
forest (RF), association rule (AR) algorithms, ensemble
learning, k-means clustering and principal component analysis
(PCA)) and their advantages, disadvantages and applications in
IoT security
1) Decision Trees (DTs)
DT-based methods mainly classify by sorting samples
according to their feature values. Each vertex (node) in a tree
represents a feature, and each edge (branch) denotes a value that
the vertex can have in a sample to be classified. The samples
are classified starting at the origin vertex and with respect to
their feature values. The feature that optimally splits the
training samples is deemed the origin vertex of the tree .
Several measures are used to identify the optimal feature that
best splits the training samples, including information gain
 and the Gini index .
Most DT-based approaches consist of two main processes:
building (induction) and classification (inference) . In the
building (induction) process, a DT is constructed typically by
initially having a tree with unoccupied nodes and branches.
Subsequently, the feature that best splits the training samples is
considered the origin vertex of the tree. This feature is selected
using different measures, such as information gain. The premise
is to assign the feature root nodes that maximally reduce the
intersection area between classes in a training set, consequently
improving the discrimination power of the classifier. The same
procedure is applied to each sub-DT until leaves are obtained
and their related classes are set. In the classification (inference)
process, after the tree is constructed, the new samples with a set
of features and unknown class are classified by starting with the
root nodes of the constructed tree (i.e. the tree constructed
during the training process) and proceeding on the path
corresponding to the learnt values of the features at the inner
nodes of the tree. This procedure is sustained until a leaf is
acquired. Finally, the related labels (i.e. predicted classes) of
the new samples are obtained .
Researchers in summarised the main points for
simplifying DT construction. Firstly, pre-pruning or postpruning is applied to the tree to reduce the tree size. Secondly,
the space of the states searched is adjusted. Thirdly, the search
algorithm is enhanced. Next, the data features are reduced by
removing or disregarding redundant features through the search
process. Finally, the structure of the tree is converted into an
alternative data structure, such as a set of rules. The main
weaknesses of DT-based methods are summarised as follows
 . Firstly, they require large storage because of the nature
of construction. Secondly, understanding DT-based methods is
easy only if few DTs are involved. However, certain
applications involve a massive construction of trees and several
decision nodes. In these applications, the computational
complexity is high, and the underlying model for classifying
samples is complex.
A DT is used as a main classifier or collaborative classifier
with other ML classifiers in security applications, such as
intrusion detection . For example, a previous study
proposed the use of a fog-based system call system to secure
IoT devices . The research used DT to analyse network
traffic to detect suspicious traffic sources and consequently
detect DDoS behaviour.
2) Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
SVMs are used for classification by creating a splitting
hyperplane in the data attributes between two or more classes
such that the distance between the hyperplane and the most
adjacent sample points of each class is maximised . SVMs
are notable for their generalisation capability and specifically
suitable for datasets with a large number of feature attributes
but a small number of sample points . Theoretically,
SVMs were established from statistical learning . They
were initially created to categorise linearly divisible classes into
a two-dimensional plane comprising linearly separable data
points of different classes (e.g. normal or abnormal). SVMs
should produce an excellent hyperplane, which delivers
maximum margin, by increasing the distance between the
hyperplane and the most adjacent sample points of each class.
The advantages of SVMs are their scalability and their
capabilities to perform real-time intrusion detection and update
the training patterns dynamically.
SVMs have been widely used in various security
applications, such as intrusion detection , and are
efficient in terms of memory storage because they create a
hyperplane to divide the data points with a time complexity
equal to !(#$), where N refers to the number of samples . In relation to the IoT environment, a study 
developed an Android malware detection system to secure IoT
systems and applied a linear SVM to their system. They
compared the detection performance of SVM with other ML
algorithms, namely, naïve Bayes (NB), RF and DT. The
comparison results showed that SVM outperformed the other
ML algorithms. Such results confirmed the robust application
of SVM for malware detection. Nevertheless, additional studies
are essential to investigate the performance of SVMs with
enriched datasets and datasets that are created with different
environments and attack scenarios. Moreover, comparing the
performances of SVM with DL algorithms, such as
convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithms, in such a
situation may be interesting.
In a previous work, an SVM was used to secure a smart grid,
and attack detection in a smart grid was empirically studied
 . This research showed that the ML algorithms SVM,
KNN, perceptron, ensemble learning and sparse logistic
regression are effective in detecting known and unknown
attacks, performing better than traditional methods used for
attack detection in smart grids.
In another research direction, SVM was recently used as a
tool to exploit device security. The results in showed
that ML methods can break cryptographic devices and that
SVM is more effective in breaking cryptographic devices than
the traditional method (i.e. template attack).
3) Bayesian theorem-based algorithms
Bayes’ theorem explains the probability of an incident on the
basis of previous information related to the incident . For
instance, DoS attack detection is associated with network traffic
information. Therefore, compared with assessing network
traffic without knowledge of previous network traffic, using
Bayes’ theorem can evaluate the probability of network traffic
being attack (related or not) by using previous traffic
information. A common ML algorithm based on Bayes’
theorem is the Naive Bayes (NB) classifier.
The NB classifier is a commonly used supervised classifier
known for its simplicity. NB calculates posterior probability
and uses Bayes’ theorem to forecast the probability that a
particular feature set of unlabelled examples fits a specific label
with the assumption of independence amongst the features. For
example, for intrusion detection, NB can be used to classify the
traffic as normal or abnormal. The features that can be used for
traffic classification, such as connection duration, connection
protocol (e.g. TCP and UDP) and connection status flag, are
treated by the NB classifier independently despite that these
features may depend on one another. In NB classification, all
features individually contribute to the probability that the traffic
is normal or abnormal; thus, the modifier “naïve” is used. NB
have been used for network intrusion detection and
anomaly detection . The main advantages of NB
classifiers include simplicity, ease of implementation,
applicability to binary and multi-class classification, low
training sample requirement and robustness to irrelevant
features (The features are preserved independently.). However,
NB classifiers cannot capture useful clues from the
relationships and interactions among features. The interactions
among features can be important for accurate classification,
particularly in complex tasks in which the interactions among
features can significantly help the classifier increase its
discrimination power among classes .
4) k-Nearest neighbour (KNN)
KNN is a nonparametric method. KNN classifiers often use
the Euclidean distance as the distance metric . Figure 6
demonstrates KNN classification, in which new input samples
are classified. In the figure, the red circles represent malicious
behaviours, and the green circles represent the normal
behaviours of the system. The newly unknown sample (blue
circle) needs to be classified as malicious or normal behaviour.
The KNN classifier categorises the new example on the basis
of the votes of the selected number of its nearest neighbours;
i.e. KNN decides the class of unknown samples by the majority
vote of its nearest neighbours. For instance, in Figure 6, if the
KNN classification is based on one nearest neighbour (k = 1),
then it will categorise the class of the unseen sample as normal
behaviour (because the nearest cycle is a green cycle). If the
KNN classification is based on two nearest neighbours (k = 2),
then the KNN classifier will categorise the class of the unseen
sample as normal behaviour because the two nearest circles are
green (normal behaviour). If the KNN classification is based on
three and four nearest neighbours (k = 3, k = 4), then the KNN
classifier will categorise the class of the unknown sample as
malicious behaviour because the three and four nearest circles
are red circles (malicious behaviour). Testing different values
of k during the cross-validation process is an important step to
determine the optimal value of k for a given dataset. Although
the KNN algorithm is a simple classification algorithm and
effective for large training datasets , the best k value
always varies depending on the datasets. Therefore,
determining the optimal value of k may be a challenging and
time-consuming process. KNN classifiers have been used for
network intrusion detection and anomaly detection .
Considering the IoT environment, a study proposed a
model for the detection of U2R and R2L attacks. The model
reduced the dimensionality of the features to enhance efficiency
using two layers of feature reduction and then applied a twotier classification model that uses NB and KNN classifiers; the
proposed model showed good detection results for both attacks.
Another research developed intrusion detection system-based
KNN . The developed system was meant for use in
classifying nodes as normal or abnormal in a wireless sensor
network (WSN), which is an important unit of IoT systems; the
proposed system exhibited efficient and accurate intrusion
detection.
Figure 6 KNN working principle
5) Random forest (RF)
RFs are supervised learning algorithms. In an RF, several
DTs are constructed and combined to acquire a precise and
robust prediction model for improved overall results .
Therefore, an RF consists of numerous trees that are
constructed randomly and trained to vote for a class. The most
voted class is selected as the final classification output .
Even though the RF classifier is constructed mainly using DTs,
these classification algorithms substantially differ. Firstly, DTs
normally formulate a set of rules when the training set is fed
into the network, and this set of rules is subsequently used to
classify a new input. RF uses DTs to construct subsets of rules
for voting a class; thus, the classification output is the average
of the results and RF is robust against over-fitting. Moreover,
RF bypasses feature selection and requires only a few input
parameters . However, the use of RF may be impractical in
specific real-time applications in which the required training
dataset is large because RF needs the construction of several
DTs. RF algorithms have been used for network intrusion
detection and anomaly detection . In a previous study
 , RF, SVM, KNN and ANN were trained to detect DDoS
in IoT systems, and RF provided slightly better classification
results than did the other classifiers when limited feature sets
were used to avoid additional computational overhead and
improve the applicability of the system to real-time
classification. RF was trained using features obtained from
network traffic with the purpose of correctly recognising IoT
device categories from the white list. The authors extracted and
manually labelled network traffic data from 17 IoT devices.
These devices belonged to nine categories of IoT devices and
adopted to train a multi-class classifier using RF algorithms.
The study concluded that ML algorithms, in general, and
specifically RF, hold practical significance in correctly
identifying unauthorised IoT devices .
6) Association Rule (AR) algorithms
AR algorithms have been used to identify an unknown
variable by investigating the relationship among various
variables in a training dataset. For example, let ', ) and * be
variables in a dataset +. An AR algorithm aims to study the
relationship among these variables to discover their correlations
and consequently construct a model. Subsequently, this model
is used to predict the class of new samples. AR algorithms
identify frequent sets of variables , which are combinations
of variables that frequently co-exist in attack examples. For
example, in a previous study , the associations between
TCP/IP variables and attack types were investigated using ARs,
and the occurrence of various variables, such as service name,
destination port, source port and source IP, were examined to
predict the attack type. The AR algorithm reported in 
exhibited favourable performance in intrusion detection. The
researchers used fuzzy association rules in an intrusion
detection model, which yielded a high detection rate and a low
false positive rate . However, compared with other
learning methods, AR methods are not commonly used in IoT
environments; thus, further exploration is suggested to check
whether an AR method can be optimised or combined with
another technique to provide an effective solution to IoT
security. The main drawbacks of AR algorithms in practice are
as follows. Firstly, the time complexity of AR algorithms is
high. Association rules increase rapidly to an unmanageable
quantity, particularly when the frequency among variables is
decreased. Although several different approaches have been
introduced to tackle the issue of efficiency, they are not always
effective . Moreover, AR algorithms are based on simple
assumptions among variables (direct relationships and
occurrence). In certain cases, these assumptions are
inapplicable, especially to security applications, in which
attackers usually attempt to imitate the behaviour of normal
7) Ensemble learning (EL)
One of promising directions in ML is EL. EL combines the
outputs of numerous basic classification methods to produce a
collective output and consequently improve classification
performance. EL aims to combine heterogeneous or
homogeneous multi-classifiers to obtain a final result . At
the initial stage of ML development, every learning method has
its advantages and achievements in specific applications or with
specific datasets. Experimental comparisons in found that
the best learning method differs by application. The underlying
learning theory used for a classifier depends on the data. Given
that the nature of data apparently changes with the application,
the best learning method that suits the given application data
may not be the best for other applications. Therefore,
researchers have started combining different classifiers to
improve accuracy. EL uses several learning methods; thus, it
reduces variance and is robust to over-fitting. The combination
of different classifiers can provide results beyond the original
set of hypotheses; thus, EL can adapt well to a problem .
However, the time complexity of an EL-based system is more
than that of a single classifier-based system because EL
comprises several classifiers . EL has been
effectively used for intrusion, anomaly and malware detection
 .
A previous study showed that the time complexity of
such learning models can be reduced to make them suitable for
devices with limited hardware resources, such as IoT devices.
the authors proposed a lightweight, application-independent,
ensemble learning-based framework for detecting online
anomalies in the IoT environment. The proposed framework
aims to tackle two issues: 1) accomplishing automated and
distributed online learning approaches to identifying anomalies
for resource-constrained devices and 2) evaluating the proposed
framework with real data. The study reported that the ensemblebased method outperformed each individual classifier .
8) k-Means clustering
k-Means clustering is based on an unsupervised ML
approach. This method aims to discover clusters in the data, and
k refers to the number of clusters to be generated by the
algorithm. The method is implemented by iteratively allocating
each data point to one of the k clusters according to the given
features. Each cluster will contain samples with similar
features. The k-means algorithm applies iterative refinement to
generate an ultimate result. The inputs of the algorithm are the
number of clusters (k) and dataset, which contains a set of
features for each sample in the dataset. Firstly, the k centroids
are estimated, and then each sample is assigned to its closest
cluster centroid according to the squared Euclidean distance.
Secondly, after all the data samples are assigned to a specific
cluster, the cluster centroids are recalculated by computing the
mean of all samples assigned to that cluster. The algorithm
iterates these steps until no sample that can modify the clusters
exists . The main limitations of k-means clustering
are as follows. Firstly, the user has to select k in the beginning.
Secondly, this algorithm assumes that all spherical clusters have
an approximately equal numbers of samples. The k-means
algorithms can be applied to anomaly detection by
distinguishing normal behaviour from abnormal behaviour by
feature similarity calculations . Muniyandi, Rajeswari
and Rajaram proposed an anomaly detection method
using k-means with DT (i.e. C4.5 DT algorithm). However, the
performance of k-means was less effective than those of
supervised learning methods, specifically in detecting known
attack . Unsupervised algorithms are generally a good
choice when generating the labelled data is difficult. However,
the application of clustering methods, in general, and k-means
in particular, to IoT system security is still at its infancy and
should be explored further.
Unsupervised ML methods have many applications in
securing IoT systems. For instance, k-means clustering was
used for securing WSNs by detecting intrusions . In a
study on Sybil detection in industrial WSNs , a kerneloriented scheme was proposed to differentiate Sybil attackers
from normal sensors by clustering the channel vectors. A
clustering algorithm showed the potential to preserve private
data anonymisation in an IoT system . The use of
clustering to develop data anonymisation algorithms can
significantly advance data exchange security .
9) Principal component analysis (PCA)
PCA is a feature-reduction technique that can be applied to
transform a large set of variables into a reduced set that
preserves most of the information represented in the large set.
This technique converts a number of probably correlated
features into a reduced number of uncorrelated features, which
are called principal components . Therefore, the main
working principle of PCA can be utilised for feature selection
to realise real-time intrusion detection for IoT systems; a
previous work proposed a model that uses PCA for feature
reduction and adopts softmax regression and KNN algorithm as
classifiers. The author reported that the combination of PCA
with these classifiers provided a time- and computing-efficient
system that can be utilised in real time in IoT environments
Table 1 shows Potential ML methods for securing IoT
systems and their advantages, disadvantages and applications in
IoT security.
Table 1 Potential ML methods for securing IoT system
Working principle
Advantages
Disadvantages
Potential Application in
IoT Security
DT-based method uses a DT to
establish a model (i.e. a prediction
model) to learn from training
samples by representing them as
branches and leaves. The pretrained model is then used to
predict the class of the new
DT is a simple, easy-to-use and
transparent method.
DT requires large storage
because of its construction
nature. Understanding DTbased methods is easy only if
few DTs are involved.
Detection of intrusion
 and suspicious
traffic sources 
SVMs form a splitting hyperplane
in the feature dimension of two or
more classes such that the
distance between the hyperplane
and the most adjacent sample
points of each class is maximised
SVMs are known for their
generalisation capability and
suitability for data consisting of
a large number of feature
attributes but a small number of
sample points .
The optimal selection of a
kernel is difficult.
Understanding and interpreting
SVM-based models are
difficult.
Detection of intrusion
 , malware
 and attacks in
smart grids 
NB calculates the posterior
probability. It uses Bayes’
theorem to forecast the
probability that a particular
feature set of unlabelled samples
fits a specific label with the
assumption of independence
amongst features.
NB is known for its simplicity,
ease of implementation, low
training sample requirement
 and robustness to
irrelevant features (The features
are preserved independently.).
NB handles features
independently and thus cannot
capture useful clues from the
relationships and interactions
among features. (It may work
effectively in applications
whose samples have dependent
and related features.)
Detection of network
intrusion .
KNN classifies the new sample
on the basis of the votes of the
selected number of its nearest
neighbours; i.e. KNN decides the
class of unknown samples by the
majority vote of its nearest
neighbours.
KNN is a popular and effective
ML method for intrusion
detection.
The optimal k value usually
varies from one dataset to
another; therefore, determining
the optimal value of k may be a
challenging and timeconsuming process.
Detection of intrusions
 and anomalies
 .
In an RF, several DTs are
constructed and combined to
acquire a precise and established
prediction model for improved
overall results.
RF is robust to over-fitting. RF
bypasses feature selection and
requires only a few input
parameters.
RF is based on constructing
several DTs; thus, it may be
impractical in specific real-time
applications in which the
required training dataset is
Detection of intrusion
 , anomalies ,
DDoS attacks and
unauthorised IoT devices
AR algorithms aim to study the
relationship among the variables
in a given training dataset T to
discover correlations and
consequently construct a model.
This model is then used to predict
the class of new samples.
AR algorithms are simple and
easy to use.
The time complexity of the
algorithms is high. AR
algorithms use simple
assumptions among variables
(direct relationships and
occurrence). In certain cases,
these assumptions are
inapplicable, especially to
security applications.
Detection of intrusion
EL combines the outputs of
numerous basic classification
methods to produce a collective
output and consequently improve
classification performance.
EL reduces variance and is
robust to over-fitting. EL
provides results beyond the
original set of hypotheses;
therefore, EL can adapt better
than can a single classifierbased method to a problem.
The time complexity of an EL
system is higher than that of a
single classifier-based system.
Detection of intrusion,
anomalies and malware
 .
clustering
k-Means clustering is an
unsupervised learning approach
that identifies clusters in the data
according to feature similarities. k
refers to the number of clusters to
be generated by the algorithm.
Unsupervised algorithms are
generally a good choice when
generating the labelled data is
difficult. k-Means clustering
can be used for private data
anonymisation in an IoT
system because it does not
require labelled data.
k-Means clustering is less
effective than supervised
learning methods, specifically
in detecting known attacks
Sybil detection in
industrial WSNs 
and private data
anonymisation in an IoT
system 
PCA is a process that converts a
number of probably correlated
features into a reduced number of
uncorrelated features, which are
called principal components
PCA can achieve
dimensionality reduction and
consequently reduce the
complexity of the model.
PCA is a feature-reduction
method that should be used
with other ML methods to
establish an effective security
PCA can be used for
real-time detection
systems in IoT
environments by
reducing the model
B. Deep learning (DL) methods for IoT Security
Recently, the applications of DL to IoT systems have become
an imperative research topic . The most vital advantage of
DL over traditional ML is its superior performance in large
datasets. Several IoT systems produce a large amount of data;
thus, DL methods are suitable for such systems. Moreover, DL
can automatically extract complex representations from data
 . DL methods can enable the deep linking of the IoT
environment . Deep linking is a unified protocol that
permits IoT-based devices and their applications to interact
with one another automatically without human intervention.
For example, the IoT devices in a smart home can automatically
interact to form a fully smart home .
DL methods provide a computational architecture that
combines several processing levels (layers) to learn data
representations with several levels of abstraction. Compared
with traditional ML methods, DL methods have considerably
enhanced state-of-the-art applications . DL is a ML subfield that utilises several non-linear processing layers for
discriminative
generative
abstraction
transformation for pattern analysis. DL methods are also known
as hierarchical learning methods because they can capture
hierarchical representations in deep architecture. The working
principle of DL is inspired by the working mechanisms of the
human brain and neurons for processing signals. Deep networks
are constructed for supervised learning (discriminative),
unsupervised
(generative
combination of these learning types, which is called hybrid DL.
CNNs and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are examples of
discriminative DL methods. Deep autoencoders (AEs), deep
belief networks (DBN), restricted Boltzmann machines
(RBMs), generative adversarial networks (GANs) and
ensemble of DL networks (EDLNs) are examples of hybrid DL
Figure 7 Illustration of NNs Working Principle for IoT Security
1) Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
CNNs were introduced to reduce the data parameters used in
a traditional artificial neural network (ANN). The data
parameters are reduced by utilising three concepts, namely,
interaction,
equivariant
representation . Reducing the connections between layers
increases the scalability and improves the training time
complexity of a CNN.
A CNN consists of two alternating types of layers:
convolutional layers and pooling layers. The convolutional
layers convolute data parameters with the help of multiple
filters (kernels) of equal size . The pooling layers perform
down-sampling to decrease the sizes of the subsequent layers
through max pooling or average pooling. Max pooling divides
the input into non-overlapping clusters and selects the
maximum value for each cluster in the previous layer , whereas average pooling averages the values of each
cluster in the previous layer. Another important layer of a CNN
is the activation unit, which performs a non-linear activation
function on each element in the feature space. The non-linear
activation function is selected as the rectified linear unit (ReLU)
activation function, which involves nodes with the activation
function ,(-) = /0-(0, -) . The working principle of
CNN applied to IoT Security is shown in Figure 8.
The main advantage of a CNN is that it is extensively applied
to the training approaches in DL. It also allows for the automatic
learning of features from raw data with high performance.
However, a CNN has high computational cost; thus,
implementing it on resource-constrained devices to support onboard security systems is challenging. Nevertheless, distributed
architecture can solve this issue. In this architecture, a light deep
neural network (DNN) is implemented and trained with only a
subset of important output classes on-board, but the complete
training of the algorithm is achieved at cloud level for deep
classification .
The development of CNNs is mainly directed towards image
recognition advancement. Accordingly, CNNs have become
widely used, leading to developing successful and effective
models for image classification and recognition with the use of
large public image sources, such as ImageNet .
Furthermore, CNNs demonstrate robustness in numerous other
applications. For IoT security, a study proposed a CNNbased malware detection method for Android. With the
application of the CNN, the significant features related to
malware detection are learnt automatically from the raw data,
thereby eliminating the need for manual feature engineering.
The key point in using a CNN is that the network is trained to
learn suitable features and execute classification conjointly,
thus eliminating the extraction process required in traditional
ML and consequently providing an end-to-end model .
However, the robust learning performance of CNNs can be used
by attackers as a weapon. A previous study showed that a
CNN algorithm can break cryptographic implementations
successfully.
Figure 8 Illustration of CNN Working Principle for IoT Security
2) Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
An RNN is a vital category of DL algorithms. RNNs were
proposed to handle sequential data. In several applications,
forecasting the current output is based on the analysis of the
associations from several previous samples. Thus, the output of
the neural network depends on the present and past inputs. In
such an arrangement, a feed-forward NN is inappropriate
because the association between the input and output layers are
preserved with no dependency . Therefore, when the
backpropagation algorithm was introduced, its most remarkable
application was the training of RNNs . For
applications that consist of sequential inputs (e.g. speech, text
and sensor data), RNNs are recommended .
An RNN integrates a temporal layer to capture sequential
data and then learns multifaceted variations through the hidden
units of the recurrent cell . The hidden units are modified
according to the data presented to the network, and these data
are continually updated to reveal the present condition of the
network. The RNN processes the present hidden state by
estimating the subsequent hidden state as an activation of the
formerly hidden state. RNNs are used because of their
capability of managing sequential data effectively. This
capability is advantageous for various tasks, such as threat
​Data from
IoT Devices
Classification
Feature Fxtraction
​Fully Connected
Convolutiona
Convolution
al Layer 2
​Attack Prediction
[Early Warning
​Attacks Detection
​IoT Devices
detection, in which the patterns of the threat are time dependent.
Therefore, using recurrent connections can improve neural
networks and reveal important behaviour patterns. The main
drawback of RNNs, however, is the issue of vanishing or
exploding gradients .
RNNs and their variants have achieved excellent
performance in many applications with sequential data, such as
machine translation and speech recognition .
Moreover, RNNs can be used for IoT security. IoT devices
generate large amounts of sequential data from several sources,
such as network traffic flows, which are among the key features
for detecting several potential network attacks. For example, a
previous study discussed the feasibility of an RNN in
examining network traffic behaviour to detect potential attacks
(malicious behaviour) and confirmed the usefulness of the RNN
in classifying network traffic for accurate malicious behaviour
detection. Thus, RNNs provide a practical solution in realworld scenarios. Exploring RNNs and their variants are of
significance in improving IoT system security, specifically for
time series-based threats.
3) Deep autoencoders (AEs)
A deep AE is an unsupervised learning neural network
trained to reproduce its input to its output. An AE has a hidden
layer h, which defines a code used to represent the input .
An AE neural network is divided into two parts: the encoder
function ℎ= ,(-) and the decoder function, which attempts to
reproduce the input 9 = :(ℎ).The encoder obtains the input and
converts it into an abstraction, which is generally termed as a
code. Subsequently, the decoder acquires the constructed code,
which was initially produced to represent the input, to rebuild
the original input. The training process in AEs should be
accomplished with minimum reconstruction error .
However, AEs cannot learn to replicate the input perfectly. AEs
are also restricted because they can produce an approximate
copy only, merely copying the inputs that are similar to the
training data. The model is required to prioritise which
characteristics of the inputs should be copied; thus, it frequently
learns useful characteristics of the data . AEs are
potentially important for feature extraction. AEs can be
successfully used for representation learning to learn features
(in place of the manually engineered features used in traditional
ML) and reduce dimensionality with no prior data knowledge.
AEs, nevertheless, consume high computational time. Although
AEs can effectively learn to capture the characteristics of the
training data, they may only complicate the learning process
rather than represent the characteristics of the dataset if the
training dataset is not representative of the testing dataset.
AEs were used to detect network-based malware in ; the
AEs were trained to learn the latent representation of a diverse
feature set; particularly, AEs were trained on the feature vector
extracted from the cybersystems. The AEs exhibited better
detection performance than did the traditional ML algorithms
SVM and KNN . In another study , an AE was
combined with a DBN to construct a malware detection method
and used for data dimensionality reduction by non-linear
mapping to extract only the significant features; subsequently,
the DBN learning algorithm was trained to detect malicious
4) Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs)
RBMs are deep generative models developed for
unsupervised learning . An RBM is a completely
undirected model with no link between any two nodes in the
same layer. RBMs consist of two types of layers: visible and
hidden layers. The visible layer holds the known input, whereas
the hidden layer consists of multiple layers that include the
latent variables. RBMs hierarchically understand features from
data, and the features captured in the initial layer are used as
latent variables in the following layer.
The research in developed a network anomaly
detection model that can overcome the inherent challenges in
developing such a model. These challenges include the
generation of labelled data required for the effective training of
the model because a network traffic dataset is multi-part and
irregular. The second challenge is the constant evolution of
anomaly behaviour with time. Therefore, the model should be
dynamically adapted to detect any new form of attacks and
generalised to detect the anomaly in different network
environments. To solve these challenges, the researchers in
 proposed a learning model that is based on a
discriminative RBM, which they selected due to its capability
to combine generative models with suitable classification
accuracy to detect network anomaly in a semi-supervised
fashion even with incomplete training data. However, their
experimental results showed that the classification performance
of the discriminative RBM was affected when the classifier was
tested on a network dataset that differed from the network
dataset on which the classifier was trained. This finding should
be further investigated, and how a classifier can be generalised
to detect an anomaly in different network environments should
be further studied.
The feature representation capability of a single RBM is
limited. However, RBM can be substantially applied by
stacking two or more RBMs to form a DBN. This process is
discussed in the following section.
5) Deep belief networks (DBNs)
DBNs are generative methods . A DBN consists of
stacked RBMs that execute greedy layer-wise training to
accomplish
performance
unsupervised
environment. In a DBN, training is accomplished layer by layer,
each of which is executed as an RBM trained on top of the
formerly trained layer (DBNs are a set of RBMs layers used for
the pre-training phase and subsequently become a feed-forward
network for weight fine-tuning with contrastive convergence.)
 . In the pre-training phase, the initial features are trained
through a greedy layer-wise unsupervised approach, whereas a
softmax layer is applied in the fine-tuning phase to the top layer
to fine-tune the features with respect to the labelled samples
DBNs have been successfully implemented in malicious
attack detection. A previous study proposed an approach
to secure mobile edge computing by applying a DL-based
approach to malicious attack detection. The study used a DBN
for automatic detection, and the proposed DBN-based model
showed vital improvement in malware detection accuracy
compared with ML-based algorithms . This result
demonstrated the superiority of DL, in general, and DBNs in
particular, to traditional manual feature engineering methods in
malware detection. In another study , an AE was
combined with a DBN to establish a malware detection method,
and an AE DL algorithm was used for the reduction of data
dimensionality by non-linear mapping to extract only the
significant features; subsequently, the DBN learning algorithm
was trained to detect malicious code.
DBNs are unsupervised learning methods trained with
unlabelled data iteratively for significant feature representation.
However, even though DBNs use contrastive convergence to
reduce computational time, these networks are still inapplicable
to on-board devices with limited resources.
6) Generative adversarial networks (GANs)
Introduced by , GANs have recently emerged as
promising DL frameworks. A GAN framework simultaneously
trains two models, namely, generative and discriminative
models, via an adversarial process as shown in Figure 9. The
generative model learns the data distribution and generates data
samples, and the discriminative model predicts the possibility
that a sample originates from the training dataset rather than the
generative model (i.e. evaluates the sample for authenticity).
The objective of training the generative model is to increase the
probability that the discriminative model misclassifies the
sample . In each stage, the generative model, which is the
generator, is prepared to deceive the discriminator by
generating a sample dataset from random noise. By contrast, the
discriminator is fed with several real data samples from the
training set, accompanied by the samples from the generator.
The discriminator aims to classify real (from the training
dataset) and unreal (from the generative model) samples. The
performances of the discriminative and generative models are
measured by the correctly and incorrectly classified samples,
respectively. Subsequently, both models are updated for the
next iteration. The output discriminative model assists the
generative model to enhance the samples generated for the
subsequent iteration .
GANs have been recently implemented in IoT security. For
example, the study in proposed an architecture for
securing the cyberspace of IoT systems, and the proposed
architecture involves training DL algorithms to classify the
system behaviour as normal or abnormal. GAN algorithms were
integrated into the proposed architecture for preliminary study,
whose evaluation results showed the effectiveness of the GANbased architecture in detecting abnormal system behaviour
GANs may have a potential application in IoT security
because they may learn different attack scenarios to generate
samples similar to a zero-day attack and provide algorithms
with a set of samples beyond the existing attacks. GANs are
suitable for training classifiers through a semi-supervised
approach. GANs can generate samples more rapidly than can
fully visible DBNs because the former is not required to
generate different entries in the samples sequentially. In GANs,
generating a sample needs only one pass through the model,
unlike in RBMs, which require an unidentified number of
iterations of a Markov chain . However, GAN
training is unstable and difficult. Learning to generate discrete
data, such as text, by using a GAN is a challenging task [205,
Figure 9 Illustration of GAN Working Principle
7) Ensemble of DL networks (EDLNs)
Several DL algorithms can work collaboratively to perform
better than independently implemented algorithms. EDLNs can
be accomplished by merging generative, discriminative or
hybrid models. EDLNs are often used to handle complex
problems with uncertainties and high-dimensional features. An
EDLN comprises stacked individual classifiers, either
homogenous
(classifiers
heterogeneous (classifiers from different families), and is used
to enhance diversity, accuracy, performance and generalisation
 . Although EDLNs have achieved remarkable success in
many applications, such as human activity recognition, EDLNs
application in IoT security needs further investigation,
particularly the possibility of implementing light homogenous
or heterogeneous classifiers in a distributed environment to
improve the accuracy and performance of an IoT security
system and solve challenges related to computational
complexity. Table 2 shows Potential DL methods for securing
IoT systems and their advantages, disadvantages and
applications in IoT security.
Table 2 Potential DL methods for securing IoT systems
Working principle
Advantages
Disadvantages
Potential Application in
IoT Security
CNNs mainly aim to reduce
data parameters used by
applying sparse interactions,
parameter sharing and
equivariant representations
 , thereby reducing the
connections between layers to
quantities less than those in
CNNs are robust supervised
DL methods with highly
competitive performance.
With the new features of
CNNs, their scalability is
increased and their training
time complexity is improved
compared with those of
ANNs. CNNs have potential
application in IoT security as
they can automatically learn
features from security raw
CNNs have high
computational cost; thus,
implementing them on
resource-constrained
devices to support onboard security systems is
challenging.
Malware detection ;
CNNs can automatically
learn features of raw
security data; therefore,
they can construct an endto-end security model for
IoT systems .
RNNs integrate a temporal
layer to take sequential data and
then learn multi-faceted
variations with the hidden unit
of the recurrent cell .
RNNs and their variants have
achieved excellent
performance in many
applications with sequential
data. In certain cases, IoT
security data consist of
sequential data; thus, RNNs
have potential application in
IoT security.
The main drawback of
RNNs is the issue of
vanishing or exploding
RNNs can classify network
traffic with high accuracy
in detecting malicious
behaviour . RNNs
and their variants show
considerable potential in
improving IoT system
security, specifically for
time series-based threats.
An AE has a hidden layer ℎ,
which has a code to represent
the input. An AE neural
network is divided into two
parts: the encoder function ℎ=
,(-) and the decoder function,
which attempts to reproduce the
input 9 = :(ℎ). The encoder
obtains the input and converts it
into an abstraction, which is
generally termed as a code.
Subsequently, the decoder
acquires the constructed code
that was initially produced to
represent the input to rebuild
the original input.
AEs are potentially important
for feature extraction. AEs
can be effectively used for
representation learning to
learn features in place of the
manually engineered features
used in traditional ML and
reduce dimensionality with
no prior data knowledge.
AEs consume considerable
computational time.
Although AEs can
effectively learn to capture
the characteristics of the
training data, if the training
dataset is not
representative of the
testing dataset, then the
AEs may only complicate
the learning process rather
than represent the
characteristics of the
AEs can be used for
detecting malware .
AE has been combined
with a DBN to establish a
malware detection method
RBMs are deep generative
models developed for
unsupervised learning .
They are completely undirected
models with no link between
any two nodes in the same
Using a feedback mechanism
on RBMs allows for the
extraction of numerous vital
features through an
unsupervised approach.
RBMs have high
computational cost; thus,
implementing them on
resource-constrained IoT
devices to support onboard security systems is
challenging.
RBMs can be used for
network anomaly detection
DBNs consist of stacked RBMs
that execute greedy layer-wise
training to accomplish robust
performance in an unsupervised
environment.
DBNs are unsupervised
learning methods trained
with unlabelled data
iteratively for significant
feature representation.
DBNs present high
computational cost due to
the extensive initialisation
process caused by the large
number of parameters.
DBNs can be used for
malicious attack detection
C. Reinforcement learning (RL) methods for IoT security
Learning from the surrounding environment is one of the first
learning methods humans experience. Humans naturally start
learning by interacting with their environment. RL is inspired
by the psychological and neuroscientific perspectives on animal
behaviour and of the mechanism by which agents can enhance
their control of the environment . RL involves
making an agent learn how to map situations to actions
appropriately to achieve the highest rewards . The agent
does not have previous knowledge of which actions to
implement but has to learn which actions produce the most
rewards by attempting them through trial and error. The
features ‘trial’ and ‘error’ are the main and unique features of
RL. Thus, the agent continues to learn from its experience to
increase its rewards. One of the recent successful RL methods
is the deep Q network . Extensions of deep Q networks
have been suggested, including double Q-learning ,
continuous control with deep RL and prioritised
experience replay .
RL has been implemented to solve several IoT issues. Studies
by proposed an anti-jamming scheme that is based
on reinforcement learning for wideband autonomous cognitive
radios (WACRs). In , information about sweeping jammer
signal and unintentional interference was used to distinguish it
from other WACRs; RL was used with this information to learn
a sub-band selection policy accurately to evade the jammer
signal and interference from other WACRs. Similarly, in ,
an RL method based on Q-learning was trained to effectively
avoid jamming attacks sweeping over a wide spectrum of
hundreds of MHz in real time. In the same direction, used
RL to develop an anti-jamming scheme for cognitive radios and
integrate the scheme with deep CNN to improve the efficiency
of RL in a large number of frequency channels. A similar
scheme against aggressive jamming was proposed using deep
RL in , in which jamming was considered activated in an
aggressive environment, which is normally expected in tactical
mobile networking; the results showed that RL is a promising
method of developing schemes against aggressive jamming.
V. IOT SECURITY LAYERS BASED ON ML AND DL METHODS
In this section, we classify the previous studies on ML and
DL methods for IoT security according to the layers these
methods intend to protect. Even though ML and DL may be
applied to protect more than one layer or the end-to-end system
(which is the advantage of ML and DL methods over other
methods and holds potential future uses), the following
classification is proposed to highlight the conceptualisation of
the ML and DL methods for IoT security. At the end of this
section the technology tools that can essentially enable ML/DL
deployment for IoT security are listed.
A. Perception layer
One of the promising applications of DL methods is physicallayer authentication. Traditional physical-layer authentication
techniques apply assumption checks and relate the randomness
and exclusiveness of the radio channel between “Alice” and
“Bob”, to detect spoofing attacker “Eve” in a wireless network.
Nonetheless, such an approach is not always practical,
specifically in dynamic networks . Wang, Jiang, Lv and
Xiao used a learning model to construct a physical-layer
authentication model that uses past data generated from a
spoofing model as learning vectors to train an extreme learning
machine. The proposed model exhibited improved spoofing
detection performance and consequently achieved considerably
enhanced authentication accuracy compared with that of stateof-the-art methods.
Shi, Liu, Liu and Chen proved that the present Wi-Fi
signals generated by IoT objects can be adopted to detect
distinctive human behavioural and physiological features and
can be utilised to authenticate individuals on the basis of an
The GAN framework
simultaneously trains two
models (i.e. generative and
discriminative models) via an
adversarial process. The
generative model learns the
data distribution and generates
data samples, and the
discriminative model predicts
the possibility that a sample
originates from the training
dataset rather than the
generative model (i.e. evaluates
the instance for authenticity).
In GANs, generating a
sample needs only one pass
through the model, unlike in
DBNs and RBMs in which
an unidentified number of
iterations of a Markov chain
is required .
GAN training is unstable
and difficult. Learning to
generate discrete data by
using GAN is a difficult
task .
GANs can be used to build
an architecture for securing
the cyberspace of IoT
systems .
EDLNs can be accomplished
by merging generative,
discriminative or hybrid
Combining DL classifiers
can help achieve model
diversity, improve model
performance and expand
model generalisation.
The time complexity of the
system can be significantly
increased.
The use of GANs in
securing IoT systems needs
further investigation,
particularly the possibility
of implementing light
homogenous or
heterogeneous classifiers in
a distributed environment
to improve the accuracy
and performance of a
understanding of their daily activities. The authors proposed a
scheme which adopts a single pair of Wi-Fi signals generated
by IoT devices to mine Wi-Fi channel state information and
thus obtain the amplitude and the relative phase for precise user
authentication without the need for user participation. Using
these features, the authors developed a DL model (i.e. Deep
Neural Network (DNN)) to identify the daily human activity
distinctiveness of each individual and subsequently generate a
fingerprint for each user, called Wi-Fi fingerprint, to capture the
distinct characteristics of different users; the proposed DLbased authentication method exhibited high accuracy .
This study validates the potential application of DL algorithms
in constructing authentication systems.
In another study , a scheme against aggressive jamming
was developed using RL, and jamming was considered
activated in an aggressive environment, which is normally
expected in tactical mobile networking. RL was found effective
in developing a method against aggressive jamming .
The research in also considered the issue of jamming
in an IoT network and introduced a centralised approach to
addressing possible jamming attacks in an IoT environment,
which consists of resource-constrained devices. The idea of the
proposed model is to use the IoT access point to protect against
the jamming attacker by distributing its power over the subcarriers in an intelligent manner and using an evolutionarybased algorithm. The proposed method can converge in a
practical iteration number; thus, it can provide a better solution
than a random power allocation strategy.
Along the same direction, two previous studies 
proposed RL-based anti-jamming schemes for WACRs. In
 , the authors used information about sweeping jammer
signal and unintentional interference to distinguish it from those
of other WACRs. This information and RL were combined to
learn a sub-band selection policy accurately to evade the
jammer signal and interference from other WACRs. Similarly,
in , an RL method based on Q-learning was trained to
effectively avoid jamming attacks sweeping over a wide
spectrum of hundreds of MHz in real-time. In the same
direction, used RL to develop an anti-jamming scheme
for cognitive radios and integrate it with deep CNN to improve
the efficiency of RL in a large number of frequency channels.
Incorporating cognitive radio (CR) capability into IoT
devices has paved the way for an innovative research on IoT
systems . Currently, many researchers are conducting
studies on communication and computing in IoT systems.
According to two previous studies , IoT systems
cannot be sustained without comprehensive cognitive
capability because of growing issues. CRs are radio devices that
can learn and change in accordance with their dynamic
environment . The main step towards accomplishing such
cognitive operation is enabling CRs to sense and understand
their working environment. Ideally, CRs should be able to work
over a wide frequency range. However, sensing all required
frequencies in real time is a challenging task, specifically with
the existence of jamming attacks. CRs can become increasingly
useful and reliable communication systems if they can
eliminate the incidence of accidental interference or deliberate
jamming attacks .
B. Network layer
The network layer forms the largest surface of the IoT
system. This layer is responsible for transmitting and routing
data. It provides a ubiquitous access environment to the
perception layer, i.e. data communication and storage
functionalities . Therefore, securing the IoT network layer
should be of high technical priority. Along the same line of
thought, Yavuz proposed a DL-based model to detect the
routing protocol for IoT systems and created a dataset for
training and testing the DL model by using the Cooja IoT
simulator with simulations up to 1000 nodes within 16 networks
to detect three types of attacks, namely decreased rank attack,
hello flood attack and version number attack. The DNN
achieved high performance in detecting the three attacks.
However, the authors did not mention the statistics as to how
many normal and anomalous samples were in the created
dataset. Precision, recall and f-measure were used as evaluation
metrics; however, in model evaluation, they may not reflect the
actual performance of the model and tend to be biased if the
created dataset is imbalanced.
Nobakht, Sivaraman and Boreli proposed an intrusion
detection framework that is implemented at the network level
and constructed ML algorithms to protect smart devices
installed in home environments. They used precision and recall
metrics to measure the performance of the classifiers. However,
the dataset used was unbalanced, with the number of illegal
access samples forming the majority of the samples in the
dataset; thus, both evaluation metrics may not precisely reflect
the model performance. In case of imbalanced data, other
performance metrics such as the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) can be better choice to
evaluate the performance than accuracy, recall and precision
metrics .
A previous study discussed the viability of an RNN
(i.e. large short-term memory [LSTM] network) in the analysis
of network traffic behaviour to detect potential attacks
(malicious behaviour) and confirmed the effectiveness of the
RNN in precisely classifying network traffic to detect malicious
behaviour; thus, the LSTM network can be adopted as a
practical solution in real-world scenarios.
Cañedo and Skjellum used ML to detect anomalies,
specifically training ANN algorithms to detect whether the data
sent from an edge to the smart object in an IoT system are valid
or invalid. They generated the data from the edge to the device
nodes and then inserted invalid and valid data to train the
model; the experimental results showed that the ANN can
effectively detect invalid data. However, diverse and enriched
datasets that contain various data tampering attacks should be
used to train and test the ANN to reconfirm whether it can
maintain high accuracy in practical settings or other advanced
learning algorithms are required. An investigation in this
research direction is recommended to generate enriched
In another study , an intrusion detection system (IDS)
based on a hybrid detection method (i.e. unsupervised ML
method with specification-based method) was used for an IoT
system. For this purpose, the author proposed a local intrusion
detection method at the local node by using a specificationbased intrusion detection approach; the method examined the
behaviour of the host nodes and sent analysis results to the
global node, which used an ML-based intrusion detection
method (i.e. unsupervised optimum-path forest algorithm 
for clustering the data from local node on the basis of the
MapReduce design ).
A generative model (i.e. unsupervised model) using AEs was
proposed in to detect malware network-based anomaly in
cybersystems. The AEs were trained to learn the latent
representation of a diverse feature set, and they received a
feature vector extracted from the cybersystems; compared with
SVM and KNN, the AEs exhibited improved detection
performance .
Wi-Fi technology is an IoT-enabling technology, especially
for smart homes . Wi-Fi technology is of practical
importance to the expansion of IoT . A previous study
 aimed to detect impersonation attacks in a Wi-Fi
environment by developing a method called weighted feature
selection for extracting and selecting deep features, which were
combined with the features generated by a stacked AE (SAE)
algorithm. The combined features were then fed into a neural
network to train it for classifying the input data into two classes
(i.e. impersonation or normal) . This combination of
unsupervised DL algorithm (i.e. SAE) and supervised DL
algorithm (i.e. ANN) showed high detection accuracy,
confirming the potential applications of deep algorithms in
securing Wi-Fi networks from impersonation attacks. A similar
study used a combination of two unsupervised algorithms
(SAE) for mining features and k-means clustering for
categorising the input into two classes: benign and malicious.
The research in developed a network anomaly
detection model that can overcome the inherent challenges in
developing such a model. These challenges include the
generation of labelled data required for the effective training of
the model because a network traffic dataset is multi-part and
irregular. The second challenge is the constant evolution of
anomaly behaviour with time. Therefore, the model should be
dynamically adapted to detect any new form of attacks and
generalised to detect the anomaly in different network
environments. To solve these challenges, the researchers in
 proposed a learning model that is based on a
discriminative RBM, which they selected due to its capability
to combine generative models with suitable classification
accuracy to detect network anomaly in a semi-supervised
fashion even with incomplete training data. However, their
experimental results showed that the classification performance
of the discriminative RBM was affected when the classifier was
tested on a network dataset that differed from the network
dataset on which the classifier was trained. This finding should
be further investigated, and how a classifier can be generalised
to detect an anomaly in different network environments should
be further studied.
Saied, Overill and Radzik used an ANN to detect
known and unknown DDoS attacks in a real-time environment.
The proposed defence technique aimed to thwart fake packets
and permit real packets to pass through. They assessed the
ANN’s performance in unknown DDoS detection when it is
trained with old and updated datasets and reported that the
further they trained the algorithm with the latest features of
known DDoS attacks, the more they improved the detection
probabilities for known and unknown DDoS attacks. The ANN
algorithm learns from training samples and then detects zeroday attack features, which are comparable to the features on
which it was trained .
Chen, Zhang and Maharjan developed a DL-based
model for malicious attack detection to secure mobile edge
computing. The approach used a DBN for automatic detection,
and the model exhibited improved accuracy in malware
detection compared with ML-based algorithms, confirming the
effectiveness of the automatic feature learning characteristic of
DL compared with traditional feature engineering methods.
Meidan et al. implemented ML algorithms for precise
IoT device identification by utilising network traffic features,
which are then fed into a multi-stage classifier. The classifier
categorises the devices that are connected to the network as IoT
or non-IoT devices; the ML algorithms identify unauthorised
links of IoT devices automatically and accordingly alleviate the
disruptions that may occur due to threats.
In a previous study , the abnormal behaviour of IoT
objects was profiled, and the generated dataset from profiling
was used to train the classifier to detect abnormal behaviour.
The author investigated how a partial variation (assuming that
the attacker can utilise such changes for malicious purposes) of
sensed data can influence the accuracy of the learning algorithm
and used SVM and k-means clustering as experimental cases
for examining the impact of such changes on the detection
accuracy of both ML algorithms. The results showed that both
algorithms (i.e. SVM and k-means) suffered from detection
accuracy drops. The zero-day attacks are mostly variations of
existing attacks; thus, the accuracy of the classifier in detecting
variations and changes in the dataset is research topic for future
investigation.
A system called ‘IoT SENTINEL’, which is based on the RF
classification algorithm, was proposed in to recognise the
types of devices connected to an IoT system automatically and
execute an action to restrain any of vulnerable connections
accordingly to reduce damage that may be caused by
compromised devices.
A previous study developed an IDS for IoT by
combining fuzzy c-means clustering and the feature
selection method PCA . The results of the study indicated
that the proposed method can increase detection effectiveness.
In , the authors proposed a framework to recognise all
potential attack paths and alleviate the effects of attacks on the
IoT system; the proposed framework contains a graphical
security model. The framework consists of five connected
stages starting with data processing, in which the information
from the system and the security metrics is fed and processed.
In the second stage, which is the security model generation, a
gap model is generated; this model contains all potential attack
paths in the IoT system; an attack path identifies the structure
of the nodes that the intruder can compromise to gain access to
the required node. In the third and fourth stages, the IoT
network, including the attack paths, is visualised (i.e. security
visualisation) and analysed (i.e. security analysis), respectively.
Finally, the security model is updated on the basis of the
analysis of the attack paths and patterns captured in the previous
stages. However, this study used basic statistical analysis to
obtain the security model; therefore, whether the proposed
framework can be improved by integrating it with intelligent
methods, such as ML or DL methods, should be investigated.
In , a solution was proposed to detect and restrain
malware diffusion in an IoT network. The solution is based on
fog computing, which can simultaneously maximise malware
detection and minimise the possibility of privacy breach. The
proposed malware detection system was constructed using an
IDS, and deployment was accomplished at cloud and fog
computing to avoid the restrictions on IDS deployment in smart
objects . The authors also presented a framework to show
the possible application of malware dissemination restraint in
IoT networks.
C. Application layer
Currently, most IoT services have application and user
interfaces; for example, the Android platform is becoming a
vital element for enabling the IoT system . In the related
security literature, a previous study . showed the effective
performance of DL in accurately detecting Android malware,
and the authors of the study constructed a DL model to learn
features from Android apps. Subsequently, the learning model
was used to identify unspecified Android malware; the authors
showed the effectiveness of using DL in Android malware
detection in terms of performance accuracy and time efficiency,
indicating that DL can be adapted to real-world applications.
A past work proposed an Android malware detection
method that utilises a CNN. With the application of the CNN,
the significant features related to malware detection are learnt
automatically from the raw data, thereby eliminating the need
for manual feature engineering. The main advantage of using
DL algorithms, such as CNNs, is that the network is trained to
learn suitable features and execute classification conjointly,
eliminating the extraction process required in traditional ML
and consequently providing an end-to-end model .
The study in proposed an architecture for securing the
cyberspace of IoT systems, and the proposed architecture
involves training ML algorithms to classify the system
behaviour as normal or abnormal. They used GAN algorithms,
which were integrated into the proposed architecture for
preliminary study, whose results showed the effectiveness of
DL-based architecture in detecting abnormal system behaviour.
Cybersecurity remains to be a serious challenge, especially
with the steadily increasing number of objects connecting to the
cyberspace, such as IoT. Cyberattacks, including zero-day
incessantly
consequently,
vulnerabilities and opportunities open to attackers increase with
the rapid growth of IoT. Many of these attacks are minor
variations of formerly identified cyberattacks . Therefore,
the recent improvements in effective learning algorithms are
significant. Effective learning algorithms can be trained to
adapt to attack variations in the cyberspace with high-level
feature abstraction capability; thus, they can provide resilient
solutions to the variations of formerly identified cyberattacks or
new attacks . A previous study proposed a DL model
to enhance cybersecurity and enable attack detection in IoT
systems and verified the appropriateness of the DL model in
securing the cyberspace of IoT systems. Similarly, 
proposed a distributed DL model to deliver accurate protection
against cyberattacks and threats in fog-to-things computing and
used an SAE algorithm to construct their learning model. The
authors confirmed that the DL models are more suitable for
such cyberattack protection than are traditional methods in
terms of scalability, accuracy and false alarm rate.
Table 3 shows the comparison and summary of studies on
ML and DL for IoT security.
D. Enabling technology for ML/DL deployment for IoT
On the one hand, realising ML/DL to construct an
intelligence-based security for IoT systems can be practically
challenging
requirements are required to implement such complex
algorithms. On the other hand, the recent advancements in
computational capability of tiny devices and in several ML/DL
implementation
successfully
implementing these methods onboard devices, such as
smartphones , or in fog and edge computing platforms
 . As shown in Figure 10 the technology tools that can
essentially enable ML/DL deployment for IoT security can be
generally listed as a large growth of IoT data, robust software
frameworks for facilitating the development of security model
based on ML/DL methods and sophisticated hardware
equipment to deploy the developed security model.
Large growth of IoT data: The large growth will result in
producing large-volume data. The data contains useful
information about the system behaviour under different modes,
that is, ‘normal and attack modes’. The current volume of data
is considered larger than that in the past. Data are the main
elements for successful implementing ML/DL-based systems.
Therefore, additional data about system behaviour, which can
be used to successfully enable ML/DL deployment for IoT
security, are produced with the continued growth of IoT
systems. However, several challenges related to creating
security data remain. These challenges are discussed in the
challenges and future direction section.
Robust software frameworks: A recent development of
ML/DL has resulted in introducing several dedicated ML/DL
implementation frameworks and libraries that can empower
ML/DL deployment for IoT security that can enable ML/DL
deployment for IoT security. The learning algorithms are
continuously developing. However, building and deploying
them successfully can be challenging without effective
frameworks and dedicated libraries. Currently, several
frameworks allow the building of models that can offer an
enhanced level of abstraction with minimal programming
Table 3 Comparison and summary of studies on ML and DL for IoT security
Attack surfaces
Threats detected
or security application
Supervised approaches
Unsupervised
approaches
Supervised
approaches
Unsupervised
approaches
approaches
algorithms
clustering
Perception
Applicatio
Routing attack detection
Jamming attacks
False data injection attacks
Intrusion detection
Data tampering
Spoofing attack detection
Jamming attacks
Malware detection
Impersonation attacks
Impersonation attacks
Cyberattacks
Cyberattacks
DDoS attack detection
Malicious attack detection
Authentication
Malware detection
IoT device identification
(authorisation)
abnormal behaviour
Authorisation
Intrusion detection
complications. These ML/DL frameworks and dedicated
libraries support several programming languages and are built
with a GPU to optimise the training process of DL algorithms.
 . Consequently, these libraries can enable the ML/DL
deployment for IoT security by providing an efficient and easy
implementation of ML/DL. Therefore, researchers and
scientists on security requirements mostly focus on applying
and optimising such algorithms rather than building them from
scratch which can be time-consuming and entail high costs.
These libraries include TensorFlow , convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding , Theano
 , deeplearning4j , Torch , Neon and MXNet
 (for additional DL Libraries, see ).
Effective deployment strategies: The ML/DL model for IoT
security can be deployed on-board, on cloud computing or on
edge computing. The search for the optimal deployment
strategy is vital for the ML/DL-based model implementation in
real life to secure IoT devices and systems. The deployment of
ML/DL for IoT system security must consider the limited
resource of IoT devices (i.e. limited computational power and
memory size), real-time threats detection and response and
accessibility to frequent updating of security models (updating
the model to detect newly emerging threats).
For the limited resource of IoT devices, offloading the
ML/DL execution can be a practical solution in terms of
computational power, memory size and performance and a
suitable means for regular updates of the ML/DL model.
However, offloading may lead to high latency which may
not satisfy the required real-time detection systems for practical
IoT systems. The second choice for deploying ML/DL for IoT
system security can be accomplished by deploying the ML/DL
security model on the IoT device which is not concerned with
communication quality . However, deploying ML/DL on
the IoT device remain challenging. The main feature of IoT
devices is limited, thereby indicating limited computational
power and memory size. However, applying ML/DL-based
computational
consumption and sizable memory to store the model. Moreover,
current ML/DL frameworks are commonly built on third-party
libraries, which renders the migration to onboard deployment
extra challenging .
On the one hand, the abovementioned solution can still be
optimised in the future to successfully satisfy the requirements
for deploying ML/DL for IoT system security. On the other
hand, edge computing can bridge the gap between the
deployment of cloud computing with powerful resources but
high latency and the onboard deployment with no latency but
limited resources. The deployment of ML/DL for IoT system
security using edge computing can enable effective
computation power over onboard deployment that is executed
at the edge of the network. Therefore, the processing is
performed near the data sources and has less latency than the
deployment on the cloud. Edge computing can process
downstream data from cloud services to IoT devices and
upstream data from IoT devices to cloud services (e.g.
smartphone that operates between body sensors and the cloud)
 . By implementing an edge computing framework, the
ML/DL security model for the IoT system can be placed near
the network edge, operate as guards to detect malicious
behaviour, secure devices and reduce the severity of
eavesdropping threats by approaching the IoT devices .
Figure 10 Illustration the technology tools that can essentially enable ML/DL deployment for IoT security
VI. ISSUES, CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we present a list of Issues, challenges and
future directions for using ML and DL methods to mitigate
security weakness IoT systems, which are classified based on
data, learning strategies, IoT environments, inherent ML and
DL Challenges, opportunities to integrated ML/DL with other
technology, computational complexity issues and security vs
other trades off requirements.
A. IoT data related issues
1) Availability of security related datasets
The general purpose of learning algorithms is capturing the
patterns from the available partial training dataset and then
constructing a model to categorise the new inputs on the basis
of the learnt patterns. In this process, a question to investigate
is the volume of training data required to train the learning
algorithms sufficiently for these algorithms to be generalised
for new input in the given domain . In the context of the
application of ML and DL for IoT security, the major challenge
encountered by ML and DL, in general, and the supervised ML
and DL methods in particular, is how to extract or generate a
realistic and high-quality training dataset that contains various
possible attack types. A high-quality training dataset is an
essential ingredient to train the ML and DL algorithms
accurately. The training datasets should be comprehensive and
diverse. They should contain information that reflects nearly all
of the strategies of real-world attacks because these training
datasets are the basis for obtaining model knowledge. This
condition can directly influence model accuracy. Given that IoT
systems generate large volumes of data, real-time data
streaming data quality maintenance remains a challenge.
A vital future research direction is the use of crowd-sourcing
methods for generating datasets related to IoT threats and
attacks. Rich datasets that include nearly all attack patterns
should be generated for training ML and DL algorithms.
Furthermore, such datasets can be used to benchmark the
accuracy of newly proposed algorithms against that of existing
methods for attack detection. Although generating collaborative
IoT threat datasets, which can be continuously updated with
new attacks, is of great importance, it is challenging technically
due to the wide diversity of IoT devices. Furthermore, a privacy
issue prevails because datasets may contain sensitive or critical
information that are not meant to be shared publicly,
specifically for industrial and medical IoT devices.
2) Learning to secure IoT with low-quality data
Most of the proposed DL representations are generally for
high-quality data . However, IoT systems comprise
heterogeneous connected devices, and large-scale streaming,
leading to the possibility of high-noise and corrupted data to be
gathered from such systems . Therefore, learning to
secure IoT systems requires effective DL models that can
handle and learn from low-quality data, particularly when
obtaining high-quality training data is practically infeasible.
Therefore, multi-modal and effective DL models should be
developed to secure IoT systems with large-scale streaming,
heterogeneous and high-noise data.
3) Augmentation of IoT security data to improve learning
algorithm performance
Intuitively, richer the data that ML and DL algorithms have
to learn from, the more accurate they can be . Although
obtaining a large dataset is relatively easy in certain domains,
such as image and natural language processing, acquiring a
large dataset for ML and DL is relatively difficult in the domain
of data security in IoT systems. Therefore, finding alternative
means to obtain substantial amounts of data in this domain is
desirable. Data augmentation is used to expand limited data by
generating new samples from existing ones. In the
augmentation of IoT security data, the limited amount of
existing IoT security samples can be utilised to generate new
The key challenge in data augmentation is producing new
data samples that preserve the appropriate data distribution for
each class, normally necessitating domain knowledge . In view of this problem, suitable methods for the
augmentation of IoT security data should be investigated to
improve the classification accuracy of learning methods.
B. Learning Strategies for Effective IoT Security
1) Zero-day attacks on IoT
The main advantage of ML and DL methods over traditional
security methods, such as the threat signature-based method, is
their capability to detect zero-day attacks. Zero-day attacks,
which are evolving threats, were previously anonymous to
detection systems. These attacks have varying potentials, such
as metamorphic malware attacks that automatically reprogram
themselves each time they are circulated or transmitted.
Consequently, detecting these malware attacks by traditional
methods is difficult . The number of emerging IoT
security threats ., such as zero-day attacks, is continuously
growing at an alarming rate . For example, the Mirai botnet
and its derivations are becoming an alarming threat to the
security of IoT systems . The development of the recent
derivation of the Mirai botnet, Satori, proves that other
malicious IoT botnets are emerging to exploit known and zeroday vulnerabilities .
On the one hand, the recent derivations of Mirai suggest that
IoT malware will continue growing because Mirai’s open
source code allows creators of IoT malware to produce new
variants of Mirai that exploit known and zero-day
vulnerabilities to attack IoT devices . On the other
hand, having the ability to monitor and control IoT security
intelligently provides an important solution to these new attacks
or the zero-day attack and its variations. ML and DL algorithms
are powerful analysis tools for learning normal or abnormal
behaviour on the basis of the interactions among the IoT
systems and devices within the IoT ecosystem. The input data
from each element of an IoT system and its devices can be
collected and examined to determine normal patterns of
interaction and consequently identify malicious behaviour at an
early stage. Moreover, in view of the capability of ML and DL
methods to learn from existing samples to predict future
unknown samples intelligently, these methods have the
potential to predict new attacks, which, in many cases, are
simple derivations and mutations of previous attacks.
Therefore, IoT security systems need to advance from the
simple facilitation of the secure communication between
devices to intelligent security enabled by DL and ML methods.
2) Lifelong Learning for learning IoT threats
One of main characteristics of the IoT environment is
dynamism; several new things join and numerous objects leave
the system given the numerous and diverse IoT devices used to
manage different applications and scenarios. Given IoT’s
nature, normal structures and patterns of IoT systems may
considerably change with time, and threats and attacks targeting
the IoT system may likewise persistently vary with time.
Therefore, distinguishing between normal and abnormal IoT
system behaviour cannot be always pre-defined. Thus, the
frequent updating of security models is required to handle and
understand IoT modifications. In an actual IoT environment,
the short-term learning of threats and attacks targeting IoT
systems may be ineffective for long-term protection.
Consequently, the concept of lifelong learning can hold realistic
significance in long-term real-world applications. The concept
of lifelong machine learning is directed towards
the construction of a model that can perform the retraining
process repeatedly for the learning of new emerging patterns
related to each behaviour. The model should be able to adapt to
and learn from new environments continuously .
Researchers have reported that the further they trained the
algorithm with the latest features of known DDoS attacks, the
more they improved the detection probabilities for known and
unknown DDoS attacks. The ANN algorithm learns from
training samples and then detects zero-day attack features,
which are comparable to the features on which it was trained
 . Therefore, frequently updating the training samples is
important for developing effective real-world security models
for IoT-related threats.
3) Transfer learning
Transfer learning refers to the idea of transferring knowledge
from a domain with sufficient training data to a domain with
insufficient training data. The main purpose of transfer learning
is to reduce the time and effort required for the new learning
process. The main concern in transfer learning deals with the
part of knowledge that can be transferred as knowledge that is
common between the domains. Therefore, transferring such
knowledge is useful. Meanwhile, transferring knowledge that is
specific for a particular domain and does not hold any
importance to other domains must be avoided .
The concept of transfer learning can be useful for securing
IoT systems, which comprise different elements, such as
devices, WSNs and cloud computing. The security of these
elements has already been extensively studied, and wellestablished training samples on different attacks have been
generated. Consequently, if transfer learning is accomplished
successfully from the elements of the IoT, then such learning
may significantly improve the security performance of the
entire IoT system with less effort and cost in constructing
training samples.
C. ML and DL for IoT security in interdependent,
interconnected and interactive environments
In this section, we present the opportunities for using ML and
DL methods to mitigate internal security issues arising from the
structures of IoT systems, which are interdependent,
interconnected and interactive environments.
As explained previously, with the rapid increase in the
number of IoT devices, the collaboration among devices is
becoming increasingly autonomous; i.e. they require reduced
human involvement. IoT devices no longer simply interact with
one another like devices within a network. Many current IoT
devices are designed to achieve the vision of a smart city, in
which many of the devices are controlled by other devices or
depend on the operational condition of other devices or the
surrounding environment
The advantage of using ML and DL in securing IoT devices
in such an environment is that these methods can be developed
to go beyond simply understanding the operational behaviour
of specific devices to understanding the operational behaviour
of entire systems and their devices.
Moreover, IoT systems connect billions of devices; thus, not
only the surface of the attack but also the magnitude of the
attack should be considered in IoT systems. With these densely
interconnected devices, an infected thing can result in a
destructive attack that infects a considerable number of things
at a large scale, even affecting a substantial part of a city.
For interconnected systems, the benefit of using ML and DL
for securing IoT devices is that ML the DL methods can provide
intelligence to systems for detecting abnormal behaviours of a
thing or groups of things and thus automatically respond at an
early stage. This strategy may mitigate the impact of the attack
and lead to learning for the prevention of future occurrences of
similar attacks on the basis of a solid understanding of the
current causes.
Along the same direction, ML and DL can be effective for
securing IoT devices in an interactive environment In SIoT,
suitable instructions should be established for objects to choose
their appropriate friends as these impacts the service outputs
built on top of the social network . The advancement in
SIoT increases critical security and privacy concerns regarding
the disclosure of sensitive information related to the objects
ML and DL methods can potentially contribute to securing
the integration of social networking into IoT. However, this
direction is still at its infancy and needs further investigation.
D. ML and DL Challenges
1) Possible misuse of ML and DL algorithms by attackers
(breaking cryptographic implementations by ML and DL
Recent advances in ML and DL algorithms have enabled
them to be used in breaking cryptographic implementations. For
example, two previous studies used ML to break
cryptographic systems using SVMs, which outperformed the
template attack. Similarly, the authors in investigated
different DL algorithms to break cryptographic systems and
reported that DL can break cryptographic systems. Specifically,
CNN and AE algorithms performed better than did ML
algorithms (SVM and RF) and the rational profiling method
template attack.
A previous study showed that RNNs can learn decryption.
Specifically, an RNN with a 3000-unit LSTM can learn the
Enigma machine decryption function by learning effective
internal representations of these ciphers; the results suggested
that DL algorithms, such as RNNs, can capture and learn the
algorithmic representations of polyalphabetic ciphers for
cryptanalysis .
2) Privacy of ML and DL
Recent studies have shown that ML and DL
algorithms can leak data. Privacy-preserving ML and DL
algorithms are vulnerable to dominant attacks . A study
showed that federated, distributed or even decentralised DL
methods are easily broken and unable to maintain training set
privately . The authors developed an attack to manipulate
the real-time nature of a learning process in which the adversary
was allowed to train a GAN that creates samples similar to those
in the targeted training dataset, which was supposed to be
private; the samples produced by the GAN were supposed to
originate from the same distribution as the training dataset
 . Therefore, DL algorithms themselves are vulnerable to
potential attacks when generating the training data.
Consequently, the attackers can build a DL system that can
recognise how DL-based detection methods work and thus
generate attacks which cannot be detected easily. This area of
research is still at its infancy and needs to be investigated
further to find the appropriate solution to such an issue.
3) Security of ML and DL methods
Researchers have recently investigated various threats that
can be launched against ML and DL algorithms. These
algorithms are susceptible to many threats that either decrease
the accuracy and performance of the classifiers or expose
sensitive data used in the training process of the classifiers.
Examples of the potential threats that can be utilised by
attackers include poisoning, evasion, impersonation and
inversion attacks s . Poisoning is a threat in which the
attacker injects malicious samples with incorrect labels into the
training dataset to modify training data distribution, decrease
the discrimination power of the classifier in distinguishing
between the normal and abnormal behaviour of the system, and
ultimately decrease classifier accuracy and performance. Such
attacks can be potentially launched against ML algorithms that
need to dynamically update their training sets and learning
models to adapt to the new attacks features, such as ML
algorithms for malware detection . The second
possible attack on ML and DL is the evasion attack. This attack
is based on generating adversarial samples by modifying the
attack features to be slightly different from the malicious
samples used to train the model; consequently, the probability
of the attack being detected by the classifier is decreased, and
the attack avoids detection, thereby reducing the performance
of the system remarkably . The third possible attack is
impersonation. In this attack, the attacker attempts to mimic the
data samples to deceive the ML algorithms to classifying the
original samples with different labels incorrectly from the
impersonated ones . The last possible attack is
inversion, which exploits the application program interfaces
presented to the users by the current ML platform to collect
roughly the necessary information about the pre-trained ML
models . Subsequently, this extracted information is
used to perform reverse engineering to obtain the sensitive data
of users. This kind of attack violates the privacy of users by
exploring the data, which are sensitive in certain cases (e.g.
patients’ medical data), inserted in the ML models .
4) Insights into DL architecture
ML and DL methods change the means through which a
computer solves a problem, from instructing the computer what
to do programmatically to training the computer what to do
intelligently (learning from experience). However, despite the
progress achieved by DL algorithms in many applications, a
theory that can describe why and how DNNs run depending on
their architecture has not yet been established. Such a theory
can be significant in comprehending the quantity of data or the
number of the layers required to achieve the desired
performance. The theory can also facilitate the reduction of the
resources (e.g. time, energy and memory) required to construct
a DL model , thereby providing a sophisticated but
lightweight DL model that is useful for resource-constrained
systems, such as IoT devices. Establishing a lightweight DL
model is a significant step towards the implementation of onboard security systems for IoT devices. Thus, this topic needs
further exploration in future studies.
E. Integrating DL/ML with Other Technology for IoT
1) Implementation of ML and DL at the edge
Edge computing has become an essential technology in
providing IoT services. Edge computing immigrates service
provision from the cloud to the network edge, which holds a
potential solution in the IoT era . Implementing DL
and ML at the edge for IoT security can minimise delays, realise
near-real-time detection systems, improve energy efficiency
and enhance the scalability of lightweight IoT objects. Such
implementation can offer an effective framework for data
processing with reduced network traffic load. However, edge
computing is still at its infancy, and its implementation is
accompanied by several challenges. Further research needs to
be conducted to explore and develop effective strategies for
implementing DL and ML at the edge to provide real-time IoT
2) Synergic integration of ML and DL with blockchain for
IoT security
Blockchain
technology
cryptography to secure transactions within a network. A
blockchain delivers a decentralised database (called ‘digital
ledger’) of transactions, of which each node on the network is
aware . The network is a chain of devices (e.g. computers)
that all need to endorse a transaction before it can be verified
and recorded . In other words, a blockchain is simply a
data structure that allows the production and distribution of a
‘tamper-proof digital ledger’ of exchanges . The
decentralised architecture of a blockchain is antithetical to the
security issues that are inherent in a centralised architecture.
decentralised
architecture,
transaction
authentication depends on the approval of many parties in
systems rather than of a single authority, as is common practice
in centralised systems. Therefore, blockchain systems can
render transactions relatively more secure and transparent than
those in centralised systems. IoT systems are distributed by
nature. Thus, the distributed digital ledger blockchain can play
a significant role in securing IoT systems.
ML and DL are concerned with training machines to learn
from real-world samples to act autonomously and intelligently.
The goal of ML and DL methods is to allow the machines to
become smart machines. The simplified definitions of both
technologies (i.e. ML/DL and blockchain) reveal that a synergic
relation can be obtained by combining both technologies to
achieve a fully functional IoT security system. Firstly, ML and
DL may assist blockchain technology in realising smart
decision making and improved evaluation, filtering and
comprehension of data and devices within a network to
facilitate the effective implementation of blockchain for
enhanced trust and security services for IoT systems. Secondly,
blockchain may assist ML and DL by providing a large volume
of data because blockchain is a decentralised database that
stresses the importance of data distribution among several
nodes on a specific network. The availability of big data is a
main factor in establishing an accurate ML- and DL-based
model. Therefore, with the increase in the volume of data to be
analysed, particularly security-related data, the accuracy of ML
and DL methods can be considerably increased and generalised
to develop a security model with enhanced reliability.
F. Computational complexity
IoT devices are resource-constrained devices. The resources
of IoT devices (things), such as memory, computation and
energy, which are required for ML and DL deployment, are
limited and create a crucial bottleneck in the adoption of DL
and ML for real-time on-board implementation . The
current solutions of computation offloading and execution in
the cloud suffer from high wireless energy overhead. Moreover,
the availability of the applications for such solutions is based
on the network conditions. Consequently, if the network
connectivity is weak, then cloud offloading will be
unattainable, leading to the unavailability of the applications.
Another recent solution which may advance the implementation
of ML and DL for IoT security is the development of edge
computing GPUs (mobile GPU). However, GPUs on mobile
can still consume considerable mobile battery reserves .
On the one hand, enhancing GPU-based solutions and
proposing an efficient offloading strategy are important in
advancing the implementation of ML- and DL-based IoT
security to enhance the performance of IoT DL applications in
IoT systems with cloud and edge computing . On the other
hand, ML and DL frameworks that can efficiently reduce
computational complexity should be developed. Developing
real-time detection and protection systems are important for
providing effective security mechanisms, particularly for largescale IoT systems. Thus, reducing computational complexity
holds practical importance in future research.
G. Security vs Trade-offs in IoT Applications
The existing security trade-offs, such as that between
availability and safety, are another challenge to the achievement
of a robust security scheme for IoT systems. Moreover, the
importance of various security trade-offs differs from one IoT
application to another. For example, an IoMT system should
provide a security scheme, but it should also offer the flexibility
of being accessible in emergency situations. When a patient
with an implanted IoMT, which monitors his or her health
conditions, is suddenly in an emergency situation, easy access
to the IoMT device is the first priority in saving his or her life.
Therefore, creating a design that balances providing a robust
security scheme to protect the implanted IoMT and
guaranteeing accessibility of such devices during emergency
situations is necessary. Such a trade-off between security and
safety poses a critical challenge. An appropriate balance
between patient safety and device security is an important
parameter to be considered in the design phase . ML and
DL methods mainly aim to provide intelligence and contextual
awareness to devices; therefore, these methods can better
mitigate security trade-off issues than can traditional access
control methods.
Similarly, other applications of IoT have different security
trade-offs in accordance with the diverse implemented
environments. Given the required security level and security
trade-offs in specified IoT applications, security design should
satisfy different operation modes within the given applications.
Future research may utilise the intelligence capability of ML
and DL methods to design security schemes that can effectively
satisfy various security trade-offs under different operation
modes within a specified application.
VII. CONCLUSION
The requirements for securing IoT devices have become
complex because several technologies, from physical devices
and wireless transmission to mobile and cloud architectures,
need to be secured and combined with other technologies. The
advancement in ML and DL has allowed for the development
of various powerful analytical methods that can be used to
enhance IoT security.
In this survey, various IoT security threats and IoT attack
surfaces are discussed. A comprehensive review of the potential
uses of ML and DL methods in IoT security is provided. These
methods are then compared at the end of each subsection in
terms of their advantages, disadvantages and applications in IoT
security. Afterward, the uses of the ML and DL methods for
securing the main IoT layers (i.e. perception, network and
application layers) are reviewed. Finally, an extensive list of
issues, challenges and future directions related to the use of ML
and DL in effectively securing IoT systems are presented and
classified according to data; learning strategies; ML and DL for
IoT security in the interdependent, interconnected and
interactive environments of IoT systems; diverse security tradeoffs in IoT applications and synergic integration of ML and DL
with blockchain for IoT security.
This survey aims to provide a useful manual that can
encourage researchers to advance the security of IoT systems
from simply enabling secure communication among IoT
components to developing intelligent end-to-end IoT securitybased approaches.
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by NPRP
grant #8-408-2-172 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a
member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein are
solely the responsibility of the authors.
List of Acronyms
Description
Combination IPv6and Low-power
Wireless Personal Area Networks
Auto-encoders
Artificial Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Closed-Circuit Television
Cyber-physical System
Association Rules
Deep Learning
Deep Belief Network
Deep Neural Network
Denial of Service
Distributive Denial of Service
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Decision Tree
Ensemble Learning
Ensemble Deep Learning Networks
Generative Adversarial Network
Global Positioning System
Graphics Processing Unit
Internet of Things
Internet of Medical Things
K-nearest neighbour
Local Network Area
Long Short-term Memory
(Man-in-the-Middle
Naive Bayes
Near Field Communication
Principal Component Analysis
Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Rectified Linear Units
Recurrent Neural Network
Random-Forest
Radio Frequency Identification
Social Internet of Things
structured query language
Sensor networks
Support Vector Machines
ultra-wide bandwidth
Worldwide Network Area
Wireless Sensor Network
Wireless Fidelity