The Hubbard Model at Inﬁnite Dimensions:
Thermodynamic and Transport Properties
Th. Pruschke, D.L. Cox
Department of Physics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210-1106
M. Jarrell
Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0011
 
We present results on thermodynamic quantities, resistivity and optical conductivity for the Hubbard model on a simple hypercubic lattice in inﬁnite dimensions.
Our results for the paramagnetic phase display the features expected from an intuitive analysis of the one-particle spectra and substantiate the similarity of the physics
of the Hubbard model to those of heavy fermion systems.
The calculations were performed using an approximate solution to the singleimpurity Anderson model, which is the key quantity entering the solution of the
Hubbard model in this limit. To establish the quality of this approximation we compare its results, together with those obtained from two other widely used methods,
to essentially exact quantum Monte Carlo results.
PACS numbers: 65.50.+m, 71.10.+x, 71.30.h, 72.15.-v, 72.20.-i, 75.20.Hr
Typeset Using REVTEX
I. INTRODUCTION
The limit of inﬁnite spatial dimensions has turned out to be a natural starting point for
obtaining sensible approximate , and even essentially exact solutions of models
of highly correlated electronic systems. In this limit the dynamics of the system become
essentially local which considerably simpliﬁes the task of calculating quantities of interest
 .
In the present paper we want to extend our previous study of the Hubbard Hamiltonian
i,σcj,σ + h.c.
in the limit of inﬁnite spatial dimensions d = ∞. The notation in (1) is the standard one
and the limit d →∞has to be taken such that t∗2 ≡d⟨t2
k⟩k = constant. In one of us
demonstrated that the one-particle Green’s function, or equivalently the proper one-particle
self energy of the model (1), in this limit is obtained from the equation
z −ω −ǫ −Σ(z)
Here, the Green’s function G(z) is the solution of a single-impurity Anderson model with an
eﬀective hybridization given by 
Gii(z) + Σ(z) −z −µ
and A0(ǫ) denotes the free one-particle density of states (DOS). Note that for a given site i
equation (3) deﬁnes an eﬀective potential due to the presence of the lattice. Equations (2)
and (3) thus constitute the “natural” mean ﬁeld theory for the Hubbard model (1) .
This mean ﬁeld theory is of course independent of the lattice structure. For reasons
of convenience, however, we shall concentrate on a simple hypercubic lattice with N sites
and transfer along the d-coordinate axes only, i.e. tk = −2
cos(mkn). The latter
assumption obviously oversimpliﬁes the situation when one wants to consider transfer beyond
nearest neighbours, but it has the advantage that the free single-particle DOS
acquires the simple Gaussian form 
A0(ǫ) = exp(−ǫ2)/√π
when t∗2 =
2 = 1. The latter convention will set the energy scale used for the remainder
of this paper. For nearest-neighbour transfer and q = (π, π, . . .) one has perfect nesting.
However, any t2 ̸= 0 destroys this property and thus allows us to continuously bias quantities
which depend on the perfect nesting like magnetic instabilities.
The situation with nearest-neighbour transfer only was explored in refs. 5&7 using a
quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method to solve the impurity Anderson model. We could thus
obtain essentially exact results for the model (1) and discuss magnetic and single-particle
properties for a variety of model parameters and temperatures. The results at half ﬁlling
ne = 1 can most conveniently be presented in the phase diagram in Fig. 1: For small values of U and high temperatures one ﬁnds a paramagnetic metal with correlation enhanced
Fermi-liquid parameters. By increasing U for a ﬁxed temperature a crossover through a
semi-metallic like (shaded region) into a Mott-Hubbard like phase with exponentially reduced DOS at µ takes place. Note, that one never ﬁnds a true gap in the DOS for this
“phase”. Nevertheless, transport and thermodynamic properties will essentially behave like
an insulator. By lowering the temperature for ﬁxed U, one encounters an antiferromagnetic
transition which is connected with a gap in the one-particle DOS due to the cell-doubling
associated with the antiferromagnetic state. As mentioned earlier, this phase can be shifted
to lower temperatures or even be completely suppressed by magnetically frustrating the
system by a ﬁnite t2. In this case the dotted line in the antiferromagnetic region in Fig. 1
becomes important. It visualizes the behaviour of the “MI”-crossover for a ﬁxed U when
the temperature is lowered and shows an interesting and unexpected reentrance behaviour.
As we will discuss later, this is connected to a competition between the “Mott-Hubbard”
phase and the Kondo eﬀect also present in this model .
This Kondo eﬀect is apparent as the temperature approaches some small energy scale.
There are two ways we may deﬁne such an energy scale. First, we can obtain an “eﬀective
impurity” Kondo-scale TK from the self-consistently embedded impurity by calculating the
screened local moment on the site i, Tχ(T)ii, and then extracting TK by ﬁtting this result to
the universal numerical renormalization group results of Krishnamurthy et al. . We ﬁnd
that TK deﬁned in this way is strongly temperature dependent, increasing with decreasing T
 . This temperature dependence of TK can easily be understood – and is in fact expected
– from the obvious temperature dependence of the eﬀective medium deﬁned by (3). It also
explains the observed rather fast disappearance of the Abrikosov-Suhl resonance (ASR) in
the one-particle DOS, associated with this Kondo screening, with increasing temperature
and its total absence in the semi-metallic region of the phase diagram. Second, we may
also identify a scale T0 as where the ASR in the density of states reaches half its maximum
value. This latter energy scale appears to be more physically meaningful since it shows up
in physical quantities like speciﬁc heat and resistivity.
Away from half ﬁlling the Mott-Hubbard phase is immediately replaced by a Fermi
liquid with strongly enhanced Fermi liquid parameters. More precisely, we found a narrow
resonance at µ for low temperatures which leads to the observed enhanced quasiparticle
mass. This resonance could again be traced to a Kondo-screening of the local moments with
a dynamically generated low temperature energy scale – T0 – connected to it. The magnetic
transition is also found to be suppressed upon doping. Finally, for greater than 20% doping,
correlation eﬀects become less important and the system basically behaves like one would
expect from standard perturbation theory.
The remainder of this paper is split into three parts. First, we will compare diﬀerent
approximation schemes to the QMC results. The main reason is that QMC is rather time
intensive and becomes problematic for large values of U and inverse temperature β. Also,
by virtue of the method, the QMC process gives all dynamical quantities as function of
Matsubara rather than real frequency and one has to use e.g. maximum entropy methods
to analytically continue these results to real frequencies. Although this is straightforward
for densities of states, it proves problematic for quantities like the one-particle self energy.
On the other hand, several physical quantities need this real frequency dependence as input.
As we will show, a good approximation scheme for this purpose is given by a self-consistent
perturbation theory developed for the single-impurity Anderson model (NCA) . In the
second part of the paper we use this approximation to calculate free energy, speciﬁc heat,
resistivity and optical conductivity for the model (1) for the paramagnetic phase. Finally, a
discussion will close the paper.
II. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS
One major problem in using the QMC approach to calculate physical quantities is the
rather large amount of computer time one has to invest to obtain results for one particular
set of parameters. Especially for thermodynamic properties, where one has to adjust the
chemical potential to maintain a ﬁxed ﬁlling, it is diﬃcult to calculate a temperature series.
It is thus clearly desirable to have some diﬀerent methods to solve the Hamiltonian (1) or,
equivalently, the single-impurity Anderson model.
The most straightforward idea is to use standard perturbation theory in U.
known to work rather well for the symmetric single-impurity Anderson model , and
one thus may expect it to be a reasonable approximation at half ﬁlling and for small values
of U. Away from the symmetric point it is known that at least the lowest order does not
reproduce the correct occupation number . Nevertheless it is a simple method and it
is surely worthwhile to outline its region of applicability. It also has the advantage that
it automatically fulﬁlls Fermi-liquid sumrules. A rather complete discussion up to second
order in U has been reported by Menge and M¨uller-Hartmann . Since it has been
pointed out by Georges and Kotliar that these results are not qualitatively much diﬀerent
from the lowest second order result with Hartree self consistency , we shall use the
latter approach here.
The most successful approximate methods for dealing with highly correlated electron
systems have been developed for the single-impurity Anderson model by choosing the mixing
term as perturbation . Unfortunately, the price one has to pay for leaving the Coulomb
interaction intact is that the standard methods of perturbation theory fail. This problem
can be nicely circumvented for the impurity problem, leading to well deﬁned and controlled
approximation schemes like the so-called NCA . This approximation is known to
work well when the physics of the system is dominated by spin ﬂuctuations but
fails when charge excitations become important. In this respect it may be viewed as an
approach complementary to standard perturbation theory. In addition, the NCA tends to
violate Fermi-liquid properties for temperatures much lower than the smallest energy scale
in the problem . However, the NCA is nevertheless quite reliable over a large interval
of parameters including temperature . Since the solution of the model (1) for d = ∞
essentially reduces to the solution of a single-impurity Anderson model it is natural to
adopt the NCA for this problem.
Another natural attempt is to extend the perturbation theory with respect to mixing
directly onto concentrated systems. In this case, however, the missing features of standard
perturbation theory complicate the problem considerably and a controlled approximation (like in the impurity case) presently does not exist.
With the use of some ad-hoc
assumptions it is nevertheless possible to set up an approximation for this problem, too.
These theories are originally designed for the periodic Anderson model and known in literature as XNCA and LNCA . Recently, one of the authors has shown that any such
theory for the periodic Anderson model can be readily employed for the Hubbard model (1),
too . In order to obtain an idea about the quality of these approximations we include
the LNCA in our comparison.
The single-particle density of states for the Hubbard model (1) at half ﬁlling n = 1 for
several values of U at an inverse temperature β = 7.2 is shown in Fig. 2 for the diﬀerent kind
of approaches discussed before. Let us ﬁrst outline the general features of the DOS as they
appear from the QMC results: In all cases one ﬁnds two prominent peaks at roughly ±U/2
which have to be identiﬁed with charge excitations on and oﬀthe local levels. In addition
there is a pronounced resonance at µ for small values of U due to coherent movement of
the particles in the system. This feature is suppressed when U is increased and eventually
a pseudo-gap opens at µ.
In comparing the diﬀerent approximations to the QMC results the ﬁrst thing to note is
that the overall agreement between QMC and NCA, apart from small diﬀerences at µ, is
very good. For U = 6 we did not succeed in analytically continuing the QMC results. The
only quantity we were able to obtain here is the position of the edges of the pseudo-gap.
These were found to be in good agreement with those predicted by the NCA. We want
to point out that for this value of U, as generally for values U well inside the “insulator”
phase in Fig. 1 and βU ≫1, the NCA does not provide stable results but tends to produce
spurious oscillations at the gap edges. However, general structures like the width of the
pseudo-gap are reproduced with good accuracy. Nevertheless, these instabilities prohibit a
thorough investigation of this surely very interesting part of the phase diagram at half ﬁlling.
We want to emphasize that this problem is not intrinsic to the NCA, but rather must be
attributed to numerical instabilities of the computer code used to solve the NCA equations.
The reason is that structures in the NCA equations become very sharp in this region and
eventually cannot be resolved on a discrete energy mesh. When this occurs we approximate
these structures as poles, which gives rise to the mentioned numerical instabilities. Note,
that this problem does not occur outside the “insulator” phase and oﬀhalf ﬁlling. A rather
interesting point is that “poles” in the NCA begin to develop exactly when the DOS at µ
becomes exponentially small. This empirical observation was also conﬁrmed by QMC for
some characteristic points in the phase diagram and eventually used to ﬁnd an estimate of
the right hand border of the crossover region in Fig. 1.
Apparently, perturbation theory in U generally fails to reproduce even qualitatively both
the high and the low-energy features of the DOS. Only for small U may the quasiparticle
band at µ be regarded as a good approximation to the QMC data. The LNCA on the
other hand looks like a too large value of U had been used. This may be attributed to
the approximations involved which put a strong emphasis on local correlations and are thus
likely to overestimate residual local interactions. It also clearly overestimates the charge
excitation bands and shows little of the ﬁner structure near the gap edges , but at least
it reproduces the general features of the DOS qualitatively correctly and accounts for the
existence of the pseudo-gap.
In Fig. 3 we present some typical results oﬀhalf ﬁlling, namely for µ = 1 (ne ≈0.94) and
µ = 0.5 (ne ≈0.8) at two diﬀerent temperatures β = 3.6 and β = 14.4. The value of the
Coulomb repulsion is U = 4. Again, QMC and NCA are in good agreement concerning the
high and the low energy features except for Fig. 3(d), where ANCA(µ) comes out much too
large, i.e. the NCA fails to account properly for the low energy physics. This is the principal
failure directly related to the approximations involved in the NCA .
Interestingly, the LNCA gives a much weaker temperature dependence of the DOS at
µ, indicating that this approximation underestimates the characteristic low energy scale T0.
This is in accordance with the observation made earlier, namely that the LNCA tends to
overestimate the role of the local correlations. Apart from this failure the general form of
the spectra agrees at least qualitatively with the exact result. To obtain reasonable results
from perturbation theory, we found it necessary to ﬁx the occupancy to the QMC value by
adjusting the chemical potential. This given, the perturbation theory apparently becomes
better with increasing hole concentration. It nevertheless produces features which are too
broad and rather poor imitations of the charge excitation peaks.
A ﬁrst conclusion one may draw from these considerations is that the NCA reproduces
most of the general features of the single particle DOS with good accuracy.
Fig. 3(d) clearly shows that for some choice of parameter values the most important region
at µ is approximated very poorly. In order to achieve a better classiﬁcation of the portion
of the parameter space where the NCA constitutes a reliable approximation to the problem
let us substantiate the diﬀerences between QMC and NCA by looking at the quasiparticle
weight deﬁned by
ζ−1(T) = 1 −ImΣ(iω0)
where ω0 = πT is the lowest Matsubara frequency . Figure 4 displays this function for
µ = 1 and U = 4 as obtained from QMC (circles) and NCA (squares). Note that for these
parameter values we expect T0 ≈1/8 , i.e. ζ−1(T →0) ≈8. The agreement between
QMC and NCA is satisfactorily, especially for temperatures T >∼T0/2. For temperatures
T <∼T0/2 the values obtained by the NCA become too large although the order of magnitude
is still good. Things become worse as soon as T ≪T0, where the NCA produces again an
upturn instead of a saturation. Both, the slightly too large values as well as the failure for
T <∼T0/5, must be attributed to the well known pathology of the NCA . In our case, the
most important aspect of this pathology is its tendency to give a slightly too small absolute
value for the self energy near µ . While for the Anderson impurity model this behaviour
is not important for temperatures T >∼0.1TK , the self-consistency process involved here
naturally accumulates this deﬁciency, leading to the observed small discrepancies between
QMC and NCA in the spectra and ζ−1(T). Eventually the NCA breaks down completely
for temperatures small compared to T0. However, from our comparison one can conclude
that the results produced by the NCA are reliable for T/T0 >∼1/5.
For small U and/or far away from half ﬁlling the latter restriction makes the NCA
obviously rather useless, because the low temperature energy scale is usually of the order
O(1) here (see, for example, Fig. 3d with µ = 1.5 and β = 14.4). However, in the interesting
region of large U and close to half ﬁlling the low temperature scale T0 is much smaller. In
these cases the NCA provides a fast and consistent way to obtain information that is hard
to access by other methods. For example, let us discuss the one-particle self energies and
the reentrance behaviour found in the phase diagram at half ﬁlling (see Fig. 1).
The imaginary part of the one-particle self energy is a quantity interesting in its own right
since it provides valuable information about the low temperature behaviour of the system.
For a normal Fermi liquid when T →0, one expects −ImΣ(ω + iδ) to exhibit a parabolic
minimum at µ with a curvature and temperature dependence that is characteristic of the
eﬀective mass of the quasiparticles in the system. A way to obtain this latter information has
already been discussed with the deﬁnition of the quasiparticle weight equation (8). Figure
5 gives an impression of how the self energy behaves for some parameter values, namely at
half ﬁlling (ne = 1) for two values of U = 2, 4 for a ﬁxed temperature β = 7.2 in Fig. 5(a)
and oﬀhalf ﬁlling (ne ≈0.94), for a ﬁxed U = 4 and two characteristic temperatures
β = 3.6, 28.8 in Fig. 5(b). While for U = 2 (full curve in Fig. 5a) and oﬀhalf ﬁlling
(Fig. 5b) |ImΣ| obviously develops a nice parabolic minimum at µ, the behaviour for U = 4
at half ﬁlling (broken curve in Fig. 5a) is completely diﬀerent. Here a sharp peak at µ
appears separated by a (pseudo-) gap from the continuum of particle-hole excitations. From
general arguments it follows that −ImΣ(µ + iδ) ≈1/A(µ) in this case. It is clear that
one will never obtain a Fermi liquid with this type of self energy . Physically, this peak
corresponds to an eﬀective resonant scattering provided by the medium surrounding a given
particle, thus localizing it by forming a bound state. It is nevertheless surprising to ﬁnd such
a structure when general phase space arguments rather suggest that particle-hole scattering
near µ has to vanish . Thus an important question is whether this structure is stable or
may be replaced by the usual minimum for T →0. This leads us directly to the reentrance
behaviour seen in Fig. 1.
To study this interesting behaviour more closely we ﬁx the Coulomb parameter at U = 3.5
and scan the temperature from above the MI-crossover region (T = 0.32) down to T = 0.002.
Obviously, such a low temperature cannot be reached with QMC for this value of U. The
results are shown in Fig. 6. One nicely sees the opening of the pseudo-gap as the temperature
is lowered. Eventually, this pseudo-gap is destroyed by a very narrow resonance at µ which
also signals the onset of Fermi-liquid behaviour. From the value of A(µ) we extrapolate to
a low temperature scale T0 <∼1/400. Thus, the Fermi liquid that eventually emerges has
extremely large Fermi-liquid parameters. Another question is why such an Abrikosov-Suhl
resonance can built up from an insulator at all? Here we must keep in mind that we merely
observe a pseudo-gap, i.e. the DOS around µ is never exactly zero and consequently will
lead to a small but ﬁnite low temperature scale T0. Whether the Fermi-liquid phase will win
depends entirely on the balance between the energy gain due to the delocalization of the
particles in the narrow band at µ and the loss in correlation energy for the same reasons. It
deﬁnitely seems more favourable for 3 < U < 4 but we cannot decide from the data available
whether the transition line will ﬁnally intercept the abscissa at a U < ∞or not. We must
stress at this point that this whole scenario is valid if and only if we have suﬃcient magnetic
frustration to suppress or destroy the antiferromagnetic transition appearing in the phase
III. THERMODYNAMIC AND TRANSPORT PROPERTIES
The peculiar features of the single-particle DOS and self energy discussed in the previous section motivate a closer inspection of thermodynamic and transport properties of the
Hubbard model (1) in the paramagnetic phase. Except for the one-dimensional model, a
thorough study of these quantities in the thermodynamic limit was not possible yet. Previous results from QMC simulations are usually restricted to relatively small values of
U or comparatively high temperatures. Since they are carried out on a ﬁnite lattice with
a discrete energy spectrum, they probably will also miss the Kondo eﬀect if it persists in
three dimensions. The simpliﬁcations arising in d = ∞, however, make it possible to give
closed expressions for several quantities including the free energy, internal energy and optical
conductivity which involve only the one-particle propagators in a simple way. We are thus
in principle in a position to calculate these quantities exactly or, since we shall use the NCA
to solve equations (2)-(3), obtain at least a very good approximation for them.
Although the derivation of the expressions for those quantities is straight forward we will
just state the ﬁnal results and leave the mathematics to the appendix. To start with, the
thermodynamic potential Ω(T) is given by 
βΩ= NβΩimp −
Here, Ωimp is the local free energy contribution from the eﬀective Anderson impurity problem.
Although, in principle, the knowledge of Ω(T) provides everything one needs, it is helpful to
have an independent expression for the internal energy E(T), too. The main reason is that
thermodynamic quantities are usually obtained by diﬀerentiating Ω(T), which is a rather
unpleasant task from a numerical point of view. In particular, the speciﬁc heat is a second
derivative of Ω, but it is a ﬁrst of E(T). An expression for E(T) is given by
dωf(ω) (tk + ω) Akσ(ω) + 1
The last quantity we want to study in this paper is the conductivity. We restrict ourselves
to the q = 0 component, because without coupling to elastic degrees of freedom we do not
expect the model (1) to exhibit any incommensurate charge density instability, i.e. the q = 0
component will be the most important one. In this particular case, the limit d →∞provides
us with an extreme simpliﬁcation, namely one can easily show (see e.g. ref. 28 and appendix)
that the expression for σ(ω, T) reduces to
dǫA0(ǫ)A(ǫ, ω′)A(ǫ, ω′ + ω)f(ω′) −f(ω′ + ω)
Note that for ω →0 this is very similar to the result of Schweitzer and Czycholl , except
that our result is written as energy integrals and thus avoids their explicit sum on lattice
sites that is impossible to evaluate in d →∞.
Let us begin with a discussion of the properties of the model (1) at half ﬁlling. Due to
numerical diﬃculties the NCA is currently not able to provide stable enough results in the
interesting region just above the “MI”-crossover line. We therefore have to concentrate on
a value just below the critical one and we found it to be a convenient choice to use U = 3.
As it turns out, the behaviour found here is already close to what one may expect in the
“insulating” region.
Before we turn to the actual thermodynamic properties, we ﬁrst want to give with Fig. 7
an impression of the variation of the one-particle spectra with temperature.
It is clear
that the dip in the DOS at µ for higher temperatures is a poor replacement for the actual
exponentially small DOS at larger values of U. However, together with the Abrikosov-Suhl
resonance at low temperatures it gives a fairly good picture of the general temperature
dependence of the DOS even for U > Uc. From it we may anticipate the behaviour of the
various thermodynamic and transport properties: Starting from high temperatures, one will
encounter a temperature regime (e.g. t∗> T ≫T0) where the DOS mainly consists of two
separated bands. For the entropy for example this means that it will be rather ﬂat with a
value reﬂecting the degeneracy of the states in the lower band, i.e. S ≈ln 2. At the same
time the speciﬁc heat will decrease and become very small. If there were a true gap we
would actually expect CV ∼exp(−β∆Gap). The resistivity, on the other hand will be large
and increases with decreasing temperature, while the optical conductivity is governed by
the charge excitations of energy U and shows no Drude peak.
Figure 8 displays the diﬀerent thermodynamic quantities for the parameters under consideration as a function of temperature. In addition, we include for comparison some values
of the internal energy E(T) as obtained from QMC (circles). Again, QMC and NCA are
found to be in good agreement. It is noteworthy, that the internal energy becomes rather ﬂat
at T ≈1/5. At the same time the entropy has a saddle point with a value of S ≈ln 2, and
the speciﬁc heat becomes small, as expected. The unphysical variation of S(T) and C(T)
found in this interval must be attributed to numerical inaccuracy. In fact, by increasing the
precision of the results we observed that e.g. the nonmonotonic variation in S(T) is reduced
considerably while the value seems to approach S ≈ln 2 with good accuracy. Also, the
internal energy appears to be much more insensitive to numerical inaccuracies than the free
When the temperature is further lowered, we see a decrease of S(T) again, accompanied
by a strong increase of C(T), which eventually shows a maximum. This peak in C(T) is
a further ﬁngerprint of the Kondo-eﬀect in this model. Unfortunately, a further decrease
in temperature is not possible, since the NCA-pathology becomes important for T <∼0.01.
From our experience this points towards a proper low temperature energy scale of about
T0 ≈1/20, which is also consistent with the position of the peak in C(T) at T ≈T0/3. At
present one can only infer from the knowledge of the properties of heavy fermion materials
that C(T) ∼T/T0 for temperatures below the maximum.
From these results one may easily extrapolate to the behaviour of the system for U > 3.
In fact, we mainly expect the extent of the ﬂat region in E(T) and S(T) to become larger,
namely it should last roughly until a possible crossover into the Kondo regime begins. Then
one will ﬁnd a very steep decrease of both quantities again. For values of U smaller than
U = 3 on the other hand the ﬂat region will shrink and the slope of the decrease for lower
temperatures will become smaller.
The resistivity for these parameter values as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. 9.
Consistent with the DOS and the thermodynamics we ﬁrst observe a semi-metallic increase at
high temperatures which goes through a maximum and then decreases for low temperatures.
Since we expect the system to behave like a Fermi liquid at low temperatures, the resistivity
should follow ρ(T) = ρ0+a·(T/T0)2, where ρ0 = 0, T0 ≈1/20 and a = O(1). The calculated
data generally follow this law when we also allow for a small intercept ρ0 ≈−5 · 10−2 (see
inset in Fig. 9). It is obvious that this negative intercept is a pure artifact and related to
the pathology of the NCA: As discussed earlier, the approximations in the NCA tend to
give a too small value of Im(GNCA(ω + iδ))−1 near µ. Since the self-energy is given by the
diﬀerence between this quantity and the eﬀective hybridization eq. (3), one will eventually
encounter a temperature where causality is violated and the results by the NCA become
meaningless. For the present parameter values this happens for T <∼1/100. It is clear, that
this breakdown will manifest itself strongest right at the minimum of ImΣ(ω −iδ), which
happens to be always exactly at µ at half ﬁlling due to the particle-hole symmetry. Since the
low-temperature resistivity on the other hand is approximately just given by ImΣ(−iδ) ,
this violation of causality produced by the NCA leads directly to the observed unphysical
value of ρ0.
The picture for half ﬁlling is completed by the optical conductivity in Fig. 10.
expected, the case U = 3 already gives an idea how the “insulator” will look like: For
high temperatures one ﬁnds a weak vestige of the Drude peak for ω →0 which at ﬁrst is
suppressed when the temperature is lowered. Note, however, that we always maintain a
ﬁnite value for σ(0) consistent with the DOS in Fig. 7. At the same time the spectral weight
of the charge excitation peak at ω = U increases. When we further lower the temperature,
the situation reverses. A Drude peak at ω = 0 builds up again (see inset in Fig. 10) and
the spectral weight at ω = U is decreased. In addition, a shoulder emerges at ω ≈1. This
feature must be ascribed to the additional excitations from the lower Hubbard band to the
Abrikosov-Suhl resonance at µ. Note that the spectral weight associated with this additional
resonance is rather small.
Let us ﬁnish the discussion of the half ﬁlled case with a look at the typical behaviour
of the optical conductivity inside the “insulator” region in Fig. 1. Although the numerical
problems prohibit a discussion of thermodynamic quantities here the results prove to be
stable enough to allow the calculation of σ.
Figure 11 shows our results for the DOS
(Fig. 11(a)) and σ(ω) (Fig. 11(b)) for a value of U = 6 and temperatures β = 1.44 (full
curves) and β = 28.8 (broken curves). The high temperature result represents a point in the
semi-metallic portion of the phase diagram (Fig. 1) and still shows a small peak at ω = 0
due to the thermally induced states in the gap here. This feature is however completely
lost in the “insulating phase”, where only the charge excitation peak at ω = U survives.
We point out that the high temperature results for U = 3 are indeed similar to the general
behaviour found here even though the larger DOS at µ of course leads to a ﬁnite value for
σ(0) there.
The situation oﬀhalf ﬁlling is studied for the case U = 4 and ne = 0.97. The variation of
the DOS with temperature for these parameter values is collected in Fig. 12. Compared to
the temperature dependence of A(0) in Fig. 7, we observe a slower increase here, i.e. we have
a somewhat smaller low-temperature scale T0. From the value of A(0; T = 1/28.8) ≈2/√π
we extrapolate to a T0 <∼1/30 for these parameter values. Although we are in principle
able to trace the properties of the model (1) for a ﬁxed electron density, it turns out that
the obtainable numerical accuracy is not suﬃcient to get a reasonable result for the free
energy. However, as already mentioned for the half ﬁlled case, the internal energy E(T) is
much more well behaved and we shall concentrate on its behaviour here. The results for
the thermodynamics are collected in Fig. 13. The features found are actually very similar
to the ones known from heavy fermion physics, as expected: We observe a maximum in
C(T) at approximately T0/3, where T0 ≈1/30 was read oﬀthe half-height of the DOS in
Fig. 12. Note that in contrast to half ﬁlling we do not have a pronounced ﬂat region in E(T)
or S(T) here. The values for the entropy in Fig. 13 were obtained by direct integration
R C(T)/TdT. Taking into account the decreasing relative precision in E(T) and
the resulting large errors in C(T) for lower temperatures we ﬁnd, as expected, an entropy
S ≈ln 2 associated with the low temperature peak in C(T).
The resistivity in this case is shown in Fig. 14. As in the picture for half ﬁlling we observe
an increase of ρ(T) at high temperatures which eventually goes through a maximum. For low
temperatures we ﬁnd a power law ρ(T) = a · (T/T0)2 with T0 ≈30 and a = O(1) consistent
with Fermi liquid theory. This time we do not observe any unphysical behaviour down to
the lowest temperatures studied. This may be related to the fact, that the slight shift of the
minimum of ImΣ(ω −iδ) above µ suﬃciently reduces the inﬂuence of the NCA-pathology
It is noteworthy that for half ﬁlling and oﬀhalf ﬁlling the position of the maximum in
ρ(T) does not seem to be related to T0 in a way similar to heavy-fermion systems. In fact,
from the position of these maxima one would rather tend to rate the systems as weakly
correlated.
It is, however, important to remember that since the DOS at µ is strongly
temperature dependent, the Kondo scale itself is a function of temperature.
Finally we present the optical conductivity for the parameter values U = 4 and ne = 0.97
in Fig. 15 for some characteristic temperatures. The general structure is similar to half
ﬁlling except that the Drude peak for ω →0 continuously develops when the temperature
is decreased. Also, the “Kondo”-shoulder found in Fig. 10 is not visible here. Again, the
weaker temperature dependence of σ(ω →0) points towards a smaller T0 in this case.
IV. SUMMARY
In this paper we have presented a detailed study of thermodynamic and transport properties of the Hubbard model on a inﬁnite-dimensional hypercubic lattice. In contrast to the
previous study we did not take into account the antiferromagnetic ordering expected
for this model with nearest neighbour transfer, but concentrated on the paramagnetic case.
The importance of such a study is motivated by the fact that inclusion of transfer beyond
nearest neighbours will magnetically frustrate the system and thus depress the ordering. Besides, the eﬀect of an antiferromagnetic transition on thermodynamic quantities like S(T)
and C(T) is well known once their behaviour in the paramagnetic regime is known.
The ﬁrst part of this paper was devoted to a comparison between diﬀerent approaches to
the Hubbard model. As reference point we used the essentially exact QMC method discussed
extensively in refs. 5 and 7. We found that a good description can be achieved by using
the NCA to approximately solve the impurity Anderson model which enters the solution of
(1) in inﬁnite dimensions. Using the NCA, the self-consistent set of equations can be solved
very quickly which enabled us to present a variety of quantities as functions of temperatures
for physically meaningful parameters. One of our main results is the interesting variation of
the entropy and speciﬁc heat in the half ﬁlled case. We believe that this behaviour can be
viewed as generic for the strongly correlated model. This conjecture was basically conﬁrmed
by the qualitative similarity between our results for half ﬁlling and n = 0.97.
Unfortunately, the NCA-approach breaks down for too low temperatures due to an intrinsic violation of Fermi-liquid properties. However, our low-temperature results strongly
suggest that a heavy-electron liquid builds up with a unique energy scale deductable from
the variation of the various physical quantities. One thus can in principle adopt the well
developed phenomenology for these systems to extrapolate to a consistent low-temperature
limit for the paramagnetic phase of the inﬁnite dimensional Hubbard model .
Together with our previous study, to the extent of our knowledge this represents the
ﬁrst consistent and reliable study of dynamic and thermodynamic properties of the d >
1 Hubbard model in the thermodynamic limit. Although the qualitative eﬀects of ﬁnite
dimensional corrections are not well understood, we believe that many of the features found
here will basically persist in at least d = 3.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation grant number DMR-
88357341, the National Science Foundation grant number DMR-9107563, the Ohio State
University center of materials research and by the Ohio Supercomputing Center.
APPENDIX A: EXPRESSIONS FOR Ω(T) AND E(T)
In the following we will provide the derivation of the expressions for the free energy (9)
and internal energy (10) for the Hubbard model in d →∞.
Let us start with the free energy. According to Baym one can quite generally write
the grand canonical potential as
βΩ(Σ) = Φ(G) −Tr(Σ · G) −Tr ln((G0)−1 −Σ)
where shorthand matrix notations
(G)ij;nm = Gij(iωn, iωm)
(Σ)ij;nm = Σij(iωn, iωm)
were introduced. The functional Φ is deﬁned via the perturbation expansion of Σ in terms
of G by the property
For d →∞we know that Σ(z) ≡Σ(z)1 and its perturbation expansion involves only the
local component of G, Gii(z). This implies that Φ(G) = Φ({Gii}) = NΦimp(Gii) and
βΩ(T) = NΦimp(Gii) −NTr(ΣGii) −NTr ln(G−1
= NβΩimp −
Here, Ωimp is the local free energy contribution from the eﬀective Anderson impurity problem
for a given Σ .
For the derivation of E(T) we ﬁrst note, that from Ω= E −TS −µN one obtains for
ﬁxed particle number E = ∂(βΩ)/∂β + µN + β∂µ/∂βNe. With Ω= −β−1 ln Z this leads to
the relation E(T) = ⟨H⟩+µNe. Note that this unusual form arises because our deﬁnition of
the Hubbard Hamiltonian (1) absorbs the term −µN. In order to calculate the expectation
value, let us evaluate the following commutator :
iσ[ciσ, H] =
iσ[ciσ, c†
lσcjσ] + c†
iσ[ciσ, c†
jσclσ]) −µ
iσ[ciσ, njσ]
iσ[ciσ, nl↑nl↓]
= Hkin −µN + 2U = 2H −Hkin + µN .
That means for ⟨H⟩
iσ[ciσ, H]⟩−1
iσ[ciσ, H]⟩−1
tkGkσ(−δ) + 1
G[ciσ,H],c†
tkGkσ(iωn) +
G[ciσ,H],c†
With the equation of motion
zGii(z) = 1 + G[ciσ,H],c†
and using translational invariance, i.e. Gii(z) = 1
P Gkσ(z), one arrives at
(tkGkσ(iωn) + iωnGkσ(iωn) −1) eiωnδ + 1
Gkσ(iωn) =
dωf(ω)Akσ(ω)
R dωAkσ(ω) = 1
(iωnGkσ(iωn) −1) eiωnδ = 1
iωn −ωeiωnδ
dωωf(ω)Akσ(ω)
the ﬁnal equation reads
dωf(ω) (tk + ω) Akσ(ω) + 1
APPENDIX B: OPTICAL CONDUCTIVITY
In general, the conductivity tensor is expressed via the current-current susceptibility as
σkl(ω) = −1
iωχjl,jk(ω + iδ)
iω⟨⟨jl|jk⟩⟩(ω + iδ)
≡Re˜σkl(ω + iδ) .
For the simple cubic lattice under consideration, the tensor is proportional to the unit tensor,
d˜σ(z) = 1
⟨⟨jl|jl⟩⟩(z) .
Further, the current operator for the Hubbard model (1) is given by (e = ¯h = 1)
where the group velocity or the particles is deﬁned via vk = ∇tk. This leads to
d˜σ(z) = 1
l⟨⟨nkσ|nk′σ⟩⟩(z) .
This expression has the perturbation expansion shown in Fig. 16. One important implication
of the limit d →∞is, that the irreducible vertex Γ(iωn, iωm; iν) in Fig. 16 has to be purely
local . This means that the k-summations in the second part of Fig. 16 can be performed
independently and thus these vertex corrections vanish, because vk has a diﬀerent parity
than tk . This means, that only the simple bubble survives and we are left with (the
lattice constant to be taken unity)
˜σ(iν) = 1
klGkσ(iωn)Gkσ(iωn + iν) = 1
4t2 sin2(kl)Gkσ(iωn)Gkσ(iωn + iν)
for nearest-neighbour transfer.
The problem left is to evaluate the sum
˜ρ0(ǫ) = 1
sin2(kl)δ(ǫ −tk)
For this purpose, we use the method applied by M¨uller-Hartmann and study the Fouriertransform of (B6):
˜ρ0(ǫ)eisǫdǫ = 1
sin2(kl)eistk
−π e−2ist cos k dk
−π sin2 ke−2ist cos k dk
2 [J0(2st)]d + d
2 [J0(2st)]d−1 J2(2st) ,
where Jν(z) are Bessel functions. Noting that A0(ǫ) =
R dse−isǫ [J0(2st)]d, we ﬁnd
sin2(kl)δ(ǫ −tk) = d
−∞dse−isǫ [J0(2st)]d−1 J2(2st)
This relation is valid for a simple cubic lattice and nearest neighbour transfer in any dimension. For the current purpose we are only interested in the limit d →∞, where one can
achieve a further substantial simpliﬁcation. Noting that 2t ∼1/
d ≪1 we may approximate J2(2st) ≈s2t2 for large d and ﬁnd for the last term in (B8)
dse−isǫ [J0(2st)]d−1 J2(2st) ≈t2
dss2e−isǫ [J0(2st)]d
= −t2d2A0(ǫ)
Since t2 ∼1/d this term is negligible in the limit d →∞, i.e. ˜ρ0(ǫ) = d · ρ0(ǫ)/2 and ﬁnally
˜σ(iν) = 1
dǫA0(ǫ)G(ǫ, iωn)G(ǫ, iωn + iν) = 1
dǫdωdω′A0(ǫ)A(ǫ, ω)A(ǫ, ω′)f(ω) −f(ω′)
ω −ω′ + iν
Taking the real part of the analytic continuation of equation (B10) leads to our ﬁnal result
for the optical conductivity
dǫA0(ǫ)A(ǫ, ω′)A(ǫ, ω′ + ω)f(ω′) −f(ω′ + ω)
When we collect the missing constants we ﬁnd for the unit of the conductivity
σ0 = πe2a2t∗2
V ol ≈10−2 . . . 10−3[µΩcm]−1 ,
for t∗≈1eV and a = O(a0).