Adaptation – not by sweeps alone
Jonathan K. Pritchard1 and Anna Di Rienzo2
Jonathan K. Pritchard: ; Anna Di Rienzo: 
1Jonathan K. Pritchard is at the Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60615, USA
2Anna Di Rienzo is at the Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60615, USA
There has been recent progress in identifying selective sweeps underlying a range of adaptations.
Jonathan Pritchard and Anna Di Rienzo argue that many adaptive events in natural populations
may occur by polygenic adaptation, which would largely go undetected by conventional methods
for detecting selection.
A major goal in evolutionary biology is to understand the genetic basis of how organisms
adapt to their environments. Within the population genetics community, adaptation is
typically viewed as involving selective sweeps that drive beneficial alleles from low to high
frequency in a population.
In a highly influential paper, Maynard Smith and Haigh modelled selection acting on a new
mutation that is rapidly driven to fixation1. Recent work has also emphasized the possibility
of sweeps on recessive variants or from standing variation, as well as partial sweeps2, 3
(here, we use the term ‘selective sweep’ to refer to a large, rapid shift in frequency of a
beneficial allele, regardless of whether there is an associated hitchhiking signal).
There are now many statistical tests that aim to detect sweep signals4, 5. These tests have
been used to identify adaptive alleles at high frequency that underlie a range of beneficial
phenotypes in humans and other species. Examples include human adaptations to infectious
agents (for example, DARC and caspase 12), to reduced ultraviolet light (pigmentation loci
such as SLC24A5 and KITLG), to milk consumption (lactase) and to high altitude (EPAS1).
Despite these recent successes, we argue here that this view of adaptation that proceeds by
selective sweeps at key loci is too limited. By contrast, classical selection models of
artificial and natural selection in the quantitative genetics literature emphasize the
importance of modest changes in allele frequencies at many loci6, 7, 8— that is, ‘polygenic
adaptation’. We believe that polygenic models have received too little attention in the
population genetics community.
Competing interests statement: The authors declare no competing financial interests
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 19.
 
Nat Rev Genet. 2010 October ; 11(10): 665–667. doi:10.1038/nrg2880.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
It seems likely to us that, as in traditional quantitative genetic models, many — possibly
even most — adaptive events in natural populations occur by polygenic adaptation.
Polygenic adaptation could allow rapid adaptive shifts, yet would often go undetected using
conventional methods for detecting selection9, 10, 11. Moreover, polygenic adaptation is
qualitatively different from the models of adaptive substitutions that dominate the
population genetics literature.
It has long been known that many traits in humans and other species are both phenotypically
variable and fairly heritable, and are controlled by large numbers of loci of small effect.
Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies have confirmed that many quantitative
traits in humans are extremely polygenic, including height, body mass index, age at
menarche, blood pressure, blood lipid levels, basal metabolic rate and glucose tolerance.
Suppose that a population is well-adapted to its environment until the environment changes
(for example, the population moves to a new location with a different climate), thereby
changing the optimal value of one or more phenotypes. If there is already considerable
heritable variation underlying the phenotype in question, then the population can adapt
rapidly to the new conditions at a speed that depends on the strength of selection and the
heritability of the trait6, 7.
The key point is that we should expect such an adaptation to occur by small allele frequency
shifts spread across many loci. As a hypothetical example, consider the adaptation of human
height — a trait for which there are probably hundreds of SNPs that each affect height by a
few millimeters12. Strong selection for increased height could be very effective, as height is
extremely heritable. But at the level of individual SNPs, the effect of selection would be
rather weak, exerting just a small upward pressure in favour of each of hundreds of ‘tall’
alleles. Suppose that at 500 SNPs, the tall alleles each increase the expected height of a
person by 2 mm. Then, an average shift of just 10% in the population allele frequency of
each tall allele would increase average height in the population by 20 cm (assuming that
SNPs contribute additively). Although these numbers are hypothetical, they illustrate that,
for a highly polygenic trait, a dramatic adaptive response could result from modest allele
frequency changes at many loci. This model is different from classical sweep models. Most
importantly, adaptation could occur without dramatic allele frequency changes and without
adaptive fixation events.
If polygenic adaptation is indeed an important mode of adaptation, then what types of trait
would be most likely to evolve in this way? Traits that are strongly heritable prior to
selection (that is, that have standing variation for selection to act on) with many loci of small
effect, are likely to evolve by the polygenic model. These conditions probably hold for most
quantitative traits.
By contrast, some traits are controlled by relatively few genes and this predisposes them to
adaptation by selective sweeps. For example, the lactase persistence and Duffy-null
mutations, both of which have undergone selective sweeps in humans, affect the expression
of the key proteins in milk digestion and the entry of Plasmodium vivax into erythrocytes,
respectively. Similarly, there may be traits that are heritable and affected by variants at
Pritchard and Di Rienzo
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
many different loci, but for which many of the relevant variants would have strongly
negative pleiotropic effects13. In these cases, sweeps might occur specifically at sites in the
genome that can be modified without competing negative effects.
Finally, the sweep and polygenic models are not mutually exclusive. It may be that often the
alleles with largest effect sizes (and without strongly negative pleiotropic effects) sweep to
fixation, whereas much of the adaptive response is caused by smaller allele frequency shifts
at many loci9.
To understand polygenic adaptation, we need progress both in empirical approaches to
detecting it and in theoretical modelling.
To detect polygenic adaptation in real data will require different empirical approaches than
those that are used to find selective sweeps. Unlike sweeps, the small allele frequency shifts
underlying polygenic adaptations are unlikely to leave signals that stand out above neutral
patterns of variation (at least at individual loci). Although selective sweeps can be detected
using genetic data alone, studies of polygenic adaptations will be likely to require
information about the adaptive phenotype or the relevant environmental pressures.
One type of approach will be to identify phenotypes that may have undergone adaptive
changes in particular environments, such as adaptations to cold climate, high altitude or
novel ecological conditions. To dissect the genetic basis of such adaptations, one might
collect phenotyped samples from closely related populations that have and have not
experienced the selective pressure of interest and use GWA mapping to identify relevant
quantitative trait loci (QTLs). Additionally, one would want to measure the extent of
phenotypic adaptation — estimated as the difference in average phenotype between the
adapted and non-adapted populations when they are living under matched conditions (exact
matching of conditions may be difficult in human studies). Then one could ask: what
fraction of the phenotypic difference can be explained by alleles with large versus small
frequency differences? Are the phenotypic effect sizes of QTLs with large allele frequency
differences greater than those with subtle frequency shifts10? What fraction of the
phenotypic difference cannot be explained by detected sweep signals or QTLs at all (and
hence might result from the cumulative effect of many weak QTLs)?
In another type of scenario, one might hypothesize that a particular aspect of the
environment is an important selective factor (for example, climate or diet) but it is unclear
what all the relevant phenotypes are. In this case, we might study adaptation by looking at
sets of populations that have independently adapted to the same selective pressures14, 15.
One type of signal would be alleles that show parallel frequency shifts in response to similar
environmental pressures in distantly related populations (although this type of approach is
unlikely to be powerful for alleles with very small effects)15.
On the theoretical side, there is a need to bridge the gap between the classical quantitative
perspective and the population genetics approach (which has focused more explicitly on
quantities that can be measured in molecular data).
Pritchard and Di Rienzo
Nat Rev Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
First, we should understand better the conditions that can lead to a purely polygenic process.
Does it result from sweeps or from a combination of sweeps along with smaller shifts in
allele frequencies at many loci9? Key parameters in such models — some of which are not
well known — include the numbers, allele frequencies and effect sizes for variants that
affect a selected phenotype; the extent of pleiotropic effects; the effective population size;
the mutation rates for new mutations that affect the phenotype; and the strength of
selection16. More complex scenarios would result from selection regimes that fluctuate over
time owing to environmental oscillations17.
We also need more modelling of the ways in which polygenic adaptation, if it is widespread,
might affect genome-wide patterns of variation. For example, to what extent would
widespread polygenic adaptation reduce levels of polymorphism or divergence near genes
and other functional elements18? If this is likely to be a strong effect for realistic parameter
values, then genome-wide patterns of polymorphism might allow us to measure the extent of
polygenic adaptation. However, such signals might be difficult to distinguish from the
predictions of selective sweep and background selection models, and may in fact contribute
to patterns of variation that are commonly attributed to sweeps or background selection19.
Another important type of data in studying molecular evolution comes from between-species
differences. To what extent would widespread polygenic adaptation affect genome-wide
substitution rates at functional sites20? How much would it contribute to signals of positive
selection in between-species tests? For a polygenic trait at the selective optimum, we might
imagine a kind of stabilizing selection on the constellation of variants segregating in the
genome. That is, for a population near the selective optimum, a random change in the allele
frequency at one locus would be approximately neutral if it is balanced by opposing
change(s) in allele frequency elsewhere in the genome, such that the average phenotype
remains unchanged. Now consider an adaptive shift. Suppose that a species adapts to be
taller by small increases in the allele frequencies of many tall alleles. This would result in a
small increase in the long-term fixation probabilities of the tall alleles. However, the effect
of this mode of adaptation on substitution rates would likely be modest (except for extreme
selective shifts), as the tall alleles would include a mixture of ancestral and derived alleles.
In summary, polygenic adaptation is likely to be an important mechanism of adaptive
change. Polygenic adaptation would allow effective adaptation to environmental changes but
would do so without selective sweeps and with little effect on substitution rates. A key
challenge for the coming years will be to understand the extent and role of polygenic
adaptation in evolution.
Acknowledgments
We thank G. Coop, J. Pickrell, M. Przeworski and G. Sella for comments, and the National Institutes of Health
grants DK56670, GM79558 and MH84703 and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute for funding support. We
apologize to authors whose work could not be cited owing to space constraints.