Translating and Segmenting Multimodal Medical Volumes with Cycle- and
Shape-Consistency Generative Adversarial Network
Zizhao Zhang1,2, Lin Yang1, Yefeng Zheng2
1University of Florida
2Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare
Synthesized medical images have several important applications, e.g., as an intermedium in cross-modality image
registration and as supplementary training samples to boost
the generalization capability of a classiﬁer. Especially, synthesized computed tomography (CT) data can provide Xray attenuation map for radiation therapy planning.
this work, we propose a generic cross-modality synthesis
approach with the following targets: 1) synthesizing realistic looking 3D images using unpaired training data, 2)
ensuring consistent anatomical structures, which could be
changed by geometric distortion in cross-modality synthesis
and 3) improving volume segmentation by using synthetic
data for modalities with limited training samples. We show
that these goals can be achieved with an end-to-end 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) composed of mutuallybeneﬁcial generators and segmentors for image synthesis
and segmentation tasks. The generators are trained with an
adversarial loss, a cycle-consistency loss, and also a shapeconsistency loss, which is supervised by segmentors, to reduce the geometric distortion. From the segmentation view,
the segmentors are boosted by synthetic data from generators in an online manner.
Generators and segmentors
prompt each other alternatively in an end-to-end training
fashion. With extensive experiments on a dataset including
a total of 4,496 CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
cardiovascular volumes, we show both tasks are beneﬁcial
to each other and coupling these two tasks results in better
performance than solving them exclusively.
1. Introduction
In current clinical practice, multiple imaging modalities
may be available for disease diagnosis and surgical planning
 . For a speciﬁc patient group, a certain imaging modality
might be more popular than others. Due to the proliferation of multiple imaging modalities, there is a strong clinical need to develop a cross-modality image transfer analysis
system to assist clinical treatment, such as radiation therapy
Figure 1: Our method learns two parallel sets of generators GA/B and segmentors SA/B for two modalities A and
B to translate and segment holistic 3D volumes. Here we
illustrate using CT and MRI cardiovascular 3D images.
planning .
Machine learning (ML) based methods have been widely
used for medical image analysis , including detection, segmentation, and tracking of an anatomical structure.
Such methods are often generic and can be extended from
one imaging modality to the other by re-training on the target imaging modality. However, a sufﬁcient number of representative training images are required to achieve enough
robustness. In practice, it is often difﬁcult to collect enough
training images, especially for a new imaging modality not
well established in clinical practice yet. Synthesized data
are often used to as supplementary training data in hope that
they can boost the generalization capability of a trained ML
model. This paper presents a novel method to address the
above-mentioned two demanding tasks (Figure 1). The ﬁrst
is cross-modality translation and the second is improving
segmentation models by making use of synthesized data.
To synthesize medical images, recent advances 
have used generative adversarial networks (GANs) to
formulate it as an image-to-image translation task. These
methods require pixel-to-pixel correspondence between two
domain data to build direct cross-modality reconstruction.
 
However, in a more common scenario, multimodal medical images are in 3D and do not have cross-modality paired
data. A method to learn from unpaired data is more general
purpose. Furthermore, tomography structures (e.g. shape),
in medical images/volumes, contain diagnostic information.
Keeping their invariance in translation is critical. However,
when using GANs without paired data, due to the lack of
direct reconstruction, relying on discriminators to guarantee this requirement is not enough as we explain later.
It is an active research area by using synthetic data to
overcome the insufﬁciency of labeled data in CNN training. In the medical image domain, people are interested in
learning unsupervised translation between different modalities , so as to transfer existing labeled data from other
modalities.
However, the effectiveness of synthetic data
heavily depends on the distribution gap between real and
synthetic data. A possible solution to reduce such gap is by
matching their distributions through GANs .
In this paper, we present a general-purpose method to realize both medical volume translation as well as segmentation. In brief, given two sets of unpaired data in two modalities, we simultaneously learn generators for cross-domain
volume-to-volume translation and stronger segmentors by
taking advantage of synthetic data translated from another
domain. Our method is composed of several 3D CNNs.
From the generator learning view, we propose to train adversarial networks with cycle-consistency to solve the
problem of data without correspondence. We then propose
a novel shape-consistency scheme to guarantee the shape
invariance of synthetic images, which is supported by another CNN, namely segmentor. From the segmentor learning view, segmentors directly take advantage of generators
by using synthetic data to boost the segmentation performance in an online fashion. Both generator and segmentor
can take beneﬁts from another in our end-to-end training
fashion with one joint optimization objective.
On a dataset with 4,496 cardiovascular 3D image in MRI
and CT modalities, we conduct extensive experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method qualitatively
and quantitatively from both generator and segmentor views
with our proposed auxiliary evaluation metrics. We show
that using synthetic data as an isolated ofﬂine data augmentation process underperforms our end-to-end online approach. On the volume segmentation task, blindly using
synthetic data with a small number of real data can even
distract the optimization when trained in the ofﬂine fashion.
However, our method does not have this problem and leads
to consistent improvement.
2. Related work
There are two demanding goals in medical image synthesis. The ﬁrst is synthesizing realistic cross-modality images , and second is to use synthetic data from other
modalities with sufﬁcient labeled data to help classiﬁcation
tasks (e.g. domain adaption ).
In computer vision, recent image-to-image translation
is formulated as a pixel-to-pixel mapping using encoderdecoder CNNs . Several studies
have explored cross-modality translation for medical images, using sparse coding , GANs , CNN
 , etc. GANs have attracted wide interests in helping
addressing such tasks to generate high-quality, less blurry
results . More recent studies apply pixel-topixel GANs for brain MRI to CT image translation 
and retinal vessel annotation to image translation . However, these methods presume targeting images have paired
cross-domain data. Learning from unpaired cross-domain
data is an attractive yet not well explored problem .
Synthesizing medical data to overcome insufﬁcient labeled data attracted wide interests recently . Due
to the diversity of medical modalities, learning an unsupervised translation between modalities is a promising direction . demonstrates the beneﬁts on brain (MRI and
CT) images, by using synthetic data as augmented training
data to help lesion segmentation.
Apart from synthesizing data, several studies use adversarial learning as an extra supervision on the
segmentation or detection networks. The adversarial loss
plays a role of constraining the prediction to be close to
the distribution of groundtruth. However, such strategy is a
reﬁnement process, so it is less likely to remedy the cost of
data insufﬁciency.
3. Proposed Method
This section introduces our proposed method. We begin by discussing the recent advances for image-to-image
translation and clarify their problems when used for medical volume-to-volume translation. Then we introduce our
proposed medical volume-to-volume translation, with adversarial, cycle-consistency and shape-consistency losses,
as well as dual-modality segmentation. Figure 2 illustrates
our method.
3.1. Image-to-Image Translation for Unpaired Data
GANs have been widely used for image translation in
the applications that need pixel-to-pixel mapping, such as
image style transfer . ConditionalGAN shows a
strategy to learn such translation mapping with a conditional setting to capture structure information. However,
it needs paired cross-domain images for the pixel-wise reconstruction loss. For some types of translation tasks, acquiring paired training data from two domains is difﬁcult
or even impossible. Recently, CycleGAN and other
similar methods are proposed to generalize ConditionalGAN to address this issue. Here we use CycleGAN to
illustrate the key idea.
Adversarial loss
CrossEntroy
Shape-consistency loss
Cycle-consistency loss
Adversarial loss
Shape-consistency loss
Cycle-consistency loss
CrossEntroy
Generator View
Segmentor View
: Generators
: Segmentors
: Forward path
: Backward path
Figure 2: The illustration of our method from the generator view (left) and the segmentor view (right). Generator view:
Two generators learn cross-domain translation between domain A and B, which are supervised by a cycle-consistency loss, a
discriminative loss, and a shape-consistency loss (supported by segmentors), respectively. Segmentor view: Segmentors are
trained by real data and extra synthetic data translated from domain-speciﬁc generators. Best viewed in color.
Given a set of unpaired data from two domains, A and
B, CycleGAN learns two mappings, GB : A →B and
GA : B →A, with two generators GA and GB, at the same
time. To bypass the infeasibility of pixel-wise reconstruction with paired data, i.e. GB(A) ≈B or GA(B) ≈A, CycleGAN introduces an effective cycle-consistency loss for
GA(GB(A)) ≈A and GB(GA(B)) ≈B. The idea is that
the generated target domain data is able to return back to
the exact data in the source domain it is generated from. To
guarantee the ﬁdelity of fake data GB(A) and GA(B), CycleGAN uses two discriminators DA and DB to distinguish
real or synthetic data and thereby encourage generators to
synthesize realistic data .
3.2. Problems in Unpaired Volume-to-Volume
Translation
Lacking supervision with a direct reconstruction error
between GB(A) and B or GA(B) and A brings some uncertainties and difﬁculties towards to the desired outputs for
more speciﬁed tasks. And it is even more challenging when
training on 3D CNNs.
To be speciﬁc, cycle-consistency has an intrinsic ambiguity with respect to geometric transformations. For example, suppose generation functions, GA and GB, are cycle
consistent, e.g., GA(GB(A)) = A. Let T be a bijective geometric transformation (e.g., translation, rotation, scaling,
or even nonrigid transformation) with inverse transformation T −1.
It is easy to show that G
A = GA◦T and G
B = GB◦T −1
are also cycle consistent. Here, ◦denotes the concatenation
operation of two transformations. That means, using CycleGAN, when an image is translated from one domain to
the other it can be geometrically distorted. And the distortion can be recovered when it is translated back to the
original domain without provoking any penalty in data ﬁdelity cost. From the discriminator perspective, geometric
transformation does not change the realness of synthesized
images since the shape of training data is arbitrary.
Such problem can destroy anatomical structures in synthetic medical volumes, which, however, has not being addressed by existing methods.
3.3. Volume-to-Volume Cycle-consistency
To solve the task of learning generators with unpaired
volumes from two domains, A and B, we adopt the idea
of the cycle-consistency loss (described above) for generators GA and GB to force the reconstructed synthetic sample
GA(GB(xA)) and GB(GA(xB)) to be identical to their inputs xA and xB:
Lcyc(GA, GB) = ExA∼pd(xA)[||GA(GB(xA)) −xA||1]
+ ExB∼pd(xB)[||GB(GA(xB)) −xB||1],
where xA is a sample from domain A and xB is from domain B. Lcyc uses the L1 loss over all voxels, which shows
better visual results than the L2 loss.
3.4. Volume-to-Volume Shape-consistency
To solve the intrinsic ambiguity with respect to geometric transformations in cycle-consistency as we pointed out
above, our method introduces two auxiliary mappings, de-
ﬁned as SA : A →Y and SB : B →Y , to constrain the
geometric invariance of synthetic data. They map the translated data from respective domain generators into a shared
shape space Y (i.e. a semantic label space) and compute
pixel-wise semantic ownership. The two mappings are represented by two CNNs, namely segmentors. We use them
as extra supervision on the generators to support shapeconsistency (see Figure 2), by optimizing
Lshape(SA, SB, GA, GB) =
ExB∼pd(xB)[−1
Blog(SA(GA(xB))i)]
+ExA∼pd(xA)[−1
Alog(SB(GB(xA))i)],
where yA, yB ∈Y denote the groundtruth shape representation of sample volumes xA and xB, respectively, where
B ∈{0, 1, ..., C} represent one voxel with one out of
C classes. N is the total number of voxels in a volume.
Lshape is formulated as a standard multi-class cross-entropy
Regularization Shape-consistency provides a level of regularization on generators. Recall that different from ConditionalGAN, since we have no paired data, the only supervision for GA(xB) and GB(xA) is the adversarial loss, which
is not sufﬁcient to preserve all types of information in synthetic images, such as the annotation correctness. introduces a self-regularization loss between an input image and
an output image to force the annotations to be preserved.
Our shape-consistency performs a similar role to preserve
pixel-wise semantic label ownership, as a way to regularize the generators and guarantee the anatomical structure
invariance in medical volumes.
3.5. Multi-modal Volume Segmentation
The second parallel task we address in our method is
to make use of synthetic data for improving the generalization of segmentation network, which is trained together with generators. From the segmentor view (Figure
2) of SA and SB, the synthetic volumes {GB(xA), yA} and
{GA(xB), yB} provide extra training data to help improve
the segmentors in an online manner. During training, SA
and SB take both real data and synthetic data that are generated by generators online (see Figure 2). By maximizing
the usage of synthetic data, we also use reconstructed synthetic data, {GA(GB(xA)), yA} and {GB(GA(xB)), yB},
as the inputs of segmentors.
Note that the most straightforward way to use synthetic
data is fusing them with real data and then train a segmentation CNN. We denote this as an ad-hoc ofﬂine data augmentation approach. Compared with it, our method implicitly performs data augmentation in an online manner. Formulated in our optimization objective, our method can use
synthetic data more adaptively, which thereby offers more
stable training and thereby better performance than the of-
ﬂine approach. We will demonstrate this in experiments.
Figure 3: Example outputs on 2D slides of 3D cardiovascular CT and MRI images of the results using 3D CycleGAN
(second row) and ours (third row). The ﬁrst row is the input samples. The original results of CycleGAN have severe
artifacts, checkerboard effects, and missing anatomies (e.g.,
descending aorta and spine), while our method overcomes
these issues and achieves signiﬁcantly better quality.
3.6. Objective
Given the deﬁnitions of cycle-consistency and shapeconsistency losses above, we deﬁne our full objective as:
L(GA, GB, DA, DB, SA, SB) = LGAN(GA, DA)
+ LGAN(GB, DB)
+ λLcyc(GA, GB)
+ γLshape(SA, SB, GA, GB)
The adversarial loss LGAN (deﬁned in ) encourages
local realism of synthetic data (see architecture details). λ is
set to 10 and γ is set to 1 during training. To optimize LGAN
, Lcyc, and Lshape, we update them alternatively: optimizing GA/B with SA/B and DA/B ﬁxed and then optimizing
SA/B and DA/B (they are independent), respectively, with
GA/B ﬁxed.
The generators and segmentors are mutually beneﬁcial,
because to make the full objective optimized, the generators have to generate synthetic data with lower shapeconsistency loss, which, from another angle, indicates lower
segmentation losses over synthetic training data.
4. Network Architecture and Details
This section discusses necessary architecture and training details for generating high-quality 3D images.
4.1. Architecture
Training deep networks end-to-end on 3D images is
much more difﬁcult (from optimization and memory as-
Figure 4: Qualitative results of our translation from MRI to CT (ﬁrst row) and from CT to MRI (second row). For each
sample (in one out of six grids), we show three orthogonal cuts through the center of 3D volumes.
pects) than 2D images. Instead of using 2.5D or subvolumes , our method directly deals with holistic volumes. Our design trades-off network size and maximizes
its effectiveness.
There are several keys of network designs in order to achieve visually better results. The architecture of our method is composed by 3D fully convolutional layers with instance normalization (performs
better than batch normalization ) and ReLU for generators or LeakyReLU for discriminators. CycleGAN originally designs generators with multiple residual blocks .
Differently, in our generators, we make several critical modiﬁcations with justiﬁcations.
First, we ﬁnd that using both bottom and top layer representations are critical to maintain the anatomical structures
in medical images. We use long-range skip-connection in
U-net as it achieves much faster convergence and locally smooth results. ConditionalGAN also uses U-net generators, but we do not downsample feature maps as greedily
as it does. We apply 3 times downsampling with stride-
2 3×3×3 convolutions totally, so the maximum downsampling rate is 8. The upsampling part is symmetric. Two sequential convolutions are used for each resolution, as it performs better than using one. Second, we replace transposeconvolutions to stride 2 nearest upsampling followed by a
3×3×3 convolution to realize upsampling as well as channel changes.
It is also observed in that transposeconvolution can cause checkerboard artifacts due to the uneven overlapping of convolutional kernels. Actually, this
effect is even severer for 3D transpose-convolutions as one
pixel will be covered by 23 overlapping kernels (results in
8 times uneven overlapping). Figure 3 compares the results
with CycleGAN, demonstrating that our method can obtain
signiﬁcantly better visual quality1.
For discriminators, we adopt the PatchGAN proposed by
 to classify whether an overlapping sub-volume is real
or fake, rather than to classify the whole volume. Such approach limits discriminators to use unexpected information
from arbitrary volume locations to make decisions.
For segmentors, we use an U-Net , but without any
normalization layer. Totally 3 times symmetric downsampling and upsampling are performed by stride 2 max-poling
and nearest upsampling. For each resolution, we use two
sequential 3×3×3 convolutions.
4.2. Training details
We use the Adam solver for segmentors with a
learning rate of 2e−4 and closely follow the settings in CycleGAN to train generators with discriminators. In the next
section, for the purpose of fast experimenting, we choose
to pre-train the GA/B and DA/B separately ﬁrst and then
train the whole network jointly. We hypothesized that ﬁnetuning generators and segmentors ﬁrst is supposed to have
better performance because they only affect each other after they have the sense of reasonable outputs. Nevertheless, we observed that training all from scratch can also
obtain similar results. It demonstrates the effectiveness to
couple both tasks in an end-to-end network and make them
converge harmonically. We pre-train segmentors for 100
epochs and generators for 60 epochs. After jointly train-
1We have experimented many different conﬁgurations of generators
and discriminators. All trials did not achieve desired visual results compared with our conﬁguration.
Table 1: Shape quality evaluation using the proposed Sscore (see text for deﬁnition) for synthesized images. The
synthetic volumes using our method has much better shape
quality on both modalities. SC denotes shape-consistency.
S-score (%)
G w/ SC (Ours)
ing for 50 epochs, we decrease the learning rates for both
generators and segmentors steadily for 50 epochs till 0. We
found that if the learning rate decreases to a certain small
value, the synthetic images turn to show clear artifacts and
the segmentors tend to overﬁt. We apply early stop when the
segmentation loss no longer decreases for about 5 epochs
(usually takes 40 epochs to reach a desired point). In training, the number of training data in two domains can be different. We go through all data in the domain with larger
amount as one epoch.
5. Experimental Results
This section evaluates and discusses our method. We
introduce a 3D cardiovascular image dataset. Heart is a
perfect example of the difﬁculty in getting paired crossmodality data as it is a nonrigid organ and it keeps beating.
Even if there are CT and MRI scans from the same patient,
they cannot be perfectly aligned. Then we evaluate the two
tasks we addressed in our method, i.e., volume segmentation and synthesis, both qualitatively and quantitatively with
our proposed auxiliary evaluation metrics.
5.1. Dataset
We collected 4,354 contrasted cardiac CT scans from patients with various cardiovascular diseases (2−3 volumes
per patients). The resolution inside an axial slice is isotropic
and varies from 0.28 mm to 0.74 mm for different volumes.
The slice thickness (distance between neighboring slices) is
larger than the in-slice resolution and varies from 0.4 mm
to 2.0 mm. In addition, we collected 142 cardiac MRI scans
with a new compressed sensing scanning protocol.
MRI volumes have a near isotropic resolution ranging from
0.75 to 2.0 mm. This true 3D MRI scan with isotropic voxel
size is a new imaging modality, only available in handful
top hospitals. All volumes are resampled to 1.5 mm for
the following experiments. We crop 86×112×112 volumes
around the heart center. The endocardium of all four cardiac chambers is annotated. The left ventricle epicardium is
annotated too, resulting in ﬁve anatomical regions.
We denote CT as domain A data and MRI as domain
B. We organize the dataset in two sets S1 and S2. For S1,
we randomly select 142 CT volumes from all CT images
Ad-hoc approach
Our approach
Figure 5: Illustration of the strategies to use synthetic data
to improve segmentation. The left is the comparing ad-hoc
ofﬂine approach. The right in our approach that uses synthetic data from the generator in an online fashion.
to match the number of MRI volumes. For both modalities,
50% data is used as training and validation and the rest 50%
as testing data. For S2, we use all the rest 4,212 CT volumes
as an extra augmentation dataset, which is used to generate
synthetic MRI volumes for segmentation. We ﬁx the testing
data in S1 for all experiments.
5.2. Cross-domain Translation Evaluation
We evaluate the generators both qualitatively and quantitatively. Figure 4 shows some typical synthetic results of
our method. As can be observed visually, the synthetic images are close to real images and no obvious geometric distortion is introduced during image translation. Our method
well preserves cardiac anatomies like aorta and spine.
Shape invariance evaluation For methods of GANs to generate class-speciﬁc natural images, proposes to use the
Inception score to evaluate the diversity of generated images, by using an auxiliary trained classiﬁcation network.
Inspired by this, we propose the S-core (segmentation
score) to evaluate the shape invariance quality of synthetic
images. We train two segmentation networks on the training data of respective modalities and compare the multiclass Dice score of synthetic volumes.
For each synthetic volume, S-score is computed by comparing to the
groundtruth of the corresponding real volume it is translated from. Hence, higher score indicates better matched
shape (i.e. less geometric distortion). Table 1 shows the
S-score of synthetic data from CT and MRI for generators
without the shape-consistency loss, denoted as G w/o SC.
Note that it is mostly similar with CycleGAN but using our
optimized network designs. As can be seen, our method (G
w/ SC) with shape-consistency achieves large improvement
over the baseline on both modalities.
5.3. Segmentation Evaluation
Here we show how well our method can use the synthetic
data and help improve segmentation. We compare to an
ad-hoc approach as we mentioned above. Speciﬁcally, we
individually train two segmentors, denoted as ˜
We treat the segmentation performance of them as Base-
Table 2: The segmentation performance comparison. Initialized from the baseline model trained with only Real data
(Baseline (R)), the second and third rows show the boosted
results by using Synthetic data with the comparing ADA
and our method, respectively.
Dice score (%)
Baseline (R)
Ours (R+S)
line (R) in the following. Then we train generators ˜
GB with the adversarial and cycle-consistency losses (setting the weight of the shape-consistency loss to 0). Then by
adding synthetic data, we perform the following comparison:
1. Ad-hoc approach (ADA): We use ˜
GB to generate synthetic data (To make fair comparison, both
synthetic data GA/B(xB/A) and reconstructed data
GA/B(GB/A(xA/B)) are used). We ﬁne-tune ˜SA/B
using synthetic together with real data (Figure 5 left)2.
2. Our method: We join ˜
GB (also with
discriminators) and ﬁne-tune the overall networks in
an end-to-end fashion (Figure 5 right), as speciﬁed in
the training details.
Note that the comparing segmentation network is U-net
 . For medical image segmentation, U-Net is well recognized as one of the best end-to-end CNN. Its long-range skip
connection performs usually better or equal well as FCN or
ResNet/DenseNet based architectures do , especially for
small size medical datasets. The results of U-net is very representative for state-of-the-art medical image segmentation
on our dataset.
We perform this experimental procedure on S1 and S2
both. In the the ﬁrst experiment on S1, we test the scenario
that how well our method uses synthetic data to improve
segmentation given only limited real data. Since we need to
vary the number of data in one modality and ﬁx another, we
perform the experiments on both modalities, respectively.
By using 14% real data and all synthetic data from the
counter modality, Table 2 compares the segmentation results. We use the standard multi-class Dice score as the
evaluation metric .
As can be observed, our method
achieves much better performance on both modalities. For
CT segmentation, ADA even deteriorates the performance.
We speculate that it is because the baseline model trained
with very few real data has not been stabilized. Synthetic
data distracts optimization when used for training ofﬂine.
2At each training batch, we take half real and half synthetic data to
prevent possible distraction from low-quality synthetic data.
Figure 6: The qualitative evaluation of segmentation results
on MRI. We show the axial and sagittal views of two samples. Our method boosts the baseline segmentation network
with only extra synthetic data. As can be observed, the segmentation errors of the baseline are largely corrected.
While our method adapts them fairly well and leads to signiﬁcant improvement.
We also demonstrate the qualitative results of our method
in Figure 6. By only using extra synthetic data, our method
largely corrects the segmentation errors. Furthermore, we
show the results by varying the number of real data used
in Figure 7 (left and middle). Our method has consistently
better performance than the ADA. In addition, we notice
the increment is growing slower as the number of real data
increases. One reason is that more real data makes the segmentors get closer to its capacity, so the effect of extra synthetic data gets smaller. But this situation can be deﬁnitely
balanced out by increasing the size of segmentors with suf-
ﬁcient GPU memory.
The second experiment is applied on S2, which has much
more CT data, so we aim at boosting the MRI segmentor. We vary the number of used synthetic data and use all
real MRI data. Figure 7 (right) compares the results. Our
method still shows better performance. As can be observed,
our method uses 23% synthetic data to reach the accuracy
of the ADA when it uses 100% synthetic data.
5.4. Gap between synthetic and real data
Reducing the distribution gap between real and synthetic
data is the key to make synthetic data useful for segmentation. Here we show a way to interpret the gap between
Percentage (%) of R data used
Dice score (%)
CT segmentation
Baseline (R)
Ours (R+S)
Percentage (%) of R data used
Dice score (%)
MRI segmentation
Baseline (R)
Ours (R+S)
Precentage (%) of S data used
Dice score (%)
MRI segmentation
Ours (R+S)
Figure 7: The segmentation accuracy (mean Dice score) comparison to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method of using
Synthetic data to boost segmentation. The left plot shows the segmentation accuracy by varying the percentage of Real data
used for training segmentation on CT using dataset S1, using a equal number of synthetic data. Baseline (R) is trained with
only real data. Others are trained from it, e.g. ADA (R+S) is trained by adding only S data. The middle plot shows the same
experiments on MRI. The right plot shows results by varying the number of synthetic data on MRI using dataset S2 using a
equal number of real data. Our method has consistently better performance. See text for details about comparing methods.
Percentage (%) of R/S data used
Dice score (%)
Gap between R and S data
Ours (R+S)
Baseline (R+S)
Baseline (R+R)
Figure 8: The gap analysis of Real and Synthetic data.
For all comparing methods, we use one pre-trained network
with 14% real data, whose Dice score is 70.3%. Then we
vary the number of R or S data used to boost segmentation
of Baseline (R+R), Baseline (R+S), and Ours (R+S). Our
method signiﬁcantly reduces the gap for all settings.
synthetic and real data by evaluating their performance to
improve segmentation. On dataset S1, we train a MRI segmentor using 14% real data. Then we boost the segmentor
by adding 1) pure MRI real data, 2) using ADA, and 3) using our method. As shown in Figure 8, our method reduces
the gap of the ADA signiﬁcantly, i.e., by 61% given 14%
real data and 20.9% given 85% real data.
Moreover, we found that, when using the synthetic data
as augmented data ofﬂine (our comparing baseline), too
much synthetic data could diverge the network training.
While in our method, we did not observe such situation.
However, we also observe that the gap is more difﬁcult to
reduce as the number of read data increases. Although one
of reasons is due to the modal capacity, we believe the solution of this gap-reduction worth further study.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we present a method that can simultaneously learn to translate and segment medical 3D images,
which are two signiﬁcant tasks in medical imaging. Training generators for cross-domain volume-to-volume translation is more difﬁcult than that on 2D images. We address
three key problems that are important in synthesizing realistic 3D medical images: 1) learn from unpaired data, 2) keep
anatomy (i.e. shape) consistency, and 3) use synthetic data
to improve volume segmentation effectively. We demonstrate that our uniﬁed method that couples the two tasks is
more effective than solving them exclusively. Extensive experiments on a 3D cardiovascular dataset validate the effectiveness and superiority of our method.