DeeperCut: A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster
Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Eldar Insafutdinov1, Leonid Pishchulin1, Bjoern Andres1,
Mykhaylo Andriluka1,2, and Bernt Schiele1
1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany,
2Stanford University, USA
Abstract. The goal of this paper is to advance the state-of-the-art of
articulated pose estimation in scenes with multiple people. To that end we
contribute on three fronts. We propose (1) improved body part detectors
that generate eﬀective bottom-up proposals for body parts; (2) novel
image-conditioned pairwise terms that allow to assemble the proposals
into a variable number of consistent body part conﬁgurations; and (3) an
incremental optimization strategy that explores the search space more ef-
ﬁciently thus leading both to better performance and signiﬁcant speed-up
factors. Evaluation is done on two single-person and two multi-person pose
estimation benchmarks. The proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms
best known multi-person pose estimation results while demonstrating
competitive performance on the task of single person pose estimation1.
Introduction
Human pose estimation has recently made dramatic progress in particular on
standard benchmarks for single person pose estimation . This progress has
been facilitated by the use of deep learning-based architectures and by the
availability of large-scale datasets such as “MPII Human Pose” . In order to
make further progress on the challenging task of multi-person pose estimation we
carefully design and evaluate several key-ingredients for human pose estimation.
The ﬁrst ingredient we consider is the generation of body part hypotheses.
Essentially all prominent pose estimation methods include a component that
detects body parts or estimates their position. While early work used classiﬁers
such as SVMs and AdaBoost , modern approaches build on diﬀerent
ﬂavors of deep learning-based architectures . The second key ingredient
are pairwise terms between body part hypotheses that help grouping those into
valid human pose conﬁgurations. In earlier models such pairwise terms were
essential for good performance . Recent methods seem to proﬁt less from
such pairwise terms due to stronger unaries . Image-conditioned pairwise
terms however have the promise to allow for better grouping. Last but not
least, inference time is always a key consideration for pose estimation models.
1 Models and code available at 
 
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
Fig. 1. Sample multi-person pose estimation results by the proposed DeeperCut.
Often, model complexity has to be treated for speed and thus many models do
not consider all spatial relations that would be beneﬁcial for best performance.
In this paper we contribute to all three aspects and thereby signiﬁcantly
push the state of the art in multi-person pose estimation. We use a general
optimization framework introduced in our previous work as a test bed for
all three key ingredients proposed in this paper, as it allows to easily replace
and combine diﬀerent components. Our contributions are three-fold, leading to a
novel multi-person pose estimation approach that is deeper, stronger, and faster
compared to the state of the art :
– “deeper”: we propose strong body part detectors based on recent advances in
deep learning that – taken alone – already allow to obtain competitive
performance on pose estimation benchmarks.
– “stronger”: we introduce novel image-conditioned pairwise terms between
body parts that allow to push performance in the challenging case of multipeople pose estimation.
– “faster”: we demonstrate that using our image-conditioned pairwise along with
very good part detection candidates in a fully-connected model dramatically
reduces the run-time by 2–3 orders of magnitude. Finally, we introduce a
novel incremental optimization method to achieve a further 4x run-time
reduction while improving human pose estimation accuracy.
We evaluate our approach on two single-person and two multi-person pose
estimation benchmarks and report the best results in each case. Sample multiperson pose estimation predictions by the proposed approach are shown in Fig. 1.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Related work. Articulated human pose estimation has been traditionally formulated as a structured prediction task that requires an inference step combining
local observations of body joints with spatial constraints. Various formulations
have been proposed based on tree and non-tree models . The
goal of the inference process has been to reﬁne observations from local part
detectors into coherent estimates of body conﬁgurations. Models of this type have
been increasingly superseded by strong body part detectors , which has
been reinforced by the development of strong image representations based on
convolutional networks. Recent work aimed to incorporate convolutional detectors
into part-based models or design stronger detectors by combining the detector
output with location-based features .
Speciﬁcally, as we suggest in , in the presence of strong detectors spatial
reasoning results in diminishing returns because most contextual information
can be incorporated directly in the detector. In this work we elevate the task
to a new level of complexity by addressing images with multiple potentially
overlapping people. This results in a more complex structured prediction problem
with a variable number of outputs. In this setting we observe a large boost from
conducting inference on top of state-of-the-art part detectors.
Combining spatial models with convnets allows to increase the receptive ﬁeld
that is used for inferring body joint locations. For example iteratively trains
a cascade of convolutional parts detectors, each detector taking the scoremap
of all parts from the previous stage. This eﬀectively increases the depth of the
network and the receptive ﬁeld is comparable to the entire person. With the
recent developments in object detection newer architectures are composed of a
large number of layers and the receptive ﬁeld is large automatically. In this paper,
we introduce a detector based on the recently proposed deep residual networks
 . This allows us to train a detector with a large receptive ﬁeld and to
incorporate intermediate supervision.
The use of purely geometric pairwise terms is suboptimal as they do not take
local image evidence into account and only penalize deviation from the expected
joint location. Due to the inherent articulation of body parts the expected location
can only approximately guide the inference. While this can be suﬃcient when
people are relatively distant from each other, for closely positioned people more
discriminative pairwise costs are essential. Two prior works have introduced
image-dependent pairwise terms between connected body parts. While uses an
intermediate representation based on poselets our pairwise terms are conditioned
directly on the image. clusters relative positions of adjacent joints into T = 11
clusters, and assigns diﬀerent labels to the part depending on which cluster it
falls to. Subsequently a CNN is trained to predict this extended set of classes
and later an SVM is used to select the maximum scoring joint pair relation.
Single person pose estimation has advanced considerably, but the setting is
simpliﬁed. Here we focus on the more challenging problem of multi-person pose
estimation. Previous work has addressed this problem as sequence of person
detection and pose estimation . use a detector for initialization and
reasoning across people, but rely on simple geometric body part relationships
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
and only reason about person-person occlusions. focus on single partially
occluded people, and handle multi-person scenes akin to . In we propose to
jointly detect and estimate conﬁgurations, but rely on simple pairwise terms only,
which limits the performance and, as we show, results in prohibitive inference
time to fully explore the search space. Here, we innovate on multiple fronts both
in terms of speed and accuracy.
DeepCut Recap
This section summarizes DeepCut and how unary and pairwise terms are used
in this approach. DeepCut is a state-of-the-art approach to multi-person pose
estimation based on integer linear programming (ILP) that jointly estimates poses
of all people present in an image by minimizing a joint objective. This objective
aims to jointly partition and label an initial pool of body part candidates into
consistent sets of body-part conﬁgurations corresponding to distinct people. We
use DeepCut as a general optimization framework that allows to easily replace
and combine diﬀerent components.
Speciﬁcally, DeepCut starts from a set D of body part candidates, i.e. putative
detections of body parts in a given image, and a set C of body part classes, e.g.,
head, shoulder, knee. The set D of part candidates is typically generated by body
part detectors and each candidate d ∈D has a unary score for every body part
class c ∈C. Based on these unary scores DeepCut associates a cost or reward
αdc ∈R to be paid by all feasible solutions of the pose estimation problem for
which the body part candidate d is a body part of class c.
Additionally, for every pair of distinct body part candidates d, d′ ∈D and
every two body part classes c, c′ ∈C, the pairwise term is used to generate a cost
or reward βdd′cc′ ∈R to be paid by all feasible solutions of the pose estimation
problem for which the body part d, classiﬁed as c, and the body part d′, classiﬁed
as c′, belong to the same person.
With respect to these sets and costs, the pose estimation problem is cast
as an ILP in two classes of 01-variables: Variables x : D × C →{0, 1} indicate
by xdc = 1 that body part candidate d is of body part class c. If, for a d ∈D
and all c ∈C, xdc = 0, the body part candidate d is suppressed. Variables
→{0, 1} indicate by ydd′ = 1 that body part candidates d and d′ belong
to the same person. Additional variables and constraints described in link the
variables x and y to the costs and ensure that feasible solutions (x, y) well-deﬁne
a selection and classiﬁcation of body part candidates as body part classes as well
as a clustering of body part candidates into distinct people.
The DeepCut ILP is hard and hard to approximate, as it generalizes the
minimum cost multicut or correlation clustering problem which is APX-hard
 . Using the branch-and-cut algorithm to compute constant-factor
approximative feasible solutions of instances of the DeepCut ILP is not necessarily
practical. In Sec. 5 we propose an incremental optimization approach that uses
branch-and-cut algorithm to incrementally solve several instances of ILP, which
results into 4–5x run-time reduction with increased pose estimation accuracy.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Part Detectors
As argued before, strong part detectors are an essential ingredient of modern pose
estimation methods. We propose and evaluate a deep fully-convolutional human
body part detection model drawing on powerful recent ideas from semantic segmentation, object classiﬁcation and human pose estimation .
Architecture. We build on the recent advances in object classiﬁcation and
adapt the extremely deep Residual Network (ResNet)
 for human body
part detection. This model achieved excellent results on the recent ImageNet
Object Classiﬁcation Challenge and speciﬁcally tackles the problem of vanishing
gradients by passing the state through identity layers and modeling residual
functions. Our best performing body part detection model has 152 layers (c.f.
Sec. 3.2) which is in line with the ﬁndings of .
Stride. Adapting ResNet for the sliding window-based body part detection is
not straight forward: converting ResNet to the fully convolutional mode leads to
a 32 px stride which is too coarse for precise part localization. In we show
that using a stride of 8 px leads to good part detection results. Typically, spatial
resolution can be recovered by either introducing up-sampling deconvolutional
layers , or blowing up the convolutional ﬁlters using the hole algorithm .
The latter has shown to perform better on the task of semantic segmentation.
However, using the hole algorithm to recover the spatial resolution of ResNet
is infeasible due to memory constraints. For instance, the 22 residual blocks in
the conv4 bank of ResNet-101 constitute the major part of the network and
running it at stride 8 px does not ﬁt the net into GPU memory2. We thus employ
a hybrid approach. First, we remove the ﬁnal classiﬁcation as well as average
pooling layer. Then, we decrease the stride of the ﬁrst convolutional layers of the
conv5 bank from 2 px to 1 px to prevent down-sampling. Next, we add holes to
all 3x3 convolutions in conv5 to preserve their receptive ﬁeld. This reduces the
stride of the full CNN to 16 px. Finally, we add deconvolutional layers for 2x
up-sampling and connect the ﬁnal output to the output of the conv3 bank.
Receptive ﬁeld size. A large receptive ﬁeld size allows to incorporate context
when predicting locations of individual body parts. argue about the importance of large receptive ﬁelds and propose a complex hierarchical architecture
predicting parts at multiple resolution levels. The extreme depth of ResNet allows
for a very large receptive ﬁeld (on the order of 1000 px compared to VGG’s 400
px ) without the need of introducing complex hierarchical architectures. We
empirically ﬁnd that re-scaling the original image such that an upright standing
person is 340 px high leads to best performance.
Intermediate supervision. Providing additional supervision addresses the
problem of vanishing gradients in deep neural networks . In addition
to that, reports that using part scoremaps produced at intermediate stages
2 We use NVIDIA Tesla K40 GPU with 12 GB RAM
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
as inputs for subsequent stages helps to encode spatial relations between parts,
while use spatial fusion layers that learn an implicit spatial model. ResNets
address the ﬁrst problem by introducing identity connections and learning residual
functions. To address the second concern, we make a slightly diﬀerent choice: we
add part loss layers inside the conv4 bank of ResNet. We argue that it is not strictly
necessary to use scoremaps as inputs for the subsequent stages. The activations
from such intermediate predictions are diﬀerent only up to a linear transformation
and contain all information about part presence that is available at that stage of
the network. In Sec. 3.2 we empirically show a consistent improvement of part
detection performance when including intermediate supervision.
Loss functions. We use sigmoid activations and cross entropy loss function
during training . We perform location reﬁnement by predicting oﬀsets from
the locations on the scoremap grid to the ground truth joint locations .
Training. We use the publicly available ResNet implementation (Caﬀe) and
initialize from the ImageNet-pre-trained models. We train networks with SGD
for 1M iterations, starting with the learning rate lr=0.001 for 10k, then lr=0.002
for 420k, lr=0.0002 for 300k and lr=0.0001 for 300k. This corresponds to roughly
17 epochs of the MPII train set. Finetuning from ImageNet takes two days on
a single GPU. Batch normalization worsens performance, as the batch size
of 1 in fully convolutional training is not enough to provide a reliable estimate of
activation statistics. During training we switch oﬀcollection of statistics and use
the mean and variance that were gathered on the ImageNet dataset.
Evaluation of Part Detectors
Datasets. We use three public datasets: “Leeds Sports Poses” (LSP) (personcentric (PC) annotations); “LSP Extended” (LSPET) ; “MPII Human Pose”
(“Single Person”) consisting of 19185 training and 7247 testing poses. To
evaluate on LSP we train part detectors on the union of MPII, LSPET and LSP
training sets. To evaluate on MPII Single Person we train on MPII only.
Evaluation measures. We use the standard “Percentage of Correct Keypoints
(PCK)” evaluation metric and evaluation scripts from the web page
of . In addition to PCK at ﬁxed threshold, we report “Area under Curve”
(AUC) computed for the entire range of PCK thresholds.
Results on LSP. The results are shown in Tab. 1. ResNet-50 with 8 px stride
achieves 87.8% PCK and 63.7% AUC. Increasing the stride size to 16 px and
up-sampling the scoremaps by 2x to compensate for the loss on resolution slightly
drops the performance to 87.2% PCK. This is expected as up-sampling cannot
fully compensate for the information loss due to a larger stride. Larger stride
minimizes memory requirements, which allows for training a deeper ResNet-
152. The latter signiﬁcantly increases the performance (89.1 vs. 87.2% PCK,
65.1 vs. 63.1% AUC), as it has larger model capacity. Introducing intermediate
supervision further improves the performance to 90.1% PCK and 66.1% AUC, as
it constraints the network to learn useful representations in the early stages and
uses them in later stages for spatial disambiguation of parts.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Hip Knee Ank PCK AUC
ResNet-50 (8 px)
90.3 85.0 81.5 88.6
ResNet-50 (16 px + 2x up-sample)
89.8 84.6 80.4 89.3
ResNet-101 (16 px + 2x up-sample) 96.9
91.2 85.8 82.6 90.9 90.2 85.9 89.1
ResNet-152 (16 px + 2x up-sample) 97.4
91.7 85.7 82.4 90.1
+ intermediate supervision
97.4 92.7 87.5 84.4 91.5 89.9
87.2 90.1 66.1
DeepCut 
91.0 83.8 78.1 91.0
Wei et al. 
97.8 92.5 87.0 83.9 91.5 90.8 89.9 90.5 65.4
Tompson et al. 
79.2 67.9 63.4 69.5
Chen&Yuille 
78.2 71.8 65.5 73.3
Fan et al. 
75.2 65.3 64.0 75.7
Table 1. Pose estimation results (PCK) on LSP (PC) dataset.
Hip Knee Ank PCKh AUC
ResNet-152
94.1 88.6 83.9 87.2
+ intermediate supervision 96.8 95.2 89.3 84.4 88.4 83.4 78.0
DeepCut 
90.2 83.4 77.3 82.6
Tompson et al. 
90.3 80.5 74.3 77.6
Carreira et al. 
91.7 81.7 72.4 82.8
Tompson et al. 
91.9 83.9 77.8 80.9
Wei et al. 
97.8 95.0 88.7 84.0 88.4 82.8 79.4
Table 2. Pose estimation results (PCKh) on MPII Single Person.
The results are compared to the state of the art in Tab. 1. Our best model
signiﬁcantly outperforms DeepCut (90.1% PCK vs. 87.1% PCK), as it relies
on deeper detection architectures. Our model performs on par with the recent
approach of Wei et al. (90.1 vs. 90.5% PCK, 66.1 vs. 65.4 AUC). This is
interesting, as they use a much more complex multi-scale multi-stage architecture.
Results on MPII Single Person. The results are shown in Tab. 2. ResNet-152
achieves 87.8% PCKh and 60.0% AUC, while intermediate supervision slightly
improves the performance further to 88.5% PCKh and 60.8% AUC. Comparing the
results to the state of the art we observe signiﬁcant improvement over DeepCut 
(+5.9% PCKh, +4.2% AUC), which again underlines the importance of using
extremely deep model. The proposed approach performs on par with the best
know result by Wei et al. (88.5 vs. 88.5% PCKh) for the maximum distance
threshold, while slightly loosing when using the entire range of thresholds (60.8 vs.
61.4% AUC). We envision that extending the proposed approach to incorporate
multiple scales as in should improve the performance. The model trained
on the union of MPII, LSPET and LSP training sets achieves 88.3% PCKh and
60.7% AUC. The fact that the same model achieves similar performance on both
LSP and MPII benchmarks demonstrates the generality of our approach.
Image-Conditioned Pairwise Terms
As discussed in Sec. 3, a large receptive ﬁeld for the CNN-based part detectors
allows to accurately predict the presence of a body part at a given location.
However, it also contains enough evidence to reason about locations of other
parts in the vicinity. We draw on this insight and propose to also use deep
networks to make pairwise part-to-part predictions. They are subsequently used
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
Fig. 2. Visualizations of regression predictions. Top: from left shoulder to the right
shoulder (green), right hip (red), left elbow (light blue), right ankle (purple) and top of
the head (dark blue). Bottom: from right knee to the right hip (green), right ankle (red),
left knee (dark blue), left ankle (light blue) and top of the head (purple). Longer-range
predictions, such as e.g. shoulder – ankle may be less accurate for harder poses (top row,
images 2 and 3) compared to the nearby predictions. However, they provide enough
information to constrain the search space in the fully-connected spatial model.
Fig. 3. Visualization of features extracted to score the pairwise. See text for details.
to compute the pairwise probabilities and show signiﬁcant improvements for
multi-person pose estimation.
Our approach is inspired by the body part location reﬁnement described in Sec. 3.
In addition to predicting oﬀsets for the current joint, we directly regress from the
current location to the relative positions of all other joints. For each scoremap
location k = (xk, yk) that is marked positive w.r.t the joint c ∈C and for each
remaining joint c′ ∈C \ c, we deﬁne a relative position of c′ w.r.t. c as a tuple
cc′ = (xc′ −xk, yc′ −xk). We add an extra layer that predicts relative position
cc′ and train it with a smooth L1 loss function. We thus perform joint training
of body part detectors (cross-entropy loss), location regression (L1 loss) and
pairwise regression (L1 loss) by linearly combining all three loss functions. The
targets t are normalized to have zero mean and unit variance over the training
set. Results of such predictions are shown in Fig. 2.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
We then use these predictions to compute pairwise costs βdd′cc′. For any
pair of detections (d, d′) (Fig. 3) and for any pair of joints (c, c′) we deﬁne
the following quantities: locations ld, l′
d of detections d and d′ respectively;
the oﬀset prediction od
cc′ from c to c′ at location d (solid red) coming from
the CNN and similarly the oﬀset prediction od′
c′c (solid turquoise). We then
compute the oﬀset between the two predictions: ˆodd′ = ld′ −ld (marked in dashed
red). The degree to which the prediction od
cc′ agrees with the actual oﬀset ˆodd′
tells how likely d, d′ are of classes c, c′ respectively and belong to the same
person. We measure this by computing the distance between the two oﬀsets
∆f = ∥ˆodd′ −od
cc′∥2, and the absolute angle θf = |∡(ˆodd′, od
cc′)| where f stands for
forward direction, i.e from d to d′. Similarly, we incorporate the prediction od′
the backwards direction by computing ∆b = ∥ˆod′d −od′
c′c∥2 and θb = |∡(ˆod′d, od′
Finally, we deﬁne a feature vector by augmenting features with exponential terms:
fdd′cc′ = (∆f, θf, ∆b, θb, exp(−∆f), . . . , exp(−θb)).
We then use the features fdd′cc′ and deﬁne logistic model:
p(zdd′cc′ = 1|fdd′cc′, ωcc′) =
1 + exp(−⟨ωcc′, fdd′cc′⟩).
where K = (|C| × (|C| + 1))/2 parameters ωcc′ are estimated using ML.
Sampling Detections
Location reﬁnement NMS. DeepCut samples the set of detections D from the
scoremap by applying non-maximum suppression (NMS). Here, we utilize location
reﬁnement and correct grid locations with the predicted oﬀsets before applying
NMS. This pulls detections that belong to a particular body joint towards its
true location thereby increasing the density of detections around that location,
which allows to distribute the detection candidates in a better way.
Splitting of part detections. DeepCut ILP solves the clustering problem by
labeling each detection d with a single part class c and assigning it to a particular
cluster that corresponds to a distinct person. However, it may happen that the
same spatial location is occupied by more than one body joint, and therefore, its
corresponding detection can only be labeled with one of the respecting classes.
A naive solution is to replace a detection with n detections for each part class,
which would result in a prohibitive increase in the number of detections. We
simply split a detection d into several if more than one part has unary probability
that is higher than a chosen threshold s (in our case s = 0.4).
Evaluation of Pairwise
Datasets and evaluation measure. We evaluate on the challenging public
“MPII Human Pose” (“Multi-Person”) benchmark consisting of 3844 training
and 1758 testing groups of multiple overlapping people in highly articulated poses
with a variable number of parts. We perform all intermediate experiments on
a validation set of 200 images sampled uniformly at random and refer to it as
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
Hip Knee Ank
time [s/frame]
DeepCut 
DeepCut 
44.1 33.5 26.5 33.0
DeepCut 
58.3 47.4 38.9 45.2
70.9 59.8 53.1 44.4 50.0
+ location reﬁnement before NMS 70.3 61.6 52.1 43.7 50.6 47.0 40.6 52.6
Table 3. Eﬀects of proposed pairwise and unaries on the pose estimation performance
(AP) on MPII Multi-Person Val.
Hip Knee Ank
time [s/frame]
bi-directional + angle
70.3 61.6 52.1 43.7 50.6 47.0 40.6 52.6
uni-directional + angle 69.3
58.4 51.8 44.2 50.4
bi-directional
58.3 51.0 42.7 51.1
Table 4. Eﬀects of diﬀerent versions of the pairwise terms on the pose estimation
performance (AP) on MPII Multi-Person Val.
MPII Multi-Person Val. We report major results on the full testing set, and on
the subset of 288 images for the direct comparison to . We follow the oﬃcial
evaluation protocol3 and evaluate on groups using provided rough group location
and scale. In more detail, we localize each group by cropping around the group
using the provided information and use resulting crops as input to multi-person
pose estimation. The AP measure evaluating consistent body part detections
is used for performance comparison. Additionally, we report median running time
per frame measured in seconds4.
Evaluation of unaries and pairwise. The results are shown in Tab. 3. Baseline
DeepCut achieves 33.3% AP. Using the proposed pairwise signiﬁcantly improves
performance achieving 47.7% AP. This clearly shows the advantages of using
image-conditioned pairwise to disambiguate the body part assignment for multiple overlapping individuals. Remarkably, the proposed pairwise dramatically
reduce the run-time by two orders of magnitude . This
underlines the argument that using strong pairwise in the fully-connected model
allows to signiﬁcantly speed-up the inference. Using additionally the proposed
part detectors further boosts the performance (52.3 vs. 47.7% AP), which can be
attributed to better quality part hypotheses. Run-time is again almost halved,
which clearly shows the importance of obtaining high-quality part detection
candidates for more accurate and faster inference. Performing location reﬁnement
before NMS slightly improves the performance, but also reduces the run-time by
2x: this allows to increase the density of detections at the most probable body
part locations and thus suppresses more detections around the most conﬁdent
ones, which leads to better distribution of part detection candidates and reduces
confusion generated by the near-by detections. Overall, we observe signiﬁcant
performance improvement and dramatic reduction in run-time by the proposed
DeeperCut compared to the baseline DeepCut.
Ablation study of pairwise. An ablation study of the proposed image-conditioned
pairwise is performed in Tab. 4. Regressing from both joints onto the opposite
3 
4 Run-time is measured on a single core Intel Xeon 2.70GHz
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
joint’s location and including angles achieves the best performance of 52.6%
AP and the minimum run-time of 578 s/frame. Regressing from a single joint
only slightly reduces the performance to 51.1% AP, but signiﬁcantly increases
run-time by 4x: these pairwise are less robust compared to the bi-directional,
which confuses the inference. Removing the angles from the pairwise features
also decreases the performance (51.3 vs. 52.6% AP) and doubles run-time, as it
removes the information about body part orientation.
Incremental Optimization
Solving one instance of the DeepCut ILP for all body part candidates detected
for an image, as suggested in and summarized in Sec. 2, is elegant in theory
but disadvantageous in practice:
Firstly, the time it takes to compute constant-factor approximative feasible
solution by the branch-and-cut algorithm can be exponential in the number
of body part candidates in the worst case. In practice, this limits the number of
candidates that can be processed by this algorithm. Due to this limitation, it does
happen that body parts and, for images showing many persons, entire persons
are missed, simply because they are not contained in the set of candidates.
Secondly, solving one instance of the optimization problem for the entire
image means that no distinction is made between part classes detected reliably,
e.g. head and shoulders, and part classes detected less reliably, e.g. wrists, elbows
and ankles. Therefore, it happens that unreliable detections corrupt the solution.
To address both problems, we solve not one instance of the DeepCut ILP
but several, starting with only those body part classes that are detected most
reliably and only then considering body part classes that are detected less reliably.
Concretely, we study two variants of this incremental optimization approach
which are deﬁned in Tab. 5. Speciﬁcally, the procedure works as follows:
For each subset of body part classes deﬁned in Tab. 5, an instance of the
DeepCut ILP is set up and a constant-factor approximative feasible solution
computed using the branch-and-cut algorithm. This feasible solution selects,
labels and clusters a subset of part candidates, namely of those part classes that
are considered in this instance. For the next instance, each cluster of body part
candidates of the same class from the previous instance becomes just one part
candidate whose class is ﬁxed. Thus, the next instance is an optimization problem
for selecting, labeling and clustering body parts that have not been determined
by previous instances. Overall, this allows us to start with more part candidates
consistently and thus improve the pose estimation result signiﬁcantly.
Evaluation of Incremental Optimization
Results are shown in Tab. 6. Single stage optimization with |D| = 100 part
detection candidates achieves 52.6% AP (best from Tab. 3). More aggressive
NMS with radius of 24 px improves the performance (54.5 vs. 52.6% AP), as it
allows to better distribute detection candidates. Increasing |D| to 150 slightly
improves the performance by +0.6% AP, but signiﬁcantly increases run-time
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
head, shoulders
hips, knees
elbows, wrists
hips, knees
Table 5. As the run-time of the DeepCut branch-and-cut algorithm limits the number
of part candidates that can be processed in practice, we split the set of part classes
into subsets, coarsely and ﬁnely, and solve the pose estimation problem incrementally.
Hip Knee Ank
time [s/frame]
1-stage optimize, 100 det, nms 1x 70.3
61.6 52.1 43.7 50.6
1-stage optimize, 100 det, nms 2x 71.3
64.1 55.8 44.1 53.8
1-stage optimize, 150 det, nms 2x 74.1
65.6 56.0 44.3 54.4
2-stage optimize
66.8 58.8 46.1 54.1
3-stage optimize
69.3 58.4 47.5 55.1
+ split detections
78.5 70.5 59.7 48.7 55.4 50.6 44.4 58.7
DeepCut 
44.1 33.5 26.5 33.0
Table 6. Performance (AP) of diﬀerent hierarchical versions of DeeperCut on MPII
Multi-Person Val.
(1041 vs. 596 s/frame). We found |D| = 150 to be maximum total number of
detection candidates (11 per part) for which optimization runs in a reasonable time.
Incremental optimization of 2-stage inference slightly improves the performance
(56.5 vs. 55.1% AP) as it allows for a larger number of detection candidates per
body part (20) and leverages typically more conﬁdent predictions of the upper
body parts in the ﬁrst stage before solving for the entire body. Most importantly, it
halves the median run-time from 1041 to 483 s/frame. Incremental optimization
of 3-stage inference again almost halves the run-time to 271 s/frame while
noticeably improving the human pose estimation performance for all body parts
but elbows achieving 57.6% AP. These results clearly demonstrate the advantages
of the proposed incremental optimization. Splitting the detection candidates
that simultaneously belong to multiple body parts with high conﬁdence slightly
improves the performance to 58.7% AP. This helps to overcome the limitation
that each detection candidate can be assigned to a single body part and improves
on cases where two body parts overlap thus sharing the same detection candidate.
We also compare the obtained results to DeepCut in Tab. 6 (last row). The
proposed DeeperCut outperforms baseline DeepCut (58.7 vs. 33.3% AP) by
almost doubling the performance, while run-time is reduced dramatically by 3
orders of magnitude from the infeasible 259220 s/frame to aﬀordable 270 s/frame.
This comparison clearly demonstrates the power of the proposed approach and
dramatic eﬀects of better unary, pairwise and optimization on the overall pose
estimation performance and run-time.
Comparison to the State of the Art
We compare to others on MPII Multi-Person Test and WAF datasets.
Results on MPII Multi-Person. For direct comparison with DeepCut we
evaluate on the same subset of 288 testing images as in . Additionally, we
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Hip Knee Ank
time [s/frame]
subset of 288 images as in 
DeeperCut (1-stage)
79.4 66.1 57.9 63.5
87.5 82.8 70.2 61.6 66.0 60.6 56.5 69.7
DeepCut 
71.8 57.9 39.9 56.7
DeeperCut (1-stage)
65.4 54.9 45.2 52.3
79.1 72.2 59.7 50.0 56.0 51.0 44.6 59.4
Faster R-CNN + unary 64.9
62.9 53.4 44.1 50.7
full set, excluding out-of-group predictions
89.4 84.5 70.4 59.3 68.9 62.7 54.6 70.0
Faster R-CNN + unary 75.1
73.6 62.7 51.0 61.1
Table 7. Pose estimation results (AP) on MPII Multi-Person.
provide the results on the entire testing set. Results are shown in Tab. 7. DeeperCut
without incremental optimization already outperforms DeepCut by a large margin
(66.2 vs. 54.1% AP). Using 3-stage incremental optimization further improves the
performance to 69.7% AP improving by a dramatic 16.5% AP over the baseline.
Remarkably, the run-time is reduced from 57995 to 230 s/frame, which is an
improvement by two orders of magnitude. Both results underline the importance
of strong image-conditioned pairwise terms and incremental optimization to
maximize multi-person pose estimation performance at the reduced run-time. A
similar trend is observed on the full set: 3-stage optimization improves over a
single stage optimization (59.4 vs. 54.7% AP). We observe that the performance
on the entire testing set is over 10% AP lower compared to the subset and runtime is doubled. This implies that the subset of 288 images is easier compared to
the full testing set. We envision that performance diﬀerences between DeeperCut
and DeepCut on the entire set will be at least as large as when compared on
the subset. We also compare to a strong two-stage baseline: ﬁrst each person
is pre-localized by applying the state-of-the-art detector following by NMS
and retaining rectangles with scores at least 0.8; then pose estimation for each
rectangle is performed using DeeperCut unary only. Being signiﬁcantly faster (1
s/frame) this approach reaches 51.0% AP vs. 59.4% AP by DeeperCut, which
clearly shows the power of joint reasoning by the proposed approach.
Excluding out-of-group predictions. Qualitative analysis of group crops
generated by our cropping procedure reveals that crops often include people from
other groups due to excessive crop sizes. DeeperCut is being penalized for correctly
predicting poses of such individuals outside of each group: in AP-based evaluation
such predictions are treated as false positives thus signiﬁcanly decreasing the AP
performance. In order to address this issue we exclude such predictions in the
following way: we extend provided bounding box aroud each group’s center by a
constant padding (37 pixels in the scale-normalized image), and use the extended
bounding box to ﬁlter out all predicted poses whose centers of mass fall outside of
the bounding box. This signiﬁcantly improves DeeperCut results (70.0 vs. 59.4%
AP), as well as the results of the baseline two-stage approach (59.7 vs. 51.0% AP).
Proposed DeeperCut signiﬁcantly improves over the strong two-stage baseline
(70.0 vs. 59.7% AP), which is in agreement with our observations reported above.
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
Head U Arms L Arms Torso mPCP AOP
DeeperCut nms 3.0
DeepCut 
Ghiasi et al. 
Eichner&Ferrari 97.6
Chen&Yuille 
Table 8. Pose estimation results (mPCP) on WAF dataset.
time [s/frame]
92.6 81.1 75.7 78.8 82.0
DeepCut 
80.8 73.7 73.6 76.2
Chen&Yuille 83.3
56.1 46.3 35.5 55.3
Table 9. Pose estimation results (AP) on WAF dataset.
Results on WAF. Results using the oﬃcial evaluation protocol assuming
mPCP and AOP evaluation measures and considering detection bounding boxes
provided by are shown in Tab. 8. DeeperCut achieves the best result improving
over the state of the art DeepCut (86.3 vs. 84.7% mPCP, 88.1 vs. 86.5% AOP).
Noticeable improvements are observed both for upper (+2.3% mPCP) and
lower (+2.4% mPCP) arms. However, overall performance diﬀerences between
DeeperCut and the baseline DeepCut are not as pronounced compared to MPII
Multi-Person dataset. This is due to the fact that actual diﬀerences are washed
out by the peculiarities of the mPCP evaluation measure: mPCP assumes that
people are pre-detected and human pose estimation performance is evaluated only
for people whose upper body detections match the ground truth. Thus, a pose
estimation method is not penalized for generating multiple body pose predictions,
since the only pose prediction is considered whose upper body bounding box best
matches the ground truth. We thus re-evaluate the competing approaches 
using the more realistic AP evaluation measure5. The results are shown in Tab. 9.
DeeperCut signiﬁcantly improves over DeepCut (82.0 vs. 76.2% AP). The largest
boost in performance is achieved for head (+16.0% AP) and wrists (+5.2% AP):
DeeperCut follows incremental optimization strategy by ﬁrst solving for the most
reliable body parts, such as head and shoulders, and then using the obtained
solution to improve estimation of harder body parts, such as wrists. Most notably,
run-time is dramatically reduced by 3 orders of magnitude from 22000 to 13
s/frame. These results clearly show the advantages of the proposed approach
when evaluated in the real-world detection setting. The proposed DeeperCut also
outperforms by a large margin. The performance diﬀerence is much more
pronounced compared to using mPCP evaluation measure: in contrast to mPCP,
AP penalizes multiple body pose predictions of the same person. We envision
that better NMS strategies are likely to improve the AP performance of .
Conclusion
In this paper we signiﬁcantly advanced the state of the art in articulated multiperson human pose estimation. To that end we carefully re-designed and thor-
5 We used publicly-available pose predictions of for all people in WAF dataset.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
oughly evaluated several key ingredients. First, drawing on the recent advances in
deep learning we proposed strong extremely deep body part detectors that – taken
alone – already allow to obtain state of the art performance on standard pose
estimation benchmarks. Second, we introduce novel image-conditioned pairwise
terms between body parts that allow to signiﬁcantly push the performance in the
challenging case of multi-people pose estimation, and dramatically reduce the
run-time of the inference in the fully-connected spatial model. Third, we introduced a novel incremental optimization strategy to further reduce the run-time
and improve human pose estimation accuracy. Overall, the proposed improvements allowed to almost double the pose estimation accuracy in the challenging
multi-person case while reducing the run-time by 3 orders of magnitude.
Appendix A
Qualitative Evaluation on MPII
Multi-Person Dataset
We perform qualitative analysis of the proposed DeeperCut approach on MPII
Multi-Person dataset. First, we visualize novel image-conditioned pairwise terms.
Then, we demonstrate successful and failure cases of the proposed approach.
Image-Conditioned Pairwise
In order to visually analyze the proposed pairwise terms for a particular body
part c, we proceed as follows. First, we randomly select a person in the image.
Next, for each body part c′ ̸= c we ﬁx location of c′ at its ground truth location
(to separate the eﬀects of possible misdetection) and predict the location of c
using the learned regressor. Then, we compute the pairwise probability p(cc′)6 for
every possible location of c in the image. Fig. 4, rows 1–5, shows the probability of
c =right knee anywhere in the image given the ﬁxed location of other body parts.
It can be seen that individual pairwise scoremaps have shape of cone extending
towards the correct location, but are visually quite fuzzy. In order to visualize the
eﬀects of the pairwise predictions interacting in the fully-connected spatial model,
we combine individual scoremaps by multiplying them. Combined scoremap
is shown in Fig. 4, row 6. Clearly, interplay of individual pairwise scoremaps
produces a strong evidence for a single right knee of a selected individual. This
is in contrast to multi-modal unary scoremaps (Fig. 4, row 7) that show a strong
response of any knee in the image. This clearly shows that the proposed pairwise
terms can be successfully used to ﬁlter out body part locations belonging to
multiple people thus eﬀectively disambiguating between individuals. Fig. 5 shows
more examples of combined pairwise scoremaps for each body part of randomly
selected individuals, and unary scoremaps. It can be seen that although combined
pairwise scoremaps are more fuzzy compared to the unary scoremaps, they allow
to ﬁlter out the body part detections of other individuals when predicting the
pose of the person in question.
6 We intentionally simplify the notation compared to Eq. (1).
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
p(r knee | r ankle)
p(r knee | r hip)
p(r knee | l ankle)
p(r knee | l knee)
p(r knee | l hip)
p(r knee | r wrist)
p(r knee | r elbow)
p(r knee | r shoulder)
p(r knee | l wrist)
p(r knee | l elbow)
p(r knee | l shoulder)
p(r knee | chin)
p(r knee | top head)
Fig. 4. Visualizations of the pairwise probabilities when the right knee of the middle
person is used as target and ﬁxed locations of other body parts as source. See text for
explanation.
A Deeper, Stronger, and Faster Multi-Person Pose Estimation Model
Fig. 5. Visualizations of all unary scoremaps (rows 2, 4 and 6) and all combined pairwise
scoremaps (rows 1, 3 and 5). Pairwise scoremaps are visualized for a randomly selected
individual to avoid clutter: for each target body part individual predictions from all
other body parts are obtained and combined the same way as in Fig. 4. Color-coding
corresponds to diﬀerent body parts. Multiple scoremaps are overlaid on the same image
for visualization purposes.
E. Insafutdinov, L. Pishchulin, B. Andres, M. Andriluka, and B. Schiele
Examples of Successful and Failure Cases
In Fig. 6 we include additional examples of successful pose estimation results
by DeeperCut. The proposed approach correctly resolves cases with only subset
of body parts of a person visible in the image. For example, in the image 4 it
correctly outputs only visible parts for the person shown in red. DeeperCut is
also able to correctly assemble body parts even for rare body articulations as in
the image 25. Remarkably, the proposed approach also correctly handles cases of
strong partial occlusions. For example, in the image 1 body parts are correctly
associated to subjects shown in blue, cyan and magenta, even though only small
portion of the cyan subject is visible in the image.
We illustrate and analyze the failure cases of DeeperCut in Fig. 7. The included
examples further illustrate the diﬃculty of the task of jointly estimating body
articulations of multiple people. We identify several prominent failure modes,
and include examples for each mode. First row shows examples of cases when
DeeperCut generates a body conﬁguration by merging body parts of several people.
In these examples the proposed pairwise terms failed to disambiguate between
people due to their close proximity in the image. For example, in the image
7 DeeperCut groups left and right limbs of the dancing pair. In the resulting
conﬁguration the positions of upper limbs are geometrically consistent with
each other, but are not consistent with respect to their appearance. Modeling
consistency in appearance between left and right extremities should help to
mitigate this type of errors and we will aim to address this in the future work.
Another type of errors shown at the bottom of Fig. 7 corresponds to cases when
DeeperCut outputs spurious body conﬁgurations that can not be assigned to
any ground-truth annotation. This happens either when body parts of the same
person are grouped into several distinct clusters, or when a consistent body
conﬁguration is formed from detections in background. Both of these cases are
penalized by the AP evaluation measure. In Fig. 7 we also visualize examples of
failures due to confusion between similarly looking left and right limbs as in the
image 10 and occasional failures of pose estimation on rare body conﬁgurations
as in image 14.