Hierarchical Face Parsing via Deep Learning
Ping Luo1,3
Xiaogang Wang2,3
Xiaoou Tang1,3
1Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 
 
 
This paper investigates how to parse (segment) facial
components from face images which may be partially occluded.
We propose a novel face parser, which recasts
segmentation of face components as a cross-modality data
transformation problem, i.e., transforming an image patch
to a label map. Speciﬁcally, a face is represented hierarchically by parts, components, and pixel-wise labels. With this
representation, our approach ﬁrst detects faces at both the
part- and component-levels, and then computes the pixelwise label maps (Fig.1). Our part-based and componentbased detectors are generatively trained with the deep belief
network (DBN), and are discriminatively tuned by logistic
regression. The segmentators transform the detected face
components to label maps, which are obtained by learning
a highly nonlinear mapping with the deep autoencoder. The
proposed hierarchical face parsing is not only robust to partial occlusions but also provide richer information for face
analysis and face synthesis compared with face keypoint detection and face alignment. The effectiveness of our algorithm is shown through several tasks on 2, 239 images selected from three datasets (e.g., LFW , BioID and
CUFSF ).
1. Introduction
Explicitly parsing face images into different facial components implies analyzing the semantic constituents (e.g.,
mouth, nose, and eyes) of human faces, and is useful for a
variety of tasks, including recognition, animation, and synthesis. All these applications bring new requirements on
face analysis—robustness to pose, background, and occlusions. Existing works, including both face keypoint detection and face alignment, focus on localizing a number of
landmarks, which implicitly cover the regions of interest.
The main idea of these methods is to ﬁrst initialize the locations of the landmarks (i.e., mean shape) by classiﬁcation
or regression, and then to reﬁne them by template match-
Figure 1. Hierarchical representation of face parsing (a). A face image
is parsed by combining part-based face detection (b), component-based
face detection (c), and component segmentation (d). There are four partbased detectors (left/right/upper/lower-half face) and six component-based
detectors (left/right eye, left/right eyebrow, nose and mouth). Each component detector links to a novel component segmentator. (d) shows that the
segmentators can transform the detected patches to label maps (1st, 2nd
columns) and we obtain the ﬁne-label maps after hysteresis thresholding
(3rd). (e) is the image segmentation result (i.e., groups into 2 and 10 clusters) obtained by normalized cut.
ing or graphical models (e.g., M-
RF) . In this work, we study the problem from a
new point of view and focus on computing the pixel-wise
label map of a face image as shown in Fig.1 (d). It provides
richer information for further face analysis and synthesis
such as 3D modeling and face sketching ,
comparing to the results obtained by face keypoint detection and face alignment. This task is challenging and existing image segmentation approaches cannot achieve satisfactory results without human interaction. An example is
shown in Fig.1(e). Inspired by the success of deep autoencoder , which can transform high-dimensional data into
low-dimensional code and then recover the data from the
code within single modality, we recast face component segmentation as a cross-modality data transformation problem,
and propose an alternative deep learning strategy to directly learn a highly non-linear mapping from images to label
978-1-4673-1228-8/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE
Figure 2. (a) and (b) deﬁne parts and components, which correspond to
the nodes in Fig.1 (a). Red points are the positions of parts (a) or components (b). Red boxes are extracted image patches for training. (c) shows
the spatial relationship (i.e., orientation and position) between parts and
components.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical face parser. A
face is represented hierarchically by parts, components, and
pixel-wise labels (Fig.1 (a)). With this representation, our
approach ﬁrst detects faces at both the part- and componentlevels, and then computes the pixel-wise label maps. The
deformable part- and component-based detectors are incorporated by extending the conventional Pictorial model in
a hierarchical fashion. As shown in Fig.1 (a), each node at
the upper three layers is a detector generatively pre-trained
by Deep Belief Network (DBN) and discriminatively tuned with logistic regression (sec.3.2). At the bottom
layer, each node is associated with a component segmentator, which is fully trained on a dataset with patch-label map
pairs by a modiﬁed deep autoencoder (sec.3.3). Then,
we demonstrate that with this model, a greedy search algorithm with a data-driven strategy is sufﬁcient to efﬁciently
yield good parsing results (sec.3.1). The effectiveness of
hierarchical face parsing is demonstrated through the applications of face alignment and detection of facial keypoints,
and it outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
1.1. Related Work
Recent approaches of scene parsing provide an alternative view for face analysis, which is to compute the
pixel-wise label maps . This representation offers richer information and robustness compared with the existing
face alignment and key point detection methods.
Active Shape Model (ASM) is a well established and
representative face alignment algorithm, and has many variants . They heavily rely on good initialization
and do not work well on images taken in unconstrained environments, where shape and appearance may vary greatly. Starting with multiple initial shapes is a natural way to
overcome this problem . For instance, in order to be
robust to noise, the Markov Shape Model samples
many shapes by combining the local line segments and appearances as constraints. Although such methods reduce the
dependence on initialization, they are computationally expensive since a large number of examples have to be drawn;
otherwise, the matching may get stuck at local minimum.
To improve computational efﬁciency and to be robust
to pose variations and background clutters, it has become
Figure 3. Compare the alignment results of ((a)-(d)) and ours ((e)-
(h)) when face images are partially occluded. Landmarks can be easily
obtained from the label maps obtained by our approach. The white boxes
indicate the initial face detection results employed in . It is not accurate
in (a) due to occlusion. The blues boxes indicate the results of component
detection. The red boxes indicate the results of part-based detectors employed in our approach.
popular to adopt discriminative approaches in facial analysis . For example, the BoRMaN method 
and the Regression ASM were proposed to detect facial
features or components using boosting classiﬁers on small
image patches. A component-based discriminative search
algorithm extended the Active Appearance Model
(AAM) by combining the facial-component detectors
and the direction classiﬁers, which predict the shifting directions of the detected components.
However, the aforementioned approaches have two
drawbacks. First, it is difﬁcult for a single detector to
accurately locate an occluded face for initialization. Thus,
the matching process fails to converge since the initial shape
is far away from the optimal solution as shown in Fig.3
(a). Our method adopts multiple hierarchical deformable
part- and component-based detectors and is more robust to
partial occlusions. Second, since face detection and shape
matching are optimized alternately, we empirically observe
that even though the face components can be well detected,
shape matching may still converge to a local minima because the correlation between shape and image appearance
is not well captured as shown in Fig.3 (a)(c). Our method
employs DBN to establish strong correlations between images and shapes by estimating the label maps directly from
the detected image patches. See Fig.1 (d) and Fig.3 (f)(h)
for details.
2. A Bayesian Formulation
Our hierarchical face parsing can be formulated under
a Bayesian framework, under which the detectors and segmentators can be explained as likelihoods, and spatial consistency can be explained as priors.
Let I be an input image and L be a set of class labels of
all the detectors. Here, L = {ℓr, ℓp
i=1..4 (see the upper
three layers of Fig.1 (a))1. Under the Bayesian Framework,
our objective is to compute a solution θ that maximizes a
posterior probability, p(θ|I, L). Therefore,
arg max p(I, L|θ)p(θ)
arg max log p(I, L|θ) + log p(θ).
After taking “log”, the objective value is equivalent to a
summation of a set of scores. In other words, our problem
is, given a facial image I, to hierarchically ﬁnd the most
possible parsing representation θ = (V r, V p, V c, V s, E),
which contains a set of nodes and edges.
More specifically, V r/p/c = {vr/p/c
are the root detector (K = 1), part detectors (K = 4),
and component detectors (K = 6) respectively.
(Erp, Epc) indicates the spatial relations among the upper
three layers. Here, we denote the component segmentators
as V s = {vs
i, φi, Λi)}6
i=1. In particular, a node is
described by a bounding box b, a binary variable λ ∈{0, 1}
that indicates whether this node is occluded (“oﬀ”) or not
(“on”), and a set of deep learning parameters ρ and φ2. Λ
denotes the label map of the corresponding component.
2.1. The Scores of Spatial Consistency
Here, log p(θ) in Eq.1 is the score of spatial consistency,
which is modeled as a hierarchical pictorial structure.
p(θ) is the prior probability, measuring the spatial compatibility between a face and its parts, and also between
each part and the components. Hence, we have p(θ) =
p(Erp|vr)p(Epc|V p), in which Erp = {< vr, vp
i=1 and Epc = {< vp
V c}j=1..6
i=1..4 indicate two edge set (Fig.1 (a)). In this paper,
we consider orientations and locations as two kinds of spatial constraints. Therefore, the prior p(Erp|vr) can be
factorized as,
p(Erp|vr) =
p(o(br, bp
i )|λr)p(d(br, bp
Here, the functions o(·, ·) and d(·, ·) respectively calculate the relative angle and the normalized Euclidean distance between the centers of two bounding boxes br and
For example, in Fig.2 (c), we illustrate the spatial
constraints of the right eye related to the left-half face.
We model the probabilities of these two spatial relations
as Gaussian distributions. For instance, p(o(br, bp)|λr =
1In our experiment (sec.3.4), ℓr ∈R2, ∀ℓp
i ∈R5, ∀ℓc
j ∈R7, each
vector indicates class label of the node and has a 1-of-K representation.
Consider “mouth (ℓc
5)” as an example, the 5-th element is set to be 1 and
all the other are 0, and the 7-th element denotes the class of background.
2ρ = (ρdbn, ρreg) includes the parameters for DBN and logistic regression. φ will be written as φae in later derivation which denotes the
parameters for the deep autoencoder.
1) = N(o(br, bp); μbrbp, Σbrbp)3. Similarly, the prior of
p(Epc|V p) can be factorized in the same way.
2.2. The Scores of Detectors and Segmentators
log p(I, L|θ) in Eq.1 can be explained as the sum of the
scores of detectors and segmentators, and they are modeled
through DBNs and deep autoencoders respectively.
Let Ib be the image patch occupied by the bounding box
b. The likelihood probability, p(I, L|θ), can be factorized
into the likelihood of each node as,
i∈{r,p1,...,p4,c1,...,c6}
p(Ibi, ℓi|vi)
segmentator
By applying the Bayes rule, we formulate the likelihood of each detector as p(Ib, ℓ|v)
p(Ib; ρdbn) ×
p(ℓ|Ib, ρdbn; ρreg)4, and the likelihood of each component
segmentator as p(Ibs|vs) = p(Ibs|Λs; φs
We model the ﬁrst term of the detector’s likelihood by
DBN and discuss details in sec.3.2, and the second term
evaluates how likely a node should be located on a certain
image patch, is derived as below,
p(ℓ|Ib, b, λ, ρdbn; ρreg) ∝exp{−∥ℓ−f(Ib, ρdbn; ρreg) ∥1},
where, given an image patch, f(·, ·) is a softmax function
that predicts its class label based on the learned parameters
ρdbn and ρreg. Furthermore, the likelihood of the segmentator has the following form6 and its parameters are learned
by deep autoencoders (sec.3.3),
p(Ibs|Λs, bs, λs; φs
exp{−min{g1(Ibs|Λs; φs
ae), ..., gk(Ibs|Λs
Here, we learn k deep autoencoders to estimate the label
maps of a facial component and return the one with the minimal cross-entropy error gk(·, ·)7.
3. Hierarchical Face Parsing
Before we discuss the details, we ﬁrst give an overview
of our algorithm in sec.3.1.
After that, we describe our
methods for learning the detectors in sec.3.2 and the segmentators in sec.3.3.
3When a node is “oﬀ”, log p(o(br, bp)|λr = 0) = ϵ, where ϵ is a
sufﬁciently small negative number.
4We drop the superscripts r/p/c here.
5Note that the random variables b and λ are omitted for simplicity in
the derivation of the likelihoods.
6Eq.4 and Eq.5 are deﬁned when λ = 1. Please refer to footnote 3 for
the situation that λ = 0.
7gk(·, ·) evaluates the cross-entropy error between the input image
patch and the reconstructed one under the k-th deep autoencoder.
Figure 4. The parsing process. In practice, we adopt the HOG features
from and each testing image (a) is described by a HOG feature pyramid
similar to . (b) shows the scores of the “face” and the “right-half face”
detectors. Note that the former one evaluates all positions while the latter
one evaluates only a small portion. (c) illustrates the scores of component
segmentators and the transformed label maps.
3.1. Data-driven Greedy Search Algorithm
Our data-driven greedy search algorithm can be separated into two steps: part-based face detection and component
segmentation. For the ﬁrst step, we assume that the nodes of
root and parts are visible (i.e., λ = 1), then we sequentially evaluate their detectors with the sliding window scheme.
Once a node has been activated, the other nodes, guided by
the data-driven information, will only search within a certain range. For instance, as shown in Fig.4 (b), the root detector tests all positions while the detector of the right-half
face tests only a small portion. After running all ﬁve detectors, we combine the scores together, resulting in a good
hypothesis of the face’s position. Such strategy for object
detection is fully evaluated in , where convincing results
are reported. For the second step, we use the component
detectors to search the components on the previously proposed location (Fig.4 (c)). If a component is activated, its
corresponding segmentator is performed to output the label
map. Eventually, the ﬁnal score of the parsing is achieved
by summing up the scores of spatial constraints (sec.2.1),
detection (Eq.4), and segmentation (Eq.5). Moreover, the
result will be pruned by a threshold learned on a validation
set. We summarize the algorithm in Algorithm.1.
Data-driven strategy 1. To improve the search algorithm, we solve a localization problem that is to determine the
angle and distance between a detected and an undetected
node. For example, as illustrated in Fig.2 (c), given the location of the detected left-half face, we decide to predict the
coordinates of the undetected right eye. We deal with this
problem by training two regressors: the ﬁrst one estimates
the angle α, and the second one ﬁnds the distance β. The
Support Vector Regression is adopted to learn these two
regressors.
Algorithm 1: Hierarchical Face Parsing
Input: an image I and the class label set L
Output: label maps of facial components
1) Part-based detection:
(1) evaluate face or part detectors on I according to sec.3.2 in a
data-driven fashion
(2) hypothesize the face’s or parts’s position by calculating the
scores of spatial constraints (Eq.2) and detection (Eq.4)
2) Component segmentation:
(1) detect the components around the location proposed by 1)
(2) if a component is detected, then estimate its label map
(3) compute the scores according to sec.2.1 and Eq.5
3) Combine the scores of 1) and 2) together, if the ﬁnal score is
larger than a threshold, then output the result.
Data-driven strategy 2. It is not necessary for us to enumerate all the combinations of the binary variable λ. If a
node is not detectable, its λ is set to zero8.
3.2. Learning Detectors
In this paper, we model our detectors by deep belief
network (DBN), which is unsupervisedly pre-trained using
layer-wise Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) and
supervisedly ﬁne-tuned for classiﬁcation using logistic regression. Here, given image patches Ib as the training samples (i.e., inputs in Fig.5 (a)), a DBN with K layers models the joint distribution between Ib and K hidden layers
h1, ..., hk as follows:
p(Ib, h1, ..., hk; ρdbn) =
p(hk|hk+1; ρdbn))p(hK−1, hK; ρdbn),
= h0, p(hk|hk+1; ρdbn)) is a visible-givenhidden conditional distribution of the RBM at level k, and
p(hK−1, hK; ρdbn) is the joint distribution at the top-level
RBM. Speciﬁcally, as illustrated in Fig.5 (a), learning the
paraments ρ = (ρdbn, ρreg) of each detector includes two
stages: ﬁrst, ρdbn = {Wi, ui, zi}i=1..3 are estimated by
pre-training the DBN using three RBMs layer-wisely. Then,
we randomly initialize ρreg = (Wr, ur), and the initialized parameters ρreg along with the pre-trained parameters
ρdbn are ﬁne-tuned by logistic regression. This logistic regression layer maps the outputs of the last hidden layer to
class labels and is optimized by minimizing the loss function between label hypothesis (ℓ) and ground truth (ℓ). In
the following, we discuss how to estimate ρdbn by RBM in
As the building block of DBN (see Fig.5 (a)), a RBM is
an undirected two-layer graphical model with hidden units
(h) and input units (Ib). There are symmetric connections
(i.e., weights W) between the hidden and visible units, but
8No need to evaluate the scores related to them.
This is different
from , where all part ﬁlters are visible.
Figure 5. Illustration of learning process. We employ a four-layer DBN to model our detectors (a). The DBN is trained by layer-wise RBMs and tuned by
logistic regression. Then, we propose a deep training strategy containing two steps to train the segmentators: ﬁrst, we train a deep autoencoder (c), whose
ﬁrst layer are replaced by a one-layer denoising autoencoder (b). The deep autoencoder is tuned in one modality, while the one-layer autoencoder is tuned
in both modalities. Each trained segmentator can directly output the label map using an image patch as input (d).
no connections within them. It deﬁnes a marginal probability over Ib using an energy model as below,
p(Ib; ρdbn) =
exp{zT Ib + uT h + hT WIb}
where Z is the partition function and z, u are the offset vector for input units and hidden units respectively. In our case,
the conditional probabilities of p(h|I) and p(I|h) can be
simply modeled by products of Bernoulli distributions:
p(hi = 1|I) = sigm(ui + Wi·I),
p(Ij = 1|h) = sigm(zj + WT
sigm(·) is the sigmoid function. The parameters ρdbn can
be estimated by taking gradient steps determined by the
contrastive divergence .
3.3. Learning Segmentators
In this section, we introduce a deep learning approach
for training the component segmentators, which transform image patches to label maps.
The data transformation problem has been well examined by deep architectures
(i.e., multilayer network) in previous methods. Nevertheless, they mainly focus on single modality, such as deep
autoencoder and deep denoising autoencoder .
The former one encodes high-dimensional data into lowdimensional code and decodes the original data from it,
while the latter one learns a more robust encoder and decoder which can recover the data even though they are heavily corrupted by noise. By combining and extending the existing works, we propose a deep training strategy containing
two portions: we train 1) a deep autoencoder, whose ﬁrst
layer is replaced by 2) a one-layer denoising autoencoder.
In the following, we explain how to generate the training
data ﬁrst, and then discuss the above two steps in detail.
To learn a mapping from images to label maps, we must
explore the correlations between them. Therefore, unlike
sec.3.2 where only image data are used for training, here
we concatenate the images and ground truth label maps together as a training set. Since our purpose is to output label
map given only image as input, we augment this training set
by adding samples that have zero values of the label map
and original values of the image (see Fig.5 (b)(c)). In other
words, half of the training data has only image (i.e., (Ib, 0)),
while the other half has both image and ground truth label map (i.e., (Ib, Λ)). Similar strategy is adopted by ,
which learns features by using data from different modalities in order to improve the performance of classiﬁcation
performed in single modality.
1) Deep Autoencoder. As shown in Fig.5 (c), we establish a four-layer deep autoencoder, whose parameters ρae
can be deﬁned as {Wi, ui, zi}i=1..2. The weights and offset vector for the ﬁrst layer are achieved by a one-layer denoising autoencoder introduced in step 2). We estimate the
weights of the second layer by RBM, and the weights of the
upper two layers are tied similar to (i.e., W3 = W2T ,
W4 = W1T ). Then, the whole network is tuned in single
modality, that is minimizing the cross-entropy error LH between the outputs at the top layer (i.e., reconstructed label
maps Λ) and the targets (i.e., ground truth label maps Λ).
2) One-layer denoising autoencoder. Modeling the lowlevel relations between data from different modalities is crucial but not a trivial task. Therefore, to improve the performance of the deep network, we specially learn its ﬁrst
layer with a denoising autoencoder as shown in Fig.5
(b). Such shallow network is again pre-trained by RBM, but
tuned in both modalities (i.e., images and label maps). Note
that in the ﬁne-tuning stage, only the images and the ground
truth label maps are used as the targets as shown at the top
layer of Fig.5 (b).
Overall, with these two steps, each component segmentator learns a highly non-linear mapping from images to label maps. The testing procedure is illustrated in Fig.5 (d),
where we delete the unused image data in the output. Thus,
the deep network indeed outputs a label map given an image
3.4. Implementation Details
In this section, we sketch several details for the sake of
reproduction.
Training Detectors. We randomly select 3, 500 images
from the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) database.
We then randomly perturb each extracted image patch (see
red boxes in Fig.2 (a)(b)) by translation, rotation, and scaling. Therefore, for each category, we totaly have 42, 000
training patches. Multi-label classiﬁcation strategy is employed so that training three DBNs are enough (i.e., one
for face detector, one for part detectors, and the other for
component detectors). More speciﬁcally, as shown in Fig.5
(a), we construct a 3-layers deep architecture and the unit
numbers are 2 times, 3 times, and 4 times of the input size
respectively. We supervisedly tune three DBNs with 2 outputs, 5 outputs, and 7 outputs at the top layer respectively.
To construct the examples of the background category, we
crop 105, 000 patches from the background for each DBN.
All examples of the three DBNs are normalized to 64 × 64,
64 × 32, and 32 × 32 respectively. We use 9 gradient orientations and 6 × 6 cell size to extract the HOG feature.
Figure 6. (a) Different translations and orientations are imposed in our
training data. (b) shows how to deal with pose variations. We ﬁrst separate
the training data by K-means, then learn one deep autoencoder on each
Training Segmentators. We choose anther 500 images
from the LFW database, whose label maps are manually annotated. Nevertheless, in order to cover variant poses,
we import ﬂuctuations on position and orientation for each
example as illustrated in Fig.6 (a). Similarly, all training
patches are ﬁxed at 32 × 32 and described by HOG feature. In order to account for pose variations, we train a set
of 4-layers deep autoencoders for each component, which is
obtained by ﬁrst applying K-means on the label maps and
then training one autoencoder on each cluster. Empirically,
we set K = 15 (Fig.6 (b)).
4. Experiments
We conduct four experiments to test our algorithm. First,
we perform face parsing on the LFW database to evaluate the performance of our segmentators; Second, we
collect a dataset from internet and compare the face alignment results with a state-of-the-art method, the Componentbased Discriminative Search (CBDS) ; Third, we compare with two leading approaches (i.e., BoRMaN and
Extended ASM (eASM) ) of feature point extractions.
This experiment is conducted on the BioID database;
Finally, to further evaluate the generalization power, we
carry out a segmentation task on the CUHK Face Sketch
FERET Database (CUFSF) . Note that for all these experiments, our model is trained on the LFW as outlined in
Experiment I: performance of segmentators.
test our segmentators with a 7-classes facial image parsing experiment, which is to assign each pixel a class label
(e.g., left/right eye, left/right brow, nose, mouth, and background). First, we randomly select 300 images from the
LFW database, and all the label maps of these images are
well-labeled by hand. Then, our data-driven greedy search
algorithm is performed on these images to achieve the reconstructed label maps, from which we obtain the ﬁnal results after hysteresis thresholding. Fig.7 (a) shows the confusion matrix, in which accuracy values are computed as the
percentage of image pixels assigned with the correct class
label. The overall pixel-wise labeling accuracy is 90.86%.
It demonstrates the ability of the learned segmentators on
the segmentation of facial components. Several parsing results are visualized in Fig.10 (a).
Figure 7. (a) shows the confusion matrix of Experiment I. (b) and (c) are
the face models for Experiment II and Experiment III respectively.
Experiment II: face alignment. The purpose of our
second experiment is to test our algorithm on the task of
face alignment compared with the CBDS method, which
was trained on many public databases including LFW over
4, 000 images. In the spirit of performing a database independent test, we collect a testing dataset containing 118
facial images from Google Image Search and Flickr. This
dataset is challenging due to occlusion, background clutters,
pose and appearance variations. Some examples are given
To apply our method to face alignment, we ﬁrst obtain
the label map with the data-driven greedy search algorithm.
Then a mean shape as illustrated in Fig.7 (b) is ﬁtted to the
label map by minimizing the Procrustes distance . Note,
the mean shape we used is different from the CBDS’s. To
allow a fair comparison, we thus exclude the bridge of the
Figure 8. Some samples in the testing dataset of Experiment II.
nose in our shape, and the inner lips and proﬁles of CBDS
are also excluded. To yield a better alignment, we permit
sightly non-rigid deformation of each landmark during the
matching procedure. We summarize the results in Table 1,
which shows the percentage of images with the root mean
squared error (RMSE) less than the speciﬁc thresholds. As
we can see, our algorithm achieves better results than CBD-
S. This is because our part-based detectors are very robust
to occlusions and pose variations, and the segmentators can
directly estimate the label map without a separated template
matching process. The results of our method on several partially occluded faces are shown in Fig.10 (b).
Methods \ RMSE
<9.5 pixels
<12 pixels
Table 1. Comparisons the alignment results with CBDS . Each column is the percentage of images with RMSE less than a threshold.
Experiment III: feature point extraction. The goal of
our third experiment is to compare our approach to BoR-
MaN and eASM with a facial feature points detection task.
Fig.7 (c) plots the model of 21 feature points we use, which
is deﬁned similar to the BoRMaN method except the point
at the facial proﬁle. Our algorithm can be easily extended to
consider the proﬁle. Our feature points are extracted on the
reconstructed label map, where two eye center points are equivalent to the centers of the eye detectors and the other
boundary points are achieved by running fast corner detection. In this experiment, we collect two testing sets and
denote them as A and B. Set A consists of all the original
1, 521 images in the BioID database, while set B consists
of 200 randomly occluded images selected from set A. We
separate this experiment into two parts: 1) we ﬁrst compare with both BoRMaN and eASM on the set A, and 2) we
compare with BoRMaN on the set B9.
Part 1. Both BoRMaN and eASM evaluated their methods on the whole BioID database. We therefore can compare the performance with these two methods on the set A.
The cumulated error distributions of the me17 error measure are illustrated in Fig.9 (left). The me17 measure
computes the mean error over all internal points, which are
9Since the program of eASM is not publicly obtainable, we only compare with BoRMaN on set B. Its executable program is available at:
 
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
Images Portion
Images Portion
Figure 9. Comparisons of the cumulative error distribution of point-wise
error measured on set A (left) and set B (right) respectively.
all the points except for the facial proﬁle and eyelids. Fig.9
(left) shows that our approach outperforms these two methods.
Part 2. We then compare our method with BoRMaN on
set B, where the images are partially occluded. The results
are shown in Fig.9 (right). When occlusions are presented, we demonstrate that our approach provides signiﬁcantly
better results. Some results are plotted in Fig.10 (c).
Experiment IV: facial component segmentation. To
further show that our algorithm can generalize to different
facial modality, we conduct a 7-classes segmentation test on
100 face sketch images selected from the CUFSF database.
The deﬁnition of the 7 classes is similar to Experiment I.
We evaluate by computing the accuracy values, which are
the percentage of image pixels assigned to the correct label. Several results are visualized in Fig.10 (d). Our overall
pixel-wise labeling accuracy is 92.9%, which is better than
84.1% of the CBDS method.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a hierarchial face parser,
where face parsing is achieved by part-based face detectors, component-based detectors, and component segmentators. For accurate face parsing, we recast segmentation of
face components as the cross-modality data transformation
problem, and solve it by a new deep learning strategy, which
can output the label map given an image patch as input. By
incorporating the deformable part-based detectors and the
segmentators, our parser is very robust to occlusions, pose
variations, and background clutters. We test our method on
several applications and demonstrate great improvement.
6. Acknowledgement
This work is partially supported by Hong Kong SAR
through RGC project 416510, and by Guangdong Province
through Introduced Innovative R&D Team of Guangdong
Province 201001D0104648280.