See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: 
Dilated Convolutional Neural Networks for Time Series Forecasting
Article  in  Journal of Computational Finance · March 2017
DOI: 10.21314/JCF.2019.358
3 authors, including:
Anastasia Borovykh
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
7 PUBLICATIONS   11 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Sander M Bohte
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
89 PUBLICATIONS   1,534 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Anastasia Borovykh on 07 February 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Dilated Convolutional Neural Networks for Time Series Forecasting
Anastasia Borovykh∗
Sander Bohte †
Cornelis W. Oosterlee ‡§
This version: January 2, 2018
We present a method for conditional time series forecasting based on an adaptation of the recent deep
convolutional WaveNet architecture. The proposed network contains stacks of dilated convolutions that
allow it to access a broad range of history when forecasting, a ReLU activation function and conditioning
is performed by applying multiple convolutional ﬁlters in parallel to separate time series which allows for
the fast processing of data and the exploitation of the correlation structure between the multivariate time
series. We test and analyze the performance of the convolutional network both unconditionally as well
as conditionally for ﬁnancial time series forecasting using the S&P500, the volatility index, the CBOE
interest rate and several exchange rates and extensively compare it to the performance of the well-known
autoregressive model and a long-short term memory network. We show that a convolutional network is
well-suited for regression-type problems and is able to eﬀectively learn dependencies in and between the
series without the need for long historical time series, is a time-eﬃcient and easy to implement alternative
to recurrent-type networks and tends to outperform linear and recurrent models.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network, ﬁnancial time series, forecasting, deep learning, multivariate
time series
Introduction
Forecasting ﬁnancial time series using past observations has been a topic of signiﬁcant interest for obvious
reasons. It is well known that while temporal relationships in the data exist, they are diﬃcult to analyze
and predict accurately due to the non-linear trends, heavy tails and noise present in the series .
developing models for forecasting ﬁnancial data it is desirable that these will be both able to learn non-linear
dependencies in the data as well as have a high noise resistance. Traditional autoregressive models such as
VAR and ARMA fail to capture non-linear patterns. Feedforward neural networks have been a popular
way of learning the dependencies in the data as these allow to learn non-linearities without the need of
specifying a particular model form in advance, see or . Hybrid approaches using neural networks
∗Dipartimento di Matematica, Universit`a di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. e-mail: 
†Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. e-mail: 
‡Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. e-mail: 
§Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
and econometric models have also been proposed, e.g. . One downside of classical feedforward neural
networks is that a large sample size of data is required to obtain a stable forecasting result.
The main focus of this paper is on multivariate time series forecasting, speciﬁcally ﬁnancial time series.
In particular, we forecast time series conditional on other, related series. Financial time series are known to
both have a high noise component as well as to be of limited duration – even when available, the use of long
histories of stock prices can be diﬃcult due to the changing ﬁnancial environment. At the same time, many
diﬀerent, but strongly correlated ﬁnancial time series exist. Here, we aim to exploit multivariate forecasting
using the notion of conditioning to reduce the noisiness in short duration series. Eﬀectively, we use multiple
ﬁnancial time series as input in a neural network, thus conditioning the forecast of a time series on both its
own history as well as that of multiple other time series. Training a model on multiple stock series allows the
network to exploit the correlation structure between these series so that the network can learn the market
dynamics in shorter sequences of data. As shown by e.g. for classiﬁcation, using multiple conditional
time series as inputs can improve both the robustness and forecast quality of the model by learning long-term
temporal dependencies in between series.
A convolutional neural network (CNNs), see , is a biologically-inspired type of deep neural network
(DNN) that has recently gained popularity due to its success in classiﬁcation problems (e.g. image recognition
 or time series classiﬁcation ). The CNN consists of a sequence of convolutional layers, the output of
which is connected only to local regions in the input. This is achieved by sliding a ﬁlter, or weight matrix,
over the input and at each point computing the dot product between the two (i.e. a convolution between the
input and ﬁlter). This structure allows the model to learn ﬁlters that are able to recognize speciﬁc patterns in
the input data. Recent advances in CNNs for time series forecasting include where the authors propose
an undecimated convolutional network for time series modelling based on the undecimated wavelet transform
and in which the authors propose to use an autoregressive-type weighting system for forecasting ﬁnancial
time series, where the weights are allowed to be data-dependent by learning them through a CNN. In general
literature on ﬁnancial time series forecasting with convolutional architectures is still scarce, as these types of
networks are much more commonly applied in classiﬁcation problems. Intuitively, the idea of applying CNNs
to time series forecasting would be to learn ﬁlters that represent certain repeating patterns in the series and
use these to forecast the future values. Due to the layered structure of CNNs, they might work well on noisy
series, by discarding in each subsequent layer the noise and extracting only the meaningful patterns, in this
way bearing similarities to neural networks which use wavelet transformed time series (i.e. a split in highand low-frequency components) as input, see e.g. , .
Currently, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and in particular the long-short term memory unit (LSTM)
 , , are the state-of-the-art in time series forecasting, see also and in particular for ﬁnancial
forecasting results. The eﬃciency of these networks can be explained by the recurrent connections that allow
the network to access the entire history of previous time series values. Alternatively one might employ a
convolutional neural network with multiple layers of dilated convolutions . The dilated convolutions,
in which the ﬁlter is applied by skipping certain elements in the input, allow for the receptive ﬁeld of the
network to grow exponentially, hereby allowing the network to, similar to the RNN, access a broad range
of history. The advantage of the CNN over the recurrent-type network is that due to the convolutional
structure of the network, the number of trainable weights is small, resulting in a much more eﬃcient training
and predicting.
Motivated by in which the authors compare the performance of the PixelCNN to the PixelRNN
 , a network used for image generation, in this paper, we aim to investigate the performance of the
convolutional neural network compared to that of autoregressive and recurrent models on forecasting noisy,
ﬁnancial time series. The CNN we employ is a network inspired by the convolutional WaveNet model from
 ﬁrst developed for audio forecasting, whose structure we simplify and optimize for multivariate time series
forecasting. Our network focusses on learning long-term relationships in and between multivariate, noisy
time series. Similar to it makes use of the dilated convolutions, however these convolutions are applied
with parametrized skip connections from both the input time series as well as the time series we condition
on, in this way learning long- and short-term interdependencies in an eﬃcient manner. Furthermore, the
gated activation function from the original WaveNet model is replaced by a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU),
simplifying the model and reducing the training time.
This paper consists of several main contributions. First of all, we present a CNN inspired by the WaveNet
model, with a structure that is simpliﬁed and optimized for time series forecasting, i.e. using a ReLU activation and a novel and more optimal way of conditioning with parametrized skip connections. Second, knowing
the strong performance of CNNs on classiﬁcation problems, our work is –to the best of our knowledge– the
ﬁrst to show that they can be applied successfully to forecasting ﬁnancial time series of limited length. By
conducting an extensive analysis of the WaveNet model and comparing the performance to that of an LSTM,
the current state-of-the-art in forecasting, and an autoregressive model popular in econometrics our paper
shows that the WaveNet model is a time-eﬃcient and easy to implement alternative to recurrent-type networks and tends to outperform the linear and recurrent models. Lastly, we show using examples on artiﬁcial
time series as well as the S&P500, VIX, CBOE interest rate and ﬁve exchange rates that the eﬃcient way
of conditioning in the WaveNet model enables one to extract temporal relationships in between time series
improving the forecast, while at the same time limiting the requirement for a long historical price series and
reducing the noise, since it allows one to exploit the correlations in between related time series. As a whole,
we show that convolutional networks can be a much simpler and easier to train alternative to recurrent
networks while achieving an at least as good or better accuracy on non-linear, noisy forecasting tasks.
In this section we start with a review of neural networks and convolutional neural networks.
introduce the particular convolutional network structure that will be used for time series forecasting.
Background
Feedforward neural networks
A basic feedforward neural network consists of L layers with Ml hidden nodes in each layer l = 1, ..., L.
Suppose we are given as input x(1), ..., x(t) and we want to use the multi-layer neural network to output the
forecasted value at the next time step ˆx(t + 1). In the ﬁrst layer we construct M1 linear combinations of the
input variables in the form
w1(i, j)x(j) + b1(i), for i = 1, ..., M1,
where w1 ∈RM1×t are referred to as the weights and b1 ∈RM1 as the biases. Each of the outputs a1(i),
i = 1, ..., M1 are then transformed using a diﬀerentiable, nonlinear activation function h(·) to give
f 1(i) = h(a1(i)), for i = 1, ..., M1.
The nonlinear function enables the model to learn nonlinear relations between the data points. In every
subsequent layer l = 2, ..., L −1, the outputs from the previous layer f l−1 are again linearly combined and
passed through the nonlinearity
f l(i) = h
wl(i, j)f l−1(j) + bl(j)
, for i = 1, ..., M1,
with wl ∈RMl×Ml−1 and bl ∈RM
l . In the ﬁnal layer l = L of the neural network the forecasted value ˆx(t+1)
is computed using
ˆx(t + 1) = h
wL(j)f L−1(j) + bL
with wl ∈R1×Ml−1 and bl ∈R. In a neural network, every node is thus connected to every node in adjacent
layers, see Figure 2.1.
Convolutions
A discrete convolution of two one-dimensional signals f and g, written as f ∗g, is deﬁned as
(f ∗g)(i) =
f(j)g(i −j),
where depending on the deﬁnition of the convolution, nonexistent samples in the input may be deﬁned to
have values of zero, often referred to as zero padding, or computing the product only at the points where
samples exist in both signals. Note that a convolution is commutative, i.e. (f ∗g) = (g ∗f). If the signals
are ﬁnite, the inﬁnite convolution may be truncated. In other words, suppose f = [f(0), ..., f(N −1)] and
g = [g(0), ..., g(M −1)], the convolution of the two is given by
(f ∗g)(i) =
f(j)g(i −j).
The size of the convolution output depends on the way undeﬁned samples are handled. If a certain amount
of the undeﬁned samples is set to zero this is referred to as zero padding. If we do not apply zero padding
the output has size N −M + 1 (so that i = 0, ..., N −M), while padding with p zeros at both sides of the
input signal f results in an output of size N −M + 2p + 1. The zero padding thus allows one to control the
output size of the convolution, adjusting it to be either decreasing, the same, or increasing with respect to
the input size. A convolution at point i is thus computed by shifting the signal g over the input f along j
and computing the weighted sum of the two.
Convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks were developed with the idea of local connectivity. Each node is connected
only to a local region in the input, see Figure 2.1. The spatial extent of this connectivity is referred to as
the receptive ﬁeld of the node. The local connectivity is achieved by replacing the weighted sums from the
neural network with convolutions. In each layer of the convolutional neural network, the input is convolved
with the weight matrix (also called the ﬁlter) to create a feature map. In other words, the weight matrix
slides over the input and computes the dot product between the input and the weight matrix. Note that as
opposed to regular neural networks, all the values in the output feature map share the same weights. This
means that all the nodes in the output detect exactly the same pattern. The local connectivity and shared
weights aspect of CNNs reduces the total number of learnable parameters resulting in more eﬃcient training.
The intuition behind a convolutional neural network is thus to learn in each layer a weight matrix that will
be able to extract the necessary, translation-invariant features from the input.
The input to a convolutional layer is usually taken to be three-dimensional: the height, weight and
number of channels. In the ﬁrst layer this input is convolved with a set of M1 three-dimensional ﬁlters
applied over all the input channels (in other words, the third dimension of the ﬁlter map is always equal to
the number of channels in the input) to create the feature output map. Consider now a one-dimensional
input x = (xt)N−1
t=0 of size N with no zero padding. The output feature map from the ﬁrst layer is then given
by convolving each ﬁlter w1
h for h = 1, ..., M1 with the input:
a1(i, h) = (w1
h ∗x)(i) =
h(j)x(i −j),
h ∈R1×k×1 and a1 ∈R1×N−k+1×M1. Note that since the number of input channels in this case is
one, the weight matrix also has only one channel. Similar to the feedforward neural network, this output is
then passed through the non-linearity h(·) to give f 1 = h(a1).
In each subsequent layer l = 2, ..., L the input feature map, f l−1 ∈R1×Nl−1×Ml−1, where 1×Nl−1 ×Ml−1
is the size of the output ﬁlter map from the previous convolution with Nl−1 = Nl−2 −k + 1, is convolved
with a set of Ml ﬁlters wl
h ∈R1×k×Ml−1, h = 1, ..., Ml, to create a feature map al ∈R1×Nl×Ml:
al(i, h) = (wl
h ∗f l−1)(i) =
h(j, m)f l−1(i −j, m).
The output of this is then passed through the non-linearity to give f l = h(al). The ﬁlter size parameter
k thus controls the receptive ﬁeld of each output node. Without zero padding, the convolution output in
every layer has width Nl = Nl−1 −k + 1 for l = 1, .., L. Since all the elements in a feature map share the
same weights this allows for features to be detected in a time-invariant manner, while at the same time it
reduces the number of trainable parameters. The output of the network after L convolutional layers will
be the matrix f L, the size of which depends on the ﬁlter size and number of ﬁlters used in the ﬁnal layer.
Depending on what we want our model to learn, the weights in the model are trained to minimize the error
between the output from the network f L and the true output we are interested in.
Figure 2.1: A feedforward neural network with three layers (L) vs. a convolutional neural network with two
layers and ﬁlter size 1 × 2, so that the receptive ﬁeld of each node consists of two input neurons from the
previous layer and weights are shared across the layers, indicated by the identical colors (R).
Consider a one-dimensional time series x = (xt)N−1
t=0 . Given a model with parameter values θ, the task for
a predictor is to output the next value ˆx(t + 1) conditional on the series’ history, x(0), ..., x(t). This can be
done by maximizing the likelihood function
p(x(t + 1)|x(0), ..., x(t), θ).
To learn this likelihood function, we present a convolutional neural network in the form of the WaveNet
architecture augmented with a number of recent architectural improvements for neural networks such
that the architecture can be applied successfully to time series prediction.
Time series often display long-term correlations, so to enable the network to learn these long-term dependencies we use stacked layers of dilated convolutions. As introduced in , a dilated convolution outputs a
stack of Ml feature maps given by
h ∗d f l−1)(i) =
h(j, m)f l−1(i −d · j, m),
where d is the dilation factor and Ml the number of channels. In other words, in a dilated convolution the
ﬁlter is applied to every dth element in the input vector, allowing the model to eﬃciently learn connections
between far-apart data points.
We use an architecture similar to and with L layers of dilated
convolutions l = 1, ..., L and with the dilations increasing by a factor of two: d ∈[20, 21, ..., 2L−1]. The ﬁlters
w are chosen to be of size 1×k := 1×2. An example of a three-layer dilated convolutional network is shown
in Figure 2.2. Using the dilated convolutions instead of regular ones allows the output y to be inﬂuenced
by more nodes in the input. The input of the network is given by the time series x = (xt)N−1
t=0 . In each
subsequent layer we apply the dilated convolution, followed by a non-linearity, giving the output feature
maps f l, l = 1, ..., L. These L layers of dilated convolutions are then followed by a 1 × 1 convolution which
reduces the number of channels back to one, so that the model outputs a one-dimensional vector. Since we
are interested in forecasting the subsequent values of the time series, we will train the model so that this
output is the forecasted time series ˆx = (ˆxt)N−1
Figure 2.2: A dilated convolutional neural network with three layers.
The receptive ﬁeld of a neuron was deﬁned as the set of elements in its input that modiﬁes the output
value of that neuron. Now, we deﬁne the receptive ﬁeld r of the model to be the number of neurons in the
input in the ﬁrst layer, i.e. the time series, that can modify the output in the ﬁnal layer, i.e. the forecasted
time series. This then depends on the number of layers L and the ﬁlter size k, and is given by
r := 2L−1k.
In Figure 2.2, the receptive ﬁeld is given by r = 8, one output value is inﬂuenced by eight input neurons.
As mentioned before, sometimes it is convenient to pad the input with zeros around the border. The
size of this zero-padding then controls the size of the output. In our case, to not violate the adaptability
constraint on x, we want to make sure that the receptive ﬁeld of the network when predicting x(t + 1)
contains only x(0), ..., x(t). To do this we use causal convolutions, where the word causal indicates that the
convolution output should not depend on future inputs. In time series this is equivalent to padding the input
with a vector of zeros of the size of the receptive ﬁeld, so that the input is given by
[0, ..., 0, x(0), ..., x(N −1)] ∈RN+r,
and the output of the L-layer Wavenet is
[ˆx(0), ..., ˆx(N)] ∈RN+1.
At training time the prediction of x(1), ..., x(N) is thus computed by convolving the input with the kernels
in each layer l = 1, ..., L, followed by the 1 × 1 convolution. At testing time a one-step ahead prediction
ˆx(t + 1) for (t + 1) ≥r is given by inputting [x(t + 1 −r), ..., x(t)] in the trained model. An n-step ahead
forecast is made sequentially by feeding each prediction back into the network at the next time step, e.g. a
two-step ahead out-of-sample forecast ˆx(t + 2) is made using [x(t + 2 −r), ..., ˆx(t + 1)].
The idea of the network is thus to use the capabilities of convolutional neural networks as autoregressive
forecasting models. In a simple autoregressive model of order p the forecasted value for x(t + 1) is given by
ˆx(t + 1) = Pp
i=1 αixt−i + ϵ(t), where αi, i = 1, ..., p are learnable weights and ϵ(t) is white noise. With the
WaveNet model as deﬁned above, the forecasted conditional expectation for every t ∈{0, ..., N} is
E[x(t + 1)|x(t), ..., x(t −r)] = β1(x(t −r)) + ... + βr(x(t)),
where the functions βi, i = 1, ..., r are data-dependent and optimized through the convolutional network.
We remark that even though the weights depend on the underlying data, due to the convolutional structure
of the network, the weights are shared across the outputted ﬁlter map resulting in a weight matrix that is
translation-invariant.
Objective function.
The network weights, the ﬁlters wl
h, are trained to minimize the mean absolute error
(MAE); to avoid overﬁtting, i.e. too large weights, we use L2 regularization with regularization term γ, so
that the cost function is given by
|ˆx(t + 1) −x(t + 1)| + γ
where ˆx(t + 1) denotes the forecast of x(t + 1) using x(0), ..., x(t). Minimizing E(w) results in a choice of
weights that make a tradeoﬀbetween ﬁtting the training data and being small. Too large weights often
result in the network being overﬁtted on the training data, so the L2 regularization, by forcing the weights
to not become too big, enables the model to generalize better on unseen data.
Remark 1 (Relation to the Bayesian framework). In a Bayesian framework minimizing this cost function
is equivalent to maximizing the posterior distribution under a Laplace distributed likelihood function centered
at the value outputted by the model ˆx(t + 1) with a ﬁxed scale parameter β = 1
p(x(t + 1)|x(0), ..., x(t), θ) ∼Laplace(ˆx(t + 1), β),
and with a Gaussian prior on the model parameters.
The output is obtained by running a forward pass through the network with the optimal weights being
a point estimate from the posterior distribution. Since the MAE is a scale-dependent accuracy measure one
should normalize the input data to make the error comparable for diﬀerent time series.
Weight optimization.
The aim of training the model is to ﬁnd the weights that minimize the cost function
in (1). A standard weight optimization is based on gradient descent in which one incrementally updates the
weights based on the gradient of the error function,
h(τ + 1) = wl
h(τ) −η∇E(w(τ)),
for τ = 1, ..., T, where T is the number of training iterations and η is the learning rate. Each iteration τ thus
consists of a forward run in which one computes the forecasted vector ˆx and the corresponding error E(w(τ)),
and a backward pass in which the gradient vector ∇E(w(τ)), the derivatives with respect to each weight
h, is computed and the weights are updated according to (2). The gradient vector is computed through
backpropagation, which amounts to applying the chain rule iteratively from the error function computed in
the ﬁnal layer until the gradient with respect to the required layer weight wl
h is obtained:
∂f l(i, h)
∂f l(i, h)
where we sum over all the nodes in which the weight of interest occurs. The number of training iterations
T is chosen so as to achieve convergence in the error. Here we employ a slightly modiﬁed weight update by
using the Adam gradient descent . This method computes adaptive learning rates for each parameter by
keeping an exponentially decaying average of past gradients and squared gradients and use these to update
the parameters. The adaptive learning rate allows the gradient descent to ﬁnd the minimum more accurately.
Activation functions.
In each layer we use a non-linearity, or activation function, to transform the output
from the convolution, hereby allowing the model to learn non-linear representations of the data. In our model
the non-linearity takes the form of the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) deﬁned as ReLU(x) := max(x, 0), so that
the output from layer l is:
1 ∗d f l−1) + b, ..., ReLU(wl
Ml ∗d f l−1 + b)
where b ∈R denotes the bias that shifts the input to the nonlinearity, ∗d denotes as usual the convolution
with dilation d and f l ∈R1×Nl×Ml+1 denotes the output of the convolution with ﬁlters wh
l , h = 1, ..., Ml
in layer l. Unlike the gated activation function used in for audio generation, here we propose to use
the ReLU as it was found to be most eﬃcient when applied to the forecasting of the non-stationary, noisy
time series. At the same time using the ReLU reduces the training time and thus simpliﬁes the model. The
ﬁnal layer, l = L, has a linear activation function, which followed by the 1×1 convolution then outputs the
forecasted value of the time series ˆx = [ˆx(0), ..., ˆx(N)].
When training a deep neural network, one of the problems keeping the network from learning the optimal
weights is that of the vanishing/exploding gradient . As backpropagation computes the gradients by the
chain rule, when the derivative of the activation function takes on either small or large values, multiplication
of these numbers can result in the gradients for the weights in the initial layers to vanish or explode,
respectively. This results in either the weights being updated too slowly due to the too small gradient, or
not being able to converge to the minimum due to gradient descent step being too large. One solution to
this problem is to initialize the weights of the convolutional layers in such a way that neither in the forward
nor in the backward propagation of the network the weights reduce or magnify the magnitudes of the input
signal and gradients, respectively. A proper initialization of the weights would keep the signal and gradients
in a reasonable range of values throughout the layers so that no information will be lost while training the
network. As derived in , to ensure that the variance of the input is similar to the variance of the output,
a suﬃcient condition is
h] = 1, for h = 1, ..., Ml+1, ∀l,
which leads to a zero-mean Gaussian distribution whose standard deviation is
2/z, where z is the total
number of trainable parameters in the layer. In other words, the weights of the ReLU units are initialized
(for τ = 0) as
with z = Ml · 1 · k, the number of ﬁlters in layer l times the ﬁlter size 1 × k.
Residual learning.
When adding more layers to the network, standard backpropagation becomes unable
to ﬁnd the optimal weights, resulting in a higher training error. This problem, called the degradation problem
 , is thus not caused by overﬁtting. Consider a shallow network with a small number of layers, and its
deeper counterpart.
The deeper model should not result in a higher training error, since there exists a
solution by construction: set all the weights in the added layers to identity mappings. However in practice,
gradient descent algorithms tend have problems learning the identity mappings. The proposed way around
this problem is to use residual connections which force the network to approximate H(x) −x, instead
of H(x), the desired mapping, so that the identity mapping can be learned by driving all weights to zero.
Optimizing the residual mapping by driving the weights to zero tends to be easier than learning the identity.
The way residual connections are implemented is by using shortcut connections, which skip one or more
layer(s) and thus get added unmodiﬁed to the output from the skipped layers. While in reality, the optimal
weights are unlikely to be exactly the identity mappings, if the optimal function is closer to the identity than
a zero mapping, the proposed residual connections will still aid the network in learning the better optimal
Similar to , in our network, we add a residual connection after each dilated convolution from the input
to the convolution to the output. In the case of Ml > 1 the output from the non-linearity is passed through
a 1×1 convolution prior to adding the residual connection. This is done to make sure that the residual
connection and the output from the dilated convolution both have the same number of channels. This allows
us to stack multiple layers, while retaining the ability of the network to correctly map dependencies learned
in the initial layers.
Relation to discrete wavelet transform
The structure of the network is closely related to the discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Wavelet analysis
can be used to understand how a given function changes from one period to the next by matching a wavelet
function, of varying scales (widths) and positions, to the function.
The DWT is a linear transform of
x = (xt)N−1
with N = 2J which decomposes the signal into its high- and low-frequency components by
convolving it with high- and low-pass ﬁlters. In particular, at each level j of the transform the input signal is
decomposed into Nj = N
2j wavelet and scaling coeﬃcients ⟨x, ψj,k⟩and ⟨x, φj,k⟩(also called the approximation
and detail) for k = 0, ..., Nj −1, by convolving the input x simultaneously with ﬁlters h and g given by
h(t) = 2−j/2ψ(−2−jt),
g(t) = 2−j/2φ(−2−jt),
where ψ(·) is the wavelet and φ(·) the scaling function. In every subsequent level we apply the transform to
the approximation coeﬃcients, in this way discarding the high-frequency components (the detail) and ending
up with a smoothed version of the input signal. This is very similar to the structure of the CNN, where in
each subsequent layer we convolve the input from the previous layer with a learnable ﬁlter. In each layer,
the ﬁlter is used to recognize local dependencies in the data, which are subsequently combined to represent
more global features, until in the ﬁnal layer we compute the output of interest. By allowing the ﬁlter to
be learnable as opposed to ﬁxed ´a priori as is the case in the DWT, we aim to ﬁnd the ﬁlter weights that
minimize the objective function (1) by recognizing the certain patterns in the data in this way resulting in
an accurate forecast of the time series.
Conditioning
When forecasting a time series x = (xt)N−1
t=0 conditional on another series y = (yt)N−1
t=0 , we aim at maximizing
the conditional likelihood,
p(x|y, θ) =
p (x(t + 1)|x(0), ..., x(t), y(0), ..., y(t), θ) .
The conditioning on the time series y is done by computing the activation function of the convolution with
h in ﬁrst layer as
h ∗d x + b) + ReLU(v1
h ∗d y + b),
for each of the ﬁlters h = 1, ..., M1. When predicting x(t + 1) the receptive ﬁeld of the network must contain
only x(0), ..., x(t) and y(0), ..., y(t). Therefore, similar to the input, to preserve causality the condition is
appended with a vector of zeros the size of the receptive ﬁeld. In the authors propose to take v1
a 1 × 1 ﬁlter. Given the short input window, this type of conditioning is not always able to capture all
dependencies between the time series. Therefore, we use a 1 × k convolution, increasing the probability of
the correct dependencies being learned with fewer layers. The receptive ﬁeld of the network thus contains
2L−1k elements of both the input and the condition(s).
Instead of the residual connection in the ﬁrst layer, we add skip connections parametrized by 1×1 convolutions from both the input as well as the condition to the result of the dilated convolution. The conditioning
can easily be extended to a multivariate M×N time series by using M dilated convolutions from each separate
condition and adding them to the convolution with the input. The parametrization of the skip connections
makes sure that our model is able to correctly extract the necessary relations between the forecast and both
the input and condition(s). Speciﬁcally, if a particular condition does not improve the forecast, the model
can simply learn to discard this condition by setting the weights in the parametrized skip connection (i.e. in
the 1×1 convolution) to zero. This enables the conditioning to boost predictions in a discriminative way. If
the number of ﬁlters Ml is larger than one, the parametrized skip connection uses a 1×1 convolution with
Ml ﬁlers, so that the summation of the skip connection and the original convolution is valid. The network
structure is shown in Figure 2.3.
Remark 2 (Ability to learn non-linear dependencies). We remark here on the ability of the model to learn
non-linear dependencies in and between time series. A feedforward neural network requires at least a single
hidden layer with a suﬃciently large number of hidden units in order to approximate a non-linear function
 . If in the CNN we set the ﬁlter width to one, a necessary requirement for the model to learn non-linear
dependencies will be to have Ml > 1, since in this case the role of the ﬁlters is similar to that of the hidden
units. Alternatively, learning non-linearities in a CNN requires the use of both a ﬁlter width and number
of layers larger than one. Each layer essentially computes a dot-product and a summation of a non-linear
transformation of several outputs in the previous layer. This output is in turn a combination of the input
and condition(s) and the role of the hidden units is played by the summation over the ﬁlter width, hereby
allowing non-linear relations to be learned in and between the time series.
Figure 2.3: The network structure. In the ﬁrst layer (L) the input and condition (with the zero padding)
are convolved, passed through the non-linearity and summed with the parametrized skip connections. The
result from this ﬁrst layer is the input in the subsequent dilated convolution layer with a residual connection
from the input to the output of the convolution. This is repeated for the other layers, until we obtain the
output from layer L (M). This output is passed through a 1×1 convolution, resulting in the ﬁnal output:
the forecasted time series (R).
Experiments
Here, we evaluate the performance of the proposed Wavenet architecture versus current state-of-the-art
models (RNNs and autoregressive models) when applied to learning dependencies in chaotic, non-linear time
series. The parameters in the model, unless otherwise mentioned, are set to k = 2, L = 4, Ml = 1 for
l = 0, ..., L −1, the Adam learning rate is set to 0.001 and the number of training iterations is 20000. The
regularization rate is chosen to be 0.001. We train networks with diﬀerent random seeds, discard any network
which underperforms already on the training set and report the average results on the test set over three
selected networks.
An artiﬁcial example
In order to show the ability of the model to learn both linear and non-linear dependencies in and between
time series, we train and test the model on the chaotic Lorenz system. The Lorenz map is deﬁned as the
solution (X, Y, Z) to a system of ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) given by
˙X = σ(Y −X)
˙Y = X(ρ −Z) −Y
˙Z = XY −βY,
with initial values (X0, Y0, Z0). We approximate the solution using an Euler method. We present in Table
3.1 the one-step ahead forecasting results for each of the three coordinates (X, Y, Z) with the unconditional WaveNet (uWN) and the conditional Wavenet (cWN). In the cWN the forecast of e.g.
ˆXt contains Xt−1, ..., Xt−1−r, Yt−1, ..., Yt−1−r and Zt−1, ..., Zt−1−r. We use a training time series of length 1000,
t=1 , (Yt)1000
and (Zt)1000
Then we perform a one-step ahead forecast of Xt, Yt and Zt for
t = 1000, ..., 1500, and compare the forecasted series ˆXt, ˆYt and ˆZt to the true series. The RMSE is computed over this test set. Comparing the results of the uWN with the RMSE benchmark of 0.00675 from 
obtained with an Augmented LSTM, we conclude that the network is well-capable of extracting both linear
and non-linear relationships in and between time series. At the same time, conditioning on other related
time series reduces the standard deviation as one can see from the smaller standard deviation in the RMSE
of the cWN compared to the uWN.
In Figure 3.1 we show the forecast of the X-coordinate in more detail. As seen from both the forecast
and the histogram of the error, the cWN results in a more precise forecast. Furthermore, the learning rate
of 0.001, while resulting in a slower initial convergence, is much more eﬀective at obtaining the minimum
training error, both unconditionally as well as conditionally. Figure 3.2 shows the out-of-sample forecast of
the uWN and the cWN for X and Y. Conditioning allows the network to learn the true underlying dynamics
of the system, resulting in a much better out-of-sample forecast.
From the RMSE in Table 3.1 we see
that the conditioning does not improve the accuracy of one-step-ahead forecast in the case of Z (as the
forecast might already unconditionally be very accurate), however from the out-of-sample forecast plots in
Figure 3.2 and the top right plot in Figure 3.3 we can conclude that conditioning is necessary in order to
learn the underlying non-linear and linear dynamics in between the series. Furthermore, with Figure 3.3 we
Coordinate
0.00577 (0.00242)
0.00174 (0.00133)
0.00864 (0.00487)
0.00583 (0.00350)
0.00496 (0.00363)
0.00536 (0.00158)
Table 3.1: RMSE (mean (standard deviation)) for the one-step ahead forecast of the Lorenz map with
(X0, Y0, Z0) = (0, 1, 1.05), σ = 10, ρ −28 and β = 8/3. The cWN results for each coordinate are conditioned
on the other two in the system. The current benchmark, the average RMSE over X, Y and Z, is 0.00675
from .
Figure 3.1: The X-coordinate of the Lorenz map (green), the unconditional one-step ahead forecast (red)
(TL), the conditional forecast (blue) (TR), the convergence behaviour of unconditional and conditional
forecast for diﬀerent learning rates (LL) and the histogram of the errors for the one-step-ahead forecast on
the test set (LR).
Figure 3.2: The training sample t ∈ and a fully out-of-sample forecast for time steps t ∈ 
for the X-coordinate (L) and the Y -coordinate (R)
verify Remark 2 numerically. Using only one ﬁlter and a ﬁlter width of one does not allow the non-linear
dependencies to be learned correctly, while using either a ﬁlter width or the number of ﬁlters larger than one
signiﬁcantly improves the out-of-sample forecast. Unfortunately, using both k = 2 and Ml = 3 results in a
worsened performance of the forecast, since the combination of the wide receptive ﬁeld and a large number
of parameters results in the model being unable to ﬁnd the optimal weights.
Financial data
We analyze the performance of the network on the S&P500 data in combination with the volatility index
and the CBOE 10 year interest rate to analyze the ability of the model to extract – both unconditionally as
well as conditionally– meaningful trends and relationships in and between the noisy datasets. Furthermore,
we test the performance on several exchange rates to showcase the ability of the model to eﬃciently learn
long-term dependencies.
Data preparation
We deﬁne a training period of 750 days (approximately three years) and a testing period of 250 days
(approximately one year) on which we perform the one-day ahead forecasting. The data from 01-01-2005
until 31-12-2016 is split into nine of these periods with non-overlapping testing periods. Let P s
t be the value
of time series s at time t. We deﬁne the return for s at time t over a one-day period as
Then we normalize the returns by subtracting the mean, µtrain, and dividing by the standard deviation,
σtrain, obtained over all the time series that we will condition on in the training period (note that using the
mean and standard deviation over the train and test set would result in look-ahead biases). The normalized
Figure 3.3: The training sample t ∈ and a fully out-of-sample forecast for time steps t ∈ 
for the Z-coordinate with Ml = 1, k = 1 (TL), Ml = 1, k = 2 (TR), Ml = 3, k = 1 (BL) and Ml = 3, k = 2
return is then given by
We then divide the testing periods into three main study periods: period A from 2008 until 2010, period B
from 2011 until 2013 and period C from 2014 until 2016. The performance is then evaluated by performing
one-step ahead forecasts over these testing periods and comparing the MASE scaled by a naive forecast and
the HITS rate. An MASE smaller than one means that the absolute size of the forecasted return is more
accurate than that of a naive forecast, while a high HITS rate shows that the model is able to correctly
forecast the direction of the returns.
Benchmark models
We compare the performance of the WaveNet model with several well-known benchmarks: an autoregressive
model widely used by econometricians, and an LSTM , currently the state-of-the-art in time series
forecasting. Similar to the LSTM is implemented using one LSTM layer with 25 hidden neurons and a
dropout of 0.1 followed by a fully connected output layer with one neuron and we use 500 training epochs.
LSTM networks require sequences of input features for training, and we construct the sequences using
r = 2L−1k historical time steps so that the receptive ﬁeld of the WaveNet model is the same as the distance
that the LSTM can see into the past. The LSTM is implemented to take as input a matrix consisting of
sequences of all the features (the input and condition(s)), so that its performance can be compared to that
of the VAR and the cWN.
Index forecasting
We compare the performance of the unconditional and the conditional WaveNet in
forecasting the S&P500, in the cWN case conditioned on both the volatility index and the CBOE 10 year
interest rate. Using one ﬁlter and multiple layers should enable the model to learn non-linear trends and
dependencies in and between the time series, and in this example we try to verify this numerically. From
Table 3.2 we see that the unconditional WaveNet performs best in terms of MASE. The conditional WaveNet
exploits the correlation between the three time series resulting in a higher hit rate, but a slightly worse MASE
compared to the unconditional one as it is ﬁtted on multiple noisy series. The LSTM also performs similar
to the cWN in terms of the HITS rate, but results in a higher MASE, meaning that both networks are
able to forecast the direction of the returns, but the LSTM is worse at predicting the size of the return.
The WaveNet model outperforms the VAR conditionally in period A terms of HITS rate, showcasing the
ability of the model to learn relationships that are more complex than simple linear dependencies, if these
are present. After 2010 the dependencies between the S&P500 and the interest rate and volatility index
seem to have weakened (due to e.g. the lower interest rate or higher spreads) as the improvement of the
conditional WaveNet over the unconditional WaveNet is smaller. This suggests that the WaveNet can be
used to recognize these switches in the underlying ﬁnancial regimes. Overall, in terms of the HITS rate the
WaveNet performs similar to the state-of-the-art LSTM, in particular in period A, when strong dependencies
were still present between the index, interest rate and volatility. In the other two periods the performance
of the cWN in terms of the HITS is similar to that of a naive and the autoregressive forecast, from which we
infer that there are no longer strong dependencies present between the time series. Furthermore, the good
performance of the naive model in periods B and C can be explained by the fact that it implicitly uses the
knowledge that the period after the ﬁnancial crisis was a bull market with a rising price trend. From these
results we can conclude that the WaveNet is indeed able to recognize patterns in the underlying datasets, if
these are present. If not, the WaveNet model does not overﬁt on the noise in the series, as can be seen by
the consistently lower MASE compared to the other models.
Exchange rate data
Next we analyze the performance of the cWN on several exchange rates, in particular
to compare the ability to discriminate between multiple inputs and the ability to learn long-term dependencies
0.873(0.026)
0.525(0.006)
1.067(0.021)
0.496(0.016)
0.929(0.021)
0.531(0.008)
0.685(0.025)
0.515(0.007)
0.681(0.002)
0.484(0.007)
0.684(0.006)
0.537(0.011)
0.699(0.042)
0.524(0.009)
0.693(0.014)
0.500(0.009)
0.701(0.015)
0.536(0.016)
Table 3.2: MASE and HITS (mean(standard deviation)) for a one-step ahead forecast over the periods A,
B and C of the S&P500, both unconditional and conditional on the volatility index and the CBOE 10 year
interest rate.
of the proposed model versus the VAR and the LSTM. We present a statistical analysis of the exchange rates
in Table 3.3. Of particular relevance to the performance of the model are the standard deviation, skewness
and kurtosis. A high standard deviation means that there is a lot of variance in the data. This could cause
models to underperform as they become unable to accurately forecast the rapid movements. A high positive
or negative skewness, meaning the asymmetry of the returns around its mean value, indicates the existence
of a long right or left tail, respectively. We train the neural network to ﬁt a symmetric distribution centered
at the mean of the dataset. The existence of this tail could result in the trained model performing worse
in cases of high absolute skewness. Kurtosis is a measure of the tails of the dataset compared to those of
a normal distribution. A high kurtosis is the result of infrequent extreme deviations. If a model tends to
overﬁt the dataset, and in particular overﬁt on these extreme deviations, a high kurtosis would result in a
worse performance. Figure 3.4 shows the correlations between the exchange rates in the three periods. As
expected, the exchange rates that contain the same currencies exhibit stronger correlations than those with
diﬀerent currencies.
Mean Return
Standard deviation
Table 3.3: Statistical analysis of ﬁve foreign exchange rates.
In Table 3.4 we present the results of the conditional WaveNet forecast over the exchange rate data,
conditioning on the other exchange rates. Exchange rate data tends to contain long-term dependencies, so
we expect the WaveNet model, with its ability of learning long term relationships, to perform well. As we
Figure 3.4: The correlation matrices of the ﬁve foreign exchange rates in periods A, B and C.
0.829(0.012)
0.863(0.005)
0.880(0.004)
0.868(0.005)
0.893(0.007)
0.925(0.024)
0.911(0.029)
0.974(0.029)
0.948(0.023)
0.934(0.014)
0.950(0.016)
1.031(0.022)
0.980(0.034)
0.839(0.034)
0.898(0.017)
0.693(0.016)
0.667(0.021)
0.759(0.064)
0.728(0.014)
0.834(0.089)
0.690(0.006)
0.693(0.006)
0.699(0.005)
0.717(0.015)
0.710(0.009)
0.702(0.009)
0.716(0.029)
0.721(0.014)
0.709(0.004)
0.716(0.004)
Table 3.4: MASE (mean(standard deviation)) one-step ahead multivariate forecast over the periods A, B
and C of ﬁve foreign exhange rates.
see from the table, the WaveNet consistently outperforms the vector-autoregressive model and the LSTM in
terms of the MASE. In period A the data has a very high kurtosis, probably due to the global ﬁnancial crisis
that was happening in 2008. Remarkably, we note that while the autoregressive model during this period of
very high kurtosis performs worse than a naive forecast, the WaveNet model does not overﬁt the extremes
resulting in a good performance in terms of the MASE. In periods of high absolute skewness and high
standard deviation, but relatively low kurtosis, e.g. period C, the WaveNet model and the autoregressive
model seem to be performing more or less equally. In period B we observe a relatively low standard deviation,
low kurtosis and a small absolute skewness. In this period the WaveNet model is better able to extract the
underlying dynamics compared to both the autoregressive model and the LSTM. We conclude that the
WaveNet model is indeed able to extract long-term relationships, if present. In periods of high kurtosis it is
still able to generalize well, while when the data has a high standard deviation and a high absolute skewness,
i.e. in situations with many outliers, the model is unable to correctly forecast these outliers, causing the
performance to be similar to that of a linear autoregressive model. Furthermore, as we see from Figure 3.4
some pairs of exchange rates have lower correlations than others. While the autoregressive model, when
having as input both correlated as well as uncorrelated time series, tends to overﬁt, the WaveNet is better
able to discriminate between the conditions by simply discarding those that do not improve the forecast, as
can be seen by the consistently lower MASE.
Discussion and conclusion
In this paper we presented and analysed the performance of a method for conditional time series forecasting
based on a convolutional neural network known as the WaveNet architecture . The network makes use
layers of dilated convolutions applied to the input and multiple conditions, in this way learning the trends and
relations in and between the data. We analysed the performance of the WaveNet model on various time series,
and compared the performance with the current state-of-the-art method in time series forecasting, the LSTM
model, and a linear autoregressive model. We conclude that even though time series forecasting remains
a complex task and ﬁnding one model that ﬁts all is hard, we have shown that the WaveNet is a simple,
eﬃcient and easily interpretable network that can act as a strong baseline for forecasting. Nevertheless there
is still room for improvement. One way of improving the ability of the CNN to learn non-linear dependencies
is to use a large number of layers and ﬁlters. As we saw from Figure 3.3 one encounters the problem of a
trade-oﬀbetween the ability to learn non-linearities, which requires a large number of layers and ﬁlters, and
that of overﬁtting, since a large number of layers results in a large receptive ﬁeld and many parameters. This
problem of the imbalance between the need of memory and the non-linearities was also adressed in by
using a combination of an autoregressive model and a CNN. An alternative solution to this problem might
be to use the parametrized skip connections in combination with an adaptive ﬁlter and will be studied in
our further work. Furthermore, the WaveNet model proved to be a strong competitor to LSTM models, in
particular when taking into consideration the training time. While on the relatively short time series the
prediction time is negligible when compared to the training time, for longer time series the prediction of the
autoregressive model may be sped up by implementing a recent variation that exploits the memorization
structure of the network, see or speeding up the convolutions by working in the frequency domain
emloying Fourier transforms as in , . Finally, it is well-known that correlations between data points
are stronger on an intraday basis. Therefore, it might be interesting to test the model on intraday data to
see if the ability of the model to learn long-term dependencies is even more valuable in that case.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the European Union in the the context of the H2020 EU Marie Curie Initial
Training Network project named WAKEUPCALL. We also thank an anonymous referee for the constructive
comments for improving the quality of the paper.