Jointly Optimize Data Augmentation and Network Training:
Adversarial Data Augmentation in Human Pose Estimation
Rutgers University
 
Zhiqiang Tang*
Rutgers University
 
 
Rogerio S. Feris
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
 
Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University
 
Random data augmentation is a critical technique to
avoid overﬁtting in training deep neural network models.
However, data augmentation and network training are usually treated as two isolated processes, limiting the effectiveness of network training. Why not jointly optimize the two?
We propose adversarial data augmentation to address this
limitation. The main idea is to design an augmentation network (generator) that competes against a target network
(discriminator) by generating “hard” augmentation operations online. The augmentation network explores the weaknesses of the target network, while the latter learns from
“hard” augmentations to achieve better performance. We also
design a reward/penalty strategy for effective joint training. We demonstrate our approach on the problem of human
pose estimation and carry out a comprehensive experimental
analysis, showing that our method can signiﬁcantly improve
state-of-the-art models without additional data efforts.
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved signiﬁcant
improvements in many computer vision tasks .
A key ingredient for the success of state-of-the-art deep learning models is the availability of large amounts of training
data. However, data collection and annotation are costly, and
for many tasks, only a few training examples may be available. In addition, natural images usually follow a long-tail
distribution . Effective training examples that lead
to more robust classiﬁers may still be rare even if a large
amount of data have been collected.
A common solution for this problem is to perform random data augmentation . Prior to being fed into the
*Contributed equally. The project page is publicly available: https:
//sites.google.com/site/xipengcshomepage/cvpr2018
Data Collection
Network Training
Adversarial Augmentation
Figure 1: Data preparation and network training are usually
isolated. We propose to bridge the two by generating adversarial augmentations online. The generations are conditioned
to both training images and the status of the target network.
network, training images are heuristically jittered by prede-
ﬁned transformations (e.g., scaling, rotating, occluding) to
increase variations. This strategy is simple, but data augmentation and network training are still treated as isolated
processes, leading to the following issues.
First, the entire training set is usually applied the same
random data augmentation strategy without considering the
individual difference. This may produce many ineffective
variations that are either too “hard” or too “easy” to help
the network training . Second, random data augmentations can hardly match the dynamic training status since
they are usually sampled from static distributions. Third,
Gaussian distribution are widely used, which cannot address
the long-tail issue since there would be a small chance to
sample rare but useful augmentations.
A natural question then arises: can data augmentation and
 
network training be jointly optimized, so that effective augmentations can be generated online to improve the training?
In this work, we answer the above question by proposing
a new approach that leverages adversarial learning for joint
optimization of data augmentation and network training (see
Figure 1). Speciﬁcally, we investigate the problem of human
pose estimation, aiming to improve the network training with
bounded datasets. Note that our approach can be generalized to other vision tasks, such as face alignment and
instance segmentation .
Given an off-the-shelf pose estimation network, our goal
is to obtain improved training from a bounded dataset.
Speciﬁcally, we propose an augmentation network that acts
as a generator. It aims to create “hard” augmentations that
intend to make the pose network fail. The pose network, on
the other hand, is modeled as a discriminator. It evaluates
the quality of the generations, and more importantly, tries
to learn from the “hard” augmentations. The main idea is
to generate adversarial data augmentations online, conditioned to both input images and the training status of the
pose network. In other words, the augmentation network
explores the weaknesses of the pose network which, at the
same time, learns from adversarial augmentations for better
performance.
Jointly optimizing the two networks is a non-trivial task.
Our experiments indicate that a straightforward design, such
as directly generating adversarial pixels or deformations , would yield problematic convergence behaviors (e.g. divergence and model collapse). Instead, the
augmentation network is designed to generate adversarial distributions, from which augmentation operations (i.e. scaling,
rotating, occluding) are sampled to create new data points.
Besides, we propose a novel reward and penalty policy to
address the issue of missing supervisions during the joint
training. Moreover, instead of a raw image, the augmentation
network is designed to take the byproduct, i.e. hierarchical
features, of the pose network as the input. This can further
improve the joint training efﬁciency using additional spatial
constraints. To summarize, our key contributions are:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to investigate the joint optimization of data augmentation and
network training in human pose estimation.
• We propose an augmentation network to play a minimax game against the target network, by generating
adversarial augmentations online.
• We take advantage of the wildly used U-net design and
propose a reward and penalty policy for the efﬁcient
joint training of the two networks.
• Strong performance on public benchmarks, e.g. MPII
and LSP, as well as intensive ablation studies, validate
our method substantially in various aspects.
2. Related Work
We provide a brief overview of previous methods that are
most relevant to ours in three categories.
Adversarial learning. Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) are designed as playing minimax games
between generator and discriminator. Yu and Grauman 
use GANs to synthesize image pairs to overcome the sparsity
of supervision when learning to compare images. A-Fast-
RCNN uses GANs to generate deformations for object
detection. Recent applications of GANs in human pose
estimation include and . They both treat the pose
estimation network as the generator and use a discriminator
to provide additional supervision. However, in our design,
the pose estimation network is treated as a discriminator,
while the augmentation network is designed as a generator
to create adversarial augmentations.
Hard example mining. It is wildly used in training SVM
models for object detection . The idea is to perform an alternative optimization between model training and
data selection. Hard example mining focuses on how to select hard examples from the training set for effective training.
It cannot create new data that do not exist in the training set.
In contrast, we propose an augmentation network (generator)
to actively generate adversarial data augmentations. This
will create new data points that may not exist in the training
set to improve the pose network (discriminator) training.
Human pose estimation. DeepPose proposed to use
deep neural networks for human pose estimation. Since then,
deep learning based methods started to dominate this area
 . For instance, Tompson
et al. used multiple branches of convolutional networks
to fuse the features from an image pyramid. They applied
Markov Random Field for post-processing. Chen et al. 
also tried to combine neural networks with the graphical
model inference to improve the pose estimation accuracy.
Recently, cascade models become popular for human
pose estimation. They usually connect a series of deep neural
networks in cascade to improve the estimation in a stage-bystage manner. For example, Convolutional Pose Machines
 brings obvious improvements by cascading multiple
networks and adding intermediate supervisions. Better performance is achieved by the stacked hourglass network architecture , which also relies on multi-stage pose estimation.
More recently, Chu et al. added some layers into the
stacked hourglass network for attention modeling. Yang et
al. also enhanced its performance by using pyramid
residual modules. In this paper, instead of designing a new
pose estimation network, we are more interested in how to
jointly optimize data augmentation and network training. So
we can obtain improved training effect on any off-the-shelf
deep neural network without looking for more data.
Adversarial
Target Network
Augmentation Network
Reward/Penalty
Augmentation Network
Target Network
Figure 2: Left: Overview of our approach. We propose an augmentation network to help the training of the pose network. The
former creates hard augmentations; the latter learn from generations and produces reward/penalty for model update. Right:
Illustration of the augmentation network. Instead of raw images, it takes hierarchical features of an U-net as inputs.
3. Adversarial Data Augmentation
Given a pre-designed pose network, e.g. the stacked hourglass pose estimator , our goal is to improve its training
without looking for more data. Random data augmentation
is widely used in deep neural network training. However,
random data augmentations that are sampled from static
distributions can hardly follow the dynamic training status,
which may produce many ineffective variations that are either too “hard” or too “easy” to help the network training
Instead, we propose to leverage adversarial learning to optimize the data augmentation and the network training jointly.
The main idea is to learn an augmentation network G(·|θG)
that generates “hard” augmentations that may increase the
pose network loss. The pose network D(·|θD), on the other
hand, tries to learn from the adversarial augmentations and,
at the same time, evaluates the quality of the generations.
Please refer to Figure 2 for an overview of our approach.
Generation path. The augmentation network is designed
as a generator. It outputs a set of distributions of augmentation operations. Mathematically, the augmentation network
G outputs adversarial augmentation τa(·) that may increase
D’s loss, compared with random augmentation τr(·), by
maximizing the expectation:
τa∼G(x,θD)
L[D(τa(x), y)] −L[D(τr(x), y)],
where Ωis the training image set and Γ is the random augmentation space. L(·, ·) is a predeﬁned loss function and y is
the image annotation. We highlight G(x, θD) to specify that
the generation of G is conditioned to both the input image x
and the current status of the target network D.
Discrimination path. The pose network is designed as
a discriminator. It plays two roles: 1) D evaluates the generation quality as indicated in Equation (1); 2) D tries to
learn from adversarial generations for better performance by
minimizing the expectation:
τa∼G(x,θD) L[D(τa(x), y)],
where adversarial augmentation τa can better reﬂect the
weakness of D than random augmentation τr, resulting in
more effective network training.
Joint training. The joint training of G and D is a nontrivial task. Augmentation operations are usually not differentiable , which stops gradients to ﬂow from D to G in
backpropagation. To solve this issue, we propose a reward
and penalty policy to create online ground truth of G. So
G can always be updated to follow D’s training status. The
details will be explained soon in Section 4.3.
It is crucial that G generates distributions instead of direct
operations or adversarial pixels . Our experiments
indicate that, by sampling from distributions, the generation
is more robust to outliers which may produce upside-down
augmentations. Thus, there is less chance that D would get
trapped in a local optimum.
Comparison with prior methods. We want to stress that
there is a sharp difference between our method and the recent
adversarial human pose estimation techniques . The
latter usually follow a common design that connects a pose
network (generator) with an additional network (discriminator) to obtain adversarial loss. In contrast, we propose
to learn an adversarial network (generator) to improve the
pose network (discriminator), by jointly optimizing data
augmentation and network training.
Our method is also different from others that perform
online hard example mining . Our method can create
new data points that may not exist in the dataset, whereas the
latter is usually bounded by the dataset. An exception is 
that uses GANs to generate deformations for object detection.
However, how to jointly optimize data augmentation and
network training, especially for human pose estimation, is
still an open question without investigation.
Scale distribution
Rotation distribution
Mixed Gaussians
Mixed Gaussians
Figure 3: Adversarial scaling and rotating. Our generator
predicts distributions of mixed Gaussian, from which scaling
and rotating are then sampled to augment the training image.
4. Adversarial Human Pose Estimation
Our task is to improve the training of a pre-designed pose
network. We take the wildly used U-net design as an
example. As illustrated in Figure 2 (right), the augmentation
network follows an encoder architecture. It takes the bridged
features of the U-net as inputs instead of raw images for
efﬁcient training. A set of distributions are then generated to
sample three typical augmentations: scaling, rotating, and
hierarchical occluding. Furthermore, we propose a reward
and penalty strategy for efﬁcient joint training.
4.1. Adversarial Scaling and Rotating (ASR)
The augmentation network generates adversarial augmentations by scaling and rotating the training images. The pose
network then learns from the adversarial augmentations for
more effective training. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that a
direct generation would collapse the training. It would easily
generate upside-down augmentations that are the hardest in
most cases. Instead, we divide the augmentation ranges into
m and n bins (e.g. m = 7 for scaling and n = 9 for rotating).
Each bin corresponds to a small bounded Gaussian. The augmentation network will ﬁrst predict distributions over scaling
and rotating bins. Then, the corresponding Gaussian is activated by sampling from distributions. Please refer to Figure
3 for an illustration of the sampling process.
ASR pre-training. It is crucial to pre-train the augmentation network so it can obtain the sense of augmentation
distributions before the joint training. For every training
image, we can sample totally m × n augmentations, each of
which is drawn from a pair of Gaussians. The augmentations
are then fed forward into the target network to calculate the
loss which represents how “difﬁcult” the augmentation is.
We accumulate m × n losses into the corresponding scaling and rotation bins. By normalizing the sum of bins to
1, we generate two vectors of probabilities: P s ∈Rm and
P r ∈Rn, which approximate the ground truth of scaling
and rotation distributions, respectively.
Given the ground-truth distributions P s and P r, we pro-
Pose Network
Scaling Up
Figure 4: Adversarial Hierarchical Occluding. The occlusion
mask is generated at the lowest resolution and then scaled up
to apply on hierarchical bridge features of the pose network.
pose a KL-divergence loss to pre-train the augmentation
network for scaling and rotating:
where ˜P s ∈Rm and ˜P r ∈Rn are the predicted distributions
following the above generation procedure. m and n are the
numbers of scale and rotation bins.
Discussion. Predicting distributions instead of direct augmentations has two advantages. First, it introduces uncertainties to avoid upside-down augmentations during the pretraining. Second, it helps to address the issue of missing
ground truth during the joint training, which will be explained in Section 4.3. In our design, the scaling and rotating
are directly applied on training images instead of deep features . The reason is we want to preserve the location
correspondence between image pixels and landmark coordinates. Otherwise, we might hurt the localization accuracy
once the intermediate feature maps are disturbed.
4.2. Adversarial Hierarchical Occluding (AHO)
In addition to scaling and rotating, the augmentation network also generates occluding operations to make the task
even “harder”. The human body has a linked structure where
joint locations are highly correlated to each other. By occluding parts of the image, the pose network is encouraged
to learn strong references among visible and invisible joints
Different from scaling and rotating, we ﬁnd that it is more
effective to occlude deep features instead of image pixels. It
does not have the location correspondence issue since joint
positions are unchanged after the occluding. Speciﬁcally, the
augmentation network generates a mask indicating which
part of features to be occluded so that the pose network has
more estimation errors. We only generate the mask at the
lowest resolution of 4 × 4. The mask is then scaled up to
64 × 64 to apply on bridge features of the U-net. Figure 4
explains the proposed hierarchical occluding.
Algorithm 1: Training scheme of a mini batch
Input: Mini-batch X, augmentation net G, pose net D.
Output: G, D.
1 Randomly and equally divide X into X1, X2 and X3;
2 Train D using X1;
3 Train D, G using X2 with ASR following Alg. 2;
4 Train D, G using X3 with AHO following Alg. 2;
AHO pre-training. Similar to scaling and rotating, the
augmentation network predicts an occluding distribution
instead of an instance occluding mask. The ﬁrst task is to
create the ground truth of the occluding distribution. The
idea is to assign values into a grid of w×h (e.g. w = h = 4).
The value indicates the importance of the features at the
corresponding cell. To achieve this, we vote a joint to one of
the w × h cells according to its coordinates. By counting all
joints from all images and normalizing the sum of cells to
1, we generate a heat map P o ∈Rw×h, which approximates
the ground truth of the occluding distribution.
Given the ground-truth distribution P o, we propose a
KL-divergence loss to pre-train the AHO task:
i,j log P o
where ˜P o ∈Rw×h is the heat map predicted by the augmentation network. To generate the occluding mask, we sample
one or two cells according to ˜P o, which are labeled as 0
while the rests are labeled as 1.
Discussion. Intuitively, there are three ways to apply
hierarchical occluding: (1) a single mask scales up from the
lowest to the highest resolutions, (2) a single mask scales
down from the highest to the lowest resolutions, and (3)
independent masks are generated at different resolutions.
We exclusively use the ﬁrst design in our approach since it
would occlude more than needed due to the large receptive
ﬁeld in the second case, and the occluded information may
be compensated at other resolutions in the third case.
4.3. Joint Training of Two Networks
Once ASR and AHO are pre-trained, we can jointly optimize the augmentation network and the pose network. As
we mentioned in Sec. 3, this is a non-trivial task since the
augmentation ground truth is missing. A naive approach
could be repeating the pre-training process as described in
Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 online. However, it would be
extremely time-consuming since there are a large number of
augmentation combinations.
Reward and penalty. Instead, we propose a reward and
penalty policy to address this issue. The key idea is, the
prediction of the augmentation network should be updated
according to the current status of the target network, while its
quality should be evaluated by comparing with a reference.
Algorithm 2: Training scheme of one image.
Input: Image x, augmentation network G, pose
network D.
Output: G, D.
1 Forward D to get bridge features f;
2 Forward G with f to get a distribution P;
3 Sample an adversarial augmentation ˜x from P;
4 Forward D with ˜x to compute loss ˜L;
5 Random augment x to get ˆx;
6 Forward D with ˆx to compute loss ˆL;
7 Compare ˜L with ˆL to update G using (3) and (4);
8 Update D;
To this end, we sample a pair of augmentations for each
image: 1) an adversarial augmentation τa and 2) a random
augmentation τr, as indicated in Equation (1). If the adversarial augmentation is harder than the random one, we
reward the augmentation network by increasing the probability of the sampled bin (ASR) or cell (AHO). Otherwise,
we penalize it by decreasing the probability accordingly.
Mathematically, let ˜P ∈Rk denotes the predicted distribution of the augmentation network. P ∈Rk denotes the
ground truth we are looking for. k is the number of bins
(ASR) or cells (AHO) and i is the sampled one.
If the adversarial augmentation τa leads to higher pose
network loss (more “difﬁcult”) comparing with the reference
(a random augmentation τr), we update P by rewarding:
Pi = ˜Pi + α ˜Pi;
Pj = ˜Pj −α ˜Pi
k −1, ∀j ̸= i.
Similarly, if τa leads to lower pose network loss (less “difﬁcult”) comparing with τr, we update P by penalizing:
Pi = ˜Pi −β ˜Pi;
Pj = ˜Pj −β ˜Pi
k −1, ∀j ̸= i,
where 0 < α, β ≤1 are hyperparameters that controls the
amount of reward and penalty. The augmentation network
keeps updating online, regardless of being rewarded or penalized, generating adversarial augmentations that intend to
improve the pose network.
Discussion. The pose network can learn from the ordinary random augmentation to maintain its regular performance. More importantly, it can also learn from the adversarial augmentations to achieve better performance. The
adversary augmentations may become too hard for the pose
network if we apply ASR and AHO simultaneously. Thus,
we alternately apply ASR and AHO on different images.
Here we equally split every mini batch into three shares: one
performs the random data augmentation, one performs ASR
augmentation, and one performs AHO augmentation. Please
check Algorithm 1 for the details.
Distribution
Figure 5: Network training status visualization: predicted rotating distributions of the agumentation network (Top), loss
distributions of pose network trained by adversarial (Middle) and random (Bottom) rotating augmentations. The augmentation
network predicts rotating distributions matching the loss distributions of pose network, according to the ﬁrst two rows. The
loss distribution in the last row maintains a similar shape all the time due to the ﬁxed Gaussian sampling distribution.
5. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst show the visualization of network
training states to verify the motivation of doing adversarial
dynamic augmentation. Then we quantitatively evaluate the
effectiveness of different components in the method and
further compare with state-of-the-art approaches.
5.1. Experiment Settings
We use stacked hourglass as the pose network. The
augmentation network takes the top-down part of an hourglass and only uses one cell module in each resolution block.
To evaluate the generalization capability of the proposed
adversarial augmentation, we tested two types of modules:
Residual module and Dense block . The dense block
provides direct connections among different layers, which
helps the gradient ﬂow in backpropagation.
Network design. We test both residual hourglass and
dense hourglass in our component evaluation experiments.
For residual hourglass, each residual module has a bottleneck
structure of BN-ReLU-Conv(1x1)-BN-ReLU-Conv(3x3)-
BN-ReLU-Conv(1x1). The input/output dimension of each
bottleneck is 256. The two 1 × 1 convolutions are used to
halve and double the feature dimensions.
For dense hourglass, each module is a bottleneck structure of BN-ReLU-Conv(1x1)-BN-ReLU-Conv(3x3), with
neck size 4, growth rate 32, and input dimension 128. The
dimension increases by 32 after each dense layer. At the
end of each dense block, we use BN-ReLU-Conv(1x1) to
reduce the dimension to 128. We use the standard 8 stacked
residual hourglasses as our baseline when compared
with state-of-the-art methods.
Datasets. We evaluate the proposed adversarial human
pose estimation on two benchmark datasets: MPII Human
Pose and Leeds Sports Pose (LSP) . MPII is collected
from YouTube videos with a broad range of human activities.
It has 25K images and 40K annotated persons (29K for
training and 11K for testing). Following , we sample 3K
samples from the training set for validation. Each person has
16 labeled joints.
The LSP dataset contains images from many sports
scenes. Its extended version has 11K training samples and
1K testing samples. Each person in LSP has 14 labeled joints.
Since there are usually multiple people in one image, we
crop around each person and resize it to 256×256. Typically,
random scaling (0.75-1.25), rotating (-/+30°) and ﬂipping is
used to augment the data.
Training. We use PyTorch for the implementation. RM-
SProp is used to optimize the networks. The adversarial
training contains three stages. We ﬁrst train hourglass for
a few epochs with a learning rate 2.5 × 10−4. Then we
freeze the hourglass model and use it train the AHO and
ASR networks with learning rate 2.5 × 10−4. Once they are
pre-trained, we lower the learning rates of AHO and ASR
networks to 5 × 10−5 and jointly train the three networks.
The learning rate of the target network is decayed to 5×10−5
after the validation accuracy plateaus. In all experiments,
the Percentage of Correct Keypoints (PCK) is used to
measure the pose estimation accuracy.
5.2. Visualization of the Training Status
In this experiment, we use a single residual hourglass.
Each residual block contains 3 residual modules. We are
interested in knowing how the pose network handles human
images with different data augmentations: rotating, scaling
and occluding. Since our method treats these three variations
in a similar way, we take rotating as an example. More
speciﬁcally, we visualize the loss distribution of hourglass
on images with different rotations.
Table 1: Comparison of random and adversarial data augmentation on the MPII validation set using .
Residual hourglass (size: 38M)
Dense hourglass (size: 18M)
Head Sho. Elb. Wri. Hip Knee Ank. Mean
Head Sho. Elb. Wri. Hip Knee Ank. Mean
Random Aug. 97.2
94.8 87.8 83.4 87.8 81.3
94.6 87.9 83.0 87.5 81.2
95.2 88.2 84.2 88.2 81.8
95.0 88.3 83.5 87.7 81.8
95.0 88.2 83.6 88.0 82.2
94.8 88.2 83.6 87.6 81.7
95.1 88.7 84.7 88.4 82.5
95.2 88.8 84.1 88.1 82.0
Detection rate, %
Normalized distance
Residual HG
Our Method
Residual HG
Our Method
Residual HG
Our Method
Normalized distance
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
Normalized distance
Our Method
Our Method
Our Method
Normalized distance
Normalized distance
Figure 6: Comparison of random and adversarial data augmentations on MPII validation set using . Consistent
improvements on a range of normalized distances could be observed on both residual modules (left) and dense blocks (right).
Random data augmentation. We train the pose network
using random rotating sampled from a zero-centered Gaussian distribution as shown in the last row of Figure 5. We
then test the trained pose network by applying the same
rotating distribution on the testing data. We ﬁnd that, at
different training stages (training epochs), the target network
loss always presents an inverted Gaussian-like distribution.
Adversarial data augmentation. In the beginning, the
loss distribution of the pose network is similar to the case
of random data augmentation. Since the pose network is
pre-trained by the random data augmentation. However,
the distribution becomes ﬂatter as the training continues,
which means the pose network could better handle the rotated
images. The pose network learns from the adversarial data
augmentation generated by the augmentation network.
Augmentation network training status. The status can
be visualized by applying the generated rotating augmentation. Comparing the ﬁrst two rows in Figure 5, we can
ﬁnd that the generated rotating distribution is similar to the
loss distribution of the pose network. This means that the
augmentation network could track the training status of the
target network and generate effective data augmentations.
5.3. Component Evaluation
We ﬁrst verify the effectiveness of ASR and AHO in both
residual and dense hourglasses. We use 3 residual bottlenecks in each block of residual hourglass. In dense hourglass,
we use 6 densely connected bottlenecks in one dense block.
Note that the size of dense hourglass model is less than half
of the residual hourglass. In Table 1, we compare variants
of adversarial data augmentation on . Figure 6
shows the improvement of adversarial data augmentation
compared with random data augmentation, on PCKh threshold from 0.1 to 0.5.
ASR only. Table 1 shows that ASR improves the accuracy of all the keypoints on both residual and dense hourglass,
with average improvements of 0.5% and 0.5% respectively.
This indicates that the generated adversarial scaling and rotating augmentations are efﬁctive in training the pose network.
AHO only. Table 1 shows that AHO improves accuracy
on both residual and dense hourglass, with average improvements of 0.4% and 0.4% respectively. Similarly, the pose
network can also learn improved inference from the adversarial occluding generated by the augmentation network.
ASR and AHO. Applying both ASR and AHO can further improve the accuracy by 0.4%, compared with applying
either of them. Figure 6 shows that ASR and AHO can
signiﬁcantly improve the localization accuracy especially
for joints that are usually more difﬁcult to localize, such as
ankle, knee and wrist.
Dense hourglass vs Residual hourglass. Table 1 also
shows that the dense hourglass has comparable performance
in terms of pose estimation accuracy, but much more parameter efﬁcient than the residual design (18M vs. 38M).
The dense design facilitates the gradient ﬂow through the direct connections among different feature blocks, which uses
fewer parameters without sacriﬁcing the estimation accuracy.
5.4. Comparing with State-of-the-art Methods
Quantitative comparison. To compare with state-ofthe-art methods, we apply the proposed adversarial data
augmentation to train the hourglasses network (totally 8
stacked) . The bridge features generated by the ﬁrst
hourglass network in the stack are input into the adversarial
network. The same hierarchical occluding masks are applied
to every hourglass network in the stack. Table 2 compares
Figure 7: Comparisons of the same Stacked HG network trained using random data augmentation (top) and adversarial data
augmentation (bottom). Note the improvement on challenging joints (e.g. ankle, elbow, wrist), and left-right confusion.
 accuracy of different methods on MPII dataset.
The proposed adversarial data augmentation can improve the
baseline by 0.6%, which achieves state-of-the-art performance. Table 3 compares accuracy of different
methods on LSP dataset. Again, our method can improve
the baseline by 1.5%, which signiﬁcantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.
Qualitative Comparison. Figure 7 shows qualitative
comparisons. We compare the random and adversarial data
augmentation. We can observer the improvement resulted
from the adversarial data augmentation. Interestingly, the
pose network could handle the left-right confusions after the
adversarial training.
Table 2: on the MPII test set. Our adversarial
data augmentation improves baseline stacked HGs(8) .
Head Sho. Elb. Wri. Hip Knee Ank. Mean
Pishchulin et al. 
74.3 49.0 40.8 34.1 36.5 34.4 35.2 44.1
Tompson et al. 
95.8 90.3 80.5 74.3 77.6 69.7 62.8 79.6
Carreira et al. 
95.7 91.7 81.7 72.4 82.8 73.2 66.4 81.3
Tompson et al. 
96.1 91.9 83.9 77.8 80.9 72.3 64.8 82.0
Hu et al. 
95.0 91.6 83.0 76.6 81.9 74.5 69.5 82.4
Pishchulin et al. 
94.1 90.2 83.4 77.3 82.6 75.7 68.6 82.4
Lifshitz et al. 
97.8 93.3 85.7 80.4 85.3 76.6 70.2 85.0
Gkioxary et al. 
96.2 93.1 86.7 82.1 85.2 81.4 74.1 86.1
Raﬁet al. 
97.2 93.9 86.4 81.3 86.8 80.6 73.4 86.3
Belagiannis et al. 
97.7 95.0 88.2 83.0 87.9 82.6 78.4 88.1
Insafutdinov et al. 96.8 95.2 89.3 84.4 88.4 83.4 78.0 88.5
Wei et al. 
97.8 95.0 88.7 84.0 88.4 82.8 79.4 88.5
Bulat et al. 
97.9 95.1 89.9 85.3 89.4 85.7 81.7 89.7
Chu et al. 
98.5 96.3 91.9 88.1 90.6 88.0 85.0 91.5
Stacked HGs(8) 
98.2 96.3 91.2 87.1 90.1 87.4 83.6 90.9
Ours: +ASR+AHO
98.1 96.6 92.5 88.4 90.7 87.7 83.5 91.5
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new method to jointly optimize data augmentation and network training. An aug-
Table 3: on the LSP dataset. Clear improvements
are observed over the baseline stacked HGs(8) .
Head Sho. Elb. Wri. Hip Knee Ank. Mean
Belagiannis et al. 
95.2 89.0 81.5 77.0 83.7 87.0 82.8 85.2
Lifshitz et al. 
96.8 89.0 82.7 79.1 90.9 86.0 82.5 86.7
Pishchulin et al. 
97.0 91.0 83.8 78.1 91.0 86.7 82.0 87.1
Insafutdinov et al. 97.4 92.7 87.5 84.4 91.5 89.9 87.2 90.1
Wei et al. 
97.8 92.5 87.0 83.9 91.5 90.8 89.9 90.5
Bulat et al. 
97.2 92.1 88.1 85.2 92.2 91.4 88.7 90.7
Chu et al. 
98.1 93.7 89.3 86.9 93.4 94.0 92.5 92.6
Stacked HGs(8) 
98.2 94.0 91.2 87.2 93.5 94.5 92.6 93.0
Ours: ASR+AHO
98.6 95.3 92.8 90.0 94.8 95.3 94.5 94.5
mentation network is designed to generate adversarial data
augmentations in order to improve the training of a target
network. Improved performance has been observed by applying our method on human pose estimation. In the future,
we plan to further improve our method for more general
applications in visual and language understanding.
7. Acknowledgment
This work is partly supported by the Air Force Ofﬁce
of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) under the Dynamic Data-
Driven Application Systems program. We also thank to NSF
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)
for the support of our research.