Western University
Western University
Scholarship@Western
Scholarship@Western
Centre for Human Capital and Productivity.
CHCP Working Papers
Economics Working Papers Archive
2003-3 How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College
2003-3 How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College
Quality? Evidence from Matching
Quality? Evidence from Matching
Dan A. Black
Jeffrey Smith
Follow this and additional works at: 
Part of the Economics Commons
Citation of this paper:
Citation of this paper:
Black, Dan A., Jeffrey Smith. "How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College Quality? Evidence
from Matching." CIBC Centre for Human Capital and Productivity. CIBC Working Papers, 2003-3. London,
ON: Department of Economics, University of Western Ontario .
How Robust is the Evidence on the
Effects of College Quality? Evidence
from Matching
Dan A. Black and Jeffrey Smith
Working Paper # 2003-3 June 2003
CIBC Working Paper Series
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
The University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
This working paper is available as a downloadable pdf file on our website
 
HOW ROBUST IS THE EVIDENCE ON THE
EFFECTS OF COLLEGE QUALITY?
EVIDENCE FROM MATCHING
First Version: April 9, 2002
Revised: June 12, 2003
This research was supported in part by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. We thank Alex Whalley for excellent research assistance, Markus Frölich, Shannon Seitz,
Barbara Sianesi, Alex Whalley, four anonymous referees and seminar participants at the Board of
Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve, George Mason, Ohio State, St. Gallen, Sydney, UCD, UCL,
UC-Irvine, UCLA and Uppsala for helpful comments. We also thank Barbara Sianesi for comments
and for providing her matching program.
Dan A. Black
Jeffrey A. Smith
Department of Economics
Department of Economics
and Center for Policy Research
University of Maryland,
Syracuse University
NBER and IZA
 
 
1. Introduction
A recent literature attempts to estimate the labor market effects of college quality,
focusing on the wage effects of attending a higher quality college. The literature measures
quality either in terms of inputs, such as expenditures per student or faculty salaries, or in terms
of peer quality (or selectivity), such as the average SAT score of the entering class. Recent
papers in this literature include Black, Daniel, and Smith , Brand , Brewer, Eide,
and Ehrenberg , Dale and Krueger , Light and Strayer and Turner .
The basic finding is that college quality matters for later labor market outcomes.1
The key econometric difficulty in this literature results from the non-random selection of
students into colleges of varying qualities. Better students sort into better quality colleges . With a few exceptions, the literature relies on an assumption of what
Heckman and Robb call “selection on observables” to identify the effects of college
quality in the presence of non-random selection. Under this assumption, bias resulting from the
differential selection of more able, more motivated, and otherwise better students into better
colleges is removed by conditioning on pre-determined observable characteristics of the students.
Standard practice in this literature, as in many others, consists of entering each characteristic in
levels (with perhaps a squared term for age) in a linear outcome model such as a wage equation.
In this paper, we address two related weaknesses of this identification strategy. The first
weakness arises from the fact that the linearity assumption can hide the failure of the “common
support” condition. To illustrate the problem, consider the case in which only high test score
students attend high-quality colleges and only low test score students attend low-quality colleges.
The counterfactual outcome – what high test score students experience when attending lowquality colleges – is not non-parametrically identified. Instead, the linear functional form
assumption identifies the counterfactual outcome. Even if the support problem does not prevent
estimation of college quality effects, the assumption that linearly conditioning on the observables
suffices to take account of selection bias remains problematic. This is the second weakness of
the standard approach in the literature on the labor market effects of college quality. Given that
theory does not suggest specific functional forms for outcome equations, and given the evidence
in, e.g., Tobias on the importance of non-linearities in ability in returns to schooling,
reliance on the linear functional form seems heroic.
Matching methods allow us to address both the support issue and the linear conditioning
issue in a convenient way. Similar concerns motivate the matching analyses in Dearden, Ferri
and Meghir , who examine the effects of secondary school quality in Britain, and Brand
 , who estimates the impacts of college selectivity using data on Wisconsin high school
graduates from 1957. Matching methods represent, depending on the particular method
employed, either a semi-parametric or non-parametric alternative to linear regression.2 While
matching does not solve the support problem, it does highlight the problem in a way that the
linear regression model does not. In order to reduce the dimensionality of our matching
problem, we employ propensity score matching methods, in which we match on the predicted
probability of attending a high-quality university, which is a function of observed X, rather than
matching directly on X.3 Once we have the distributions of estimated propensity scores for
sample members in high- and low-quality universities, we can compare the two densities to get a
clear sense of the extent of the common support problem.
Matching directly addresses the issue of conditioning only linearly on the X. The semiparametric propensity score matching methods we adopt combine a flexible parametric logit
specification for the propensity scores with non-parametric matching on the estimated scores.
Untreated observations similar to each treated observation in terms of the probability of
1 Brewer and Ehrenberg ably survey the earlier literature.
2 See the discussions in Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd , Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd ,
Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith , Dehejia and Wahba , and Smith and Todd . Current matching
methods require binary (or multinomial) treatments. Thus, in our context, the treatment consists of attendance at a
participation,
P X , serve as counterfactuals. By constructing an observation-specific
counterfactual for each treated observation, matching methods avoid bias due to misspecification
of the functional form in a linear model.4
Using the data from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY), we examine how students of different abilities, as measured by the first principal
component of the ten tests that comprise the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery
(ASVAB), sort into colleges of different qualities. For reasons discussed in Hoxby , this
sorting is of interest in its own right, and also informs our analysis of the support condition. We
then estimate the probability that a student attends a college in the top quartile of the quality
distribution in our sample, conditional on attending a college in either the top quartile or the
lowest quartile. The predicted probabilities from this choice equation form the propensity scores
we use to produce our matching estimates; we examine the common support condition using
these estimated scores. We select the particular matching estimator we employ and the
associated bandwidth using cross-validation methods, and then compare the estimates from
propensity score matching to estimates of the same parameter based on the standard linear
regression specification in the literature.
We reach five important empirical conclusions. First, we quantify the extent of sorting of
students by ability into colleges of different qualities. There is less sorting in a random sample
than in the non-random sample of high-end schools examined in Bowen and Bok , and
less than suggested by Herrnstein and Murray . In addition, we find that the sorting is
asymmetric: there are more high-ability students in low-quality colleges than low-ability students
high quality university rather than a low-quality university, where high and low refer to quartiles of the quality
distribution in our sample. See Imbens and Lechner for the generalization to multiple treatments.
3 Section 5 discusses the matching methods we employ in detail.
4 Other alternatives to the standard practice of entering each conditioning variable in levels in a linear regression
include non-parametric regression and more flexible parametric regression models containing many higher order
terms. Our aim here is to contrast the usual practice in the literature, which does not adopt these alternatives, with
propensity score matching methods.
in high-quality colleges. Second, unlike the findings of Heckman and Vytlacil in their
study of the returns to years of schooling, we find that sorting on ability is not sufficiently strong
to cause the support condition to fail in our sample. Using our estimated propensity scores,
however, we find that the support condition only weakly holds for persons with a high
probability of attending a high-quality college. A small number of high-ability individuals at
low-quality schools provide the counterfactual for a much larger number of high-ability
individuals at high-quality schools. As a result, our matching estimates have larger standard
errors than the corresponding OLS estimates. Third, although they are imprecisely estimated,
our matching estimates for women differ substantially from the corresponding linear regression
estimates, but the OLS and matching estimates for men are quite similar. Fourth, we find larger
estimated effects in the “thick support” region defined by
. Larger effects in
this region can result from heterogeneous treatment effects. They can also result from either
measurement error in college quality or residual selection on unobservables, both of which
should matter less in this region than in the tails of the propensity score distribution. This
finding suggests that standard estimates may understate the labor market effect of college
quality. Finally, we match on an alternative set of propensity scores containing only a small
number of variables selected via cross-validation. We obtain larger estimated effects with much
smaller standard errors, indicating a potential trade-off in finite samples between the plausibility
of the conditional independence assumption and the variance of the estimates.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the NLSY data we
use in our analysis. Section 3 describes our measures of college quality and the construction of
our college quality index. Section 4 examines the strength of the relationship between our
measure of ability and the quality of college a student attends. Section 5 defines our parameter
of interest and lays out the identifying assumptions on which we rely. Section 6 describes our
propensity score estimates and examines the support problem. Section 7 presents standard linear
regression estimates of the effect of college quality on wages using the NLSY data. Section 8
outlines the matching methods we use and Section 9 presents the corresponding estimated wage
effects. Section 10 presents estimates based on an alternative specification of the propensity
score. Section 11 concludes.
2. The NLSY Data
Our primary data source is the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), a panel
data set based on annual surveys of a sample of men and women who were 14 to 21 years old on
January 1, 1979. Respondents were first interviewed in 1979 and an attempt has been made to
re-interview them annually since then. Of the five sub-samples that
comprise the NLSY, we use only the representative cross-section and the minority over-samples.
Table 1 presents basic descriptive statistics for our sample. The top panel gives (unweighted)
statistics for the full sample, while the bottom panel gives statistics for the representative cross
section only. The sample includes only persons who had attended college at some point prior to
the 1998 survey.5
The NLSY suits our purpose well for several reasons. First, the timing means that we
have information on wages for a relatively recent cohort of college graduates that is old enough
that the vast majority of those who will attend college have already done so. Furthermore, those
who will attend graduate school have largely completed doing so as well. Second, the NLSY
confidential files provide information on individual colleges attended, which allows us to match
up information on specific colleges from external sources. Third, the NLSY allows us to
construct a compelling “ability” measure using the ASVAB, which was administered to over 90
5 For men (women) we start with 4,100 (4,299) observations in the 1998 cross-section. We drop 196 (156)
observations with missing ASVAB scores, 512 (442) observations not completing high school, 1,451 (1,335)
observations that complete high school but never attend college, 3 (1) observations with a missing value for race or
ethnicity, 306 (516) observations with missing or zero wages and 922 (1157) observations with missing values for
the variables in our college quality index.
percent of the sample.6 Fourth, the NLSY is rich enough in other covariates to make the
assumption that conditioning on observable characteristics alone solves the problem of nonrandom sorting into colleges of varying qualities plausible. These covariates include detailed
information on family background, home environment and high school characteristics.
Table 2 describes the set of covariates included in the log wage regressions and in the
propensity score models. For the region of birth, a dummy variable was created if the region
could not be determined. For the family and high school variables if a particular measure could
not be constructed because of missing data or invalid responses, we set the measure to zero and
generated a dummy variable indicating that the data are missing. Our ability controls were
created in two steps. First, we created age-adjusted ASVAB scores by regressing the scores
from each of the ten ASVAB components on age dummy variables. The residuals from these
regressions are the age-adjusted scores. The first two principal components of the age-adjusted
scores (and their squares) are the ability variables used throughout the paper.7
3. Measuring College Quality
We matched data on a large number of variables related to college quality to the NLSY
data using the information on college attended.8 We only matched data on four-year colleges;
roughly one-half of the people in our sample attended a four-year college, and many of the
quality variables are not available for two-year colleges.9
We make use of only three measures of college quality: average faculty salary in 1997,
the average Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) score of the entering class in 1990 and the average
6 Neal and Johnson describe the test in detail and discuss the issues of interpretation surrounding it.
7 We were concerned about the fact that some NLSY respondents complete the ASVAB after starting college. To
determine the empirical importance of this issue, we examined the differential in ASVAB scores between persons in
the first and fourth quartiles of the college quality distribution as a function of their age at the time of the test and
found no relationship.
8 We obtained these variables from the Department of Education’s Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) for 1997 and the U.S. News and World Report’s Directory of Colleges and Universities. These variables
change only very slowly, so utilizing values from a single point in time adds little measurement error.
freshman retention rate in 1990. The retention rate is the fraction of freshmen that return to the
same school in their sophomore year. All three variables are presumptively positively related to
college quality, but each reflects a different aspect of it. Faculty salaries represent a measure of
inputs, the average SAT score represents a measure of selectivity (or, alternatively, of peer
quality, which is a different sort of input), and the retention rate represents a “voting with your
feet” measure of quality as perceived by students and their parents.10 Descriptive statistics for
the three variables included in our index appear in Table 3. The table documents substantial
variation in all three measures among the colleges attended by both male and female NLSY
respondents.
For reasons of parsimony, and also because we think that each of our individual quality
variables represents an error-ridden measure of underlying quality, we combine the three
variables into an index. In particular, we take the first principal component of our three variables
as our index of college quality. We have examined the resulting ranking and find that it accords
with a priori notions of quality. For example, the top five colleges in the data set according to
this index are Stanford, MIT, Yale, Princeton, and the University of Pennsylvania.
4. The Relationship between Ability and College Quality
In this section we examine the relationship between ability and college quality. This
analysis provides a first pass at the support condition, as we expect substantial sorting on ability
into colleges of different qualities. That sorting may suffice to cause the support condition to
fail, even before conditioning on other variables. An examination of the extent and nature of
sorting on ability holds interest in its own right as well. Existing studies such as Bowen and Bok
 , Herrnstein and Murray , and Cook and Frank examine primarily elite
9 Our sample includes persons who went on to graduate study. The college quality variable refers to the most recent
college attended as an undergraduate in all cases.
10 We use only three quality measures in constructing the index because we do not observe each measure for all colleges,
so that adding additional measures to the index reduces the sample size. We can construct the index utilized in this paper
for 81.36 percent of the women who attended a four-year college and 81.70 percent of the men. Black, Daniel and Smith
colleges near the top of the quality distribution. Hoxby presents estimates of
variation in mean student test scores among universities of varying qualities over time and
estimates of the within-university variation in test scores over time, but does not look at the full
joint distribution. Light and Strayer present similar evidence from the NLSY but using
the selectivity of the first college attended rather than the quality of the last college attended.
Table 4 presents the joint density of student ability and college quality separately for men
and women. In each panel, rows represent quintiles of the college quality distribution and
columns represent quintiles of the ability distribution, where ability consists of the first principal
component of the ASVAB scores. Each cell contains three numbers, the row percentage, the
column percentage, and the cell percentage. Thus, in the upper left corner of Table 4 for men,
we find that 6.48 percent of the sample is in both the first quintile of the ability distribution and
the first quintile of the college quality distribution. As there are 25 cells and we are using
quintiles, random sorting would yield roughly 4 percent in each cell, so this cell is substantially
over-represented in the data.
Three main findings emerge from Table 4. First, there is substantial sorting based on
ability. For both men and women, the fraction of observations on the diagonals, and the fraction
on either the diagonal or the surrounding bands (persons with a difference of one between the
two quintile rankings) exceed what would be expected from random sorting at the 5 percent level
or better. For example, the percentages of observations on the diagonal are 24.76 and 27.17 for
men and women, respectively, compared to the 20 percent expected in the absence of sorting.
This sorting appears slightly stronger for women than for men. Second, a comparison of the offdiagonal corner cells suggests an asymmetry to the sorting, with more high-quality students at
low-quality schools than the reverse. Light and Strayer find a much stronger asymmetry
than we do when using the first, rather than the last, college attended. This difference suggests
 note that additional quality measures beyond the third (or, indeed, alternative sets of three quality measures) do
that high ability students who start their academic careers at low quality colleges often move to
higher quality colleges over the course of their academic careers. Third, at the level of quartiles
and quintiles, the sorting by ability alone does not threaten the validity of the support condition.
Yet there is sufficient sorting to suggest that when looking at the support condition more finely,
and with additional conditioning variables, troubles could arise. We return to the support issue
in Section 6; in the next section we make precise our parameter of interest and the identifying
assumptions underlying our estimates.
5. The Parameter of Interest and Our Identifying Assumptions
1Y be the outcome in the “treated” state and
0Y be the outcome in the “untreated”
state. In our application, both groups receive a treatment in the literal sense. Thus,
corresponds to the potential outcome associated with attending a high-quality college (one in the
upper quartile of our sample) and
0Y corresponds to the potential outcome associated with
attending a low-quality college (one in the lower quartile of our sample). We call these potential
outcomes because we observe only one of
for each person. Let
D = indicate that a
person attended a high-quality college and
indicate that a person attended a low-quality
college. Finally, let X be a vector of observed covariates affecting both the choice of college
quality and economic outcomes.
Our parameter of interest – the impact of treatment on the treated – is the mean effect of
attending a high-quality college rather than a low-quality college on the persons who chose to
attend a high-quality college. In terms of our notation, the parameter of interest is:
If impacts are heterogeneous, this parameter may differ from the mean impact of attending a
high-quality college on those persons currently attending a low-quality college and from the
little to change the index (or the findings, in a regression context).
mean impact of attending a high-quality college on a randomly selected person. Our parameter,
combined with information on the differential costs incurred by persons attending a high-quality
college, provides evidence on the extent of any economic returns to those additional costs.
Both cross-sectional matching methods and standard linear regression analyses estimate
the impact of a “treatment” under the assumption of selection on observables. That is, both
approaches assume that conditioning on an available set of covariates removes all systematic
differences in outcomes in the “untreated” state between high- and low-quality college attendees.
The literature formalizes the selection on observables assumption that justifies matching as the
Conditional Independence Assumption (CIA), given by:
This assumption states that the outcome in the base state (your wage if you attend a low-quality
college) is independent of the treatment (attending a high-quality college), conditional on some
set of observed covariates X. Put differently, within subgroups defined by X, attendance at a
high-quality college is unrelated to what your outcome would be if you attended a low-quality
college.11 It is important to emphasize that the CIA is just that, an assumption. In any given
context, it need not hold for any particular set of X available in the data, and it may not hold for
any set of X variables in the available data. Moreover, cross-sectional matching does nothing to
account for selection on unobservables, and can even act to increase the bias relative to not
matching for certain configurations of the unobservables; see Heckman and Siegelman, .12
The key difference between matching and linear regression is that regression makes the
additional assumption that simply conditioning linearly on X suffices to eliminate selection bias.
Of course, with sufficient higher order terms, the linear model can approximate a given non-
11 As noted in Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd , this version of the CIA is stronger than we actually require.
Mean independence conditional on the propensity scores
suffices to identify
our parameter of interest, and even this condition need only hold for respondents attending colleges in the two quartiles of
the college quality distribution being compared in a given set of estimates.
linear function of the X arbitrarily well. Most of the linear regression models in the college
quality literature, however, include no higher order terms other than perhaps squared terms in
age or experience. For such models, the linearity assumption potentially has real empirical bite.
Moreover, matching methods, but not linear regression, rely on the “common support”
assumption, which can be expressed as:
1 for all .
The support condition states that, for each X satisfying the CIA, there must be some individuals
who do not get treated; in our context, for each X, there must be some individuals who attend a
low-quality college. If there are X for which everyone attends a high quality college, then there
is no way in a matching context to construct the counterfactual outcome for these observations.
Matching on X when X is of high dimension, as in our application, raises the problem of
empty cells – the so-called curse of dimensionality. With high dimensional X, the number of
distinct vector values becomes very large, and many (even all in some contexts) of the treated
persons will have no corresponding untreated person with exactly the same values of X. One
response to this is to reduce the dimension of X by reducing the number of matching variables,
but this will reduce the plausibility of the CIA. Instead, Rosenbaum and Rubin show that
the assumptions that justify matching on X also justify matching on the probability of treatment,
, which the literature calls the “propensity score.” The intuition behind propensity
score matching is that subgroups with values of X that imply the same probability of treatment
can be combined because they will always appear in the treatment and (matched) comparison
groups in the same proportion. As a result, any differences between subgroups with different X
but the same propensity score balance out when constructing the estimates.13
12 Difference-in-differences matching methods allow for selection on time-invariant unobservables. See the
discussions in Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd and Smith and Todd .
13 The curse of dimensionality reappears when estimating the propensity scores unless a parametric model, such as a
logit or probit, is employed to do so. The literature suggests gains from being non-parametric on outcomes
Our estimates constitute partial equilibrium estimates, and can be thought of as indicating
the effect of changing college quality for one student at the margin. In formal terms, we make
the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA), which states that
depend on who attends what college or on how many attend each type of college. A general
equilibrium analysis of this question would allow for the endogeneity of the college quality
measures in response to large changes in student choices.
6. Propensity Scores and the Common Support Condition
We estimate propensity scores for men and women using a logit model and the NLSY
data. The propensity score specification for each group includes age, age squared, race/ethnicity,
region of birth dummies, the first two principal components of the ten ASVAB test scores and
their squares, and characteristics of the respondent’s high school, the respondent’s parents, and
the respondent’s home environment as a child. They pass (men) or almost pass (women)
standard balancing tests such as those described in Smith and Todd for ·
had trouble obtaining balance for high propensity scores due to the small number of
observations available.
We select our X variables to include factors expected to affect both the college quality a
respondent selects as well as outcomes in the baseline, low college quality state. The only
potentially controversial variable included in some of our estimated scores is years of schooling.
This variable poses conceptual problems in this literature, as years of schooling depend in part on
college quality, yet they also have a separate, exogenous effect on outcomes. Including years of
schooling, whether in a linear regression context or in a matching context, understates the effect
of college quality, as that part of the college quality effect that works through increasing years
attended gets netted out in the conditioning. On the other hand, not including years of schooling
(typically continuous) but parametric on participation (a binary variable), compared to utilizing a parametric model
for outcomes, particularly when a flexible specification is employed in estimating the propensity scores.
risks assigning to college quality the effects of other factors that affect years of college attended
and whether or not the student completes a degree. In the linear regression estimates presented
in Section 7 we follow Dearden, Ferri and Meghir and do it both ways; as in their paper,
we find that it makes a difference to the estimates. As a result, we also report the matching
estimates with and without including years of education in the propensity score specification.
In Figure 1, we examine the support condition using the propensity scores that include
years of education by plotting histograms of the estimated scores for both men and women. The
graphs for the scores excluding years of education show a similar pattern. For each group, the
top histogram corresponds to respondents who attended high-quality colleges (the
D = group),
while the bottom histogram corresponds to respondents who attended low-quality colleges
group). The horizontal axis defines intervals of the propensity score and the height
(or depth) of each bar on the vertical axis indicates the fraction of the relevant sample with
scores in the corresponding interval.
Figure 1 illustrates that, when looking more finely than the quartiles and quintiles
examined in Section 4, and when considering propensity scores that incorporate additional
covariates beyond ability, the support condition gets stretched even thinner. For both men and
women, nearly 42 percent of the comparison group lies below the 5th percentile of the treatment
group, and nearly 52 percent of the treatment group lies above the 95th percentile of the
comparison group. Indeed, the mean propensity score given
D = is about 0.70 while the mean
is about 0.30.
In Table 5, we provide an alternative way of examining the intensity with which the
upper tail of the comparison group gets used in constructing the estimated counterfactual mean
by presenting the deciles of the distribution of the relative weights from matching estimates
presented in Section 9 based on an Epanechnikov kernel. The weights are normalized by the
mean of the distribution so that a number less than one lies below the mean and a number greater
than one lies above the mean. We see that the comparison group observations around the 80th
percentile get used over 4.5 times more heavily than those around the 20th percentile, with the
mean of the data at about the 65th percentile. Thus, while the support condition does not fail in
our data, we are skating on thin ice in terms of identification for high values of the probability of
participation. Comparing the comparable in these data means using only a small number of
comparison observations to construct the counterfactual for a large number of treated
observations.
To examine how much difference the thin support in the upper tail makes to the
estimates, we present separate estimates for the “thick support” region, defined as
. Two concerns motivate these estimates. First, following Hausman,
Abrevaya, and Scott-Morton , we worry that high ˆ(
P X respondents observed at lowquality schools may actually represent high ˆ(
P X respondents with measurement error in their
college attended variable.
Second, we remain concerned about any lingering selection on unobservables, which will
have its largest effects on bias for values of the propensity score in the tails of the distribution.
To see this, suppose that you believe that earnings are given by
X is the deterministic portion of the wage when in the comparison group,
the deterministic portion of the wage when in the treatment group, and
corresponding error terms. Treatment is determined by the latent variable
otherwise, and
. With the propensity score
matching estimator, we want
, but if there is any
residual selection bias after conditioning on
P X and we assume that
are jointly normal,
we will have the bias
This bias is minimized about (
. Indeed, if we take the distribution of
estimated propensity scores as the true
P X , assume the error terms are normal, and assume
that we can exactly match each individual in the treatment group with individuals having exactly
P X , the selection bias from using the entire treatment group sample is 7.77 times
larger than the bias if we limit our sample to
(0.33,0.67)
. While this analytic result
obviously relies on the joint normality, the intuition underlying the result does not depend on
distributions: when the probability of being in the treatment group is high, unobservable factors
on average play a larger role than for probabilities near 0.5. Thus, when matching estimators
must rely on the right tail of the distribution of propensity scores in the comparison group, the
selection bias may be considerable even when u and
ε are only weakly correlated.
7. Regression Estimates of the Impact of College Quality
In this section we present standard regression-based estimates of the impact of college
quality on wages. In particular, Table 6 presents evidence from 16 linear regression models,
eight for men and eight for women. The dependent variable is the natural log of the respondent’s
real wage in 1998.14 In addition to the conditioning variables, we include indicator variables for
having attended a college in the second, third, and fourth quartile of the quality distribution in
14 In particular, the dependent variable is the log of the average real wage over all jobs held in 1998. Two
variables are used to construct wages: total income from wages and salary in the past calendar year and number of hours
worked in the past calendar year. The wage variable equals the log of total wage income divided by total hours worked.
Persons with no jobs in 1998 are excluded from the sample. We exclude 9.86 percent of the male respondents and 16.0
percent of the female respondents due to zero earnings. To determine the sensitivity of our results to this exclusion, we
constructed estimates using earnings levels as the dependent variable both including and excluding the zeros and found
that it made little substantive difference to the results.
our sample, as measured by the college quality index described in Section 3, and for having a
missing value of the quality index. The first quartile of the quality distribution is the omitted
group and, therefore, the implicit counterfactual. The columns vary the set of conditioning
variables included in the model. Table 2 describes the individual conditioning variables and the
notes to Table 6 define the blocks of variables included in each column. The top panel for each
group omits the years of education variable, while the bottom panel includes it.
The regression results embody five patterns of interest. First, as shown in Black, Daniel,
and Smith , conditioning on ability makes a big difference to the estimates; in
particular, it reduces the estimated effect by about one-quarter. This is consistent with the
sorting shown in Section 4. Second, including additional individual characteristics other than
ability, such as race, age, and region of birth, again reduces the estimated effects. Third,
including the years of schooling variable reduces the estimated effects by about a third relative to
the corresponding specification without years of schooling. Fourth, for men, but not for women,
the estimated effects increase monotonically as college quality increases regardless of the set of
included covariates. Finally, if we look at the two specifications that correspond to our
propensity scores, we find that attending a high-quality college rather than a low-quality college
increases wages by 11 or 12 percent for men and by about 7.5 percent for women. These
findings are broadly consistent with the regression-based literature.
8. Matching Methods
A variety of different methods exist for implementing matching. These methods differ in
the specific weights assigned to each comparison group observation. All matching estimators
have the generic form
for the individual counterfactual for treated observation i. In this equation,
the untreated comparison group observations. All matching estimators construct an estimate of
the expected unobserved counterfactual for each treated observation by taking a weighted
average of the outcomes of the untreated observations. What differs among the various matching
estimators is the specific form of the weights.
We consider three alternative matching estimators in our empirical work: the nearest
neighbor estimator, the Gaussian kernel estimator, and the Epanechnikov kernel estimator.
Asymptotically, all the different matching estimators produce the same estimate, because in an
arbitrarily large sample, they all compare only exact matches. In finite samples, different
matching estimators produce different estimates because of systematic differences between them
in which observations they assign positive weight, how much weight they assign them, and how
they handle (implicitly) the support problem.
Given the large number of competing estimators, we immediately face a problem of
which estimator to use. Following Racine and Li , we use a leave-one-out validation
mechanism to choose among the nearest neighbor, Gaussian kernel, and Epanechnikov kernel
estimators and to pick the bandwidth for the two kernel estimators. Recall that the estimation
problem we face is to estimate the missing counterfactual
0Y for those who attend colleges in the
highest quality quartile. Unfortunately, we have no observations of
0Y for the treatment group,
but we do, of course, have observations on
0Y in the comparison group. Leave-one-out
validation uses these observations to determine which of the competing models best fit the data.
As the name implies, leave-one-out validation drops the jth observation in the comparison
group and uses the remaining
N −observations in the comparison group to form an estimate of
Y , which may be denoted
−. The associated forecast error is given by
As the estimation does not include the jth observation, it represents an “out-of-sample” forecast,
and, because the estimation sample is of size
N − (rather than N), it presumably does a good
job of replicating the essential features of the estimation problem. Repeating the process for the
N −observations allows comparisons of the mean squared error or root mean squared
error of the forecasts associated with different matching estimators (or bandwidths, when
selecting a bandwidth) to guide the choice of estimator (or bandwidth).
The use of the leave-one-out validation mechanism yields three interesting results. First,
the nearest neighbor estimator performs worse than either the Gaussian kernel or the
Epanechnikov kernel estimator. This is consistent with the findings in Frölich’s Monte
Carlo analysis of the performance of alternative matching methods. Second, the Epanechnikov
kernel estimator performs modestly better than the Gaussian kernel almost independent of the
bandwidth selected. Third, the performance of the estimators is relatively insensitive to the
bandwidth selected until one gets to very small bandwidths. Given these results, we rely on the
Epanechnikov kernel to construct the matching estimates presented in the remaining sections. In
addition to its superior performance in our cross-validation exercise, the Epanechnikov kernel
converges faster than the Gaussian kernel because it has only a limited support and, for the same
reason, it implicitly imposes the support condition through the choice of the bandwidth.
9. Matching Estimates of the Impact of College Quality
Our matching estimates of the impact on wages of attending a high-quality rather than a
low-quality college appear in Table 7. As described in Section 8, we present matching estimates
using the Epanechnikov kernel with leave-one-out cross-validated bandwidths. In each case, we
present two alternative estimates: one that uses education in the estimation of the propensity
score and one that excludes education from the propensity score. We also indicate, for each
estimate, the number of treated observations for which an estimated counterfactual could be
constructed using that particular estimator. Bootstrap standard errors based on 2,000 replications
appear in parentheses below each estimate. Each bootstrap includes re-estimation of the
propensity scores used in the matching on the bootstrap sample. In the second row, we present
the OLS estimates of the parameter of interest. These estimates differ from those in Table 6
because the sample includes only persons who attended a college in the first or fourth quartile of
the quality distribution. This sample corresponds to that used for the matching estimates. The
differences in the estimates that result from changing the sample signal the potential importance
of relaxing the linear functional form assumption through matching.
In the third row, we present estimated impacts for the “thick support” region, defined in
Section 6 as the region with
. In this region, there are substantial numbers of
observations in both the treatment and comparison groups. The final row of the table presents
OLS estimates of the impact of treatment for observations in the “thick support” region.15
For men, the OLS estimates indicate a 13 to 17 percent increase in wages as the effect of
moving from a college in the first quartile of the quality distribution to one in the fourth quartile.
Both OLS estimates are statistically significant at the five percent level. In contrast, the
matching estimates range from 0.120 to 0.139, suggesting modestly smaller impacts. The
estimates are a bit smaller when we condition on education than when we do not. Neither of the
matching estimates is statistically significant at conventional levels; relaxing the linear functional
form assumption has a price.
The estimates tell a similar story for women. Here the OLS estimates indicate a wage
effect of 12 to 17 percent associated with attending a high-quality college. Both are significant
at the five percent level. The full sample matching estimates range from 0.067 to 0.078, but are
less than their corresponding standard errors.
15 We also formed estimators using the trimming mechanism suggested by Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd 
and Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd . Their scheme defines the region of common support in terms of estimates of
the densities of the propensity score in the
samples. When we apply a low cutoff value for the densities,
we obtain estimates similar to the estimates for the full sample in Table 7. When we apply a high cutoff value for the
densities, and drop around 40 percent of the sample, we obtain estimates similar to our thick support estimates in Table 7.
In contrast to the full sample estimates, the matching estimates that consider only the
“thick support” region are almost all higher than the corresponding OLS estimates, sometimes
substantially so. For men, these estimates equal 0.199 to 0.250 with and without conditioning
on years of education, respectively. The corresponding estimates for women equal 0.124 and
0.157. Following the discussion in Section 6, higher estimates in the common support can have
one of three sources. First, there may be heterogeneous treatment effects, with higher impacts
for middle values of the propensity score (something somewhat difficult to reconcile with an
economic model of college quality choice). Second, they may result from measurement error in
college quality in the tails of the distribution. Third, they may result from lingering selection on
unobservables, which has a larger effect for values of
P X outside the thick support region.
Table 8 presents matching and OLS estimates of the effect of “treatment on the treated”
for attending a college in the third quality quartile rather than the first quartile and of attending a
college in the second quality quartile rather than the first quartile. To ease the comparison, we
also replicate the corresponding estimates from Table 6. Several patterns emerge. First, for
men, the matching estimates are always smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates. Second,
for both men and women, the OLS estimates are monotonically increasing as one moves to
higher quartiles of college quality, and for men, the same is true of the matching estimator. For
women, however, the matching estimator monotonically declines with increases in the quartile of
college quality, although we cannot reject the null hypothesis that all of the estimates are the
same. Fourth, the estimated standard errors for the matching estimates always exceed those for
the OLS estimates. Thus, while the estimates do not tell a strong story about bias in the OLS
estimates, they do tell an important story about the support problem in this context. The support
condition does not fail here, but it holds so weakly that the matching estimates end up having
high variances.
Taken together, the estimates in Tables 7 and 8, along with the frequency of use analysis
for the comparison group observations in Table 5, teach two related lessons. First, substantively,
our point estimates provide some reason for concern about college quality effect estimates based
on OLS regressions that control only linearly for covariates. Second, in commonly used data
sets similar in sample size to the NLSY, and covering persons who have attended college during
years where there is substantial sorting based on ability and other characteristics, it is likely that
the support condition barely holds, with the result that the data lack sufficient information for
strong inference regarding the wage effects of college quality without the imposition of
functional form assumptions.
10. A Minimal Specification
The matching estimates presented in Section 9 relied on a matching estimator and
associated bandwidth selected via leave-one-out cross-validation. In this section, we also rely on
leave-one-out cross-validation to choose the set of variables included in the propensity score. In
conceptual terms, this amounts to choosing the propensity score model based on goodness-of-fit
considerations rather than based on theory and evidence about the set of variables related to both
college quality choice and labor market outcomes. We implemented the model selection
procedure by starting with a model containing only the first two principal components of the
ASVAB scores (and their squares) and indicators for whether the respondent was black or
Hispanic. We then successively added blocks of additional variables, such as the individual
characteristics, the home environment variables, the parental characteristics variables and the
high school characteristics variables, and compared the resulting mean squared errors. To our
considerable surprise, the minimal specification we started with out-performed the full
specification and every other competing specification we examined. Not surprisingly given the
small number of conditioning variables, satisfying the common support condition poses much
less of a problem with the minimal specification, as the conditional mean of the estimated
propensity scores equals 0.60 for
D = and 0.40 for
. Perhaps as a result, the crossvalidation selects a narrower bandwidth for women and a much narrower bandwidth for men.
We present estimates for the parameter
based on the minimal specification
(and without conditioning on years of education) in Table 9. For both men and women, the
minimal specification yields larger point estimates than the full specification. In addition, the
standard errors get much smaller, so that both estimates are statistically significant at
conventional levels. We also present OLS estimates using the same minimal set of conditioning
variables; these prove quite similar to the corresponding matching estimates.
While it is tempting to claim that this minimal specification is indeed the correct
specification, we do not accept this interpretation. Too many studies have documented the
important role of family background for both labor market outcomes and college quality choices
to simply dismiss them from the analysis. Why then does the fit of the model get worse when we
include such variables in the propensity score estimation? We believe the answer lies in the
common support problem. With the full specification, the treatment and comparison groups
have much more distinct distributions of propensity scores than with the minimal specification.
As a result, the cross-validation selects somewhat larger bandwidths for women and much larger
bandwidths for men with the full specification. As is well known, increases in the bandwidth
induce more bias as observations less similar to each treated observation receive greater weight
in constructing the estimated counterfactuals. Thus, we suspect that our minimal specification
reduces the bias resulting from the relatively wide bandwidths employed in the full specification.
The cost of this reduction in the bias from smoothing appears to consist of additional selection
bias resulting from the failure of the minimal specification to condition on all of the covariates
required for the CIA to plausibly hold in the data.
11. Conclusions
In this paper, we have investigated two potential weaknesses in the most commonly used
econometric approach in the literature that estimates the labor market effects of college quality.
These weaknesses are failure to attend to the support condition, which may be problematic in this
context due to the sorting of highly qualified students into higher quality colleges, and the failure
to condition non-linearly on important covariates such as ability. We have five main findings.
First, there is substantial sorting based on ability into colleges of differing qualities for
both men and women in the NLSY. Higher ability students disproportionately attend higher
quality colleges. We find some evidence of an asymmetry in this sorting, with more high-ability
students at low-quality colleges than low-ability students at high-quality colleges. Sorting on
ability alone, however, does not break the support condition.
Second, using our estimated propensity scores, which include ability as well as numerous
other background variables, we show that the support condition, while it does not fail, holds only
weakly in our data. In particular, our data include only a handful of individuals who attend lowquality colleges but have characteristics that give them a high probability of attending a highquality college. As a result, we end up with large standard errors. This is not a problem with the
matching estimator; rather, it is a problem with the data. Running linear regressions hides the
problem by implicitly borrowing strength from comparison observations with lower probabilities
of attending a high-quality college.
Third, our estimates raise some concerns regarding the conventional practice of using
linear selection on observables models to investigate the labor market effects of college quality.
Although the point estimates from our matching estimators are imprecise, they sometimes differ
substantially from the corresponding OLS estimates. In all cases, however, the matching
estimates support the overall finding of the regression-based literature that college quality
matters for labor market outcomes.
Fourth, our estimates based only on the “thick support” region of propensity scores
around 0.5 consistently turn out larger than those constructed using the full sample. This
difference could arise from genuinely larger impacts in this region, though we think this unlikely
on theoretical grounds. More likely, it results from either measurement error in college quality
or lingering selection on unobservables, both of which play a bigger role outside the thick
support region than within it.
Fifth, a comparison of our full propensity score specification, which includes a rich set of
covariates affecting both college quality choice and labor market outcomes, with the minimal
specification selected by cross-validation on the basis of goodness-of-fit reveals an interesting and
empirically important tradeoff. In our full specification bias arises from selecting a wide bandwidth
in response to the weakness of the common support. In the minimal specification, selection bias
arises from leaving out many of the variables whose presence makes the CIA plausible and hence
justifies matching (and regression) in our data. This tradeoff also affects the estimated standard
errors, which are much smaller for the minimal specification wherein the support condition poses
much less of a problem.