Decomposing a Scene into Geometric and Semantically Consistent Regions
Stephen Gould
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
 
Richard Fulton
Dept. of Computer Science
Stanford University
 
Daphne Koller
Dept. of Computer Science
Stanford University
 
High-level, or holistic, scene understanding involves
reasoning about objects, regions, and the 3D relationships
between them.
This requires a representation above the
level of pixels that can be endowed with high-level attributes such as class of object/region, its orientation, and
(rough 3D) location within the scene. Towards this goal, we
propose a region-based model which combines appearance
and scene geometry to automatically decompose a scene
into semantically meaningful regions. Our model is deﬁned
in terms of a uniﬁed energy function over scene appearance
and structure. We show how this energy function can be
learned from data and present an efﬁcient inference technique that makes use of multiple over-segmentations of the
image to propose moves in the energy-space. We show, experimentally, that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the tasks of both multi-class image segmentation and geometric reasoning. Finally, by understanding
region classes and geometry, we show how our model can
be used as the basis for 3D reconstruction of the scene.
1. Introduction
With recent success on many vision subtasks—object detection , multi-class image segmentation , and 3D reconstruction —holistic scene understanding has emerged as one of the next great challenges
for computer vision . Here the aim is to reason
jointly about objects, regions and geometry of a scene with
the hope of avoiding the many errors induced by modeling
these tasks in isolation.
An important step towards the goal of holistic scene understanding is to decompose the scene into regions that are
semantically labeled and placed relative to each other within
a coherent scene geometry. Such an analysis gives a highlevel understanding of the overall structure of the scene, allowing us to derive a notion of relative object scale, height
above ground, and placement relative to important semantic
categories such as road, grass, water, buildings or sky. We
provide a novel method that addresses this goal.
Our method is based on a uniﬁed model where each pixel
in the image is assigned to a single region. Regions are
labeled both with a semantic category (such as grass, sky,
foreground, and so on) and a geometric label (currently vertical, horizontal, or sky). Unlike methods that deal only
with multi-class segmentation or only with geometric
reconstruction , our approach reasons jointly about both
aspects of the scene, allowing us to avoid inconsistencies
(such as vertical roads) and to utilize the context to reduce
false positives (such as unsupported objects).
A key aspect of our approach is the use of large,
dynamically-deﬁned regions as the basic semantic unit.
Most previous methods for doing this type of image decomposition use either individual pixels or predeﬁned
superpixels . Each of these approaches has its tradeoffs. The use of individual pixels makes it difﬁcult to utilize
more global cues, including both robust statistics about the
appearance of larger regions, which can help average out the
random variations of individual pixels, and relationships between regions, which are hard to “transmit” by using local
interactions at the pixel level. The use of superpixels partially addresses some of these concerns, but as superpixels
are constructed in advance using simple procedures based
on local appearance alone, their boundaries are often inconsistent with the true segment boundaries, making an accurate decomposition of the image impossible. Our approach
dynamically associates pixels to regions, allowing region
boundaries to adjust so as to accurately capture the true object boundaries. Moreover, our regions are also much larger
than superpixels, allowing us to derive global appearance
properties for each region, including not only color and texture, but even larger properties such as its general shape,
aspect ratio, and characteristics of its boundary. These features can help capture subtle yet important cues about regions that improve classiﬁcation accuracy. As we will see,
this provides a decomposition of the scenes into objects or
appearance-coherent parts of objects (such as person’s head,
or a window in a building).
Reasoning in our model requires that we infer both the
pixel-to-region association and the semantic and geometric
labels for the regions. We address this challenge using a hybrid approach. For the pixel-association task, we propose
a novel multiple-segmentation approach, in which different
precomputed segmentations are used to propose changes to
the pixel-region associations. These proposed moves take
large steps in the space and hence help avoid local minima; however, they are evaluated relative to our global energy function, ensuring that each step improves the energy.
The region-labeling task is addressed using global energyminimization methods over the region space. This step is
not too expensive, since the number of regions is significantly lower than the number of pixels. By performing
the inference at this level, we also improve labeling accuracy because the adjacency structure between these larger
regions allows us to directly exploit correlations between
them (such as the fact that ground is below sky).
The parameters of our model are entirely learned from
data. In this model, we are learning to label entire segments,
allowing us to exploit global, region-level characteristics.
We obtain positive examples for region labels from a large
training set, which we constructed using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), at a total cost of less than $250. Negative
examples are a bit trickier to acquire, as there are exponentially many “non-regions,” most of which are obviously bad
choices. We therefore propose a novel closed-loop training regime, where the algorithm runs inference on the training images given its current model, and then uses mistakes
made in the process as negative examples to retrain.
We apply our method to a challenging data set consisting of 715 images, most of which have fairly low resolution and multiple small objects at varying scales. We show
that our approach produces multi-class segmentation and
surface orientation results that outperform state-of-the-art
methods. In addition, we show how our output can be used
as the basis for 3D scene reconstruction.
2. Background and Related Work
Our work touches on many facets of computer vision
that have, in recent years, been treated as separate problems. The problem of multi-class image segmentation (or
labeling) has been successfully addressed by a number of
works . The goal here is to label every
pixel in the image with a single class label. Typically these
algorithms construct CRFs over the pixels (or small coherent regions called superpixels) with local class-predictors
based on pixel appearance and a pairwise smoothness term
to encourage neighboring pixels to take the same label.
Some novel works introduce 2D layout consistency between objects , object shape , or relative location
between regions . However, none of these works take
into account 3D context and do not learn or enforce global
consistency, such as that “sky” needs to be above “ground”.
As an alternative to segmenting into semantic classes,
Hoiem et al. propose segmenting free-standing objects
by estimating occlusion boundaries in an image.
works attempt to reconstruct 3D depth or surface geometry directly from monocular images without ﬁrst
reasoning about occlusions. These use local color and texture cues together with pairwise interactions to infer scene
structure. None of these works attempt to understand the
semantic content of the scene and they tend to produce poor
3D reconstructions when foreground objects are present.
The use of multiple over-segmented images is not new to
computer vision. Russell et al. , for example, use multiple over-segmentations for ﬁnding objects in images, and
many of the depth reconstruction methods described above
(e.g., ) make use of over-segmentations for computing feature statistics. In the context of multi-class image
segmentation, Kohli et al. specify a global objective
which rewards solutions in which an entire segment is labeled consistently. However, their energy function is very
restricted and does not, for example, capture the interaction between region appearance and class label nor does
their energy function allow for label-dependent pairwise
preferences, such as foreground objects above road. Unlike all of these methods, our method uses multiple oversegmentations to build a dictionary of proposal moves for
optimizing a global energy function—the segments themselves are not used for computing features nor do they appear explicitly in our objective.
The importance of holistic scene interpretation has been
highlighted in a number of recent works .
methods combine tasks by passing the output of one model
to the input of another. Unlike these approaches, which optimize variables for each task separately, our method considers semantic and geometric tasks simultaneously and
performs joint optimization on a uniﬁed objective over the
variables, providing a coherent decomposition of the scene.
Perhaps most relevant is the work of Tu et al. , which
decomposes a scene into regions, text and faces using an
innovative data driven MCMC approach on a generative
model of the scene. However, their work is primarily focussed on identifying text and faces, and does not attempt
to label “generic” regions with semantic classes, nor do they
model the geometric relationship between regions.
3. Region-based Scene Decomposition
Our goal is to decompose an image I into an unknown
number (K) of geometrically and semantically consistent
regions by iteratively optimizing an energy function that
measures the quality of the solution at hand. We begin by
describing the various entities in our model. Inference and
learning are described in Section 4.
Our model reasons about both pixels and regions. Each
pixel in the image p ∈I belongs to exactly one region,
which is identiﬁed by the pixel’s region-correspondence
variable Rp ∈{1, . . . , K}. Let the set of pixels in region r
be denoted by Pr = {p : Rp = r}. The size of the region
(number of pixels) is then Nr = |Pr| = P
p 1{Rp = r}.
Each pixel has a local appearance feature vector αp ∈Rn
(described in Section 3.1 below). Associated with each region are: a semantic class label Sr, currently grass, mountain, water, sky, road, tree, building and foreground; a geometry Gr, currently horizontal, vertical, and sky; and an
appearance Ar that summarizes the appearance of the region as a whole. The ﬁnal component in our model is the
horizon. We assume that the image was taken by a camera
with horizontal axis parallel to the ground. We therefore
model the location of the horizon as the row in the image
corresponding to the horizon vhz ∈{1, . . . , height(I)}.
Given an image I and model parameters θ, our uni-
ﬁed energy function scores the entire description of the
scene: the pixel-to-region associations R; the region semantic class labels S, geometries G, and appearances A;
and the location of the horizon vhz:
E(R, S, G, A, vhz, K | I, θ) =
+ θhorizonψhorizon(vhz)
+ θregion P
(Sr, Gr, vhz; Ar, Pr)
rs (Sr, Gr, Ss, Gs; Ar, Pr, As, Ps) (3)
+ θboundary P
pq ψboundary
(Rp, Rq; αp, αq).
We now describe each of the components of our model.
3.1. Characterizing Individual Region Appearance
For each pixel p in the image, we construct a local appearance descriptor vector αp comprised of raw image features and discriminitively learned boosted features. Our raw
image features, which are computed in a small neighborhood of the pixel, are identical to the 17-dimensional color
and texture features described in . We augment these
raw features with more processed summaries that represent
the “match” between the pixel’s local neighborhood and
each of the region labels. In particular, for each (individual)
semantic and geometric label we learn a one-vs-all boosted
classiﬁer to predict the label given the raw image features
in a small neighborhood around the pixel.1 We then append
the score (log-odds ratio) from each boosted classiﬁer to our
pixel appearance feature vector αp.
In our experiments, we set the region appearance Ar to
be the maximum-likelihood Gaussian parameters over the
appearance of pixels within the region: Ar =
r ∈Rn and ΣA
r ∈Rn×n are the mean and covariance matrix for the appearance vectors αp of pixels in
1In our experiments we append to the pixel’s 17 features, the average
and variance for each feature over a 5×5-pixel window in 9 grid locations
around the pixel and the image row to give a total of 324 features. We use
the GentleBoost algorithm with 2-split decision stumps and train for 500
rounds. Our results appeared robust to the choice of parameters.
the r-th region. These summary statistics give us a more
robust estimator of the appearance of the region than would
be obtained by considering only small neighborhoods of the
individual pixels.
3.2. Individual Region Potentials
To deﬁne the potentials that help infer the label of individual regions, we extract features φr(Ar, Pr) ∈Rn describing the region appearance and basic shape. Our appearance features include the mean and covariance µA
the log-determinant of ΣA
r , and the average contrast at the
region boundary and region interior. In addition to relating
to semantic class—grass is green—the appearance features
provide a measure for the quality of a region—well-formed
regions will tend to have strong boundary contrast and (depending on the class) little variation of interior appearance.
We also want to capture more global characteristics of
our larger regions. For example, we would like to capture
the fact that buildings tend to be vertical with many straight
lines, trees tend to be green and textured, and grass tends
to be green and horizontal. Thus, we incorporate shape features that include normalized region area, perimeter, ﬁrst
and second x- and y-moments, and residual to a robust line
ﬁt along the top and bottom boundary of the region. The
latter features capture the fact that buildings tend to have
straight boundaries while trees tend to be rough.
We also include the horizon variable in the regionspeciﬁc potential, allowing us to include features that measure the ratio of pixels in the region above and below the
horizon. These features give us a sense of the scale of the
object and its global position in the scene. For example,
buildings are tall and tend to have more mass above the horizon than below it; foreground objects are often close and
will have most of their mass below the horizon. Conversely,
these potentials also allow us to capture the strong positional correlation between the horizon and semantic classes
such as sky or ground, allowing us to use the same potential
to place the horizon within the image.
To put all of these features together, we learn a multiclass logistic classiﬁer for Sr × Gr with a quadratic kernel
over φr (see Section 4.2). The score for any assignment to
the region variables is then: ψregion
(Sr, Gr, vhz; Ar, Pr) =
 Sr × Gr | φr(Ar, Pr), vhz
, where σ(·) is the
multi-class logistic function with learned parameters. We
scale the potential by the region size Nr so that our score
gives more weight to larger regions and is independent of
the number of regions in the image.
3.3. Inter-Region Potentials
Our model contains two types of inter-region potentials. The ﬁrst of these is ψboundary
(Rp, Rq; αp, αq), which
is the standard contrast-dependent pairwise boundary potential .
For two adjacent pixels p and q, we de-
ﬁne ψboundary
(Rp, Rq; αp, αq) = exp{−β−1∥αp −αq∥2}
if Rp ̸= Rq and zero otherwise where β is half the average contrast between all adjacent pixels in the image. This
term penalizes adjacent regions that do not have an edge
between them; it has the effect of trying to merge adjacent
regions that are not clearly demarcated. We note that, since
the penalty is accumulated over pairs of adjacent pixels, the
region-level penalty is proportional to the pixel-length of
the boundary between the regions.
Our second inter-region potential, ψpair, models the afﬁnity of two classes to appear adjacent to each other. Similar to the within-region potentials, we extract features
φrs(Ar, Pr, As, Ps) ∈Rm for every pair of adjacent regions r and s. We then learn independent multi-class logistic classiﬁers for Sr ×Ss and Gr ×Gs given these features.
Note that these potentials are asymmetric (exchanging regions r and s gives a different preference). The features
φrs are intended to model contextual properties between regions, for example, the boundary between building and sky
tends to be straight and building is more likely to appear
above a foreground object than below it. To capture these
properties, our features include the difference between centroids of the two regions, the proportion of pixels along the
boundary in which region r is above region s, the length and
orientation of the boundary, and residual in ﬁtting a straight
line to the boundary. In addition to these layout-based features, we include appearance difference between the regions
normalized by the total appearance variance within each region. This captures signals such as foreground objects tend
to contrast highly with other regions, whereas background
regions are more similar in appearance, such as adjacent
buildings in a city.
We normalize each pairwise potential by the sum of
the number of pixels in each region divided by the number of neighbors for the region: η =
|nbrs(r)| +
This makes the total inﬂuence on a region independent of
its number of neighbors while still giving larger regions
more weight.
The ﬁnal form of our second inter-region
potential is then ψpair
rs (Sr, Gr, Ss, Gs; Ar, Pr, As, Ps) =
−η log σ (Sr × Ss | φrs)−η log σ (Gr × Gs | φrs), where,
as above, σ(·) is the multi-class logistic function.
4. Inference and Learning
4.1. Inference Algorithm
Exact inference in our model is clearly intractable. We
adopt a two-stage hill climbing approach to minimize the
energy. In the ﬁrst stage, we modify the pixel-region association variables by allowing a set of pixels to change the
region to which they are assigned. Given the new pixel assignments, we then optimize the region and horizon variables in the second stage. The global energy of the resulting
conﬁguration is then evaluated, and the move is accepted
Procedure InferSceneDecomposition
Generate over-segmentation dictionary Ω
Initialize Rp using one of the over-segmentations
Repeat until convergence
Propose a move {Rp : p ∈ω} ←r
Update region appearance A and features φ
Run inference over regions (S, G) and horizon vhz
Compute total total energy E
If (E < Emin) then
Accept move and set Emin = E
Else reject move
Figure 1. (a) Scene decomposition inference algorithm; (b) Oversegmentation dictionary, Ω, generated by running mean-shift 
with three different parameter settings. See text for details.
only if this energy improves, ensuring that our inference is
continuously improving a coherent global objective.
The proposal moves for region associations are drawn
from a pre-computed, image-speciﬁc dictionary of image
segments Ω(Figure 1(b)). To build a “good” set of segments
we start with a number of different over-segmentations of
the image. Here, we use the mean-shift algorithm using publicly available code.2 We generate different oversegmentations by varying the spatial and range bandwidth
parameters. To allow coarse granularity moves, we also
perform hierarchical agglomerative clustering (up to a ﬁxed
depth) on each over-segmentation by merging adjacent segments that have similar appearance. We then add all subsets
constructed by this process (including the initial segments)
to the dictionary. This procedure produces a rich set of proposal moves. We sort the dictionary by the entropy of pixel
appearance within each segment so that more uniform segments are proposed ﬁrst.
In addition to moves proposed by the dictionary, we also
allow moves in which two adjacent regions are merged together. The set of allowed pixel-to-region correspondence
proposal moves is thus: (i) pick a segment ω ∈Ωand assign all Rp for p ∈ω to a new region; (ii) pick a segment
ω ∈Ωand assign all Rp for p ∈ω to one of the regions
in its neighborhood; or (iii) pick two neighboring regions r
and s and merge them, that is, ∀Rp = s set Rp = r.
Our overall inference algorithm is summarized in Figure 1(a): Brieﬂy, we initialize our pixel-to-region associations R using one of the over-segmentations used to produce our dictionary. Given our current association R, we
select a proposal move and reassign pixels to form new regions. We then update the appearance model Ar and features of any region that was affected by the move.
maintain sufﬁcient statistics over pixel appearance, making
this step very fast. Keeping the pixel-to-region correspondence variables and horizon ﬁxed, we run max-product belief propagation on the region class and geometry variables.
2 
code/EDISON/index.html
We then update the horizon vhz using Iterated Conditional
Modes (ICM).3 The new conﬁguration is evaluated relative
to our global energy function, and kept if it provides an improvement. The algorithm iterates until convergence. In our
experiments (Section 5) inference took between 30 seconds
and 10 minutes to converge depending on image complexity
(i.e., number of segments in Ω).
4.2. Learning Algorithm
We train our model using a labeled dataset where each
image is segmented into regions that are semantically and
geometrically coherent. Thus, our ground truth speciﬁes
both the region association for each pixel and the labels for
each region.
We learn each term ψhorizon, ψregion and ψpair in our energy function separately, using our labeled training data. We
then cross-validate the weights between the terms using a
subset of our training data. Since only the relative weighting between terms matter, we ﬁxed θregion to one.
For the horizon singleton term, we learn a Gaussian
over the location of the horizon in training images and set
ψhorizon(vhz) to be the log-likelihood of vhz given this model.
We normalize ψhorizon(vhz) by the image height to make
this model resolution invariant. Our learned Gaussian has
a mean of approximately 0.5 and standard deviation of 0.15
(varying slightly across experiment folds). This suggests
that the horizon in our dataset is quite well spread around
the center of the image.
The within-region term, ψregion, and the between-region
term, ψpair, are learned using multi-class logistic regression.
However, the training of the within-region term involves an
important subtlety. One of the main roles of this term is to
help recognize when a given collection of pixels is actually
a coherent region—one corresponding to a single semantic
class and a single geometry. Although all of the regions in
our training set are coherent, many of the moves proposed
during the course of inference are not. For example, our
algorithm may propose a move that merges together pixels
containing (horizontal) grass and pixels containing (vertical) trees. We want to train our classiﬁer to recognize invalid moves and penalize them. To penalize such moves,
we train our multi-class logistic regression classiﬁer with
an additional “invalid” label. This label cannot be assigned
to a candidate region during inference, and so if the proposed region r appears incoherent, the “invalid” label will
get high probability, reducing the probability for all (valid)
labels in Sr × Gr. This induces a high energy for the new
proposed assignment, making it likely to be rejected.
To train a discriminative classiﬁer that distinguishes be-
3We experimented with including vhz in the belief propagation inference but found that it changed very little from one iteration to the next and
was therefore more efﬁcient to infer conditionally (using ICM) once the
other variables were assigned.
tween coherent and incoherent regions, we need to provide
it with negative (incoherent) training instances. Here, we
cannot simply collect arbitrary subsets of adjacent pixels
that do not correspond to coherent regions: Most arbitrary
subsets of pixels are easily seen to be incoherent, so that a
discriminative model trained with such subsets as negative
examples is unlikely to learn a meaningful decision boundary. Therefore, we use a novel “closed-loop” learning procedure, where the algorithm trains on its own mistakes. We
begin by training our classiﬁer where the negative examples are deﬁned by merging pairs of adjacent ground truth
regions (which are not consistent with each other). We then
perform inference (on our training set) using this model.
During each proposal move we evaluate the outcome of inference with the ground truth annotations. We append to
our training set moves that were incorrectly accepted or rejected, or moves that were accepted (resulted in lower energy) but produced an incorrect labeling of the region variables. In this way, we can target the training of our decision
boundary on the more troublesome examples.
5. Experimental Results
We conduct experiments on a set of 715 images of urban and rural scenes assembled from a collection of public
image datasets: LabelMe , MSRC , PASCAL ,
and Geometric Context (GC) . Our selection criteria
were for the images to have approximately 320 × 240 pixels, contain at least one foreground object and have the horizon positioned within the image (it need not be visible). We
perform 5-fold cross-validation with the dataset randomly
split into 572 training images and 143 test images for each
fold. The quality of our annotations (obtained from Amazon Mechanical Turk) is extremely good and in many cases
superior to those provided by the original datasets. Images
and labels are available for download from the ﬁrst author’s
Baselines. To validate our method and provide strong
baselines for comparison, we performed experiments on
independent multi-class image segmentation and geometry
prediction using standard pixelwise CRF models. Here the
pixel class Sp (or surface geometry Gp) is predicted separately for each pixel p ∈I given the pixel’s appearance αp
(see Section 3.1). A contrast-dependent pairwise smoothness term is added to encourage adjacent pixels to take the
same value. The models have the form
E(S | I) =
ψp(Sp; αp) + θ
ψpq(Sp, Sq; αp, αq)
and similarly for E(G | I). In this model, each pixel can be
thought of as belonging to its own region. The parameters
are learned as described above with ψp a multi-class logistic over boosted appearance features and ψpq the boundary
penalty. The baseline results are shown in Table 1.
Figure 2. Examples of typical scene decompositions produced by
our method. Show for each image are regions (top right), semantic class overlay (bottom left), and surface geometry with horizon
(bottom right). Best viewed in color.
Region-based Approach. Multi-class image segmentation and surface orientation results from our region-based
approach are shown below the baseline results in Table 1.
Our improvement of 2.1% over baseline for multi-class segmentation and 1.9% for surface orientation is signiﬁcant.
In particular, we observed an improvement in each of our
ﬁve folds. Our horizon prediction was within an average of
6.9% (relative to image height) of the true horizon.
In order to evaluate the quality of our decomposition, we
computed the overlap score between our boundary predictions and our hand annotated boundaries. To make this metric robust we ﬁrst dilate both the predicted and ground truth
boundaries by ﬁve pixels. We then compute the overlap
score by dividing the total number of overlapping pixels by
half the total number of (dilated) boundary pixels (ground
truth and predicted). A score of one indicates perfect overlap. We averaged 0.499 across the ﬁve folds indicating that
on average we get about half of the semantic boundaries
correct. For comparison, using the baseline class predictions gives a boundary overlap score of 0.454.
The boundary score result reﬂects our algorithm’s tendency to break regions into multiple segments. For example, it tends to leave windows separated from buildings and
people’s torsos separated from their legs (as can be seen in
Figure 2). This is not surprising given the strong appearance
difference between these different parts. We hope to extend
our model in the future with object speciﬁc appearance and
shape models so that we can avoid these types of errors.
Figures 3 and 4 show some good and bad examples, respectively. Notice the high quality of the class and geometry predictions particularly at the boundary between classes
and how our algorithm deals well with both near and far objects. There are still many mistakes that we would like to
Pixel CRF (baseline)
Region-based energy
Table 1. Multi-class image segmentation and surface orientation
(geometry) accuracy. Standard deviation shown in parentheses.
TextonBoost 
Hoiem et al. :
Yang et al. 
• pixel model
Gould et al. 
• full model
Region-based
Region-based
Table 2. Comparison with state-of-the-art MSRC and GC results
against our restricted model. Table shows mean pixel accuracy.
address in future work. For example, our algorithm is often
confused by strong shadows and reﬂections in water as can
be seen in some of the examples in Figure 4. We hope that
with stronger geometric reasoning we can avoid this problem. Also, without knowledge of foreground subclasses,
our algorithm sometimes merges a person with a building
or confuses boat masts with buildings.
Comparison with Other Methods. We also compared
our method with state-of-the-art techniques on the 21-class
MSRC and 3-class GC datasets.
To make our
results directly comparable with published works, we removed components from our model not available in the
ground-truth labels for the respective datasets.
for MSRC we only use semantic class labels and for GC
we only use (main) geometry labels. Neither model used
horizon information. Despite these restrictions, our regionbased energy approach is still competitive with state-of-theart. Results are shown in Table 2.
6. Application to 3D Reconstruction
The output of our model can be used to generate novel
3D views of the scene. Our approach is very simple and obtains its power from our region-based decomposition rather
than sophisticated features tuned for the task. Nevertheless,
the results from our approach are surprisingly good compared to the state-of-the-art (see Figure 5 for some examples). Since our model does not provide true depth estimates
our goal here is to produce planar geometric reconstructions
of each region with accurate relative distances rather than
absolute distance. Given an estimate of the distance between any two points in the scene, our 3D reconstruction
can then be scaled to the appropriate size.
Our rules for reconstruction are simple. Brieﬂy, we assume an ideal camera model with horizontal (x) axis parallel to the ground. We ﬁx the camera origin at 1.8m above
the ground (i.e., y = 1.8). We then estimate the yz-rotation
of the camera from the location of the horizon (assumed to
be at depth ∞) as θ = tan−1( 1
f (vhz −v0)) where v0 is half
Figure 3. Representative results when our model does well. Each cell shows original image (left), overlay of semantic class label (center),
and surface geometry (right) for each image. Predicted location of horizon is shown on the geometry image. Best viewed in color.
Figure 4. Examples of where our algorithm makes mistakes, such as mislabeling of road as water (top left), or confusing boat masts as
buildings (bottom right). We also have difﬁculty with shadows and reﬂections. Best viewed in color.
the image height and f is the focal length of the camera.
Now the 3D location of every pixel p = (u, v) lies along
the ray rp = R(θ)−1K−1 [u v 1]T , where R(θ) is the rotation matrix and K is the camera model . It remains to
scale this ray appropriately.
We process each region in the image depending on its semantic class. For ground plane regions (road, grass and water) we scale the ray to make the height zero. We model each
vertical region (tree, building, mountain and foreground) as
a planar surface whose orientation and depth with respect
to the camera are estimated by ﬁtting a robust line over
the pixels along its boundary with the ground plane. This
produced good results despite the fact that not all of these
pixels are actually adjacent to the ground in 3D (such as
the belly of the cow in Figure 5). When a region does not
touch the ground (that is, it is occluded by another object),
we estimate its orientation using pixels on its bottom-most
boundary. We then place the region half way between the
depth of the occluding object and maximum possible depth
(either the horizon or the point at which the ground plane
would become visible beyond the occluding object). The
3D location of each pixel p in the region is determined by
the intersection of this plane and the ray rp. Finally, sky
regions are placed behind the last vertical region.4
7. Discussion and Future Work
In this work, we addressed the problem of decomposing a scene into geometrically and semantically coherent
regions. Our method combines reasoning over both pixels
and regions through a uniﬁed energy function. We proposed
4Technically, sky regions should be placed at the horizon, but since the
horizon has inﬁnite depth, we choose to render sky regions closer, so as to
make them visible in our viewer.
Figure 5. Novel views of a scene with foreground objects generated by geometric reconstruction.
an effective inference technique for optimizing this energy
function and showed how it could be learned from data. Our
results compete with state-of-the-art multi-class image segmentation and geometric reasoning techniques. In addition,
we showed how a region-based approach can be applied to
the task of 3D reconstruction, with promising results.
Our framework provides a basis on which many valuable extensions can be layered. With respect to 3D reconstruction, our method achieves surprising success given that
it uses only simple geometric reasoning derived from the
scene decomposition and location of the horizon. These
results could undoubtedly be improved further by integrating our method with state-of-the-art approaches that reason
more explicitly about depth or occlusion .
An important and natural extension to our method can be
provided by incorporating object-based reasoning directly
into our model. Here, we can simply reﬁne our foreground
class into subclasses representing object categories (person,
car, cow, boat, etc.). Such models would allow us to incorporate information regarding the relative location of different classes (cars are found on roads), which are very naturally expressed in a framework that explicitly models large
regions and their (rough) relative location in 3D. By reasoning about different object classes, we can also incorporate
state-of-the-art models regarding object shape and appearance features . We believe that this extension would
allow us to address one of the important error modes of our
algorithm, whereby foreground objects are often broken up
into subregions that have different local appearance (a person’s head, torso, and legs). Thus, this approach might allow us to decompose the foreground class into regions that
correspond to semantically coherent objects (such as individual people or cars).
Finally, an important limitation of our current approach
is its reliance on a large amount of hand-labeled training
data. We hope to extend our framework to make use of
large corpora of partially labeled data, or perhaps by using
motion cues in videos to derive segmentation labels.
Acknowledgments. We give warm thanks to Geremy Heitz and
Ben Packer for the many helpful discussions regarding this work.
This work was supported by DARPA T/L SA4996-10929-4 and
MURI contract N000140710747.