Trust Building with Explanation Interfaces
Pearl Pu and Li Chen
Human Computer Interaction Group, School of Computer and Communication Sciences
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)
CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
{pearl.pu, li.chen}@epfl.ch
Based on our recent work on the development of a trust model for
recommender agents and a qualitative survey, we explore the
potential of building users’ trust with explanation interfaces. We
present the major results from the survey, which provided a roadmap
identifying the most promising areas for investigating design issues
for trust-inducing interfaces. We then describe a set of general
principles derived from an in-depth examination of various design
dimensions for constructing explanation interfaces, which most
contribute to trust formation. We present results of a significantscale user study, which indicate that the organization-based
explanation is highly effective in building users’ trust in the
recommendation interface, with the benefit of increasing users’
intention to return to the agent and save cognitive effort.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine Systems – human
factors, software psychology; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: User Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, graphical
user interfaces (GUI), user-centered design.
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors, Algorithms.
Explanation interfaces, trust building, recommender agents, tradeoff
assistance.
1. INTRODUCTION
The importance of explanation interfaces in providing system
transparency and thus increasing user acceptance has been well
recognized in a number of fields: expert systems , medical
decision support systems , intelligent tutoring systems , and
data exploration systems .
Being able to effectively explain results is especially important for
product recommender systems. When users face the difficulty of
choosing the right product to purchase, the ability to convince them
to buy a proposed item is an important goal of any recommender
system in e-commerce environments. A number of researchers have
started exploring the potential benefits of explanation interfaces in a
number of directions.
Case-based reasoning recommender systems that can explain their
recommendations include ExpertClerk , Dynamic critiquing
systems , FirstCase and TopCase . ExpertClerk
explained the selling point of each sample, in terms of its difference
from the other two contrasting samples. In a similar way, FirstCase
can explain why one case is more highly recommended than another
by highlighting the benefits it offers and also the compromises it
involves with respect to the user’s preferences. In TopCase, the
relevance of any question the user is asked can also be explained in
terms of its ability to discriminate between competing cases.
McCarthy et al proposes to educate users about product
knowledge by explaining what products do exist instead of
justifying why the system failed to produce a satisfactory outcome.
This is similar to the goal of resolving users’ preference conflict by
providing them with partially satisfied solutions .
A number of researchers also reported evaluation of explanation
interfaces with real users. Herlocker et al addressed explanation
interfaces for ACF (automated collaborative filtering) systems, and
demonstrated that the histogram with grouping of neighbor ratings
was the most compelling explanation component among the users
that they studied . They also showed that providing explanations
can improve the acceptance of ACF systems and potentially improve
users’ filtering performance. Sinha and Swearingen found that
users like and feel more confident about recommendations that they
perceive as transparent.
Some consumer decision support systems with explanation
interfaces can be found on commercial websites such as Logical
(www.logicaldecisions.com),
(www.activedecisions.com),
(shopping.yahoo.com/smartsort).
So far, previous work on explanation interfaces has not explored the
potential of using explanation interfaces for building users’ trust,
which is a long term relationship between a user and the
organization that the recommender system represents.
Trust issues are critical to study for recommender systems used in ecommerce where the traditional salesperson is replaced by a product
recommender agent. Studies show that customer trust is positively
associated with customers’ intention to transact, purchase a product,
and return to the website . These results have mainly been
derived from online shops’ ability to ensure security, privacy and
reputation, i.e. the integrity and benevolence aspects of trust
constructs, and less on a system’s competence such as a
recommender system’s ability to explain its result. The contribution
of our work is that we both investigate the inherent benefits of using
explanation for trust building and examine whether such interface
features provide the same trust-related benefits as other trust
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
IUI'06, January 29-February 1, 2006, Sydney, Australia.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-287-9/06/0001...$5.00.
constructs. We primarily consider the competence perception and its
essential contribution to trust-induced benefits. See for example
regarding other trust-related issues based on reputation in
recommender systems.
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents a trust model
for recommender systems and some results from a carefully
constructed survey, identifying explanation interfaces as one of the
most promising areas to investigate design issues for trust-inducing
interfaces; section 3 describes a set of general principles derived
from an in-depth examination of various design dimensions for
constructing explanation interfaces; section 4 presents a significantscale empirical study; section 5 presents results from that study,
which indicate that the organization-based explanation is highly
effective to build users’ trust in the recommendation interface, with
the benefit of increasing their intention to return to the agent and
save their cognitive effort; section 6 discusses the implication of this
work to related work in this area, followed by the conclusion
2. TRUST MODEL AND TRUSTING
INTENTIONS
We summarize our recent work on building a trust model for
recommender systems which was reported in a workshop . The
results highly influence our current work and therefore are presented
here as an integral part of our investigation of trust building with
explanation interfaces.
2.1 Trust Model for Recommender Systems
We have conceptualized a general trust model for recommender
agents. It consists of three components: system features,
trustworthiness of the agents, and trusting intentions. The system
features mainly deal with those design aspects of a recommender
agent that can contribute to the promotion of its trustworthiness. We
classified them into three groups: the interface display techniques,
the algorithms that are used to propose recommendations, and usersystem interaction models such as how an agent elicits users’
preferences.
The agent trustworthiness is a trust formation process based on the
users’ perception of the agent’s competence, reputation, integrity,
and benevolence. It has been regarded as the main positive influence
on the trusting intentions . In this paper, we primarily
consider the competence perception and its essential contribution to
trust-induced benefits.
The trusting intentions are the benefits expected from users once
trust has been established by the recommender agents. The trusting
intentions include the intention to purchase a recommended item,
return to the store for more information on products or purchase
more recommended products, and save effort. The intention to save
effort is of particular interest to us because it examines whether
upon establishing a certain trust level with the agent, users will
likely spend less cognitive effort or actual time in selecting the
recommended items.
2.2 Trust Building with Explanation Interfaces
As a first step, we primarily consider trust building by the different
design dimensions of interface display techniques such as content
selection, explanation generation, and recommendation algorithms.
We investigate the modality of explanation, e.g., the use of graphics
vs. text, the amount of information used to explain, e.g., whether
long or short text is more trust inspiring, and most importantly
whether alternative explanation techniques exist that are more
effective in trust building than the simple “why” construct currently
used in most e-commerce websites.
The explanation generation comprises the steps of content selection
and organization, media allocation, and media realization and
coordination . Content selection determines what information
should be included in the explanations. Once the content is selected,
we must know how to organize and display it. The simplest strategy
is to display the recommendation content in a rank ordered list with
a “why” tool tip explaining the computational reasoning behind it.
As an alternative and potentially more effective technique, we have
designed an organization-based explanation interface where the best
matching item is displayed at the top of the interface along with
several categories of tradeoff alternatives. Each category is labeled
with a title explaining the characteristics of the items the respective
category contains (see Figure 2).
2.3 Qualitative Survey and Results
We have conducted a survey with 53 users in order to understand
the interaction among the three components of our trust model: the
effect of an agent’s competence in building users’ trust, the
influence of trust on users’ problem solving efficiency and other
trusting intentions, and the effective means to build trust using
explanation-based interfaces. Nine hypotheses (see for details)
were established, each of which is a statement for which the
participants indicated their level of agreement.
Results indicate that the competence of recommender agents would
not be the only contribution to users’ trust formation process, but it
is positively correlated with the trusting intention to return. In other
words, if users possess a high perception of the recommender
agent’s competence, they would be more inclined to return to the
agent for other product information and recommendations, but they
would not necessarily intend to buy the product from the website
where the agent was found. Post-survey discussion indicated that
they would visit more websites to compare the product’s price
before making a purchase. The website’s security, reputation,
delivery service and privacy policy were also important
considerations in buying a product.
Users positively responded that explanation can be an effective
means to achieve users’ trust, and the organization interface is a
more effective explanation technique than the simple “why”
construct. On the other hand, the modality and richness of an
explanation interface did not seem to contribute to the effectiveness
of the interface. From the participants’ viewpoints, these two
aspects were mostly dependent on the concrete product domain.
Users would prefer a short and concise conversational sentence for
the so-called low-risk products such as movies and books, but if
they were selecting products which carry a high level of financial
and emotional risks such as cars and houses, a more detailed and
reasonable explanation would be favored. In addition, people from
different educational backgrounds seemed to have different
preferences on the media richness.
Based on the trust model and results from the qualitative survey, we
have decided to focus our attention on explanation interfaces and the
related design issues for building users’ trust.
3. ORGANIZATION-BASED
EXPLANATION INTERFACES
Traditional product search and recommender systems present a set
of top-k alternatives to users. We call this style of displaying the
results the k-best interface. Because these alternatives are calculated
based on users’ revealed preferences (directly or indirectly), these
top-k items may not provide for diversity. Recently the need to
include more diversified items in the result list has been recognized.
Methods have been developed to address users’ potentially unstated
preferences , to cover topic diversity , to propose possible
tradeoffs a user may be prepared to accept , and to allow faster
navigation to the target choice by critiquing the proposed items
 . These related works have led us to developing an
organization-based explanation interface, combining the ideas of
diversity, tradeoff reasoning, and explanation. Here we review a set
of design principles that show promise for the design of such
interfaces.
3.1 Design Principles
We have implemented more than 13 paper prototypes of the
organization-based interface, exploring all design dimensions such
as how to generate categories, whether to use short or long text for
category titles, how many tradeoff dimensions to include, whether to
include example products in the categories or just the category titles,
etc. We have derived 5 principles based the results of testing these
prototypes with real users in the form of pilot studies and interviews.
Principle 1: Categorize remaining recommendations according to
their similar tradeoff properties relative to the top candidate
We consider the case where the explanation interface is used in the
early stage of the entire interaction cycle between a user and a
recommender agent. We assume that users are unlikely to have
stated all of their preferences. Consequently, they have not
considered tradeoff alternatives of the product currently being
considered. According to , integrating tradeoff support in a
product search tool can improve users’ decision accuracy by up to
57%. Thus, this principle suggests displaying tradeoff alternatives in
addition to the top candidate. Each category comprises a set of
similar items having the same tradeoff properties. For example, one
category contains the recommendations of notebooks that are
cheaper but heavier than the top candidate, and another category’s
notebooks are lighter but more expensive. Each category indicates a
tradeoff direction where users would potentially navigate to for
achieving their final decision goals.
Principle 2: Propose improvements and compromises in the
category title using conversational language; keep the number of
tradeoff attributes under five to avoid information overload
Here we consider designing a category’s title in terms of its format
and richness. After surveying some users, we found that most of
them preferred the category title displayed in natural and
conversational language because that makes them feel at ease. For
example, the title “these notebooks have a lower price and faster
processor speed, but heavier weight” is preferred to the title
“cheaper and faster processor speed and heavier.” Moreover, the
former title is also preferred to the title “they have a lower price and
faster processor speed and bigger memory, but heavier weight and
larger display size” which includes too many tradeoff properties.
Many users indicate that they cannot handle tradeoff with more than
three attributes.
Principle 3: Eliminate dominated categories, and diversify the
categories in terms of their titles and contained recommendations
The third principle proposes to provide the most beneficial but
diverse categories to users. If one category is too similar with, or
dominated by, another one in terms of their tradeoff properties, it
would not provide potential recommendation power to the user.
Therefore, it is better to exclude the dominated categories and
diversify the returned categories. In addition, the pilot study on
category design showed that the number of total displayed
categories is more effective when less than four since too many
categories cause information overload and confusion.
Principle 4: Include actual products in a recommended category
When we compared two interface designs where one displays only
category titles versus one displaying both category titles and a few
actual products in each category, users indicated a strong preference
in favor of the latter design, mainly due to the fact that they were
able to find their target choice much faster. Given the limitation of
the display size and users’ cognitive effort, a designer can choose up
to 6 items to display in each category.
Principle 5: Rank recommendations within each category by
exchange rate rather than similarity measure
We have also performed a pilot study to compare the effects of two
ranking strategies for the recommendations within the category. The
similarity strategy is broadly used by early case-based and
preference-based reasoning systems (CBR), which rank items
according to the similarity relative to a user’s current query. We
propose another strategy based on the exchange rate of an item
relative to the top candidate, i.e. its potential gains versus losses
compared with the top candidate (the detail formula for exchange
rate calculation will be shown shortly). The study showed that users
could more quickly find their target choice when the recommended
items within each category were sorted by the exchange rate rather
than by similarity.
3.2 Organization Algorithm
The organization algorithm was designed and implemented
optimizing the overall objectives of the five principles. The top level
of the algorithm can be described in four steps: generate all possible
category titles by the Apriori algorithm ; exclude dominated
categories; select a few prominent categories not only with longer
tradeoff distance with the top candidate but also with higher
diversity degree between each other; rank the recommended items
within each category by their exchange rates relative to the top
candidate. A resulting example based on the organization algorithm
can be seen in Figure 2.
Step 1: Generate all possible categories
We generate the categories using the method presented in . A
slight modification is that we represent each recommendation as a
tradeoff vector comprising a set of (attribute, tradeoff) pairs (the
pair is also called an item in the algorithm). Each tradeoff vector
indicates whether the attribute of the recommendation is improved
(denoted as ↑) or compromised (denoted as ↓) compared to the same
attribute of the top candidate. An example of a notebook
recommendation is denoted by a tradeoff vector {(price, ↑),
(processor speed, ↓), (memory, ↓), (hard drive size, ↑), (display size,
↑), (weight, ↓)}, indicating that this notebook has a lower price,
more hard drive size, and larger display size, but heavier weight,
slower processor speed, and less memory relative to the top
recommended notebook. Thus a tradeoff vector describes how the
current product compared to the top candidate in terms of its
advantages and disadvantages, rather than the simple equality
comparison used in dynamic critiquing (bigger, smaller, equal,
different, etc.). After all tradeoff vectors are used as input to the
Apriori algorithm, we obtain the frequent item sets in terms of their
tradeoff potentials underlying all the recommendations.
In order to limit the number of attributes involved in the category
title (principle 2), we set the Apriori’s option “maximal number of
items per set” as 3.
The recommendations whose tradeoff vectors contain the same
subset of items are grouped in the same category. Indeed, a
recommendation can belong to more than one category given that it
has different subsets of items shared by other groups of
recommendations, thus leading to a large amount of categories
potentially produced by Apriori. In the following steps, we
concentrated on how to select the most beneficial categories to
present to users based on our design principles.
Step 2: Exclude dominated categories
If one category is strictly dominated by another category in terms of
the item sets they contain in the titles, we will not show it to the
user. Formally, a category title C1 is dominated by another category
title C2 if C1 is a subset of C2 in terms of the items (attribute,
tradeoff) contained in the title or the two titles have the same
number of items (i.e.
∀item Ti∈C1, ∃ Tj ∈C2:
where Ti.attribute = Tj.attribute (with equal attribute name)
and Ti.tradeoff ≤ Tj.tradeoff ( with equal or less preferred tradeoff
property, i.e. “↓” p “↑”)
and ∃ Tp ∈C1 and Tq ∈C2
where Tp.attribute = Tq.attribute
and Tp.tradeoff p Tq.tradeoff (at least one item is with less
preferred tradeoff property)
Step 3: Select prominent categories with longer tradeoff
distance and higher diversity degree
This is where we depart from the dynamic critiquing method ,
which uses the low support value to select categories. We use two
criteria to select up to four categories: the maximal tradeoff distance
with the top candidate and maximal diversity among each other in
terms of their titles and contained recommendations (principle 3).
The tradeoff distance of each category is defined as the average sum
of the exchange rate of all recommendations which are contained in
the category:
TradeoffDi
where TC is the top candidate, SR(Ci) is the set of recommendations
contained in the category Ci, and ExRate(R, TC) is the exchange rate
of the recommendation R compared to the top candidate (see the
ExRate formula in Step 4). Intuitively, a higher tradeoff distance
indicates that a category provides the highest overall tradeoff
benefits to users (more gains than losses).
During the selection process, the category with the longest tradeoff
distance will be initially selected as the first category. The second
category will be selected if it has the biggest value of
remaining non-selected categories according to the following
TradeoffDi
where Ci is the current considered category in the remaining set, TC
is the top candidate, and SC denotes the set of categories so far
is the combination of the category’s tradeoff
distance and diversity degree with respect to the categories selected
so far. The subsequent categories are selected according to the same
rule. The selection process will end when the desired k categories
have been selected.
The global diversity of Ci with SC is the average sum of its local
diversity with each category in the SC set. The local diversity of two
categories is further determined by two factors: the title diversity and
recommendation diversity.
The title diversity determines the degree of difference between the
two item sets (Ci and Cj) respectively representing the two compared
categories’ titles:
The recommendation diversity measures the different amount of
recommendations contained in the two compared categories:
where SR(Ci) represents the set of recommendations included in
category Ci.
Step 4: Rank recommendations within a given category
by exchange rate
The global exchange rate for each recommendation R is formulated
where p is the number of attributes,
w is the weight of attribute i,
and exrate is the local exchange rate computed for each attribute
, are the values of the ith attribute of R and TC
respectively).
For numeric attributes,
parameter q=1 if the attribute i is in increasing order (i.e. the more,
the better), and q=－1 if i in decreasing order (i.e. the less, the
better). For symbolic attributes,
and vi is preferred to vj, or
if contrarily, or 0 if vi = vj.
Therefore, the exchange rate motivates a user to consider alternative
choices. A positive and higher exchange rate means that there are
potentially more gains than losses of an alternative product
compared to the top candidate.
4. USER EVALUATION
In order to understand whether the tradeoff-based organization
interface can be an alternative and more effective way to explain
recommendations, we conducted a significant-scale empirical study
during April-June 2005 that compared the organized view with the
traditional “why” interface in a within-subjects design. The main
objective is to measure the difference of users’ trust in the two
interfaces, from their perceived trustworthiness of the interface in
terms of the competence construct and two trusting intentions, the
intention to return and save effort.
4.1 Materials
In order to avoid any carryover effects due to the within-subjects
design, we developed four (2 x 2) experiment conditions. A total of
72 participants were randomly assigned to one of the four
experiment conditions, resulting in a sample size of 18 subjects for
each condition cell. Each condition has a different order of appeared
interfaces and a different product domain associated with the
interface. For example, the 18 users in one experiment condition
evaluated the ranked list interface with “why” explanations for
finding a digital camera (similar to Figure 1 but with digital cameras
as the product domain), and then the organization interface for
finding a notebook (Figure 2).
Figure 1. The “why” interface used in the user study.
Both product domains comprise 25 up-to-date items, where each
notebook has 8 attributes (manufacturer, price, processor speed,
battery life, etc.) and each digital camera contains 9 attributes
(manufacturer, price, megapixels, optical zooms, etc.). To prevent
the brand of products from influencing users’ choice, we replaced
them by manufacturers which do not exist (masked out in the
To minimize these behavior differences, we considered asking users
to select an item out of the top 25 most popular products from a
commercial website (www.pricegrabber.com) in this user study. The
top candidate is the most popular item in both interfaces (Figure 1
and 2). In the “why” interface the remaining 24 products are sorted
by their exchange rates relative to the top candidate, where the
“why” tool-tip explains how one product compares to the most
popular item (Figure 1). In the organization interface, the remaining
items are grouped in four (k=4) categories generated based on our
organization selection and ranking algorithms (Figure 2). The radio
button alongside with each item is used by participants to select the
product that they are prepared to purchase. Since the most popular
candidates in both interfaces are based on the website’s opinion,
rather than the evaluators’ own opinions, we judged that the
respondent is likely to view the other 24 products and consult the
explanations. As it turned out, it was indeed the case since less than
11.3% of users selected the top candidate in the “why” interface,
and only 8.3% in the case of the organization interface.
Figure 2. The organization interface used in the user study.
4.2 Participants
A total of 72 volunteers were recruited as participants in the user
study. They are from 16 different countries and have different
professions (student, professor, research assistant, engineer,
secretary, sales clerk and manager) and educational backgrounds
(high school, bachelor, master and doctor). Table 1 shows some of
their demographic characteristics.
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of participants (total 72)
19 (26.4%)
53 (73.6%)
High school, Bachelor, Master, Doctor
Nationality
16 countries (Spain, Canada, China, etc.)
64 (88.9%)
Online shopping
experience
62 (86.1%)
10 (13.9%)
Among the participants, 54 had bought a notebook in the past two
years, and 59 users had bought a digital camera. Most of all the
participants intend to purchase a new notebook (57 users) and
digital camera (60 users) in the near future.
4.3 Procedure
The user study was conducted at places convenient for the
participants (office, home, cafeteria, etc.) with the help of a provided
notebook or desktop computer. An online procedure containing the
instructions,
interfaces
questionnaires
implemented so that users can easily follow, and also for us to
record all of their actions in a log file. There was also an
administrator present in each user study to answer any of the user’s
questions in addition to taking notes.
The online experiment was prepared in two versions, English and
French, since these are the participants’ native languages. At the
beginning of each session, the participants were first asked to choose
the language that they prefer, and then they were debriefed on the
objective of the experiment and the upcoming tasks. In particular,
they were asked to evaluate two graphical recommendation
interfaces and to determine which interface is more helpful in
recommending products to users. Thereafter, a short questionnaire
was to be filled out about their demographics, e-commerce
experience and product knowledge.
Participants would then start evaluating the two interfaces one by
one corresponding to the order defined in the assigned experiment
condition. For each interface, the main user task was to select a
product the participant would purchase if given the opportunity,
followed by a set of 6 questions about his/her overall opinions
regarding the interface. Users were also encouraged to provide any
comment on the interface.
4.4 Hypothesis and Measured Data
Our main hypothesis was that users would build more trust in the
organization-based explanation interface than the simple “why”
construct in the list view. This was mainly assessed by the three trust
constructs in our trust model: perceived competence, the intention to
return, and the intention to save effort. The intention to save effort is
further measured by the cognitive effort and actual completion time
5. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Results were analyzed for each measured variable using paired
samples t-test.
5.1 Perceived Competence
Users’ subjective perception of the competence in the interface was
mainly measured by their perception of the interface’s ease of use
and efficiency in comparing products. Each is asked by one item (or
question) in the post-questionnaire marked on a 5-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Table 2
indicated participants’ mean responses to each item for the two
interfaces, and the Cronbach’s alpha value representing how well
the two items are related and unified to the construct “perceived
competence”.
Both items were responded to be on average higher for the
organization interface, which showed that most users regarded the
organization-based explanation interface more comfortable to use
and perceived it to be more efficient in making product comparisons.
The overall level of perceived competence of the organization
interface was thus higher than that provided by the “why” interface
(mean=3.31, SD=1.05, vs. mean=2.75, SD=1.20 for the “why”
interface, t=3.74, p<0.001, see Figure 3; median=3.5 vs. 3; mode=4
Table 2. Perceived-competence construct
Items in the Perceived
Competence construct
with “why”
I felt comfortable using the
interface;
This interface enabled me to
compare different products very
efficiently.
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.84
Trust Measurement
Competence
Return Intention
Cognitive Effort
Average Rating Level
Organized View
List View w ith "w hy"
Figure 3. Mean difference of participants’ trust formation for
the two interfaces.
5.2 Intention to Return
As demonstrated in our previous work , the most remarkable
benefit of the competence-inspired trust was its positive influence on
users’ intention to return. Accordingly, we regard the “intention to
return” as an important criterion to judge the trust achievement of
explanation-based recommendation interfaces. In our user study, it
was assessed by two interrelated post-questions (still using the 5point Likert scale), which asked participants, positively then
negatively, about their genuine intention to use the interface again
for future shopping (see Table 3).
Table 3. Intention-to-return construct
Items in the Intention to Return
with “why”
If I had to buy a product online in
the future and an interface such as
this was available, I would be very
likely to use it;
I don't like this interface, so I
would not use it again (reverse
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.91
The results showed that most of participants had stronger intention
of returning to the organization-based explanation interface in the
future, than the simple “why” list view. The difference in overall
mean value proved to be highly significant (mean=3.27, SD=1.11
for the organization vs. mean=2.67, SD=1.24 for the “why”
interface, t=4.58, p<0.001, see Figure 3; median=3.5 vs. 2.5;
mode=4 vs. 1).
5.3 Intention to Save Effort
5.3.1 Perceived Cognitive Effort
The cognitive effort refers to the psychological costs users perceived
to obtain and process information that enable them to arrive at a
decision. Like the other constructs, it was also made up of two items
(or questions) respectively responded on a 5-point Likert scale (see
Table 4 for the items and their mean responses).
Table 4. Cognitive-effort construct
Items in the Cognitive Effort
with “why”
I easily found the information I
was looking for (reverse scale);
Selecting a product using this
interface required too much effort.
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.73
The lower mean rate represents a less cognitive cost the average user
experienced during the interaction with the corresponding interface.
As a result, the overall cognitive effort was perceived significantly
lower (t=-3.89, p<0.001) on the organization-based explanation
interface (mean=2.54, SD=0.96, vs. mean=3.10, SD=1.13 for the
“why” interface, see Figure 3; median=2.5 vs. 3; mode=2 vs. 3.5).
5.3.2 Actual Completion Time
The completion time was defined as the amount of time a participant
accomplished the task of locating a desired product in the interface.
No significant difference was found between the two interfaces in
terms of task completion time (mean=2.60 minutes, SD=1.74 vs.
mean=2.62 minutes, SD=1.67 for the organization interface, t=0.13,
p=0.45). Users took slightly less time to complete the task using the
organization interface when compared by the median time
(median=2.13 vs. 2.18 minutes for the “why” interface).
5.4 Discussion
Further investigating the correlation between the above three trust
constructs (see Table 5), we found that the perceived competence is
actually highly positively correlated with the trusting intention to
return and save cognitive effort (p<0.001). This suggests an
important concept: if users perceive an interface to be more
competent, they are more willing to return to it for more product
recommendations and are also more likely to save their cognitive
effort consumed on the interface. The actual completion time,
however, has no significant correlation with the other variables
(p>0.1). Thus, even though less task time is spent on the interface, it
does not predict that users perceive less cognitive effort and have the
intention to use it again.
From users’ comments, the reasons that the organization interface
was subjectively preferred to the simple “why” list by the majority
of participants are quite clear. As a matter of fact, many users
considered it well structured and easier to use for comparing
products from different categories or in one category. Some users
thought it was a little surprising at the beginning, but they soon got
used to it and found it to be useful. It was also accepted as a good
idea to label each category to distinguish it from others. In another
word, the grouping allowed them to locate a product matching their
needs more quickly than the ungrouped display.
Table 5. Correlations among perceived competence, intention to
return, intention to save cognitive effort and completion time
(Pearson Correlation)
Competence
Intention to
Completion
Competence
Intention to
Completion
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
6. IMPLICATION TO RELATED WORK
Results from our empirical study strongly support a current trend in
displaying a diverse set of recommendations rather than the k-best
matching ones. McGinty and Smyth maintain that showing
diverse items can reduce the recommendation cycles. McSherry 
advocates that the displayed items should cover all possible
tradeoffs that the user may be prepared to accept. Faltings et al 
propose to show products that can be potentially acceptable to users
had they stated all of their preferences. In the same spirit, Price and
Messinger propose to generate the display set taking into
account users’ preference uncertainty. Our work demonstrates that
displaying a diverse set of results in an organization-based interface
more effectively enables users’ trust formation compared to the
simple k-best interface even after the “why” enhancement. We
believe that similar trust-related benefits can be obtained for these
diversity-driven interfaces proposed by other researchers in this
7. CONCLUSION
Based on our recent work on the development of a trust model for
recommender agents, we have shown that explanation interfaces
have the greatest potential to build a competence-inspired trust
relationship with its users. A carefully designed survey indicated
that a recommender agent's competence is positively correlated with
users' intention to return, but not necessarily with their intention to
purchase. It also showed that an organization-based explanation
interface is likely to be more effective than the simple "why"
interface, since most participants felt that it would be easier for them
to compare different products and make a quicker decision.
We proposed a set of five principles for the design of organization
interfaces and an algorithm for generating the content of such
interfaces. We reported a significant-scale comparative study to
further quantify users’ trust formation and trusting intentions.
Results show that the organization interface significantly increases
users’ perception of the interface’s competence, resulting in their
higher intention to use the interface again and save their cognitive
effort. Moreover, we found that the actual time spent looking for a
product did not have significant impact on users’ subjective
emotions. This indicates that less time spent on the interface does
not predict that users would subjectively experience a smaller
amount of decision effort, nor does it predict that users will form
more intention to return to the website.
8. REFERENCES
 Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T. and Swami, A. Mining association
rules between sets of tems in large databases. In Proceedings of
the International ACM SIGMOD Conference, Washington DC,
USA, 1993, 207–216.
 Armengol, E., Palaudàries, A., Plaza, E. Individual prognosis
of diabetes long-term risks: a CBR approach. Methods of
Information in Medicine 40, 2001, 46-51.
 Burke, R., Hammond, K. and Young, B. The FindMe approach
to assisted browsing. Journal of IEEE Expert, 12(4), 1997, 32–
 Carenini, G. and Moore, J. Multimedia explanations in IDEA
decision support system. Working Notes of the AAAI Spring
Symposium on Interactive and Mixed-Initiative Decision
Theoretic Systems, 1998.
 Chen, L. and Pu, P. Trust building in recommender agents. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Web Personalization,
Recommender Systems and Intelligent User Interfaces at the
2nd International Conference on E-Business and
Telecommunication Networks (ICETE’02), 2005.
 Faltings, B., Pu, P., Torrens, M. and Viappiani, P. Designing
example-critiquing interaction. International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’04), 2004, 22-29.
 Grabner-Kräuter, S. and Kaluscha, E.A. Empirical research in
on-line trust: a review and critical assessment. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 58, 2003.
 Herlocker, J.L., Konstan, J.A. and Riedl, J. Explaining
collaborative filtering recommendations. In ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 2000.
 Klein, D.A. and Shortliffe, E.H. A framework for explaining
decision-theoretic advice. Artificial Intelligence 67, 1994, 201-
 McCarthy, K., Reilly, J., McGinty, L. and Smyth, B. Thinking
positively – explanatory feedback for conversational
recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Explanation in CBR at the Seventh European Conference on
Case-Based Reasoning (ECCB’04), 2004, 115-124.
 McCarthy, K., Reilly, J., McGinty, L. and Smyth, B.
Experiments in dynamic critiquing. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
(IUI’05), 2005, 175-182.
 McGinty, L. and Smyth, B. On the role of diversity in
conversational recommender systems. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning
(ICCBR’03), 2003, 276-290.
 McKnight, D.H., and Chervany, N.L. What trust means in ecommerce customer relationships: conceptual typology.
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 2002, 35-59.
 McSherry, D. Similarity and compromise. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning
Research and Development (ICCBR’03), 2003, 291-305.
 McSherry, D. Explanation in recommender systems. In
Workshop Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on
Case-Based Reasoning, 2004, 125-134.
 O’Donovan, J. and Smyth, B. Trust in recommender systems.
In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’05), 2005, 167–174.
 Price, B. and Messinger, P.R. Optimal recommendation sets:
covering uncertainty over user preferences. In National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’05), 2005.
 Pu, P. and Chen, L. Integrating tradeoff support in product
search tools for e-commerce sites. In Proceeding of the ACM
Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC’05), 2005, 269-278.
 Pu, P., Faltings, B. and Torrens, M. Effective interaction
principles for online product search environments. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint
Conference on Intelligent Agent Technology and Web
Intelligence, 2004, 724-727.
 Pu, P. and Kumar, P. Evaluating example-based search tools.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic
Commerce (EC’04), 2004, 208-217.
 Shimazu, H. ExpertClerk: a conversational case-based
reasoning tool for developing salesclerk agents in e-commerce
webshops. Artificial Intelligence Review 18, 2002, 223-244.
 Sinha, R. and Swearingen, K. The role of transparency in
recommender Systems. In Extended Abstracts of Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’02), 2002.
 Sørmo, F. and Aamodt, A. Knowledge communication and
CBR. In Proceedings of the ECCBR-02 Workshop on Case-
Based Reasoning for Education and Training, 2002, 47-59.
 Ziegler, C.N., McNee, S.M., Konstan, J.A. and Lausen, G.
Improving recommendation lists through topic diversification.
In Proceedings of the 14th International World Wide Web
Conference (WWW’05), 2005.