Perception & Psychophysics
1975, Vol. 18 (1),55-60
The "ventriloquist effect":
Visual dominance or response bias?
CHONG S. CHOE, ROBERT B. WELCH, ROBB M. GILFORD, and JAMES F. JUOLA
University ofKansas, Lawrence, Kansas 6601,5
The interaction between vision and audition was investigated using a signal detection method. A light
and tone were presented either in the same location or in different locations along the horizontal plane,
and the subjects responded with same-different judgments of stimulus location. Three modes of stimulus
presentation were used: simultaneous presentation ofthe light and tone, tone first, and light first. For the
latter two conditions, the interstimulus interval was either 0.7 or 2.0 sec. A statistical decision model was
developed which distinguished between the perceptual and decision processes. The results analyzed
within the framework of this model suggested that the apparent interaction between vision and audition is
due to shifts in decision criteria rather than perceptual change.
One of the most controversial issues in psychology
concerns the genesis of perceptual abilities and the
relations that exist among the sense modalities. Until
educated by touch." Many scholars, such as Berkeley
and Helmholtz. argued that since visual perception is
grossly different from the image on the retina, it must
be acquired through tactual experience. Although
experiments
cmpirieistie doctrine of visual space perception .
for example,
demonstrated that vision "dominates" and modities
the proprioceptive sense when the two modalities arc
provide discrepant
information. Thus.
deflecting prism lenses comes to feel his hand where
he sees it rather than where it actually is. Rock and
Harris (I % 7) reported
several experiments
further demonstrated the dominance of vision over
educating vision. the reverse appears to be true.
The lind ing of visual dominance over proprioception
researchers
investigate
situat ions involving other sensory modalities. Pick,
Wurrcn , and Hay (ll)6l» examined the interaction of
proprioception.
proprioception
audition. and vision and audition.
For vision and
audition. the discrepancy was created by displacing
This research was supported in part by funds from Biomedical
Sciences Support Grant RR-07037 from the National Institutes of
Health. a University of Kansas General Research Grant. and Grant
MH 24h31-01 from the National Institute of Mental Health to the
fourth author. The authors thank Carl Mcf-arland and Juliet
Shaffer for their assistance. Reprint requests should be addressed
Department
Psychology.
University of
Kansas. Lawrence, Kansas htl04S.
the visual image ofa speaker by means of a 20-diopter
prism. A bias measure was defined as the amount that
the judged position of one source was shifted toward
the discrepant source. Thus. visual bias over audition
was defined as the difference between the subject's
localization of the heard position of the speaker with
and without the discrepant visual information. The
localization but audition has no effect upon visual
localization,
phenomenon
repeatedly
demonstrated before Harris's tinding of visual
dominance over proprioception .
All of these studies employed dependent variables that
were basically similar to, but less quantitative than,
phenomenon
involving vision and audition has sometimes been
called the "ventriloquist effect."
perceptual
research is whether one is measuring changes in the
perceptual system or changes in the response system
 . The bias measure is
especially vulnerable to this problem, and its validity
as an index of the perceptual process is questionable.
Auditory localization, even without interference from
other sensory information, is clearly a much more
difficult task than visual localization. When a subject
is asked to point to where he hears the sound coming
from in a conl1ict situation, it is possible that his
pointing response is influenced toward the
source simply because the latter is easier to localize.
Thus, one could argue that the subject's auditory
perception is not affected by visual perception. That
is, he might hear the sound in the same place whether
or not there is a disparate visual source, but he simply
"chooses" to point toward the visible source when it is
Another measure of change commonly employed It1
CHOE, WELCH, GILFORD, AND JUOLA
perception research is the aftereffect. In the present
context. an aftereffect measure is obtained by testing
the subject on auditory localization before and after a
period of exposure to the visual-auditory conflict. The
aftereffect measure is generally considered to be a
better index of perceptual processes than the bias
if there is a
localization of the auditory stimulus presented alone.
it must be due to a change in auditory perception.
This argument rests on the assumption that since the
visual stimulus is no longer present when the subject is
system. Several investigators have demonstrated aftereffects in
the visual-auditory contlict situation. The rationale
aftereffect
manifestation
perceptual change is valid. and observed aftereffects
might well be free of response bias. However. it seems
non perceptual
learning. might have contributed to the observed
aftereffects. In experiments by Canon .
aftereffects
aftereffects were measured by having the subject point
at the auditory target. it is possible that the observed
aftereffects represented shifts in the pointing response
itself. That is. the subject might have developed a
tendency to place the pointer away from the actual
exposure-period
experiments
auditory source rather than to the visual source during
the conflict period. the same type of response learning
could take place . As argued
localization
period might be biased toward the visual source. and
the tendency to point toward the visual source during
the exposure period might persist to the postexposure
The main inerest of intersensory interaction studies
in the effect that stimulation of one sensory
modality has upon perception of sensory input in the
Therefore.
demonstration
aftereffects would be regarded important only to the
extent that
represent perceptual events. The
tinding of aftereffects is of less importance if they
represent only a manifestation of motor learning or of
the development of a specific
Thus. it is crucial to isolate the effects of intersensory
discrepancy on perceptual processes from those on
processes.
of effects
attempted in the present study by employing the
theory of signal detect ability. A light and tone were
presented either in the same location (no discrepancy)
or in different locations (discrepancy). The tone was
to the right or left of the light equally often when their
same-different judgments of stimulus
statistical decision model was proposed here which
assumes that the subject makes a decision based on
the estimated distance between the locations of the
light and tone on each trial. More specifically, the
evaluating
subjective locations of the two stimuli against three
probability
distributions.
different types of trials (no discrepancy. tone left. and
tone right). as shown in Figure l. The model assumes
the subject responds with
"same" when the
estimated distance is less than some criterion. xc'
When the estimated distance exceeds xc' the subject
responds with "different." It is further assumed that
the probability distributions and response proportions
are symmetric for tone-right trials and tone-left trials.
That is. the subject's decisions that the distance is
greater than Xc on tone-right and tone-left trials are
equally represented in "different" response. Based on
proportions
responses.
nodiscrepancy trials and on discrepancy trials, indices of
perceptual sensitivity (d) and response bias «(3) were
determined. In addition to a simultaneous condition
in which the light and tone were presented at the same
time. successive conditions were included in which the
separation. The order of the presentation (tone-first
or light-first) and the interstimulus interval (0.7 or
2.0 sec) were varied in these conditions. It could be
argued that conflict did not exist in the successive
statistical
showing the probabUity distributions of the
judged distance between auditory and visual
stimuli for three different types of
(tone-left
tone- right
no-discrepancy trials), and areas correspond-
Ing to p(Hlts) and p(F A) for a given criterion
Subjective distance between auditory and visual stimuli
INTERACTION BETWEEN VISIONAND AUDITION
conditions.
especially
tone-first
condition.
where the location of the auditory source is perceived
before the onset of visual
stimulus. Thus. these
conditions were expected to produce results different
from those of the simultaneous condition. It was
to examine
nature of the
processes by comparing the simultaneous condition
successive
conditions
sensitivity and response bias measures. In terms of the
model in Figure 1. the problem is to estimate how far
the distributions are apart and where the subject sets
presentation
conditions.
Thirteen undergraduate students (nine males and four females)
from introductory psychology classes at the University of Kansas
participated
experiment
requirement. All reported normal vision and hearing. and were
naive as to the purpose of the experiment.
The subjects were run individually in a 2.74 x 3.66 m lAC
anecoic chamber. which was soundproof and nearly echo-free. The
subject sat facing a vertical pegboard panel which was curved into
an arc with a radius of 130 ern and its center at the subject's head
position. Nine O.4-cm-diam loudspeakers were evenly spaced 25 ern
apart (approximately II deg) on the back of the panel. 105 em
above the 1100r at approximately ear level for a seated subject. The
middle speaker was positioned directly in front of the subject. The
tone was produced by a pulse generator and had a frequency of
600 Hz and
an intensity of 60 dB.
A vertical array
light-emitting diodes
was placed at each of the nine
positions. on the interior surface of the board. The diodes emitted a
red light of 600-nm wavelength. and the brightness was 1.200 fl., as
measured by a Research spectra spot
brightness
meter with
Spectrar L-175 lens in the brightest region of the emitting surface.
The lamps were the only light source in the room. and were of
insutlicient luminance to reveal any details of the apparatus to the
A chinrest was used to stabilize the subject's head position and to
minimize head movement. Situated outside the chamber was a
panel containing a series of switches and three timers which were
used by the experimenter to control the visual and auditory target
positions. The subject and experimenter communicated through an
intercom system.
The experiment consisted of 216 trials with a 13·sec intertrial
interval. On every trial. a light and tone were presented for .15 sec
presentation
systematically. On one-third of the trials. the tone was presented
first, followed by the light (T/L trials). The order of presentation
was reversed for another th ird of the trials (LIT trials>. For both
T/L and liT trials. the interstimulus interval (lSI) was either 0.7 or
2.0 sec IT/L-O.7. TlL-2.0. LlT·0.7. and LlT-2.0. respectively>.
The remaining trials were simultaneous trials. on which the light
and tone were presented at the same time. For each of these
presentation conditions. the light and tone were presented in the
same place on half of the trials (no-discrepancy trials). Each of the
nine target positions was used equally often tor these. trials. On the
other half of the trials. the light and tone were laterally separated by
II deg (discrepancy trials). The direction of the discrepancy was
symmetrical: that is. the tone was to the right of the light on half the
trials and it was to the left on the remaining half of the trials.
Each subject was assigned to one of four different random
sequences 01'216 trials. The subjects were told of the two different
arrangements and
three different
of stimulus
presentation. The subjects were informed of the random order of
presentation.
were instructed to
"same" if they
thought the light and tone had been presented in the same location.
and "different" if the two stimuli seemed to originate from different
locations. Finally. the subjects were asked to say either "one" or
contidence
making "same"
"different" responses. The subjects responded with "one" if they
were sure and with "two" if they were not sure and therefore had
guessed about the relative locations of the stimuli.
The subjects were asked
to look straight ahead after each
response to be prepared tor the next trial. The subject's chin
remained on the chinrest throughout the experiment. Prior to
actual testing. 15 practice trials were administered. The entire
session lasted approximately 1 h..
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The frequencies of the four response types ["same
one" (SI). "same two" (52). "different two" (02).
"different one" (01)] were obtained for each subject
presentation
conditions (T/L-2.0 trials,
T/L-O.7 trials.
simultaneous
Figure 2 shows the mean proportions of the four
different response types for all subjects in the five
different conditions for no-discrepancy trials (solid
line) and for discrepancy trials (dotted line). The most
striking difference in response frequency patterns can
be observed between simultaneous trials and the other
conditions. The simultaneous trials produced more 51
response than other trials. both in no-discrepancy and
in discrepancy trials. The simultaneous trials most
closely resemble the conflict situation employed in
previous research demonstrating visual
since in the simultaneous trials high frequency of 51
response was obtained for discrepancy trials (dotted
line). it can be asserted that the present results are in
However. the use of a signal detection method allows
for a further examination of the
nature of the
apparent "ventriloquist effect." High
51 response
frequency in simultaneous trials regardless of whether
or not there was a spatial discrepancy implies the
existence of another factor-that is. response bias. The
basic argument is illustrated in Figure 3. which shows
highly correlated proportions of "same" responses (51
no-discrepancy
discrepancy trials.
The crucial evidence for the hypothesis that the
proportion
simultaneous trials was due to response bias rather
than to a change in sensitivity for
however, comes directly from the signal detection
analysis. The analysis produced two indices. that of
sensitivity (d') and that of response bias ([3). which
were based on two probabilities computed from the
SIMULTANEOUS
CHOE, WELCH,GILFORD, ANDJUOLA
O'O......._
...~_.,._....._ ..~_..._,............_
......,......_,..I11111111_~·
Figure 2. Mean proportions of the four different responses in the five different stimulus presentation conditions for no-discrepancy trials
(solid line) and for discrepancy trials (dotted line). Response types: 51 = same location, sure; 52 = same location, not sure; D2 =
different locations, not sure; Dl = different locations. sure.
1.0r--------------------,
PRESENTATION
Figure 3. Mean proportions of "same" responses (51 and 52
comblnedl in the five different stimulus presentation conditions for
no-discrepancy trials (ND) and for discrepancy trials (D!.
frequency data. The probability of hits [pt l-lits l] was
defined as the proportion of the "same" responses.
no-discrepancy
probability of false alarms [p(FA)] was the proportion
of the "same" responses on discrepancy trials. In the
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The so-called
"ventriloquist effect"
earlier studies was also demonstrated in the present
experiment. as illustrated 11\ the high proportion of
vimultancouxlv
prcxc nnxl
light a nd tone llriginated
locations.
Thus. the prcvent results arc not incompatible wit h
Figure I).
between the means of the probability distributions of
the judged distance between the light and tone for
discrepancy and no-discrepancy trials. The subject's
decision criteria determine
~ values. Measures of d
and ~ were calculated for each subject under the live
stimulus presentation conditions.! The means
presented in Table I. A one-way analysis of variance
no difference among the
live d ' values.
1.22. p > .05. The analysis of the
the other hand. showed a significant effect of stimulus
prcscntution
conserv at ive test. F( I. 12) = 5.11. P < .05. suggesting
,I shift in decision criteria for different conditions.
Multiple comparisons with the Tu key b test showed
the simultaneous
signitkantly smaller than the mean
~s forTI L trials.
All other differences were nonsignificant. Thus. the
discrepancy created by simultaneous presentation of
the light and tone in different locations influenced
sensitivity.
SIMlUAHEOUS
INTERACTION BETWEEN VISION AND AUDITION
previous findings.
analysis made it possible to reexamine the nature of
interaction
aud ition. Perceptual sensitivity (d') was equivalent in
all live presentation conditions. The lack of difference
among d's. combined with the unequal {3s suggest that
shifts in decision criteria were mainly responsible for
the different frequencies of different response types in
the five conditions.
It was recognized that the interpretation of the
signal detection analysis is not as straightforward here
as in simple threshold studies. In the latter. "false
alarm" refers to a detection response in the absence of
a stimulus. The nature of a false alarm is not as easily
specified in the present study. however. since the
presence or absence of the "stimulus" is ambiguous.
responds with
spatially disparate light and tone stimuli. it may
interaction
Therefore.
unequivocal
conclusion
examination of the frequencies of "same" responses
in the simultaneous trials alone. Only when d's and {3s
conditions.
conclusions be made concerning the nature of the
apparent sensory interaction. The critical tinding is
that there was no difference in sensitivity between the
simultaneous trials and the TIL trials. Since the tone
was terminated before the presentation of the light.
visual dominance over audition should not have been
possible in TIL trials unless one postulates that the
memory of an auditory location can be biased by
vision. This hypothesis seems implausible for two
reasons. First. if auditory memory is intluenced by
decrease. Examination of correct responses indicate
that this was not the case. Although the frequency of
"same" responses on no-discrepancy trials was lower
in the TIL trials. a higher frequency of "different"
responses was obtained on discrepancy trials (see
Figure 2). Secondly. one would expect an even higher
frequency of "same" responses in the TIL trials if the
memory of the sound location was affected by the
light. simply because memory for the location of the
tone should decay and auditory localization should.
therefore. be more easily moditied. Neither of these
expectations was observed in the data.
The results of the signal detection analysis, i.e.,
different {3s in the absence of sensitivity difference.
re-interpretation
interaction
simultaneous trials was due to the subject's decision
bias. Although the visual-auditory contlict situation
has been investigated as an extension of the visual
proprioception,
re-interpretation
visualproprioceptive conflict. The nature of the interaction
Mean d's and
I3s in Each
Stimulus Presentation Condition
in visual-proprioceptive conflict may
visual-auditory
Furthermore. the differences in the consequences of
the discrepancy may be explained in terms of the
normal relations within each pair of modalities. A
one-to-one correspondence exists between the visual
and proprioceptive senses in the normal situation.
correspondence
situation. and observed visual dominance may be
normality. i.e .. one-to-one correspondence. Although
assumption
visual-auditory contlict is that this
operates, However, this assumption might be entirely
unwarranted. Clearly. the normal relation between
perception
one-to-one correspondence, that exists for vision and
proprioception. Thus. the discrepancy between vision
comparable
between vision and
proprioception. and the same
consequences would
be expected in the
situations. In fact, one may even argue that there is no
"conflict" at all in the visual-auditory discrepancy
situation.
Indirect support can be found for the argument
that the two pairs of modalities interact differently
when early studies on visual dominance are examined.
In a study by Pick, Warren. and Hay . the mean
visual bias of audition was 48%. compared to 72% for
visual bias of proprioception. More important for the
difference
distributions of the percent bias scores obtained in the
two cases. In the case of vision over proprioception.
the bias scores were normally distributed around the
distribution of percent
scores for vision over audition was bimodal. The two
modes were found around 98% and 12% visual bias,
indicating that some subjects localized exclusively in
tcrms of vision and others in terms of audition. One
interpretation for the bimodal distribution is that
these two groups of subjects had different perceptual
experiences. However. an alternative speculation is
that the observed bimodality was due to different
response strategies, and that there might have been no
difference in their perception. The latter argument is
plausible when one considers the criticized nature of
the bias measurerpossibly manifesting a change in the
response system. Another relevant observation for this
discussion is the different degrees of the subject's
CHOE, WELCH,GILFORD, AND JUOLA
awareness of a discrepancy. Few subjects experienced
discrepancy between vision and proprioception. while
many of the subjects were aware of visual-auditory
discrepancy. That is, the subjects realized that the
light and sound originated from different sources, and
therefore no contlict was experienced. Thus visual
dominance was not needed in this situation. In line
with this argument,
Welch showed that if
discrepancy between felt and seen position of the hand
significantly less adaptation than if they experienced
the two sensory modalities to be in conflict.
In retrospect. it is interesting to note that the effect
of response bias was actually recognized in one of the
earliest studies on auditory rearrangement. Willey,
Inglis, and Pearce failed to tind any adaptation
to auditory right-left reversal after 8 days of wearing
pseudophones,
localization with the object in view ("visual auditory
localization") was
complete or gradual.
stated that "the
'development" of normal visualauditory
localization
observational attitude rather than a fundamental
reorganization of auditory perception" (p. 125).