Vol.:(0123456789)
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
 
SCIENTIFIC PAPER
Covid‑19: automatic detection from X‑ray images utilizing transfer
learning with convolutional neural networks
Ioannis D. Apostolopoulos1 · Tzani A. Mpesiana2
Received: 25 March 2020 / Accepted: 30 March 2020 / Published online: 3 April 2020
© Australasian College of Physical Scientists and Engineers in Medicine 2020
In this study, a dataset of X-ray images from patients with common bacterial pneumonia, confirmed Covid-19 disease, and
normal incidents, was utilized for the automatic detection of the Coronavirus disease. The aim of the study is to evaluate the
performance of state-of-the-art convolutional neural network architectures proposed over the recent years for medical image
classification. Specifically, the procedure called Transfer Learning was adopted. With transfer learning, the detection of various abnormalities in small medical image datasets is an achievable target, often yielding remarkable results. The datasets
utilized in this experiment are two. Firstly, a collection of 1427 X-ray images including 224 images with confirmed Covid-19
disease, 700 images with confirmed common bacterial pneumonia, and 504 images of normal conditions. Secondly, a dataset
including 224 images with confirmed Covid-19 disease, 714 images with confirmed bacterial and viral pneumonia, and 504
images of normal conditions. The data was collected from the available X-ray images on public medical repositories. The
results suggest that Deep Learning with X-ray imaging may extract significant biomarkers related to the Covid-19 disease,
while the best accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity obtained is 96.78%, 98.66%, and 96.46% respectively. Since by now, all
diagnostic tests show failure rates such as to raise concerns, the probability of incorporating X-rays into the diagnosis of
the disease could be assessed by the medical community, based on the findings, while more research to evaluate the X-ray
approach from different aspects may be conducted.
Keywords  Covid-19 · Automatic detections · X-ray · Transfer learning · Deep learning
Introduction
COVID-19 is an acute resolved disease, but it can also be
deadly, with a 2% case fatality rate. Severe disease onset
might result in death due to massive alveolar damage and
progressive respiratory failure . The early and automatic
diagnosis of Covid-19 may be beneficial for countries for
timely referral of the patient to quarantine, rapid intubation
of serious cases in specialized hospitals, and monitoring of
the spread of the disease.
Although the diagnosis has become a relatively fast process, the financial issues arising from the cost of diagnostic
tests concern both states and patients, especially in countries
with private health systems, or restricted access health systems due to prohibitive prices.
In March 2020, there has been an increase in publicly
available X-rays from healthy cases, but also from patients
suffering from Covid-19. This enables us to study the medical images and identify possible patterns that may lead to
the automatic diagnosis of the disease.
Τhe development of deep learning applications over the
last 5 years seems to have come at the right time. Deep
Learning is a combination of machine learning methods
mainly focused on the automatic feature extraction and classification from images, while its applications are broadly
met is object detection tasks, or in medical image classification tasks. Machine learning and deep learning have become
established disciplines in applying artificial intelligence to
mine, analyze, and recognize patterns from data. Reclaiming
the advances of those fields to the benefit of clinical decision
making and computer-aided systems is increasingly becoming nontrivial, as new data emerge .
* Ioannis D. Apostolopoulos
 
Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine,
University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece
Computer Technology Institute, University of Patras, Patras,
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
Deep Learning often refers to a procedure wherein deep
convolutional neural networks are utilized for automatic
mass feature extraction, which is achieved by the process
called convolution. The layers process nonlinear information
 . Each layer involves a transformation of the data into a
higher and more abstract level. The deeper we go into the
network, the more complex information is learned. Higher
layers of portrayal enhance parts of the information that are
significant for segregation and smother unimportant attributes. Usually, deep learning refers to more deep networks
than the classic machine learning ones, utilizing big data.
The purpose of this research is to evaluate the effectiveness of state-of-the-art pre-trained convolutional neural
networks proposed by the scientific community, regarding their expertise in the automatic diagnosis of Covid-19
from thoracic X-rays. To achieve this, a collection of 1427
thoracic X-ray scans is processed and utilized to train and
test the CNNs. Due to the fact that the size of the samples
related to Covid-19 is small (224 images), transfer learning
is a preferable strategy to train the deep CNNs. This is due
to the fact that the state-of-the-art CNNs are sophisticated
model requiring large-scale datasets to perform accurate feature extraction and classification. With transfer learning, the
retention of the knowledge extracted from one task is the key
to perform an alternative task.
The results are encouraging and demonstrate the effectiveness of deep learning, and more specifically, transfer
learning with CNNs to the automatic detection of abnormal
X-ray images from small datasets, related to the Covid-19
disease. Despite the limitations of the current study, which
are related to the data availability limitations, opens the horizons for more specialized research into the possible existence biomarkers related to the Covid-19 disease in X-ray
images. The possible significance of those biomarkers can be
confirmed or denied by other feature extraction techniques
such as Radiomics in future research.
Dataset of the study
For the purpose of the experiments, several sources of
X-rays were accessed. Firstly, the Github Repository was
analyzed for related datasets. A collection of X-ray images
from Cohen was selected. Secondly, the following web
sites were thoroughly examined: (a) Radiological Society
of North America (RSNA), (b) Radiopaedia, and (c) Italian
Society of Medical and Interventional Radiology (SIRM).
This collection is available on the Internet . Thirdly, a
collection of common bacterial-pneumonia X-ray scans was
added to the dataset, to train the CNNs to distinguish Covid-
19 from common pneumonia. This collection is available on
the Internet by Kermany et al. .
The collected data includes 224 images with confirmed
Covid-19, 700 images with confirmed common bacterial
pneumonia, and 504 images of normal condition. This datasets is referred to as Dataset_1.
To further evaluate the classification performance,
another experiment was conducted. Specifically, some modification to the dataset were performed. Since the first dataset
included only bacterial pneumonia cases, it was impossible
to investigate the performance of MobileNet in distinguishing the Covid-19 disease from other pneumonia cases. For
the above reason, the addition of viral pneumonia cases
(non-Covid-19) was mandatory. This dataset includes the
224 cases of confirmed Covid-19, the 504 cases of healthy
instances, and 714 cases of both bacterial and viral pneumonia (400 bacteria and 314 viral). The particular dataset
is referred to as Dataset_2.
The X-ray images were rescaled to a size of 200 × 266.
For the images of different pixel ration, and to avoid distortion, a black background of 1:1.5 ratio was added to achieve
a perfect rescale to 200 × 266. The reader must note that the
CNNs are capable of ignoring slight positional variance, i.e.,
they seek for patterns not only to a specific position of the
image but also moving patterns.
For the particular dataset, some limitations have to be
mentioned. Firstly, positive Covid-19 samples represent a
small sample of cases and even a sample referring to more
severe cases with pneumonia symptoms. Unfortunately,
there is no safer sample available at this time. Secondly, the
pneumonia incidence samples are older recorded samples
and do not represent pneumonia images from patients with
suspected Coronavirus symptoms, while the clinical conditions are missing.
Those limitations are thoroughly discussed in the "Discussion" section.
Transfer learning with CNNs
Transfer learning is a strategy wherein the knowledge mined
by a CNN from given data is transferred to solve a different
but related task, involving new data, which usually are of a
smaller population to train a CNN from scratch .
In deep learning, this process involves the initial training
of a CNN for a specific task (e.g., classification), utilizing
large-scale datasets. The availability of data for the initial training is the most vital factor for successful training
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
since CNN can learn to extract significant characteristics
(features) of the image. Depending on the capability of the
CNN to identify and extract the most outstanding image
features, it is judged whether this model is suitable for
transfer learning.
During the next phase, the CNN is employed to process a new set of images of another nature and to extract
features, according to its knowledge in feature extraction,
which was obtained during the initial training. There are
two commonly used strategies to exploit the capabilities
of the pre-trained CNN. The first strategy is called feature extraction via transfer learning and refers to the
approach wherein the pre-trained model retains both its
initial architecture, and all the learned weights. Hence,
the pre-trained model is used only as a feature extractor; the extracted features are inserted into a new network that performs the classification task. This method is
commonly used either to circumvent computational costs
coming with training a very deep network from scratch,
or to retain the useful feature extractors trained during
the initial stage.
The second strategy refers to a more sophisticated procedure, wherein specific modifications are applied to the
pre-trained model, to achieve optimal results. Those modifications may include architecture adjustments and parameter
tuning. In this way, only specific knowledge mined from
the previous task is retained, while new trainable parameters are inserted into the network. The new parameters
require training on a relatively large amount of data to be
advantageous.
In medical tasks, the most prominent practice to perform
transfer learning is exploiting the CNNs participated and
stood out in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (ILSVRC) , which evaluates algorithms for
object detection and image classification at large scale.
State‑of‑the‑art CNNs for transfer learning
In this section, a brief description of the CNNs employed
for automatic detection is illustrated. In Table 1, the CNNs
employed for the classification task and the parameters tuned
for transfer learning are presented. The parameters were
defined after several experiments, although the possible alternative choices are limitless and could be investigated in future
research as to their contribution to the improvement of the
performance. The parameter called Layer Cutoff refers to the
number of untrainable layers starting from the bottom of the
CNN. The rest of the layers, which are closer to the output
features, are made trainable, to allow more information extraction coming from the late convolutional layers. The parameter
Neural Network refers to the classifier placed at the top of the
CNN to perform the classification of the extracted features. It
is described by the total number of hidden layers and the total
number of nodes.
All the CNNs share some common hyper-parameters. More
specifically, all the convolutional layers are activated by the
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) . For the Neural Networks
utilizing two hidden layers, a Dropout layer is added to
prevent overfitting . The CNNs were compiled utilizing
the optimization method called Adam . The training was
conducted for ten epochs, with a batch size of 64.
Regarding the classification task of the CNNs, specific metrics were recorded as follows: (a) correctly identified diseased cases (True Positives, TP), (b) incorrectly classified
diseased cases (False Negatives, FN), (c) correctly identified healthy cases (True Negatives, TN), and (d), incorrectly
classified healthy cases (False Positives, FP). Please note
that TP refers to the correctly predicted Covid-19 cases, FP
refers to typical or pneumonia cases that were classified as
Covid-19 by the CNN, TN refers to normal or pneumonia
cases that were classified as non-Covid-19 cases, while the
FN refers to Covid-19 cases classified as normal or as common pneumonia cases.
Due to the fact that the main intention of the study is the
detection of Covid-19, we measure two different accuracies. The first accuracy refers to the overall accuracy of the
model in distinguishing the three classes (normal-pneumonia-Covid) and is called 3-class accuracy. The second accuracy refers to the accuracy related to Covid-19 only. That
is, if an instance is typical and is classified as pneumonia
by the CNN, it is still considered acceptable in terms of
the presence of Covid-19. The aforementioned accuracy is
called two-class accuracy.
Table 1   The CNNs of this experiment and their parameters for transfer learning
Description
VGG19 
Layer Cutoff
Neural Network
1024 nodes
MobileNet v2 
Layer Cutoff
Neural Network
1000 nodes, 750 nodes
Inception 
Layer Cutoff
Neural Network
Xception 
Layer Cutoff
Neural Network
1000 nodes, 750 nodes
Inception ResNet v2 
Layer Cutoff
Neural Network
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
Table 2   Results of the CNNs
used for transfer learning
Due to data imbalance, measurements corresponding to Sensitivity and Specificity that obtained not meaningful values for the particular set of results, are denoted by an asterisk (*)
2-class (%)
3-class (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
VGG19 
MobileNet v2 
Inception 
Xception 
Inception ResNet v2 
Table 3   Confusion matrix of
the two best CNNs
Predicted labels
Actual labels
Actual Covid-
Actual pneumonia
Actual normal
MobileNet v2 
Predicted Covid-19
Predicted pneumonia
Predicted normal
VGG19 
Predicted Covid-19
Predicted pneumonia
Predicted normal
Table 4   True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives
(TN), and False Negatives (FN) related to the Covid-19 class, for the
best performing CNNs
Bold values represent the optimal observed values
MobileNet v2
Based on those metrics, we compute the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the model. The equations explaining the
aforementioned metrics are Eqs. 1, 2, and 3.
The training and evaluation procedure was performed with
tenfold-cross-validation.
Classification accuracy on Dataset_1
The results for each CNN for Dataset_1 are illustrated in
Tables 2 and 3. In Table 2, the accuracy, sensitivity, and
specificity are presented.
The results suggest that the VGG19 and the MobileNet
v2 achieve the best classification accuracy over the rest
of the CNNs. Due to the imbalance of the dataset, all the
Acurracy = (TP + TN)∕(TP + TN + FP + FN)
Sensitivity = TP∕(TP + FN)
Speciﬁcity = TN∕(TN + FP)
CNNs perform seemingly well in terms of accuracy and
in terms of specificity. However, as those metrics depend
heavily on the number of samples representing each class,
their unilateral evaluation leads to incorrect conclusions.
For this reason, the combination of accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity must be the criterion for choosing the best
model. The measurements denoted with an asterisk (*)
in Table 2, indicate that these values are not considered
acceptable in real-life problems, due to the above issue.
To further evaluate the two best models (VGG19 and
MobileNet v2), the confusion matrix of each model is presented in Table 3.
The results of Table 3, can be simplified to represent the
sensitivity and the specificity of the test regarding Covid-
19. This procedure was explained in “Metrics” section.
The results are illustrated in Table 4.
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
While VGG19 achieves better accuracy, it is clear that
in terms of the particular disease, the optimal results are
those with the lowest number of FN. A real-life interpretation of a False Negative instance would result in the
mistaken assumption that the patient is not infected with
what this entails for the spread of the virus and public
The MobileNet v2 outperforms VGG19 in terms of
specificity and, thus, it is proven to be the most effective
model for the specific classification task, and the specific
data sample.
Classification accuracy on Dataset_2
The Dataset_2 includes viral cases of pneumonia, which
are added to the bacterial cases, and classified with the
same label, that is common pneumonia (single class). The
MobileNet v2 setup of the first experiment was retained to
perform the classification task of Dataset_2. The results are
illustrated in Tables 5 and 6. In Table 4, the overall accuracy
for the two classes, the overall accuracy for the three classes,
and the sensitivity and specificity related to Covid-19 is presented. In Table 6, the confusion matrix for the three classes
is presented.
Based on Tables  5 and 6, it is confirmed that the
MobileNet v2 effectively distinguished the Covid-19 cases
from viral and bacterial pneumonia cases from the particular
dataset. Besides, the low number of FN (3) are an encouraging result.
Discussion
Based on the results, it is demonstrated that deep learning with CNNs may have significant effects on the automatic detection and automatic extraction of essential features from X-ray images, related to the diagnosis of the
Some limitations of the particular study can be overcome
in future research. In particular, a more in-depth analysis
requires much more patient data, especially those suffering from Covid-19. A more interesting approach for future
research would focus on distinguishing patients showing
mild symptoms, rather than pneumonia symptoms, while
these symptoms may not be accurately visualized on X-rays,
or may not be visualized at all.
Moreover, it is necessary to develop models capable
of distinguishing Covid-19 cases from other similar viral
cases, such as SARS, but also from a greater variety of common pneumonia or even physiological X-rays. Besides, the
automatic diagnosis of cases was made using only a medical
image rather than a more holistic approach to the patient,
based on other factors that may be offered and may behave
as risk factors for the onset of the disease.
Nonetheless, the present work contributes to the possibility of a low-cost, rapid, and automatic diagnosis of
the Coronavirus disease. It is to be investigated whether
the extracted features performed by the CNNs constitute
reliable biomarkers aiding to the detection of Covid-19.
Also, despite the fact that the appropriate treatment is
not determined solely from an X-ray image, an initial
screening of the cases would be useful, not in the type
of treatment, but in the timely application of quarantine
measures in the positive samples, until a more complete
examination and a specific treatment or follow-up procedure is followed.
Besides, the advantage of automatic detection of Covid-
19 from either medical image lies on the reduction of
exposure of nursing and medical staff to the outbreak.
Table 5   Accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of MobileNet v2 on
2-class (%)
3-class (%)
Sensitivity
Specificity
Table 6   Confusion matrix of
the classification of Dataset_2
by MobileNet v2
Predicted labels
Actual labels
Actual Covid-
Actual pneumonia
Actual normal
MobileNet v2 
Predicted Covid-19
Predicted pneumonia
Predicted normal
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43:635–640
Funding  This study did not receive external funding.
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of