A Spectral Technique for Correspondence Problems Using Pairwise Constraints
Marius Leordeanu
Martial Hebert
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
We present an efﬁcient spectral method for ﬁnding consistent correspondences between two sets of features. We build
the adjacency matrix M of a graph whose nodes represent the potential correspondences and the weights on the
links represent pairwise agreements between potential correspondences. Correct assignments are likely to establish
links among each other and thus form a strongly connected
cluster. Incorrect correspondences establish links with the
other correspondences only accidentally, so they are unlikely to belong to strongly connected clusters. We recover
the correct assignments based on how strongly they belong
to the main cluster of M, by using the principal eigenvector of M and imposing the mapping constraints required by
the overall correspondence mapping (one-to-one or one-tomany). The experimental evaluation shows that our method
is robust to outliers, accurate in terms of matching rate,
while being much faster than existing methods.
1. Introduction
There are many tasks in computer vision which require ef-
ﬁcient techniques for ﬁnding consistent correspondences
between two sets of features, such as object recognition,
shape matching, wide baseline stereo, 2D and 3D registration. We propose an efﬁcient technique that is suitable for
such applications. Our method ﬁnds consistent correspondences between two sets of features, by taking in consideration both how well the features’ descriptors match and
how well their pairwise geometric constraints (or any other
type of pairwise relationship) are satisﬁed. Our formulation
can accommodate different kinds of correspondence mapping constraints, such as allowing a data feature to match
at most one model feature (commonly used), or allowing a
feature from one set to match several features from the other
set (used in shape matching ).
The features could consist of points, lines, shape descriptors or interest points, depending on the speciﬁc application. For problems where the features are non discriminative (e.g. points), it is the features pairwise geometric information that helps in ﬁnding the right correspondence. When
discriminative features are extracted (e.g. interest points)
then both the geometry and the properties of each individual
feature can be used.
Our approach avoids the combinatorial explosion inherent to the correspondence problem by taking advantage of
the spectral properties of the weighted adjacency matrix
M of a graph, whose nodes are the potential assignments
a = (i, i′) and whose weights on edges measure the agreements between pairs of potential assignments (Section 2).
When the two pairs of features put in correspondence by
two potential assignments agree in terms of their pairwise
geometry (or other type of pairwise relationship), there will
be an agreement link (positive edge) formed between the
two assignments. Otherwise there will be no link between
the two assignments (edge of zero weight).
We use the
terms assignment and correspondence interchangebly .
Our method is based on the observation that the graph
associated with M contains:
1. a main strongly connected cluster formed by the correct assignments that tend to establish agreement links
(edges with positive weights) among each other. These
agreement links are formed when pairs of assignments
agree at the level of pairwise relationships (e.g. geometry) between the features they are putting in correspondence.
2. a lot of incorrect assignments outside of that cluster
or weakly connected to it, which do not form strongly
connected clusters due to their small probability of establishing agreement links and random, unstructured
way in which they form these links.
These statistical properties motivate our spectral approach to the problem. We start by ﬁrst ﬁnding the level
of association of each assignment with the main cluster, by
inspecting the eigenvector of M corresponding to its largest
eigenvalue (principal eigenvector). Then we keep rejecting
the assignments of low association, until the constraints on
the correspondence mapping are met (Section 3). Spectral
methods are commonly used for ﬁnding the main clusters of
a graph, in tasks such as segmentation , grouping ,
 , and change detection . Shapiro and Brady 
also proposed a spectral technique for correspondence problems, later improved by Carcassoni and Hancock , but
their formulation is different and it applies only to matchings between point sets.
Maciel and Costeira use a different formulation based
on integral quadratic programming, which can be reduced
to an equivalent concave minimization problem.
However, the complexity of concave minimization is still nonpolynomial.
Berg and Malik obtain a more efﬁcient
implementation that works only for the case of allowing
several features from one image to match the same feature from the second image. Their approximation of the
quadratic problem with m2 + 1 linear programming problems is suitable for other mapping constraints as well (m
is the number of features to match). We implement the approximation they used, for the case of one to one matchings,
and compare it against our method. Our algorithm proves
to be several orders of magnitude faster, while also being
more robust to noise and outliers (Section 5).
Our work differs from existing approaches based on
spectral methods or quadratic programming, in that it has
a much better computational complexity, which allows it to
scale much better to large data sets, while being robust to
noise and outliers. Its low complexity is due to the relaxation during the optimization step of both the correspondence mapping constraints and the integral constraints on
the solution. We show that this method is very robust to
noise and outliers due to the spectral properties of M.
2. Problem formulation
Given two sets of features P, containing nP data features,
and Q, having nQ model features, a correspondence mapping is a set C of pairs (or assignments) (i, i′), where i ∈P
and i′ ∈Q. The features in P and Q that belong to some
pair from C are the inliers. The features for which there is
no such pair in C are the outliers. Different problems impose different kinds of mapping constraints on C, such as:
allowing one feature from P to match at most one feature
from Q, or allowing one feature from one set to match more
features from the other. Our approach can accommodate
different kinds of constraints.
For each candidate assignment a = (i, i′) there is an
associated score or afﬁnity that measures how well feature
i ∈P matches i′ ∈Q. Also, for each pair of assignments
(a, b), where a = (i, i′) and b = (j, j′), there is an afﬁnity that measures how compatible the data features (i, j) are
with the model features (i′, j′). Given a list L of n candidate assignments, we store the afﬁnities on every assignment a ∈L and every pair of assignments a, b ∈L in the n
x n matrix M as follows:
1. M(a, a) is the afﬁnity at the level of individual assignments a = (i, i′) from L. It measures how well the
data feature i matches the model feature i′. Assignments that are unlikely to be correct (due to a large
distance between the descriptors of i and i′) will be
ﬁltered out. Thus, each such rejection will reduce the
number of rows and columns in M by one.
2. M(a, b) describes how well the relative pairwise geometry (or any other type of pairwise relationship) of
two model features (i′, j′) is preserved after putting
them in correspondence with the data features (i, j).
Here a = (i, i′) and b = (j, j′). If the two assignments
do not agree (e.g. the deformation between (i, j) and
(i′, j′) is too large) or if they are incompatible based
on the mapping constraints (e.g i = j and i′ ̸= j′)
we set M(a, b) = 0. We assume M(a, b) = M(b, a)
without any loss of generality.
We require these afﬁnities to be non-negative, symmetric (M(a, b) = M(b, a)), and increasing with the quality
of the match, without any loss of generality. The candidate
assignments a = (i, i′) from L can be seen as nodes forming an undirected graph, with the pairwise scores M(a, b)
as weights on the edges and the individual scores M(a, a)
as weights at the nodes. Then, M represents the afﬁnity
matrix of this undirected weighted graph. The number of
nodes in this graph ( = number of elements in L), adapts
based on the actual data and it depends mainly on how discriminative the features’s descriptors are. If the features are
highly discriminative, such as SIFT descriptors, then only
a small fraction of all possible pairs (i, i′) are kept as candidate matches. In this case the size of M and the dimension of the problem search space are considerably reduced.
When the features are non-discriminative (such as 2D or 3D
points) and there is no a priori information about candidate
matches (e.g. constraints on translation), all possible pairs
(i, i′) can be considered as candidate assignments. In general, M is an n x n, sparse symmetric and positive matrix
where n = knP , and k is the average number of candidate
matches for each data feature i ∈P. Each feature i ∈P
will usually have a different number of candidate correspondences (i, i′), i′ ∈Q.
The correspondence problem reduces now to ﬁnding the
cluster C of assignments (i, i′) that maximizes the intercluster score S = P
a,b∈C M(a, b) such that the mapping
constraints are met. We can represent any cluster C by an
indicator vector x, such that x(a) = 1 if a ∈C and zero
otherwise. We can rewrite the total inter-cluster score as:
M(a, b) = xT Mx
The optimal solution x∗is the binary vector that maximizes the score, given the mapping constraints:
x∗= argmax(xT Mx)
The inter-cluster score xT Mx depends mainly on three
things: the number of assignments in the cluster, how interconnected the assignments are (number of links adjacent
to each assignment) and how well they agree (weights on
the links). Previous approaches , gave a quadratic
programming formulation to the correspondence problem
by embedding the mapping constraints on x in the general
form of Ax = b. Instead, we relax both the mapping constraints and the integral constraints on x, such that its elements can take real values in . We interpret x∗(a) as
the association of a with the best cluster C∗. Since only the
relative values between the elements of x matter, we can ﬁx
the norm of x to 1. Then, by the Raleigh’s ratio theorem,
x∗that will maximize the inter-cluster score xT Mx is the
principal eigenvector of M. Since M has non-negative elements, by Perron-Frobenius theorem, the elements of x∗
will be in the interval . In Section 3 we describe how
we use the mapping constraints to binarize the eigenvector
and obtain a robust approximation to the optimum solution.
The main computational gain of our approach comes
from dropping both the mapping constraints and the integral
constraints during the optimization step, and using them
only afterwards to binarize the eigenvector. The problem
becomes one of ﬁnding the main cluster from the assignments graph and can be solved easily using the well known
eigenvector technique. We show that this method is very
robust, because the main cluster in the assignments graph is
statistically formed by the correct assignments.
A key insight in the understanding of the statistics of M
is that a pair of model features is very likely to agree (in
terms of pairwise relationship between features) with the
correct corresponding pair of data features. The same pair
is very unlikely to agree with an incorrect pair of data features. Thus, correct assignments are expected to establish
agreement links between them. At the same time, incorrect
assignments are not expected to form such links, and when
they do it occurs because of accidental alignments between
features in the two data sets, which happen in a random, unstructured way. This suggests that the correct assignments
will form a highly connected cluster with a high association
score, while the wrong assignments will be weakly connected to other assignments and not form strong clusters.
The larger the value in the eigenvector x∗(a), the stronger
the association of a with the main cluster. Since this cluster
is statistically formed by correct assignments, it is natural to
interpret x∗(a) as the conﬁdence that a is a correct assignment.
3. Algorithm
We propose a greedy algorithm for ﬁnding the solution to
the correspondence problem. As discussed earlier, we interpret the eigenvector value corresponding to a particular
assignment a = (i, i′) as the conﬁdence that a is a correct assignment. We will refer to this value x∗(a) as the
confidence of a.
We start by ﬁrst accepting as correct
the assignment a∗of maximum conﬁdence (for which the
eigenvector value x∗(a∗) is maximum), because it is the
one we are most conﬁdent of being correct. Next we have
to reject all other assignments that are in conﬂict with a∗, as
dictated by the constraints on the correspondence mapping.
In our experiments these are assignments of the form (i, ∗)
or (∗, i′) (one feature i ∈P can match at most one feature
i′ ∈Q and vice-versa). Note that here one could use different constraints to ﬁnd the assignments that are in conﬂict
with a∗. We accept the next correct assignment as the one
with the next highest conﬁdence that has not been rejected
and thus it is not in conﬂict with a∗. We continue by rejecting the assignments in conﬂict with the newly accepted
assignment. We repeat this procedure of accepting new assignments of next highest conﬁdence that are not in conﬂict
with the ones accepted already, until all assignments are either rejected or accepted. This algorithm will split the set
of candidate assignments in two: the set of correct assignments C∗and rejected assignments R, having the following
property: every assignment from R will be in conﬂict with
some assignments from C∗of higher conﬁdence. Thus, no
element from R can be included in C∗without having to
remove from C∗an element of higher conﬁdence.
The overall algorithm can be summarized as follows:
1. Build the symmetric non-negative n x n matrix M as
described in Section 2.
2. Let x∗be the principal eigenvector of M. Initialize the
solution vector x with the n x 1 zero vector. Initialize
L with the set of all candidate assignments.
3. Find a∗= argmaxa∈L(x∗(a)). If x∗(a∗) = 0 stop
and return the solution x. Otherwise set x(a∗) = 1
and remove a∗from L.
4. Remove from L all potential assignments in conﬂict
with a∗= (i, i′). These are assignments of the form
(i, k) and (q, i′) for one-to-one correspondence constraints (they will be of the form (i, k) for one-to-many
constraints).
5. If L is empty return the solution x. Otherwise go back
to step 3.
We note that the outliers are found at steps 3 and 4.
They belong to weak assignments incompatible with assignments of higher conﬁdence, or to those that have a zero
corresponding eigenvector value (step 3). Different kinds
of constraints on the correspondence mapping can be used
to remove the assignments conﬂicting with higher conﬁdence assignments (step 4). Our approach takes advantage
of the fact that these constraints are usually easy to check
and it provides a simple way to enforce them as a postoptimization step. In practice our algorithm was several
orders of magnitude faster than the linear programming approximation to the quadratic problem, even for medium
size data-sets (matching 15-20 points). In turn, the linear
optimization approximation is less computationally expensive than the optimal quadratic programming approach .
In the case of rigid transformations the algorithm could
be stopped after selecting enough assignments (step 3) for
computing the transformation.
We successfully use this
modifed method on registration of 3D lines. However, the
results in this paper do not use this idea.
4. Numerical considerations
4.1. Stability issues
It is important to verify that the principal eigenvector of the
ideal matrix M ∗(in which only correct assignments form
pairwise links) is stable in the presence of outliers or deformations. Here we present an argument that shows that
the principal eigenvector of M ∗is indeed stable due to the
statistics of M ∗. In general, the principal eigenvector of a
symmetric matrix M is robust to small perturbations ∥E∥
if the difference between the ﬁrst two largest eigenvalues of
M is large , . This difference is also known as the
eigengap of M. In general, our matrix M will be a slightly
perturbed version of the ideal M ∗, in which only the correct
assignments establish pairwise agreement links among each
other. In M ∗there will be no accidental agreement links between wrong assignments (no accidental alignments), while
the correct assignments will form a clique of pairwise agreements. Thus the off-diagonal elements M ∗(a, b) will have
the maximum positive afﬁnity value if a and b are correct assignments and M ∗(a, b) = 0 otherwise. The largest eigenvalue λ∗
1 of M ∗will be equal to the total association score
of the cluster formed by the correct assignments, while its
second largest eigenvalue λ∗
2 will equal the largest afﬁnity
score M(a, a) of some wrong assignment a.
For a large enough number of correct assignments the
eigengap ρ∗of M ∗will be about the same as λ∗
can approximate ρ∗≈λ∗
1. Moreover, the principal eigenvalue will be much larger in absolute value than all the other
eigenvalues. Therefore the Frobenius norm of the ideal M ∗,
2 is slightly larger than λ∗
1, so we can
approximate ρ ≈∥M ∗∥F . This approximation conforms to
empirical observations. For example, we obtained the ideal
matrix M ∗experimentally, in matching sets of points (Section 5). We rotated and translated a set of points, without
deforming it, to obtain the other set. The matrices obtained
in this manner are very close to the ideal M ∗and their ratio
∥M ∗∥F is approximately 1 even for small data sets (Figure
Let v∗be the principal eigenvector of the ideal matrix M ∗and v be the principal eigenvector of the actual
matrix M, which is a slightly perturbed version of M ∗:
M = M ∗+ E. By Theorems V.2.8 from and 1 from
2 , the perturbation of the eigenvector
v∗satisﬁes the inequality:
Number of points to match
eigengap / Forbenius norm of M*
Example of principal eigenvector of M
nP = nQ = 25; No outliers
Deformation noise σ = 0.5
Sensitivity to deformations σd =1
Number of correct matches: 25
nP = nQ = 25; No outliers
Deformation noise σ = 3
Sensitivity to deformations σd = 5
Number of correct matches: 25
nP = nQ = 25; No outliers
Deformation noise σ = 10
Sensitivity to deformations σd = 5
Number of correct matches: 23
Example of principal eigenvector of M
Example of principal eigenvector of M
Figure 1: Top-right: ρ∗/∥M ∗∥F vs.data set size. The other plots
show principal eigenvectors (permuted such that the values of correct assignments show up on the ﬁrst 25 entries)
In our case we approximate ρ∗≈∥M ∗∥F . If we also use
the inequality
2 , we get a rough upper bound
ϵ∗on the change ∥v∗−v∥2 of the principal eigenvector:
This analysis agrees with the intuition that small perturbations ∥E∥F relative to ∥M ∗∥F will not change signiﬁcantly the direction of the principal eigenvector. In practice, even large perturbations ∥E∥F that cause the formation
or deletion of links in an unstructured way, will not produce higher eigenvector values for wrong assignments than
for correct assignments.
Only a structured perturbation,
which causes wrong assignments to belong to strong clusters, can signiﬁcantly affect the relative difference between
the eigenvector values of correct assignments vs. wrong
ones. These structured accidents happen when there is a lot
of symmetry in the data, the deformations noise is high or
there are a lot of outliers. Figure 1 shows how the principal eigenvector (obtained in experiments from Section 5)
changes smoothly as we increase the deformation noise in
the problem of matching sets of points.
In a related application on detecting structural changes
Sarkar and Boyer also discuss the robustness of the
principal eigenvector and eigenvalue to small unstructured
perturbations of matrices with similar statistics.
4.2. Complexity considerations
M is an n x n sparse matrix for which the efﬁcient computation of its ﬁrst eigenvector in step 2 is typically less than
O(n3/2). Variants of the Lanczos method, such as the one
implemented by MATLAB function eigs (which we used in
our experiments) are very efﬁcient for ﬁnding the principal
eigenvector of large symmetric sparse matrices.
Since M is very sparse both its storage and computation can be made very efﬁcient. Its space requirements and
computation time will never reach the O(n2) complexity in
practice. In our experiments (Section 5) M was on average
about 3% full. After ﬁnding the principal eigenvector, one
can show that in the worst case, the number of the remaining steps is: n + (n −1)...(n −m) = O((k −1/2)m2),
where m = min(nP , nQ) and k = n/m. For problems
where the features are very discriminative (e.g., SIFT descriptors, shape context), k is expected to be very small as
compared to m, since a feature from one set will have only a
few possible potential matches in the other set. In the worst
case, every data feature could potentially match any model
feature which leads to n = nP nQ.
5. Experiments
We evaluate the robustness of our method ﬁrst on the task
of ﬁnding correspondences between 2D sets of points. This
problem lets us evaluate the average performance of the algorithm for different levels of deformation and ratio of outliers to inliers. We study two main cases: when the deformation noise is added from a gaussian distribution with
zero mean and equal variances on the points x-y coordinates, and when sets of points are deformed using the Thin
Plate Spline model (TPS). The noise level is controlled
by varying the variance of the gaussian distribution or the
bending energy of the TPS model, and the number of outliers. We use the mapping constraint that one model feature
can match at most one data feature and vice-versa.
5.1. Deformations using white noise
In the ﬁrst set of experiments we generate data sets of 2D
model points Q by randomly selecting ni
Q inliers in a given
region of the plane. We obtain the corresponding inliers in
P by disturbing independently the ni
Q points from Q with
white gaussian noise N(0, σ) and then rotating and translating the whole data set Q with a random rotation and translation. Next we add no
P outliers in Q and P, respectively, by randomly selecting points in the same region
as the inliers from Q and P, respectively, from the same
random uniform distribution over the x-y coordinates. The
range of the x−y point coordinates in Q is 256
enforce an approximately constant density of 10 points over
a 256 x 256 region, as the number of points varies. The total number of points in Q and P are nQ = ni
P . The parameter σ controls the level of deformations between the two sets, while no
the number of outliers in P and Q, respectively. This is a
difﬁcult type of problem for two reasons. First, the points
are non-discriminative and they can be translated and rotated arbitrarily, so any of the nP points from P can potentially match any of the nQ model points from Q. This
maximizes the search space (the solution vector will have
nQnP elements) and leaves the task of ﬁnding a solution
entirely to the relative geometric information between pairs
of points. Secondly, picking points randomly in the plane
creates homogeneous data sets with an increased level of
Deformations Noise σ
Number of correct matches
Actual score
Outliers in both P and Q (evenly split)
No outliers
No outliers
Number of correct matches
Number of correct matches
Deformations Noise σ
Deformations Noise σ
Deformations Noise σ
Actual score
Number of correct matches
No outliers
No outliers
Mean and std of the number of correct matches
nP = 15 + outliers
nQ = 15 + outliers
Noise σ = 2
nP = 15 + outliers
nQ = 15 + outliers
Noise σ = 4
Mean and std of the actual matching score
Outliers in both P and Q (evenly split)
Figure 2: Performance curves for our method vs. linprog method.
The mean performance is shown as a solid red line (our method)
and a blue dash-dotted line (linprog method). One std below the
mean: red dashed lines (our method), blue dotted lines (linprog
method). First two rows: no outliers, varying deformation noise.
The number of correct matches (left) and the actual scores (right)
are plotted. Third row: the number of outliers in each P and Q is
varied for two values of the deformation noise.
symmetry, which increases the chance of accidental agreements between wrong correspondences or between correct
correspondences and wrong ones. Also, choosing outliers
from the same distribution as the inliers, within the same
region, increases the chance that similar geometrical relationships will be formed among outliers or between the outliers and the clean points as among the clean points only.
Since points are non-discriminative we set the score on
individual assignments M(a, a) to zero (we left the matching score entirely to the pairwise geometric information,
since there is no information on the individual assignments).
For the pairwise score M(a, b) on deformations between
candidate assignments a = (i, i′) and b = (j, j′) we use the
pairwise distances between points:
(dij−di′j′)2
if |dij −di′j′| < 3σd
otherwise,
where the candidate assignments are a = (i, i′) and b =
(j, j′). dij and di′j′ are the Euclidean distances between
the points i and j, and between their candidate matches i′
and j′, respectively. The parameter σd controls the sensitivity of the score on deformations.
The larger σd the
more deformations in the data we can accommodate, also
the more pairwise relationships between wrong assignments
will get a positive score.
M(a, b) deﬁned above is always non-negative and increases as the deformation between candidate pairs of assignments decreases. The total
score S = xT Mx increases as the number of assignment
links that are below the deformation threshold of 3σd increases and as the sum of squared deformations on those
links decreases.
Figure 2 shows the performance curves of our method
vs. the linear programming approximation method as
we vary the noise σ from 0.5 to 10 (in steps of 0.5), the
number of points to be matched: from 15 up to 30, and the
number of outliers in both P and Q. We score the performances of the two methods by counting how many matches
agree with the ground truth. We initially kept the sensitivity parameter ﬁxed σd = 5. For our algorithm we use the
MATLAB function eigs, which implements the Implicitly
Restarted Arnoldi method , a variant of Lanczos method.
For the linear programming method we use the MATLAB
function linprog with the LargeScale option that is based
on LIPSOL (Linear Interior Point Solver, ). Both algorithms ran on the same problem sets over 30 trials for
each value of the varying parameter (Figure 2). Both the
mean performance curves as well as the curves one standard deviation below the mean are plotted. As expected, for
large values of the deformation σ and large numbers of outliers, both algorithms start shifting smoothly from the correct matches, which indicates that some wrong assignments
have established enough links to win over correct assignments. The performance of the two algorithms degrades in
a similar manner, which suggests that the true optimum of
the score function shifts from the ground truth as the amount
of noise increases (as introduced by outliers and deformations). For lower values of the noise, both algorithms ﬁnd
the correct matches which indicates that the optimum of the
score function coincides with the ground truth. Both algorithms prove to be robust to noise, but ours shows a slightly
better robustness for larger values of noise. In the case of
outliers our algorithm is clearly more robust then the linprog based method. Also, our method is orders of magnitude faster then linprog: over 400 times faster on 20 points
problem sets (average time of 0.03 sec. vs 13 sec) and over
650 faster on 30 points problem sets (0.25 sec. vs 165 sec.),
on a 2.4 GHz Pentium computer.
We further tested our method on the same problem, but
larger data sets (50, 100 and 130 points, Figure 3), for
which linprog becomes too slow to make an extensive comparison. We notice that the performance of our algorithm
improves as the number of points increases.
This happens because as the number of data points increases, each
Deformation Noise σ
Matching Rate
Deformations Noise σ
Matching Rate
Deformations Senisitivity σd
Matching Rate
outliers / inliers in both P and Q
Matching Rate
outliers / inliers in both P and Q
Matching Rate
outliers / inliers in both P and Q
Matching Rate
nP = 83 + 17 outliers
nQ = 83 + 17 outliers
nP = 108 + 22 outliers
nQ = 108 + 22 outliers
Deformation Noise σ = 2
Deformation Noise σ = 4
Deformation Noise σ = 4
nP = 67 + 33 outliers
nQ = 67 + 33 outliers
Deformation Noise σ = 2
Mean amd standard deviation of matching rates
fullness of A
Figure 3: Average matching rates (=correctly matched inliers vs.
total inliers) over 30 tests for each parameter value on the x axis.
Middle-right: also plotted (black dash-dotted line) the ratio of nonzero values in M vs. total elements in M. The more deformation
we allow (σd) the less sparse M is
correct assignment establishes pairwise relationships with
more correct assignments. Thus it becomes more robust
to deformations or presence of outliers. Our method took
on average less than 9 seconds in MATLAB for 130 points
problem sets on a 2.4 GHz Pentium computer.
We also tried to simulate real applications of matching
very large number of points.
We limited the number of
candidate correspondences per point, by accepting as candidate matches (i, i′) only points that were within a radius
of 500 from each other. When generating the inliers in P
from the inliers in Q, we limited the translation to 100 and
the rotation around the center of mass of the points in Q
to [−π/9, π/9]. This resulted in each point from P having on average around 100 candidate correspondences in
Q, including its correct correspondence. We imposed the
additional constraint on the pairwise distances score that
M(a, b) = 0 if dij > 200 or di′j′ > 200, or the angle
between the directions of (i, j) and (i′, j′) was outside the
interval [−π/9, π/9]. The average performances, over 30
runs, on data sets of 400, 600 and 1000 points, for a deformation noise of σ = 2 and ratio of outliers/inliers =
50% in each set P and Q, were: 97% (400 points) and 93%
(both 600 and 1000 points). It took less than 30 sec. in
MATLAB on a 2.4 GHz Pentium computer to ﬁnd the solution for 1000 points.
Non rigid deformations using the Thin
Plate Spline Model
Bending Energy
Matching Rate
Bending Energy
Matching Rate
Bending Energy
Matching Rate
Example deformation for bending energy 0.1
Example deformation for bending energy 0.5
nP = 30 + 20 outliers
nQ = 30 + 20 outliers
nP = 48 + 32 outliers
nQ = 48 + 32 outliers
nP = 21 + 9 outliers
nQ = 21+ 9 outliers
Example deformation for bending energy 1
Figure 4: Top row: average matching rate of 50 points (top-left),
80 points (top-right) and 30 points (bottom-right) for different
bending energy levels, over 30 trials for each energy level. Middle
and bottom rows: examples of the x-y meshgrid deformation for
bending energy levels: 0.1, 0.5 and 1
In this Section we test our method on deformations that
follow the TPS model, for which the amount of deformation is quantiﬁed by the bending energy applied to a x-y
meshgrid (Figure 4). We generated the sets Q and P as
follows: we randomly pick ni
Q inliers in Q on a 20 by 20
x-y meshgrid. Then we randomly deform the meshgrid for
a given level of the bending energy and obtain the corresponding ni
P inliers from P. We further add no
outliers in Q and P by randomly picking points in the plane
in a region that contains the inliers. As in previous tests, we
enforce the mapping constraint that one point from P must
match at most one point from Q and vice-versa. The score
function used before on pairwise deformations is not appropriate in this case, since the pairwise distance between far
points is expected to vary more than the distance between
close points. Instead, we normalize the pairwise deformations by the absolute pairwise distance di′j′. We also penalize changes in directions. As before, we do not use any
scores on individual assignments (M(a, a) = 0). For pairwise deformations we use a score function that is similar in
concept to the one from : M(a, b) = (1 −γ)cα + γcd,
if |αab| < 3σα and |dab −1| < 3σd, and zero otherwise.
Here, cα = 4.5 −α2
α , cd = 4.5 −(dab−1)2
dij and di′j′ are the distances between the model features
(i, j) and between the data features (i′, j′), respectively, and
αab is the angle between the direction of (i, j) and that of
(i′, j′). The term cα penalizes changes in direction, cd penalizes changes in the relative length, while γ weighs one
term against the other. TPS is often used as a deformation
model for matching shapes. Figure 5 shows a couple of examples of matching point sets sampled from natural images,
using the scores deﬁned here.
34 inliers
34 inliers + 20 outliers
25 inliers
25 inliers + 15 outliers
33 out of 34
Figure 5: Correspondences between points from natural images
5.3. Recognizing objects from low resolution
In this Section we show an application of our method to
recognition of vehicles from aerial images, using the DoG
feature detector and the SIFT feature descriptor, . In this
case, because of the low resolution images, the normal voting method for retaining the correct matches cannot be
applied reliably because the number of features extracted
for each object is very small and their location and scale is
not very stable. Moreover, the SIFT descriptors are less discriminative when applied to low resolution and low texture
objects. For example, a lot of these features are extracted
at the cars boundaries, and it often happens that multiple
features from the same or different objects are very similar
to each other. Therefore, we must allow multiple candidate
matches for each feature and use the pairwise relationships
between them to disambiguate the correct correspondences.
We built 70 car models Qq from 70 video sequences, in
an unsupervised fashion, following the method described in
 . The models represent constellations of clusters of SIFT
features, that are grouped together, into the same model, if
they co-occur with a high probability during the video sequence within a small distance from each other. Given a test
image P containing an object and clutter, the task is to recognize it by trying to match it against a subset of the models
built. The model Q∗
q that gives the highest correspondence
score xT Mx will be retrieved as the correct match. We used
a pairwise score M(a, b) that is similar to the ones used previously: it is high if the distance dij between the centers of
the data features i and j is similar to the average distance
di′j′ ( during the training stage) between the centers of their
candidate model matches i′ and j′ (a = (i, i′), b = (j, j′)):
Figure 6: Examples of correspondences between data features and model features in recognizing cars from aerial images
(dij−di′j′)2
if |dij −di′j′| < 3σd
otherwise,
For the individual assignments M(a, a) we used a score
that is linearly decreasing with the L2 distance between feature i and its candidate corresponding feature i′.
We matched 506 novel images against the correct model
plus 10 other randomly selected models and we recognized
correctly 496 images (≈98% recognition rate). Figure 6
shows sample matches between the features from the test
images (left) and features from the models (right).
6. Conclusions
We have presented an efﬁcient spectral solution to correspondence problems using pairwise constraints between
candidate assignments.
The problem formulation makes
our solution suitable for a variety of vision applications
from 2D or 3D registration to object recognition. Our approach takes advantage of the fact that correct assignments
are likely to establish links among each other, while incorrect ones are unlikely to form these links and when they do,
this happens in an unstructured, random way. Then, the recovery of the correct solution becomes a problem of detecting the main strongly connected cluster in the assignments
graph. We showed in our experiments that the spectral approach is robust to noise and outliers, and it scales well with
the number of features.
7. Acknowledgements
This work was sponsored in part by Grant NBCH1030013.
The authors wish to thank David Tolliver for helpful discussions. The content does not necessarily reﬂect the position
or the policy of the Government, and no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.