Enhanced Spatial Priors for Segmentation of
Magnetic Resonance Imagery
Tina Kapur 1.*, W. Eric L. Grimson 1, Ron Kikinis 2, and William M. Wells 1'2
1 MIT AI Laboratory, Cambridge MA, USA
tkapur0 ai. mit. edu
http ://www. ai.:nit, edu/~tkapur
2 Brigham ~ Womens Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA
Abstract. A Bayesian, model-based method for segmentation of Mag-
netic Resonance images is proposed. A discrete vector valued Markov
Random Field model is used as a regularizing prior in a Bayesian clas-
sification algorithm to minimize the effect of salt-and-pepper noise com-
mon in clinical scans. The continuous Mean Field solution to the MRF is
recovered using an Expectation-Maximization algorithm, and is a prob-
abilistic segmentation of the image. A separate model is used to encode
the relative geometry of structures, and as a spatially varying prior in
the Bayesian classifier, Preliminary results are presented for the segmen-
tation of white matter, gray matter, fluid, and fat in Gradient Echo MR.
images of the brain.
Introduction
The automatic segmentation of anatomical structures from medical images such
as MRI or CT will likely benefit from the exploitation of four different kinds of
knowledge: intensity models that describe the gray level appearance of individual
structures (e.g. fluid appears bright in T2-weighted MR/), relative geometric
models that describe the relative geometry of structures in a subject-specific
reference frame (e.g. femoral cartilage is attached to the subject's femur), shape
models that describe the shape of individual structures in a subject-independent
reference frame (e.g. the brain-stem is tube-like), as well as imaging models that
capture the relevant characteristics of the imaging process.
EM-Segmentation, a segmentation method for MR] images , employed
Gaussian intensity models for the different tissue classes, and used an imaging
model to account for some distortions of the signal that are unique to the MRI
process. The work reported here continues along that theme, with two key parts.
The first contribution is the addition of a regularizer to the imaging model used in
the EM-Segmentation algorithm. Regtflarization combats salt-and-pepper noise
** The authors would like to thank Martha Shenton for contributing data for this paper. W. Wells
received support for this research in part from NIMH Research Scientist Development Awards K02
MH-01110 and R29 MH-50747 (Martha Shenton, PI) and from a Whitaker Foundation Biomedical
Research Grant (W. Wells, PI). R. Kikinis received partial support from: NIH: RO1 CA 46627-08,
PO1 CA67165-o1A1, PO1 AG04953-14, NSF: BES 9631710 and Darpa: F41624-96-2-0001.
common in clinical scans. Previous implementations of EM-segmentation deal
with this noise effectively by pre-processing the images with structure-preserving
intensity smoothers, particularly gradient-limited diffusion methods . These
methods are quite effective, but computationally costly, and not trivial to ad-
just. We leverage the Bayesian flavor of EM-Segmentation and regularize via a
prior distribution on the labeling, without incurring undue additional computa-
tional cost. Specifically, we model the prior distribution as a Markov Random
Field (MRF), and recover its Mean Field (MF) solution using the Expectation-
Maximization algorithm. While MF approximations of MRFs have previously
been usedin computer vision, we believe that the reported work is novel in its
use of this prior in conjunction with the EM-Segmentation
algorithm.
In the second component, we propose an algorithm that leverages geometric
relationships between structures for segmentation purposes. We observe that
some structures can be directly segmented from medical images by using methods
from low-level computer vision, e.g. skin surface is reproducibly segmented from
head MRI using a combination of tkresholding, connectivity, and morphological
operations. Other structures, such as the brain tissue in head MRI, do not have
as salient a combination of intensity and topology as the skin, and are harder
to segment using low-level methods. We propose a "coarse to fine" strategy in
feature (structure) space - a strategy in which the easily identifiable ("coarse")
structures are first segmented automatically and their geometry is then used to
bootstrap the segmentation of other ("fine") structures in the image. We present
an implementation of this strategy in the form of a relative geometric prior (prior
distribution on the geometry of "fine" structures, given the geometry of "coarse"
structures), and integrate it into the EM-Segmentation algorithm along with the
regularizing MRF prior summarized earlier.
Combining the two components, the contribution of this paper may be sum-
marized as the enhancement of the EM-Segmentation algorithm using two priors:
an MRF prior to encode piecewise-homogeneity of labels, and a spatial prior to
encode the relative geometry of structures.
Background
on EM Segmentation
Expectation-Maximization (EM) The EM algorithm is an iterative scheme
for estimating the parameters of a model that maximize the likelihood of the
observed signal. The key step in applying the EM algorithm is to identify a
set of hidden variables, such that it becomes possible to directly compute the
maximum-likelihood estimate of the model using the values of the observed vari-
ables and these hidden variables. Once the hidden variables are identified, and
the model parameters initialized, the EM algorithm alternates between estimat-
ing the hidden variables (as the expected values of the hidden variables using the
estimates of the model parameters; the E-step) and the model parameters (as
the maximum-likelihood estimates of the model given the observed and hidden
variables; the M-step). Each iteration improves the model estimate , and the
EM algorithm converges to a local minimum of the likelihood fimction.
EM-Segrnentation Segmentation of MRI images is a challenging problem
due to the presence of a non-linear gain field attributable to inhomogeneities
in the imaging equipment. The EM-Segmentation algorithm , approached the
segmentation of MRI images as a maximum likelihood estimation problem and
used the Expectation-Maximization algorithm to simultaneously estimate the
class label and gain at each voxel that maximize the likelihood of the observed
The observed MRI signal was modeled as a product of the true signal gen-
erated by the underlying anatomy, and the non-linear gain artifact. Using this
assumption, an iterative, supervised, Expectation-Maximization style segmenta-
tion algorithm was developed that treats the underlying label classes as hidden
variables and alternates between estimating those classes (E-step) and the max-
imally probable gain field (M-step).
In this algorithm, intensity data is log-transformed, thus converting the mul-
tiplicative gain field to an additive bias field. Observed log intensity, Yij, at each
pixel is modeled as a normal distribution, independent of all other pixels:
where N(x; #, (7) is the Gaussian distribution, with mean # and variance ~2; y~j is
the observed log intensity at pixel location (i, j); Fij is tissue class corresponding
to intensity Yij; #k, ak are the mean and standard deviation in intensity for tissue
class k; f~j is the bias field at pixe] location (i, j). The method used a spatially
stationary prior probability on the tissue ]abeks F:
Psto (r) = 1-[psto (r j)
where pstat (F~j) is the prior probability that a given voxel belongs to a particular
tissue class. This prior probability is constant through the iterations. The bias
field f~ is modeled as a multi-dimensional zero mean Ganssian random variable,
to characterize its spatial smoothness.
The E-step computes the posterior tissue class probabilities, W~jk (posterior
probability of pixel ij belonging to tissue class k), when the bias field is known:
p(Y/j[F/j = k;flij)pstat(Fij = k)
Em P (Yij IF~j = m; ~ij)P,tat (Fij = m)
The M-Step computes the value of the bias field f~ that maximizes the average
likelihood of observation, as fl = FR, where P~j = ~-~k w~j~,(ri~-,k) and F is
a linear operator that can be approximated by smoothing filters. This step is
equivalent to a MAP estimator of the bias field when the tissue probabilities W
are known. Detailed derivations of these steps can be found in .
In the next two sections, we preserve this EM framework for iterating between
tissue classification and bias field estimation, and present two different methods
for computing spatially varying priors on tissue class to enhance the spatially
stationary prior shown in Equation 2 and used in Equation 3 of the E-step.
Addition of Markov Prior
As noted, EM-Segmentation uses a spatially stationary prior on tissue class,
i.e. at each iteration, the prior probability that a voxel belongs to a particular
tissue class remains constant, and is independent of the labels of voxels in its
neighborhood. In this work, we incorporate a Maxkov prior on tissue class, un-
der which the prior probabilities at a voxel are influenced by the labels in its
immediate neighborhood. This prior model acts as a regulaxizer and biases the
solution towards piecewise-homogeneous labelings. Such a regularizing prior is
useful in segmenting scans corrupted by salt and pepper noise.
MRF priors have been used in computer vision to model smoothness as well
as different textures (e.g., ). Typical solvers for MRFs include Gibbs sampling
 , the Metropolis algorithm , Iterated Conditional Modes (ICM) , and
Mean-Field (MF) methods . ICM solvers have been used for the segmentation
of medical images .
MRF Formulation: We describe the reformulation of the prior distribution on
the tissue labels F (from Equation 2) as a Maxkov Random Field to represent
the piecewise homogeneity and the local compatibility of different tissues. The
parameters are obtained from manually labeled training data, and its Mean
Field solution is recovered using the EM framework of the previous section.
Some notation: S = {Sijll < i < m, 1 < j < n} is the lattice on which
the MRF is defined, and each site of this lattice - referred to as either Sij or
simply ij - corresponds to the pixel location (i,j) in the image. N = {Nijll <
i < m, 1 < j < n} defines the neighborhood system for the MRF, where Nij
refers to the four neighbors of pixel ij that share an edge with it, i.e. Nij =
{S~,~-l, S~,~+l, s~-l,j, S~+l,j }.
The tissue labels F = {F~jlS~ j 6 S} are modeled as an MRF with the
neighborhood system N on the lattice S. F 9 is a discrete-valued random-vector
drawn from the set {[100...0] , [010...0] ,... [000...1] }, and assigning the
value [0... 1... 0] T (with a 1 in the k th position) to F~j is equivalent to assigning
the k th tissue class to the pixel ij in the image. P satisfies the Maxkov condition,
given by: P(PijlS \ Sij) = P(PijlNij),Vij,
which means that the value of each
random variable Pij in the field depends only on its four neighbors.
The Hammersley-Clifford theorem established the Markov-Gibbs equivalence
and states that the probability of a particular configuration 3' of any MRF F
can be computed using the Gibbs probability of its clique potentials (a clique is
a subset of nodes of S that axe each others neighbors) over N:
p(r = -~) = le- ~o vo(~)
Here Vc is a clique potential which describes the prior probability of a particular
realization of the elements of the clique c.
The spatially stationary prior on the labeled image F, given by Equation 2,
may be interpreted as an MRF on the image lattice with zeroth order cliques, i.e.
there is no interaction between lattice sites. We impose local spatial coherence
on the labeling/~ by using first-order cliques. Clique potentials are computed
using an Ising-like model derived from training data, i.e., the prior probability of
tissue classes k and l occuring adjacent to each other is computed from manually
labeled images. Thus, the prior probability on the labeling, P,~rl(I1), is not
spatially stationary; it interacts with the labels in its neighborhood system.
Computing the field configuration with the maximum Gibbs probability is
computationally intractable, so we use a Mean Field approximation to the gen-
eral Markov model. We approximate the values of the field F at neighboring sites
by their statistical means, and rewrite P,~f(F), a Mean Field approximation to
Pmrf(F), as a product of single site probabilities Pml (F~j, Nij): 1
where the single site probability pmf(Fij,Ni,j) is written as a product of the
single-site prior p(Fij) and the probability of each clique involving pi•
p,~1(r~j,N~j) = 1
Ph- (T~,~-1). Ph+ (T~,j+I). Pv- (T~-I,~). P,+ (Fiq-l,j) (6)
where F~ 3. is a continuous MF approximation to Fij, - is component-wise vector
multiplication, and Z is a normalizing constant. Equations 5 and 6 describe a
general model for a discrete first-order pseudo-Ising MRF, using a particular
mean-field approximation. To apply this model we must choose specific repre-
sentations for p and each of the four neighborhood terms Pn-, Pn+, P~-, and
P~+. In addition we need to supply values for the mean field F in Equation 6.
Using MtLF Prior on Tissue Classes in EM Framework: We incorpo-
rate the model into the EM framework in the following way: For the single site
probability p we use the independent stationary prior, Pst~t, that was formerly
used in the work described in Section 2. For each ofPh-, Ph+, P.-, and P.+, we
use a model based on the empirical joint probability of neighboring pixels. For
F we use the estimates on per-pixel tissue probability produced by the previous
iteration of the EM segmentation algorithm as described in .
Since the basic EM segmentation algorithm is already computing such tissue
probabilities, the net effect is a simple modification to the E-step that relates
tissue co-occurrence statistics to the tissue probabilities that were computed on
neighboring pixels in the previous iteration.
Since F is a random variable drawn from unit vectors, we may write the
probability distribution modeled by Ph- as a linear form Pn- (g) ---- An-g, where
Ah- is a k x k matrix, where k is the number of tissue classes in the training
data, and its mn th element Ah-,m,~ gives the prior probability of tissue class ra
and n occuring as a horizontal pair in the image, with the left pixel in the pair
being tissue class n and the right one being m. The distributions Ph+, Pv-, and
1 A different tractable MRF model for brain segmentation, uzing an Iterated-
ConditionaJ-Modes solver has been explored in .
Pv+, and the corresponding A's are defined in a similar fashion. We use this
representation for the neighborhood probabilities in Equation 6 since it may be
directly evaluated on the more general vectors F.
of Relative
In this section we describe the second component of our work: a method that
leverages geometric relationships between structures for segmentation purposes.
The motivating observation is that while some structures are easily segmented
using low-level computer vision methods (primary structures), there are struc-
tares whose segmentation is facilitated by knowledge of their spatial layout (ge-
ometry) relative to other structures (secondary structures).
Summary of Method: In order to use the relative geometry information
for segmentation of a secondary structure in a given image, we first identify a set
of primitives in terms of which to define its local geometric relationship to one or
more primary structures. For example, the distance between points on the outside
surface of structure P and the closest points on the inside surface of structure
B is a primitive that describes local relative geometry of the two surfaces. Next,
we construct the relative geometric model from training (segmented) images. In
order to do this, a random variable is defined for each primitive, and segmented
images are used to construct an empirical joint probability distribution over
these random variables. This probability distribution serves as a mode] of the
relative geometric relationship between the primary and secondary structures in
question. For example, if one primitive is the distance between the outer surface
of P and the outer surface of S, and another is the distance between the inner
surface of P and the outer surface of S, then two random variables dl and d2 are
defined, one for each primitive relationship, and an empirical joint probability
distribution for dl and d2 is constructed from the segmented images. This joint
serves as the relative geometric model for structures P and S. Following the
construction of the model, we segment primary structures in the given image
using appropriate algorithms. Finally, we use the geometric model as a prior
on the spatial layout of the secondary structure, conditioned on the geometry of
the segmented primary structures and used the EM-Segmentation algorithm to
segment the secondary structure in question.
Note that this method is profitably used for the segmentation of a pair of
structures in which one is a primary structure and the geometric relationship
between the pair is informative (in an information theoretic sense). If either
constraint is violated (neither of the structures is primary, or the relationship is
uninformative), this method does not help the resulting segmentation.
Previous Work: A similar relative geometric prior was used in a traditional
Bayesian classifier to segment femoral cartilage from Knee MRI images . Also,
this work is similar in spirit to landmark based segmentation , and different
in its detection of a dense set of features as the landmarks.
Example Usage of Method to Segment Brain Tissue from MR[ Images
We observe that the skin surface and the ventricles are easily segmented in
head MRI images, and use those as primary structures for segmentation of brain
tissue (white matter and gray matter); the relationship between brain tissue and
these primary structures is well described using two primitives: ds, the distance
to the inside skin surface, and dr, the distance to the outside ventricle surface.
Next, we detail the algorithm for constructing the aforementioned empir-
ical geometric model, and its usage with the EM-Segmentation algorithm for
segmentation of white matter.
Empirical Joint Density Estimation: Example images in which the skin, the
ventricles, and white matter have been manually labeled by experts are used to
construct a non-parametric estimate for this joint density function. In particular,
chamfer distance transforms are computed for the inside skin surface and for
the outside ventricle surface. These chamfer maps are used to find ds~ and dvi,
the distance to skin and ventricle surfaces for all pixels i that are labeled white
matter, and the values are histogrammed jointly. The histogram is normalized to
obtain an empirical estimate of the joint density of ds and dv for white matter.
Note that instead of histogramming the values of the random variables, methods
such as Parzen Windowing could be used effectively for density estimation.
Usage with EM-Segmentation: The class conditional density is thus:
P(dsi, dvilxi e WM)
where xi are the spatial coordinates of the ith data pixel; WM is the set of all
pixels belonging to white matter; S is the set of all pixels belonging to the skin;
V is the set of all pixe]s belonging to the ventricles; dsi is short for dsi (S), which
is the distance from xi to the inside surface of the skin; dvi is short for dye(V),
which is the distance from xi to the outside surface of the ventricles.
Bayes rule allows us to express the posterior probability that a pixel should be
classified as white matter based on observations of its intensity and spatial rela-
tion to the skin and the ventricles (P(x~ C WMIds~(S ), dye(V), I~)) as a product
of the prior probability that a given pixel belongs to white matter (P(x~ e WM))
and the class conditional density P(ds~(S), dvi(Y),hlz~ E WM) as follows:
9 WMIds~, dvi, Ii) = P(dsl, dv~, I~lxl E WM)P(:c~
P(dsi, dye, I~)
where Ii is the intensity at xi, and the other terms are as in Equation 7. This
expression may be rewritten assuming independence between the intensity at a
pixel and its spatial relationship to skin and ventricles as:
P(xi e WMIds~,dv,,Ii) = P(ds~, dr, ix, E WM)P(h]xi
P(ds~, dvl, I~)
The first term in the numerator is the class conditional density for the model
parameters, and is estimated using the method described above. The second term
is a Ganssian intensity model for tissue class, obtained from samples of white
matter intensity. The third term is the prior probability that a pixel belongs to
white matter, computed as a ratio of white matter volume to total head volume
in a segmented scan. The denominator is a normalization factor.
This spatial probability distribution (Equation 9) can be used either in con-
junction with the Mean-Field prior of Section 3, or by itself, instead of the
spatially stationary prior in the E-step of the EM-Segmentation algorithm.
The above method is repeated to obtain a segmentation of gray matter.
We have used the work presented in this paper to classify several images from
different Gradient Echo brain MRI scans. Two examples are described here.
Gradient Echo Brain MRI with MF: Figure 1 shows the restflts of EM
Segmentation using a Mean-Field prior on a sagittal slice of a Gradient Echo
brain MRI. In the left column of the figure, the top image is the gray scale slice
with additive white noise. The second image, provided as a baseline, is its classi-
fication (gray - gray matter, white - white matter, black - air/csf, red - skin/fat)
that was obtained using a standard MAP classifier. The third image in the first
column is the classification obtained using EM Segmentation with a spatially
stationary prior, and the fourth image is the classification obtained using EM
Segmentation with a Mean Field prior. Notice that the segmentation that uses
the Mean-Field prior is much less fragmented compared to the segmentation
that uses only the spatially stationary prior. Since each of these segmentations
is obtained by thresholding the respective weights (Wijk from Equation 3) asso-
ciated with each tissue class, the middle and the right column of the figure show
the weights for each tissue class (gray matter, white matter, csf/air, skin/fat)
when the spatially stationary prior and Mean-Field prior are used, respectively.
Again, the point to note is the lack of fragmentation when the MF prior is used.
Gradient Echo Brain MRI with MF and Conditional-Spatial Priors:
Figure 2 shows the results of EM Segmentation using a Spatial-Conditional prior
in conjunction with a Mean-Field prior on a coronal slice of a Gradient Echo
brain MRI. In the left column of the figure, the top image is the grayscale
slice. The second image, provided as a baseline, is its classification (gray - gray
matter, white - white matter, black - air/csf, red - skin/fat) that was obtained
using a standard MAP classifier. The third image in the first column is the
classification obtained using EM Segmentation with a spatially stationary prior,
and the fourth image is the classification obtained using EM Segmentation with
Spatial-Conditional and Mean Field priors. Notice that the segmentation that
uses the relative spatial priors is much less fragmented, and shows improved
distinction between skin and brain tissue, as well as in the segmentation of
white matter in the brain stem, compared to the segmentation that uses only the
spatially stationary prior. Since each segmentation is obtained by thresholding
the respective weights (Wijk from Equation 3) associated with each tissue class,
the middle and the right column of the figure show the weights for each tissue
class (gray matter, white matter, csf/air, skin/fat) when the spatially stationary
prior and Mean-Field prior are used, respectively. Again, the point to note is
the lack of fragmentation due to the MF prior, and the improved distinction
between brain tissue and skin as well as improved segmentation of white matter.
Discussion
Tradeoff between Prior and Observation: A characteristic of Bayesian
methods is the delicate balance that needs to be maintained between the in-
fluence of the prior term and fidelity to the observed data. If the degree of faith
in the prior term is high (i.e. it models the underlying phenomenon accurately)
and the observation noisy, then conflicts between the prior and the observations
are resolved in favor of the prior. In contrast, ]f there is negligible noise in the
observations, then the prior can be discarded altogether, giving rise to a prior-
less or maximum-likelihood solution. Unfortunately, it is often the case that the
prior term is somewhat accurate, and the data is somewhat noisy i.e. it is not
as clear how the two terms should be traded off in Bayes rule. The art of main-
taining this balance is colloquially referred to as "tweaking the Bayesian fudge
factor" and is arguably crucial to the success of the resulting algorithm.
Empirically speaking, in our case, the relative importance of the regularizing
(Markov) prior is inversely proportional to the signal to noise ratio (SNR) in
the MRI scan. Since SNR in MR scans is directly proportionally to imaging
parameters such as the strength of the ambient magnetic field, we weigh the
prior by these parameters. For example, a scan acquired with a 0.5 Tesla magnet
is segmented using a higher weight on the MRF prior, as compared with a scan
acquired using a 1.5Tesla magnet.
How best to characterize the weighing scheme for the geometric prior is less
obvious. It would not be unreasonable, however, to measure the variation of the
geometric prior model across individuais and assign a relative importance that
is inversely proportional to that measure of variance. As a side-effect of this pro-
cess, the variance in the relative geometric model could be used to characterize
which structures this method is best suited for, and analyze its failure modes.
Unless better schemes become apparent, this is the approach we plan to take for
characterizing the importance of the geometric prior in classification.
Moving onto 3D: Since the images we are dealing with are inherently 3D
volumes, the natural next step is to extend the reported priors by a dimension.
While the 3D extension of the regularizing prior is simple to conceptualize and
implement, the extension of the geometric prior to 3D will require a convention
for normalizing images from different subjects, so that the prior usefully encodes
information across a population. The Tailarach coordinate system is a popular
normalization method and a possible choice for us.