Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , pages 443–450,
Denver, Colorado, June 4-5, 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics
SemEval-2015 Task 9: CLIPEval Implicit Polarity of Events
Irene Russo
ILC-CNR “A. Zampolli”
Via G. Moruzzi, 1
56124 Pisa
 
Tommaso Caselli
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam
 
Carlo Strapparava
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Via Sommarive, 18
38123 Povo (TN)
 
Sentiment analysis tends to focus on the polarity of words, combining their values to detect which portion of a text is opinionated.
CLIPEval wants to promote a more holistic
approach, looking at psychological researches
that frame the connotations of words as the
emotional values activated by them. The implicit polarity of events is just one aspect of
connotative meaning and we address it with a
task that is based on a dataset of sentences annotated as instantiations of pleasant and unpleasant events previously collected in psychological research as the ones on which human judgments converge.
Introduction
Current research in sentiment analysis (SA, henceforth) is mostly focused on lexical resources
that store polarity values.
For bag-of-words approaches the polarity of a text depends on the presence/absence of a set of lexical items. This methodology is successful to detect opinions about entities
(such as reviews) but it shows mixed results when
complex opinions about events - involving perspectives and points of view - are expressed.
In terms of parts of speech involved, SA approaches tend to focus on lexical items that explicitly convey opinions - mainly adjectives, adverbs
and several nouns - leaving verbs on the foreground.
Improvements have been proposed by taking into account syntax and by investigating the connotative polarity of words .
One of the
key aspects of sentiment analysis, which has been
only marginally tackled so far, is the identiﬁcation
of implicit polarity. By implicit polarity we refer
to the recognition of subjective textual units where
no polarity markers are present but still people are
able to state whether the text portion under analysis expresses a positive or negative sentiment. Recently, methodologies trying to address this aspect
have been developed, incorporating ideas from linguistic and psychological studies on the subjective
aspects of linguistic expressions.
Aiming at promoting a more holistic approach
to sentiment analysis, combining the detection of
implicit polarity with the expression of opinions
on events, we propose CLIPEval, a task based on
a dataset of events annotated as instantiations of
pleasant and unpleasant events (PE/UPEs henceforth) previously collected in psychological research
as the ones that correlate with mood (both good
and bad feelings) .
Measuring Emotional Connotations:
Psychological Studies
For a long time research in psychology has been
interested in a subjective cultural and/or emotional
coloration in addition to the explicit or denotative
meaning of any speciﬁc word or phrase. Starting
with the work of Charles E. Osgood, who in the 50s
developed a technique for measuring the connotative
meaning of concepts and analyzed human attitudes
 , psychologists have experi-
mented with emotional values activated by words,
often through the evaluation of their pleasantness.
Osgood and his colleagues proposed a factor analysis based on semantic differential scales measuring three basic attitudes that people display crossculturally: evaluation (along the scale of adjectives
“good-bad”), potency (along “strong-weak”) and activity (“active-passive”).
This line of research continued with studies evaluating Osgood’s ﬁndings with different population
and the pleasantness of words became also a dimension to correlate with other dimensions reported in
semantic norms studies, such as familiarity and imagery.
We know today that pleasantness is a semantic factor inﬂuencing short and long term memory ; similarly, showed that STM for certain unpleasant emotional words (i.e., taboo words) was
better than that for neutral words. Emotional words
are better recalled because they are related to longterm representations of autobiographical and selfreference units . Other factors have
a role: depressed subjects, for example, recalled
more unpleasant words than pleasant words.
Osgood’s studies were revised for the production
of the Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW)
 , a set of normative emotional
ratings for 1034 words in American English. This
set of verbal materials have been rated in terms of
pleasure, arousal, and dominance in order to create
a standard for use in studies of emotion and attention
(the same three basic dimensions used by Osgood).
Affective valence (or pleasure, ranging from pleasant to unpleasant) and arousal (ranging from calm to
excited) were the two primary dimensions. A third,
less strongly-related dimension, was called “dominance” or “control”.
Connotative meaning emerges as a complex and
stratiﬁed concept and only psychological studies can
guide in this maze, especially when they are supported by signiﬁcant experimental outputs such as
list of words evaluated by human subjects.
All these studies are relevant for NLP because
connotative meanings of words can help to reﬁne automatic sentiment analysis on social media, where
shared contents are often just short reports on pleasant or unpleasant events and activities. For example,
 report that connotation lexicon
guarantees better performance than other sentiment
analysis lexicons that do not encode connotations on
Twitter data.
That said, when psychological experiments ask
for judgments about single words they oversimplify:
we experience the meanings of single words as arising from compositionality, in expressions and sentences.
Even neutral words in speciﬁc contexts
can acquire a polarity as effect of semantic prosody
 .
When subjects are asked for the pleasantness of
an event they need to evaluate not just single words
but complete sentences; for this reason developed two psychometric instruments, the
Pleasant Events Schedule and the Unpleasant Events
Schedule, by sampling events that were reported to
be source of pleasure or distress by highly diverse
samples of people that rated the frequency of event’s
occurrence during past month plus a complete mood
CLIPEval Annotation
The CLIPEval exercise provides the NLP community with a newly developed dataset grounded
on psychological studies about the pleasantness of
Dedicated annotation speciﬁcations and
guidelines for the release of the dataset have been
developed.
The starting point for the development of the annotation guidelines was the PE/UPEs lists, the set
of 640 pleasant and unpleasant events (320 pleasant events and 320 unpleasant events, respectively)
collected by and
 . The dataset
could not be used as it is since it is a list of generic
sentences describing either states or actions which
are labeled as pleasant or unpleasant events. To clarify this, we report two examples extracted from the
original dataset. Example 1.) is a pleasant event
while example 2.) is an an unpleasant event. The
numbers in brackets at the beginning of the sentence
refer to the PE/UPEs number in the original dataset.
1.) (9) Planning trips or vacations.
2.) (10) Getting separated or divorced from my
Furthermore, a closer examination of PE/UPEs
has shown that ambiguity occurs, with the same
events considered both as a pleasant and an unpleasant one (e.g. Being alone), since this is plausible
from a psychological point of view. To overcome
these issues and to make the task relevant for sentences from news articles, we have applied the following strategies:
• all ambiguous PE/UPEs have been removed
from the original dataset;
• PE/UPEs have been grouped into classes
whose labels describe and aggregate different
PE/UPEs, referring often to a more general
event class with respect to the one the single
instance of a PE/UPE event describes.
choice has been necessary because the event
instances in the original psychological dataset
are conceptually similar but using the original
descriptions would result either in too generic
cases (e.g. Being with children) or too simple
(e.g. Washing my hair).
The grouping of PE/UPEs in classes has been
conducted in two phases by two annotators. In the
ﬁrst phase, both annotators have worked independently: for each PE/UPE the annotators had to decide which of them could be clustered in a more
generic class and which were to be excluded, either
because it describes a too speciﬁc (or a too generic)
event or because it explicitly express the pleasanteness of the event (e.g. (25) Driving skillfully). As
a measure of agreement for this task, we preferred
not to use kappa score, because it’s not a standard
classiﬁcation task, but we computed the percentage
of agreement. The ﬁrst evaluation shown a relatively
low agreement, only 59.06% of the 640 events were
considered as belonging to a cluster. An analysis on
the cases of disagreement has highlighted some inconsistencies. Thus, a second clusterization task has
been performed by asking to the same annotators to
go over the same data following new additional rules
that were developed during the analysis. The evaluation of this second phase shown a clear improvement
with a percentage agreement of 68.25%. As a result
of these annotation phases, we had a set of clusters
that the annotators were allowed to discuss, ﬁnding
a joint solution in cases of disagreements and identifying the best labels for the PE/UPEs clusters. The
ﬁnal output of these two phases resulted in 8 classes
of PE/UPEs (see Table 1 column “Event Class”). It
is important to point out that most of these classes
contain PE/UPEs both from the 320 pleasant events
and the 320 unpleasant events and as a consequence
the polarities of their occurrences in the training data
are mixed(see Table 1).
Due to the novelty of the
task, we could not re-use available datasets for SA.
For this reason, the second step concerns the identiﬁcation and manual annotation of real sentences from
the Annotated English Gigaword corpus , an automatically-generated syntactic
and discourse structure annotated version of the English Gigaword corpus Fifth Edition, which contains
a large English corpus of newspaper articles (four
billion words ca.). To facilitate the sentence extraction phase, we manually identiﬁed the verbal and the
nominal keywords from the event mentions composing the classes. We used WN30 and the Oxford Dictionary to extract all verb and noun synonyms of the
PE/UPEs in each class. We then queried the Gigaword corpus with this extended set of keywords to
extract sentences which contain self-reported events
by means of following patterns:
• “I|we + [verbal keyword]”
• “I|we + [nominal keyword]”
[verbal keyword]
[nominal keyword]”.
The sentences thus extracted were manually ﬁltered and annotated with respect to the 8 classes and
to their polarity. The annotation has been conducted
at sentence level. To provide homogeneous data and
annotations, the following guidelines have been developed for the assignment of the class label:
• the class label and the polarity value must be
assigned on the basis of the event that correspond syntactically to the main verb in the sentence;
• in case of coordinated main clauses, only the
ﬁrst main clause is taken into account to assign
the class label and the polarity value;
Table 1: CLIPEval corpus: Training data.
Event Class
Tot. Instances
(FEAR OF) PHYSICAL PAIN
ATTENDING EVENT
COMMUNICATION ISSUE
GOING TO PLACES
LEGAL ISSUE
MONEY ISSUE
OUTDOOR ACTIVITY
PERSONAL CARE
Table 2: CLIPEval corpus: Test data.
Event Class
Tot. Instances
(FEAR OF) PHYSICAL PAIN
ATTENDING EVENT
COMMUNICATION ISSUE
GOING TO PLACES
LEGAL ISSUE
MONEY ISSUE
OUTDOOR ACTIVITY
PERSONAL CARE
• subordinated clauses are not annotated with
class labels and polarity values.
Although all event mentions in the selected clusters have either a positive (pleasant events) or negative (unpleasant events) polarity that could be reversed by negation, during the annotation phase a
third value, namely neutral, has been introduced to
cope with those sentences containing self-reporting
events whose occurrence is uncertain
We are referring here to the notion of event factuality , i.e.
the degrees of certainty (e.g. possible, probable, certain)
associated to an event description along the category of epistemic modality. In the annotation we
focused on the syntactic information between target events instances and factuality markers, such as
modal auxiliaries and negation cues (including adverbs, adjectives, prepositions, pronouns and determiners). Events which are in the scope of factuality
markers signaling uncertainty or improbability have
been marked as neutral.
CLIPEval Tasks
The CLIPEval evaluation exercise is composed of
two tasks described as follows:
• Task A: identiﬁcation of the polarity value associated to the event instance. Participants are
required to associate each sentence with a polarity value (POSITIVE, NEGATIVE or NEU-
• Task B: identiﬁcation of the event mentions with respect to one of the 8 event
class labels plus identiﬁcation of the polarity value.
The class labels used are:
ATTENDING EVENT,
COMMUNICA-
TION ISSUE,
GOING TO PLACES;
LEGAL ISSUE,
MONEY ISSUE,
DOOR ACTIVITIES,
PERSONAL CARE,
(FEAR OF) PHYSICAL PAIN. As in Task A
the polarity values are (POSITIVE, NEGA-
TIVE or NEUTRAL).
Dataset Description
The CLIPEval evaluation exercise is based on the
CLIPEval dataset, which consists of two parts: a
training set and a test set. The ﬁnal size of the dataset
is 1,651 sentences, divided in 1,280 sentences for the
training and 371 for the test. Each event class in the
training data contains 160 sentences.
Each class in the training set is available in a separate ﬁle composed of four tab separated ﬁelds: a
sentence id, the sentence extracted from the Gigaword corpus, the polarity value and the class label.
Each ﬁle is named with the class label. Some exam-
ples of the training data are provided in the examples
below (examples from 3.) to 5.)):
3.) 8 I had just gone to a concert with my parents and I identiﬁed with the conductor a lot
Dudamel said in Spanish during a recent interview in Caracas.
POSITIVE ATTEND-
4.) 14 “It’s too cold and I can’t ride my
DOOR ACTIVITY
5.) 4 “I could take the boys to the sports museum’
says James. NEUTRAL GOING TO PLACES
The test data has been provided in a single ﬁle
with only two ﬁelds: the sentence id and the sentence extracted from the Gigaword corpus:
6.) 12 After having given a friend a lift home I was
stopped by police.
7.) 23 And then we went to a library.
Table 1 and Table 2 report the ﬁgures for polarity
values per class in the training and in the test set, respectively.
The division of the training data for the three polarity values is not balanced due to the event mentions composing the clusters. Only three clusters,
namely GOING TO PLACES, PERSONAL CARE
and ATTENDING EVENT, present a relatively balanced distribution for the polarity values.
lack of balance reﬂects real language data:
prevalence of positive or negative values is due to
the classes which may have more PEs or UPEs
(e.g. OUTDOOR ACTIVITY and COMMUNICA-
TION ISSUE, respectively).
Including more sentences which reverse the polarity of the PEs or UPEs
to balance the occurrences per polarity value would
mean to force the data from real language toward an
artiﬁcial equilibrium.
Evaluation
Since both Task A and Task B of CLIPEval are essentially classiﬁcation tasks (classiﬁcation of the polarity value for Task A and classiﬁcation of the event
instance and the polarity value for Task B), we have
used Precision, Recall and F1-measure to evaluate
the system results against the test set. Furthermore,
since this is a multi-classiﬁcation task (3 possible
values for Task A and 24 possible values for Task
B), we have computed micro average Precision, Recall and F1-measure per class. This latter measure
has been used for the ﬁnal ranking of the systems.
We have adopted standard deﬁnitions for these measures, namely:
• Precision: the number of correctly classiﬁed
positive examples, tpi per class Ci, divided by
number of examples labeled by the system as
positive (tpi plus false positive fpi):
• Recall: the number of correctly classiﬁed positive examples tpi per class Ci divided by the
number of positive examples in the data (tpi
plus false negatives fni) :
• F-measure: the mean of Precision and Recall
calculated as follows: (β2+1)PrecisionRecall
β2Precision+Recall
To better evaluate systems’ performances, we
have developed three baselines, one per Task A and
two per Task B. In particular:
• Task A baseline has been obtained by assigning to each sentence in the test set the most frequent polarity value on the basis of the data in
the training set. This resulted in marking all
371 sentences in the test set with NEGATIVE
• Task B baseline 1 has been obtained in two
steps: ﬁrst, for each class in the training data
we have selected the most frequent nouns and
verbs lemmas. This has provided us with a list
of keywords representing each class. We have
then compared each sentence in the test set with
each group of keywords and assigned as correct the class which scored the higher number
of matches. In case of a draw, a random class
between the classes with the highest scores is
assigned. If no match is found, a random class
is assigned. As for the polarity, we have used
the absolute most frequent polarity values, like
in task A (i.e. all test set entries have been assigned to NEGATIVE value).
• Task B baseline 2 has been obtained following the approach in Task B baseline 1 for the
class assignment and we have assigned the
most frequent polarity value per class according to training data (e.g. for items classiﬁed as
ATTENDING EVENTS the assigned polarity
value is POSITIVE).
Participant Systems
Overall 26 different teams registered for the task,
only two submitted the output of their system for
a total of 3 runs: SHELLFBK (Fondazione Bruno
Kessler) and SIGMA2320 (Peking Univeristy).
Only SHELLFBK submitted results for both tasks.
Furthermore, we can provide a short description just
for SHELLFBK since the SIGMA2320 team has
not submitted a system description paper.
SHELLFBK system implements a supervised
approach based on information retrieval techniques
for representing polarized information.
the training phase, each sentence is analyzed by
applying the parser contained in the Stanford NLP
From the results of the parsing activity,
both the list of the dependency relations and the
parsed trees are used for populating an inverted
index data structure containing the relationships
between each relation extracted from the sentences
and the corresponding information about its polarization. The result of the training phase is a set of
three indexes containing, respectively, the positive,
negative, and neutral information analyzed in the
training set. When the polarity of a new sentence
has to be computed, the new sentence is given as
input to the Stanford NLP Library by obtaining
the list of its dependency relations, as well as,
the corresponding parsed tree.
Such information
are built together for composing a query that is
afterwards performed on the indexes built during
the training phase. For each of the built indexes, a
retrieval score value is retrieved by the system and,
based on this, the polarity of the new sentence is
Evaluation Results
We report in Table 3 the results of both systems for
Task A and the Task A baseline. In Table 4 we report
the results for Task B and both baseline for Task B
(baseline 1 and baseline 2, respectively).
Table 3: Evaluation for Task A : polarity identiﬁcation.
F1-measure
Table 4: Evaluation for Task B : event instance and polarity identiﬁcation.
F1-measure
baseline 1
baseline 2
SHELLFBK outperforms SIGMA2320 for the
Task A; both systems improve the baseline.
results are not as good as in classiﬁcation tasks
concerning the polarities of tweets or reviews but since this
is a novel task about implicit polarity we think they
are promising.
For task B SHELLFBK has a better performance
both in terms of precision and recall if compared
with the two baselines. At the moment we do not
know if the results are due to SHELLFBK methodology or if data sparseness in the classes has an inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation task: maybe classes more
cohesive from conceptual and lexical point of view
could be easier to detect.
Conclusions and Future Work
The implicit polarity of words concerns the arising of occasional polarized meanings in speciﬁc expressions/linguistic contexts. Labeled as semantic
prosody in corpus studies and part of what psychologists call connotative meanings, the implicit polarity
is a quite marginal concept in sentiment analysis. It
requires a dynamic representation for the polarity of
words (i.e. a verb can be neutral in the vast majority
of case but can be clearly positive in some contexts)
and a compositional approach to sentiment values
that goes beyond the oversimplifying assumptions of
bag-of-words approaches.
With the CLIPEval task we asked the NLP community to look at these complexities, considering
the detection of a set of events as relevant for SA
analyses because they have been judged as pleasant or unpleasant by subjects in psychological experiments conducted by . As future work we plan to extend the dataset, including
new classes of events and annotating instances from
blogs and tweets. Also, we want to integrate the detection of polarized events with the work on stance
and perspectives in news, going toward a theoretical
model for SA that takes into account the interplay of
linguistic means used by humans to express opinions
and feelings.
Acknowledgments
One of the author wants to thanks the NWO Spinoza
Prize project Understanding Language by Machines
(sub-track 3) for partially supporting this work.