Machine Learning, 39, 135–168, 2000.
c⃝2000 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in The Netherlands.
BoosTexter: A Boosting-based System
for Text Categorization
ROBERT E. SCHAPIRE
 
AT&T Labs, Shannon Laboratory, 180 Park Avenue, Room A279, Florham Park, NJ 07932-0971, USA
YORAM SINGER
 
School of Computer Science & Engineering, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
Editors: Jaime Carbonell and Yiming Yang
This work focuses on algorithms which learn from examples to perform multiclass text and speech
categorization tasks. Our approach is based on a new and improved family of boosting algorithms. We describe
in detail an implementation, called BoosTexter, of the new boosting algorithms for text categorization tasks. We
present results comparing the performance of BoosTexter and a number of other text-categorization algorithms on
a variety of tasks. We conclude by describing the application of our system to automatic call-type identiﬁcation
from unconstrained spoken customer responses.
text and speech categorization, multiclass classiﬁcation problems, boosting algorithms
Introduction
Text categorization is the problem of classifying text documents into categories or classes.
For instance, a typical problem is that of classifying news articles by topic based on their
textual content. Another problem is to automatically identify the type of call requested by
a customer; for instance, if the customer says, “Yes, I would like to charge this call to
my Visa,” we want the system to recognize that this is a calling-card call and to process
the call accordingly. (Although this is actually a speech-categorization problem, we can
nevertheless apply a text-based system by passing the spoken responses through a speech
recognizer.)
In this paper, we introduce the use of a machine-learning technique called boosting to
the problem of text categorization. The main idea of boosting is to combine many simple
and moderately inaccurate categorization rules into a single, highly accurate categorization
rule. The simple rules are trained sequentially; conceptually, each rule is trained on the
examples which were most difﬁcult to classify by the preceding rules.
Our approach is based on a new and improved family of boosting algorithms which we
have described and analyzed in detail in a companion paper . This
new family extends and generalizes Freund and Schapire’s AdaBoost algorithm , which has been studied extensively and which has been shown to perform
well on standard machine-learning tasks . The purpose of the current work is to describe
some ways in which boosting can be applied to the problem of text categorization, and to
test its performance relative to a number of other text-categorization algorithms.
Text-categorization problems are usually multiclass in the sense that there are usually
more than two possible categories. Although in some applications there may be a very large
number of categories, in this work, we focus on the case in which there are a small to
moderate number of categories. It is also common for text-categorization tasks to be multilabel, meaning that the categories are not mutually exclusive so that the same document
may be relevant to more than one category. For instance, bibliographic medical articles are
routinely given multiple Medical Subject Index (MeSH) categories when entered into Medline, the national bibliographic searchable archive which contains more than twenty million
documents. While most machine-learning systems are designed to handle multiclass data,
much less common are systems that can handle multi-label data. While numerous categorization algorithms, such as k-nearest neighbor, can be adapted to multi-label categorization
problems, when machine-learning and other approaches are applied to text-categorization
problems, a common technique has been to decompose the multi-class, multi-label problem
into multiple, independent binary classiﬁcation problems (one per category).
In this paper, we adopt a different approach in which we use two extensions of AdaBoost
that were speciﬁcally intended for multiclass, multi-label data. In the ﬁrst extension, the
goal of the learning algorithm is to predict all and only all of the correct labels. Thus, the
learned classiﬁer is evaluated in terms of its ability to predict a good approximation of
the set of labels associated with a given document. In the second extension, the goal is to
design a classiﬁer that ranks the labels so that the correct labels will receive the highest
ranks. We next describe BoosTexter, a system which embodies four versions of boosting
based on these extensions, and we discuss the implementation issues that arise in multi-label
text categorization.
There has been voluminous work done on text categorization, including techniques based
on decision trees, neural networks, nearest neighbor methods, Rocchio’s method, supportvector machines, linear least squares, naive Bayes, rule-based methods and more. , Biebricher et al. , Cohen & Singer
 , Field , Fuhr & Pfeifer , Koller & Sahami , Lewis & Ringuette
 , Moulinier, Raˇskinis, & Ganascia , Ng, Goh, & Low and Yang ).
It would be impossible for us to compare our algorithms to all of the previous methods.
Instead, we compare to four very different methods which we believe are representative
of some of the most effective techniques available, and report results on several different
tasks. Our experiments show that, using a number of evaluation measures, our system’s
performance is generally better than the other algorithms, sometimes by a wide margin.
To further compare our algorithm to other methods, we tested the performance of
BoosTexter on a standard benchmark problem so that performance could be compared
directly with a large body of results reported in the literature. We speciﬁcally focus on a
recent study by Yang (to appear) who conducted several experiments on this benchmark
and who also surveyed many results reported by other authors. BoosTexter’s performance
places it at the very top of all the methods included in Yang’s study.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Finally, we discuss the application of BoosTexter to an automatic speech-categorization
task and compare the performance of our system to a previous algorithm which was specifically designed for this task.
Preliminaries
In this section, we describe the formal setting we use to study multi-label text categorization.
Let X denote the domain of possible text documents and let Y be a ﬁnite set of labels or
classes. We denote the size of Y by k = |Y|.
In the traditional machine-learning setting, each document x ∈X is assigned a single
class y ∈Y. The goal then, typically, is to ﬁnd a classiﬁer H : X →Y which minimizes
the probability that y ̸= H(x) on a newly observed example (x, y). In the multi-label case,
each document x ∈X may be assigned multiple labels in Y. For example, in a multiclass
news-ﬁltering problem in which the possible classes are News, Finance and Sports, a
document may belong to both News and Finance. Thus, a labeled example is a pair (x, Y)
where Y ⊆Y is the set of labels assigned to x. The single-label case is a special case in
which |Y| = 1 for all observations.
For Y ⊆Y, let us deﬁne Y[ℓ] for ℓ∈Y to be
In this paper, we will be primarily interested in classiﬁers which produce a ranking of the
possible labels for a given document with the hope that the appropriate labels will appear
at the top of the ranking. To be more formal, the goal of learning is to produce a function
of the form f : X × Y →R with the interpretation that, for a given instance x, the labels
in Y should be ordered according to f (x, ·). That is, a label ℓ1 is considered to be ranked
higher than ℓ2 if f (x, ℓ1) > f (x, ℓ2). If Y is the associated label set for x, then a successful
learning algorithm will tend to rank labels in Y higher than those not in Y. Precise evaluation
measures are discussed in Section 5.
Finally, to simplify the notation, for any predicate π, let [[π]] be 1 if π holds and 0
otherwise.
Boosting algorithms for multi-label multiclass problems
In a companion paper , we introduced and analyzed two new
boosting algorithms for multiclass, multi-label classiﬁcation problems. Here, we review
the two algorithms, discuss four versions of these algorithms, and describe an efﬁcient
implementation of the algorithms for the problem of text categorization.
The purpose of boosting is to ﬁnd a highly accurate classiﬁcation rule by combining many
weak or base hypotheses, each of which may be only moderately accurate. We assume access
to a separate procedure called the weak learner or weak learning algorithm for computing
the weak hypotheses. The boosting algorithm ﬁnds a set of weak hypotheses by calling the
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
weak learner repeatedly in a series of rounds. These weak hypotheses are then combined
into a single rule called the ﬁnal or combined hypothesis.
In the simplest version of AdaBoost for single-label classiﬁcation, the boosting algorithm
maintains a set of importance weights over training examples. These weights are used by
the weak learning algorithm whose goal is to ﬁnd a weak hypothesis with moderately low
error with respect to these weights. Thus, the boosting algorithm can use these weights to
force the weak learner to concentrate on the examples which are hardest to classify.
As we will see, for multiclass, multi-label problems, it is appropriate to maintain instead a
set of weights over training examples and labels. As boosting progresses, training examples
and their corresponding labels that are hard to predict correctly get incrementally higher
weights while examples and labels that are easy to classify get lower weights. For instance,
for the news classiﬁcation problem, it might be easy to classify a document as a news item
but hard to determine whether or not it belongs to the ﬁnance section. Then, as boosting
progresses the weight of the label News for that document decreases while the weight
of Finance increases. The intended effect is to force the weak learning algorithm to
concentrate on examples and labels that will be most beneﬁcial to the overall goal of
ﬁnding a highly accurate classiﬁcation rule.
AdaBoost.MH
Our ﬁrst boosting algorithm for multiclass multi-label classiﬁcation problems, called
AdaBoost.MH, is shown in ﬁgure 1. Let S be a sequence of training examples
⟨(x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym)⟩where each instance xi ∈X and each Yi ⊆Y. As described above,
Given: (x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym) where xi ∈X, Yi ⊆Y
Initialize D1(i, ℓ) = 1/(mk).
For t = 1, . . . , T :
• Pass distribution Dt to weak learner.
• Get weak hypothesis ht : X × Y →R.
• Choose αt ∈R.
Dt+1(i, ℓ) = Dt(i, ℓ) exp(−αt Yi[ℓ] ht(xi, ℓ))
where Zt is a normalization factor (chosen so that Dt+1 will be a distribution).
Output the ﬁnal hypothesis:
f (x, ℓ) =
αtht(x, ℓ).
The algorithm AdaBoost.MH.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
AdaBoost.MH maintains a set of weights as a distribution Dt over examples and labels.
Initially, this distribution is uniform. On each round t, the distribution Dt (together with
the training sequence S) is passed to the weak learner who computes a weak hypothesis ht.
The output of the weak learner is a hypothesis h : X × Y →R. We interpret the sign of
h(x, ℓ) as a prediction as to whether the label ℓis or is not assigned to x (i.e., a prediction
of the value of Y[ℓ]). The magnitude of the prediction |h(x, ℓ)| is interpreted as a measure
of “conﬁdence” in the prediction. The precise goal of the weak learner is described below,
as are the weak learners used in our experiments.
A parameter αt is then chosen and the distribution Dt is updated. We discuss the choice
of αt below. In the typical case that αt is positive, the distribution Dt is updated in a manner
that increases the weight of example-label pairs which are misclassiﬁed by ht (i.e., for which
Yi[ℓ] and ht(xi, ℓ) differ in sign). The ﬁnal hypothesis ranks documents using a weighted
vote of the weak hypotheses.
This algorithm is derived using a natural reduction of the multiclass, multi-label data
to binary data. Under this reduction, each example (x, Y) is mapped to k binary-labeled
examples of the form ((x, ℓ), Y[ℓ]) for all ℓ∈Y; that is, the instance or “document” part
of each derived example is formally a pair (x, ℓ), and the binary label associated with this
instance is Y[ℓ]. In other words, we can think of each observed label set Y as specifying k
binary labels (depending on whether a label ℓis or is not included in Y), and we can then
apply binary AdaBoost to the derived binary data. The algorithm that results from such a
reduction is equivalent to AdaBoost.MH.
This view of AdaBoost.MH also leads to a simple analysis. Speciﬁcally, we have proved
 a bound on the empirical Hamming loss of this algorithm, i.e.,
the fraction of examples i and labels ℓfor which the sign of f (xi, ℓ) differs from Yi[ℓ].
We showed that the Hamming loss of this algorithm is at most QT
t=1 Zt, where Zt is the
normalization factor computed on round t. This upper bound can be used in guiding both
our choice of αt and the design of our weak learning algorithm. Together, these choices
should be geared on each round t toward the minimization of
Dt(i, ℓ) exp(−αt Yi[ℓ] ht(xi, ℓ)).
In Section 4, we describe the methods used for choosing αt and the implementation of the
weak learning algorithm for text categorization.
Note that the space and time-per-round requirements of AdaBoost.MH are O(mk), not
including the call to the weak learner.
AdaBoost.MR
We next describe our second boosting algorithm called AdaBoost.MR. Whereas Ada-
Boost.MH is designed to minimize Hamming loss, AdaBoost.MR is designed speciﬁcally
to ﬁnd a hypothesis which ranks the labels in a manner that hopefully places the correct
labels at the top of the ranking.
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Given: (x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym) where xi ∈X, Yi ⊆Y
Initialize D1(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) =
½1/(m · |Yi| · |Y −Yi|)
if ℓ0 ̸∈Yi and ℓ1 ∈Yi
For t = 1, . . . , T :
• Train weak learner using distribution Dt.
• Get weak hypothesis ht : X × Y →R.
• Choose αt ∈R.
Dt+1(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) = Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) exp
2αt(ht(xi, ℓ0) −ht(xi, ℓ1))
where Zt is a normalization factor (chosen so that Dt+1 will be a distribution).
Output the ﬁnal hypothesis:
f (x, ℓ) =
αtht(x, ℓ).
The algorithm AdaBoost.MR.
With respect to a labeled observation (x, Y), we focus now only on the relative ordering
of the crucial pairs ℓ0, ℓ1 for which ℓ0 ̸∈Y and ℓ1 ∈Y. A classiﬁcation rule f misorders
a crucial pair ℓ0, ℓ1 if f (x, ℓ1) ≤f (x, ℓ0) so that f fails to rank ℓ1 above ℓ0. Our goal
now is to ﬁnd a function f with a small number of misorderings so that the labels in Y
are ranked above the labels not in Y. Put another way, our goal is to minimize the average
fraction of crucial pairs which are misordered, a quantity that we call the empirical ranking
|Yi| |Y −Yi| |{(ℓ0, ℓ1) ∈(Y −Yi) × Yi : f (x, ℓ1) ≤f (x, ℓ0)}|.
(We assume that Yi is never empty nor equal to all of Y for any instance. If there are such
instances in the training set we can simply discard them since there is no ranking problem
to be solved in this case and they do not carry any information.)
AdaBoost.MR is shown in ﬁgure 2. We now maintain a distribution Dt over {1, . . . , m}×
Y × Y and denote the weight for instance xi and the pair ℓ0, ℓ1 by Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1). This
distribution is zero, however, except on the relevant triples (i, ℓ0, ℓ1) for which ℓ0, ℓ1 is a
crucial pair relative to (xi, Yi).
As before, weak hypotheses have the form ht : X × Y →R; we think of these as
providing a ranking of labels as described above. The update rule is a bit new. Let ℓ0, ℓ1
be a crucial pair relative to (xi, Yi) (recall that Dt is zero in all other cases). Assuming
momentarily that αt > 0, this rule decreases the weight Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) if ht gives a correct
ranking (ht(xi, ℓ1) > ht(xi, ℓ0)), and increases this weight otherwise.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
As for the Hamming loss, it can be shown that the empirical
ranking loss of this algorithm is at most QT
t=1 Zt. Thus, as before, our goal in choosing αt
and ht should be minimization of
Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) exp
2α(ht(xi, ℓ0) −ht(xi, ℓ1))
We again defer the description of the technique used for this purpose to Section 4.
This algorithm is somewhat inefﬁcient when there are many labels since, naively, we
need to maintain |Yi| · |Y −Yi| weights for each training example (xi, Yi), and each weight
must be updated on each round. Thus, the space complexity and time-per-round complexity
can be as bad as θ(mk2). In fact, the same algorithm can be implemented using only O(mk)
space and time per round. By the nature of the updates, we can show that we only need to maintain weights vt over {1, . . . , m}×Y. To do this, we maintain
the condition that if ℓ0, ℓ1 is a crucial pair relative to (xi, Yi), then
Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1) = vt(i, ℓ0) · vt(i, ℓ1)
at all times. (Recall that Dt is zero for all other triples (i, ℓ0, ℓ1).) The pseudocode for this
implementation is shown in ﬁgure 3. Note that all space requirements and all per-round
computations are O(mk), with the possible exception of the call to the weak learner which
is discussed in the next section.
Weak hypotheses for text categorization
So far, we left unspeciﬁed the actual form and implementation of the weak learner, as well
as the choice of the parameter αt. In this section, we describe four implementations of weak
learners, three for AdaBoost.MH and one for AdaBoost.MR. Our system for multi-label
text categorization, called BoosTexter, can be used with any of the four methods described
Boostingismeanttobeageneralpurposemethodthatcanbecombinedwithanyclassiﬁer,
and in practice it has been used, for instance, with decision trees and neural nets. In this
paper, however, we focus on the use of boosting with very simple classiﬁers. Speciﬁcally,
for all of the methods we use, the weak hypotheses have the same basic form as a onelevel decision tree. The test at the root of this tree is a simple check for the presence or
absence of a term in the given document. All words and pairs of adjacent words are potential
terms.1 Based only on the outcome of this test, the weak hypothesis outputs predictions and
conﬁdences that each label is associated with the document. For example, going back to the
news categorization example, a possible term can be Bill Clinton, and the corresponding
predictor is: “If the term Bill Clinton appears in the document then predict that the document
belongs to News with high conﬁdence, to Finance with low conﬁdence, and that it does not
belong to Sports with high conﬁdence. If, on the other hand, the term does not appear in
the document, then predict that it does not belong to any of the classes with low conﬁdence.”
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Given: (x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym) where xi ∈X, Yi ⊆Y
Initialize v1(i, ℓ) = (m · |Yi| · |Y −Yi|)−1/2
For t = 1, . . . , T :
• Train weak learner using distribution Dt (as deﬁned by Eq. (3))
• Get weak hypothesis ht : X × Y →R.
• Choose αt ∈R.
vt+1(i, ℓ) = vt(i, ℓ) exp
2 αt Yi[ℓ] ht(xi, ℓ)
vt(i, ℓ) exp
2αtht(xi, ℓ)
vt(i, ℓ) exp
2 αtht(xi, ℓ)
Output the ﬁnal hypothesis:
f (x, ℓ) =
αtht(x, ℓ).
A more efﬁcient version of AdaBoost.MR: on each round of boosting and for each example, the running
time is linear in the number of labels (O(k)).
Figure 4 shows the ﬁrst several weak hypotheses actually found by a version of AdaBoost
on one of the datasets tested later in the paper.
Formally, denote a possible term by w, and let us deﬁne (abusively) w ∈x to mean that
w occurs in document x. Based on the term, we will be interested in weak hypotheses h
which make predictions of the form:
where the c jℓ’s are real numbers. The three weak learners we describe for AdaBoost.MH
differ only with respect to possible restrictions which we place on the values of these
Our weak learners search all possible terms. For each term, values c jℓare chosen as
described below, and a score is deﬁned for the resulting weak hypothesis. Once all terms
have been searched, the weak hypothesis with the lowest score is selected and returned by
the weak learner. For AdaBoost.MH, this score will always be an exact calculation of Zt as
deﬁned in Eq. (1) since, as noted in Section 3.1, minimization of Zt is a reasonable guiding
principle in the design of the weak learning algorithm. For AdaBoost.MR, we know of no
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
The ﬁrst ten weak hypotheses found when real AdaBoost.MH (Section 4.1) is run on the entire Reuters-
21450 dataset as described in Section 6.5. Each weak hypothesis has the following form and interpretation: if
the term associated with the weak hypothesis occurs in the given document, then output the ﬁrst row of values;
otherwise, output the second row of values. Here, each value, represented graphically as a bar, gives the output of
the weak hypothesis for one of the classes. For instance, the weak hypothesis found on the ﬁrst round of boosting
tests on the term vs. If present, a positive value is output for EARN and negative values are output for all of the
other classes. If not present, weakly negative values are output for all classes.
analytical solution for the problem of minimizing Zt. Instead, an approximation of Zt is
used as described below.
AdaBoost.MH with real-valued predictions
For our ﬁrst weak learner, we permit unrestricted real-valued predictions c jℓ. In our experiments, we call this version real AdaBoost.MH.
With minimization of Zt in mind, the values c jℓshould be calculated as follows for a given
term w: Let X0 = {x : w ̸∈x} and X1 = {x : w ∈x}. Given the current distribution Dt, we
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
calculate the following for each possible label ℓ, for j ∈{0, 1}, and for b ∈{−1, +1}:
Dt(i, ℓ)[[xi ∈X j ∧Yi[ℓ] = b]].
For readability of notation, we abbreviate the subscripts +1 and −1 in W jℓ
+1 and W jℓ
−1, writing
instead W jℓ
+ and W jℓ
−. In words, W jℓ
−) is the weight (with respect to the distribution
Dt) of the documents in partition X j which are (are not) labeled by ℓ.
It can be shown that Zt is minimized for a particular term by
and by setting αt = 1. These settings imply that
Thus, we choose the term w for which this value of Zt is smallest.
In fact, it may well happen that W jℓ
+ is very small or even zero, in which case
c jℓas deﬁned in Eq. (5) will be very large or inﬁnite in magnitude. In practice, such
large predictions may cause numerical problems, and there may be theoretical reasons to
suspect that large, overly conﬁdent predictions will increase the tendency to overﬁt. To limit
the magnitudes of the predictions, in our implementation, we use instead the “smoothed”
In our experiments, we set ε = 1/mk. Since both W jℓ
+ are bounded between 0 and
1, this has the effect of bounding |c jℓ| by roughly 1
2 ln(1/ε).
AdaBoost.MH with real-valued predictions and abstaining
The method described above assigns conﬁdence values both when a term appears in a
document and when it does not. Thus, it employs a tacit assumption that the absence of a
term carries information about the possible classes a document may belong to. However,
given our intuitive knowledge about the problem, we may wish to reject this assumption and
force the weak hypothesis to abstain whenever the given term does not appear in a document.
This can be accomplished simply by forcing each weak hypothesis to output a conﬁdence
value of zero for documents which do not contain the given term. In our experiments, we
call this version real abstaining AdaBoost.MH.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
For a given term w, this weak learner chooses predictions c1ℓfor documents which contain
w exactly as before. (In our implementation, we also smooth these values as before.) For
the rest of the documents, the prediction values c0ℓare all set to zero. Hence, the term w
has no inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation if it does not appear in the document. As before, αt is
be the weight of all the document that do not contain w. Then it can be shown that
Zt = W0 + 2
and, as before, on each round we choose a term w for which the value Zt is smallest.
One advantage of this weak learner over the ﬁrst one is an improvement in the running
time as we need to consider only the documents that include a given term w when computing
Zt. Since, typically, the number of documents that include a non-trivial term is only a small
fraction of the training data, this version is in practice 15% faster than the previous one.
Furthermore, in most of the experiments described in Section 6, the performance of the two
versions is comparable.
AdaBoost.MH with discrete predictions
The next weak learner forces the predictions c jℓof the weak hypotheses to be either +1
or −1. This is the more standard setting in which predictions do not carry conﬁdences. We
call this version discrete AdaBoost.MH.
With this restriction on the range of the weak hypotheses, we can still minimize Zt for a
given term w using the following method. With the same notation deﬁned in Section 4.1,
c jℓ= sign
which can be viewed as a (weighted) majority vote over examples in block X j for each
label ℓ. Let
Then it can be shown that, for the purposes of minimizing Zt,
we should choose
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
AdaBoost.MR with discrete predictions
We next describe a weak learner for AdaBoost.MR. As noted in Section 3.2, we would like
to minimize Zt as deﬁned in Eq. (2). Unfortunately, the exact minimization of this quantity
is not as straightforward as it was for AdaBoost.MH. We therefore only consider discrete
predictions in {−1, +1}, and we also use an approximation for Zt as a score, rather than an
exact computation. We call this discrete AdaBoost.MR.
For a given hypothesis ht, let
Dt(i, ℓ0, ℓ1)(h(xi, ℓ1) −h(xi, ℓ0)).
Then, similar to the analysis for discrete AdaBoost.MH, it can be shown that Zt ≤
if we choose
Since we do not know how to efﬁciently minimize Zt exactly, we instead ﬁnd a weak
hypothesis which minimizes the upper bound
t . We use this upper bound as our
score in choosing the best weak hypothesis.
For efﬁciency, it is important to note that the quantity rt can be computed efﬁciently in
terms of the weights vt (deﬁned in Eq. (3)). Let
dt(i, ℓ) = 1
ℓ′: Yi[ℓ′]̸=Yi[ℓ]
vt(i, ℓ′).
Then it can be shown that
dt(i, ℓ) Yi[ℓ] h(xi, ℓ).
Thus, for a particular term w, we should choose
c jℓ= sign
dt(i, ℓ) Yi[ℓ]
which gives
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Summary of the properties of the four weak learners for multiclass multi-label text categorization.
Prediction
( j ∈{0, 1})
Real & abstaining MH
c0ℓ= 0 c1ℓ= 1
Discrete MH
c jℓ= sign
(rt deﬁned in Eq. (9))
Discrete MR
c jℓ= sign
i:xi ∈X j dt(i, ℓ) Yi[ℓ]
(rt deﬁned in Eq. (11))
dt(i, ℓ) Yi[ℓ]
We thus choose the term w which maximizes this quantity, and we assign predictions
correspondingly. The parameter αt is set as in Eq. (10).
The search for a good weak hypothesis can be very time consuming when the training
corpus is large. We therefore use an inverted list that stores for each term (word, bigram,
sparse n-gram, etc.) the list of documents in which it appears. On each round, when searching for a good weak hypothesis, we scan the inverted list and for each term we evaluate its
prediction conﬁdences c jℓaccording to the version of AdaBoost that we use. A straightforward implementation would require scanning the entire collection for each term. However,
precomputing certain values can save a signiﬁcant amount of time. For AdaBoost.MH for
instance, we ﬁrst compute on each round once for all j the following values.
We now ﬁnd for each term the values W jℓ
+ by summing over the documents in which each
term appears using the inverted list. We then set W jℓ
−= W jℓ−W jℓ
+ , and proceed to ﬁnd
c jℓand the corresponding values for Zt. Hence, the amount of time spent on each round
searching for a weak hypothesis is proportional to the total number of occurrences of all
the terms in the training collection. After a weak hypothesis is found, it takes O(mk) time
to update the distribution Dt(i, ℓ).
Our system for multi-label text categorization, called BoosTexter, can be used with any
of the four implementations of weak learners described above. A brief summary of the
different implementations is given in Table 1.
Evaluation measures
For evaluating the performance of our boosting algorithms we used three evaluation measures. The ﬁrst one, one-error, is a simple generalization of classiﬁcation error for multiclass
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
multi-label problems. The one-error is also directly related to the training error . The other two evaluation measures are based on measures used in information retrieval and used to evaluate the performance of the various classiﬁcation algorithms
in terms of their label rankings.
As noted earlier, we assume that a multi-label system induces an ordering of the possible
labels for a given instance. That is, the output of the learning system is a function f : X ×
Y →R which ranks labels according to f (x, ·) so that label ℓ1 is considered to be ranked
higher than ℓ2 if f (x, ℓ1) > f (x, ℓ2). With the exception of RIPPER, all the classiﬁcation
systems we tested in this paper can indeed be viewed in this way, where the ordering is
deﬁned by assigning a real number for each possible instance-label pair x, ℓ.
We will ﬁnd it convenient to refer to the rank of a given label ℓfor instance x under
f which we denote by rank f (x, ℓ). That is, formally, rank f (x, ·) is a one-to-one mapping
onto {1, . . . , k} such that if f (x, ℓ1) > f (x, ℓ2) then rank f (x, ℓ1) < rank f (x, ℓ2).
One-error.
This measure evaluates how many times the top-ranked label was not in the
set of possible labels. Thus, if the goal of a multiclass system is to assign a single label
to a document, the one-error measures how many times the predicted label was not in
Y. We call this measure the one-error of hypothesis H since it measures the probability
of not getting even one of the labels correct. We denote the one-error of a hypothesis f
by one-err( f ). We can deﬁne a classiﬁer H : X →Y that assigns a single label for a
document x by setting H(x) = arg maxℓ∈Y f (x, y). Then, for a set of labeled documents
S = ⟨(x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym)⟩, the one-error is
one-errS(H) = 1
[[H(xi) ̸∈Yi]].
Note that, for single-label classiﬁcation problems, the one-error is identical to ordinary
While the one-error evaluates the performance of a system for the top-ranked
label, the goal of the coverage measure is to assess the performance of a system for all the
possible labels of documents. That is, coverage measures how far we need, on the average,
to go down the list of labels in order to cover all the possible labels assigned to a document.
Coverage is loosely related to precision at the level of perfect recall. Formally, we deﬁne
the coverage of f with respect to S = ⟨(x1, Y1), . . . , (xm, Ym)⟩to be
coverageS(H) = 1
ℓ∈Yi rank f (xi, ℓ) −1.
For single-label classiﬁcation problems, coverage is the average rank of the correct label,
and is zero if the system does not make any classiﬁcation errors.
Average precision.
The above measures are not complete for multi-label classiﬁcation
problems: We can achieve good (low) coverage but suffer high one-error rates, and vice
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
versa. In order to assess the label ranking of a multiclass system as a whole we used the
non-interpolated average precision, a performance measure frequently used for evaluation
of information retrieval (IR) systems . Note, however, that non-interpolated
average precision is typically used in IR systems to evaluate the document ranking performance for query retrieval. In contrast, in our experiments we use average precision for
evaluating the effectiveness of the label rankings. Formally, we deﬁne average-precision
for a ranking H with respect to a training set S, denoted avgprec ( ) for short, to be
avgprecS(H) = 1
|{ℓ′ ∈Yi | rank f (xi, ℓ′) ≤rank f (xi, ℓ)}|
rank f (x, ℓ)
In words, this measure evaluates the average fraction of labels ranked above a particular
label ℓ∈Yi which actually are in Yi. Note that avgprecS( f ) = 1 for a system f which
ranks perfectly the labels for all documents so that there is no document xi for which a label
not in Yi is ranked higher than a label in Yi.
Text categorization experiments
In this section, we describe and analyze the experiments we performed using the four
boosting algorithms for text categorization that were described in previous sections. The
experimentswereperformedonanSGIChallengewith20MIPSR10000processorsrunning
at 195 MHz. The timing information we give in this section is with respect to a single cpu.
Test corpora
Reuters-21450.
The documents in this collection were collected from Reuters newswire
in 1987. We used the modiﬁed Apte (“ModApte”) split which contains 12,902 documents.
A cleaned-up version of this dataset, called Reuters-21578, is publicly available from the
web page by David Lewis, who originally
compiled the collection. We performed the following pre-processing prior to the experiments: All words were converted to lower case, punctuation marks were removed, and
“function words” from a standard stop-list were removed.2 The average length of a document after pre-processing is 82 words. This corpus is divided into categories which in turn
are sub-divided into sub-categories. The Reuters corpus has served as the benchmark for
many text-categorization studies using various partitions of the corpus. See Yang’s work (to
appear) for an overview of the more common partitions and versions of this corpus as well
as a summary of the text categorization algorithms that tested on this corpus. In this work,
we considered several partitions of the Reuters corpus based on the broad topics at the top
hierarchy (for further details see Tables A.1, A.7, and A.9). We used 3-fold cross validation
in our experiments with these partitions. To compare our algorithm to previously published
work, we also performed experiments with a partition that includes all topics in Reuters
that have at least two relevant documents for training. This collection includes 93 topics
and was studied extensively by Yang (to appear) and others. Yang referred to this partition
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
as version-3 and compared the results to previously studied text-categorization algorithms.
We devote a separate section, Section 6.5, to the description of our experiment with this
widely tested partition of Reuters.
AP Titles.
This is a corpus of AP newswire headlines .AsfortheReuterscorpus,previousworkconcentratedonbinaryclassiﬁcation
by tagging documents as being relevant or irrelevant to topics like “federal budget” and
“Nielsens ratings.” The total number of documents in this corpus is 319,463. The headlines
are an average of nine words long, with a total vocabulary of 67,331 words. No preprocessing
of the text was done, other than to convert all words to lower case and remove punctuation
marks. We performed two sets of experiments with this corpus based on two different
labeling schemes available for this corpus.
UseNet data.
This dataset consists of Usenet articles collected by Lang from 20
different newsgroups. One thousand articles were collected for each newsgroup so there are
20,000 articles in the entire collection. This data was originally treated as single-labeled
 ). However, since people tend to post articles to multiple
newsgroups, we found after examining the headers of the articles that about 4.5% of the
articles are actually multi-labeled. Furthermore, we found 544 identical articles which were
posted to more than one group. The total number of articles after relabeling the data based
on the headers is 19,466 with 20,347 labels. Further description of this dataset is given
in Table A.11. We used 3-fold cross validation in our experiments with the newsgroup
Other algorithms
As mentioned in the introduction, there has been immense work on text categorization using
many different algorithms. Since it is impossible to implement and evaluate all previously
published algorithms, we chose the following algorithms for comparison with the boosting
algorithms:
This is Cohen’s rule-learning system as adapted to text categorization
problems by Cohen and Singer . RIPPER classiﬁes a document by applying a set
of boolean tests that check the absence (or presence) of words in the documents. RIPPER
is not capable of dealing with multiple labels. RIPPER learns a classiﬁer in the form of a
boolean combination of simple terms. It does not provide a ranking of the possible labels
for a given document. Therefore, the only performance measure we can use for comparison
is the error rate.
We implemented a version of Rocchio’s algorithm , as adapted
to text categorization by Ittner, Lewis, & Ahn and modiﬁed to multiclass problems.
In Rocchio, we represent the data (both training and test documents) as vectors of numeric
weights. The weight vector for the ith document is vi = (vi
2, . . . , vi
l ), where l is the
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
number of indexing terms used. We use single words as terms. We followed the TF-IDF
weighting and deﬁned the weight vi
k log(ND/nk)
j log(ND/n j)
Here, ND is the number of documents, nk is the number of documents in which the indexing
term k appears. The weight f i
k is log(m) + 1, where m is the number of occurrences of
the indexing term k in document i. We set f i
k = 0 if m = 0. For each class ℓwe build
a “prototype” vector which is the average weight vector over all documents xi for which
ℓ∈Yi. Formally, let X(ℓ) = {i | ℓ∈Yi}. Then the prototype vector for class ℓis
Test documents are classiﬁed by calculating the dot-products between the weight vector
representing the document and each of the prototype vectors. These dot-products induce
a ranking of the possible labels. We use this ranking to evaluate the performance of the
classiﬁer for each of the measures discussed in Section 5.
Sleeping-experts.
This is an algorithm originally proposed by Blum , studied further by Freund et al. , and ﬁrst applied to text categorization by Cohen and Singer
 . Brieﬂy, this algorithm classiﬁes a document by thresholding a score which is a
weighted combination of “experts” which are based on the word-grams appearing in the
text. This score can be used to rank the labels. The algorithm can be easily adapted to multiclass (and multi-label) settings by assigning mini-experts for each possible pair of class and
sparse word-gram. We used words and word pairs as the set of experts in the experiments.
Naive-Bayes and probabilistic TF-IDF.
These are probabilistic classiﬁers that assign,
for each document, a probability vector of belonging to each of the possible labels. Like
the algorithms above, these probability vectors can be viewed as rankings and thus used for
evaluating the performance with respect to the measures discussed in Section 5. These algorithms are available as part of the publicly available Rainbow text-categorization system3
which we used in our experiments. This system includes other classiﬁcation methods but,
in all of the experiments we performed, Naive-Bayes and probabilistic TF-IDF performed
better than the other methods available in Rainbow. Further description of Naive-Bayes and
probabilistic TF-IDF for text categorization is given in .
To handle multi-label data, we mapped to the single-label case by simply repeating each
document once for each of its assigned labels.
Experiments using single-label corpora
In the ﬁrst set of experiments, we partitioned the Reuters corpus into six disjoint classes.
These classes roughly constitute the top categorization hierarchy. We discarded articles
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
that do not belong to any of the classes and articles that belong to more than one class.
A detailed description of this subset is given in Table A.1. The total number of articles
in this experiment is 10,187. We used three-fold cross-validation in the experiments. The
results we report are averaged over the three folds. For all subsets of this dataset, we ran
the real AdaBoost.MH and real-abstaining AdaBoost.MH for 5,000 rounds and the discrete
AdaBoost.MH and AdaBoost.MR for 20,000.
We performed experiments with varying numbers of classes. We selected subsets of the
data by taking the top k classes, in decreasing number of documents, from k = 3 to 6.
For instance, for k = 3 we took 7,761 documents from the classes EARN, ACQ, and COM.
We then created three different splits into training and test data and ran the various text
categorization algorithms on each of the splits.
A summary of the results of the experiments with this dataset is given in Table A.2
and graphically in ﬁgure 5. The performance of the different multiclass versions of
AdaBoost is comparable on this data set, with a small advantage to the real-valued versions
of AdaBoost.MH (with and without abstaining). All the four versions of AdaBoost for multilabel problems clearly outperform all of the other classiﬁcation algorithms. The error of
AdaBoost.MH is almost 50% smaller than the error-rate of the best competing algorithm on
this dataset (Naive-Bayes). Similar behavior is observed for coverage and average-precision.
The next set of experiments with single-label datasets is with the AP Titles corpus. In
the ﬁrst subset of AP titles, each headline is (possibly) labeled by a single topic from 20
possible classes. We extracted 29,841 documents which belong to exactly one of the 20
classes. A description of this subset of AP titles is given in Table A.3. For the subsets in
this dataset, we ran the real-valued version of AdaBoost.MH (with and without abstaining)
for 10,000 rounds and the discrete AdaBoost.MH and AdaBoost.MR for 40,000 rounds.
As before, we tested the performance of the algorithms by extracting subsets with growing
numbers of classes, where we ordered the classes by decreasing number of documents in
each class. The results are summarized in Table A.4 and graphically in ﬁgure 6. Among
the different boosting algorithms, real AdaBoost.MH exhibits the best performance: it is
slightly better than real abstaining AdaBoost.MH and signiﬁcantly better than the discrete
AdaBoost.MH and discrete AdaBoost.MR where the latter is the worst performer among
the four boosting algorithms. The main reason for this is that 40,000 rounds were simply
not enough for the discrete versions. For discrete AdaBoost.MR and AdaBoost.MH, the
training error was still monotonically decreasing when we reached the maximal number
of rounds. This improved performance in decreasing the training error of the real-valued
versions of AdaBoost is even more vivid for large datasets, as we show subsequently.
The best competitor algorithm for this dataset is Sleeping-experts. In fact, Sleepingexperts slightly outperforms AdaBoost.MH when the number of classes is three. However,
for subsets of at least eight classes, AdaBoost.MH signiﬁcantly outperform Sleeping-experts
with respect to all three performance measures. Note also the interesting fact that, in contrast
to the results for the previous dataset, probabilistic TF-IDF outperforms Naive-Bayes, yet
both algorithms are clearly inferior to AdaBoost.MH.
The last set of experiments with single-labeled multiclass problems is with the entire AP
titles collection. In addition to the partial partition into twenty speciﬁc topics above, this
corpus is also divided into six general categories4 such that each article falls into exactly
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Left: Comparison of the various boosting algorithms for text categorization on the ﬁrst single-label
subset of Reuters-21450. Right: Comparison of real AdaBoost.MH with Naive-Bayes, probabilistic TF-IDF,
Sleeping-experts, and Rocchio on the same subset.
one category. We removed all articles not belonging to any of the categories. The number of
articles that remained is 209,700. Since this labeling scheme results in a very large corpus,
we did not use cross-validation in the experiments. Instead, we used Lewis’s chronological
split into training and test sets. The training set for this split contains 142,727 headlines
and the test set 66,973. A description of the classes is given in Table A.5 and a summary of
the results is given in Table A.6.
Since Rainbow allocates a different ﬁle for each article, this dataset was too large to be
converted into the format required for Rainbow. We therefore compared real AdaBoost.MH,
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Left: Comparison of the various boosting algorithms for text categorization on the ﬁrst single-label
subset of AP titles. Right: Comparison of real AdaBoost.MH with Naive-Bayes probabilistic TF-IDF Sleepingexperts and Rocchio on the same dataset.
discrete AdaBoost.MH, and discrete AdaBoost.MR only with Sleeping-experts, Rocchio,
and RIPPER.
Our main focus in the experiment with this dataset was the performance of the different
boosting algorithms as a function of number of rounds. In ﬁgure 7, we show the training and
test error of the algorithms as a function of the number of rounds. We see that the version of
AdaBoost.MH which uses real-valued predictions dramatically outperforms the methods
with predictions in {−1, +1}. After 180,000 rounds, discrete AdaBoost.MH reaches a
training error of 32.2% while it took real AdaBoost.MH only 642 rounds to reach this
training error—more than a two-hundred fold speed-up!
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Comparison of the training (left) and test (right) error using three boosting methods on the second
single-label subset of AP titles.
As with the previous experiments, discrete AdaBoost.MH seems to consistently outperform discrete AdaBoost.MR. This might be partially due to the approximation that is made
of Zt in lieu of its direct minimization. We fortunately do not observe overﬁtting with the
AdaBoost algorithms so that the better performance in decreasing the training error results
in lower error rates on the test data.
The best competitor algorithm for this dataset is Sleeping-experts. It takes about a thousand rounds for AdaBoost.MH to reach the test error rate of Sleeping-experts and after
30,000 rounds its test error is signiﬁcantly lower. However, Sleeping-experts is much faster
on this dataset, ﬁnishing in about a minute, roughly as long as it takes to run boosting for
25 rounds.
Experiments using multi-label corpora
For the ﬁrst set of experiments with multi-labeled corpora, we used the Reuters dataset
again. This time, we partitioned it into classes based on the nine topics constituting the top
hierarchy. We discarded documents not belonging to any topic; however, articles belonging
to more than one topic were assigned multiple labels. The total number of articles for this
partition is 10,792 and the number of different labels is 11,588; about 7% of the articles
are labeled with more than one label. We performed experiments by selecting a subset of
the classes and the corresponding articles. The subsets were again selected by choosing
the k classes with the largest number of articles for k = 3, . . . , 9. Thus, once again, the
difﬁculty of the classiﬁcation problem increases with k. A description of the dataset is given
in Table A.7. In all of the experiments with this data, we used three-fold cross validation.
We ran the versions with real-valued prediction for 10,000 rounds and the discrete versions
40,000 rounds.
A summary of the results, averaged over the three folds, is given in Table A.7 and ﬁgure 8.
The results for this multi-label dataset are similar to the previous single-label datasets.
The different boosting methods are comparable in performance. AdaBoost.MR is slightly
worse than the other three for one-error and average-precision. Real AdaBoost.MH again
outperforms all the competitor algorithms with respect to the three performance evaluation
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Left: Comparison of the various boosting algorithms for text categorization on the ﬁrst multi-label
subset of Reuters-21450. Right: Comparison of real AdaBoost.MH with Naive-Bayes, probabilistic TF-IDF,
Sleeping-experts, and Rocchio (right) on the same dataset.
measures.Furthermore,thereisnoclearwinneramongtheotheralgorithms:whileSleepingexperts is best for the subsets with a small number of classes (k < 6), Naive-Bayes is the
best one for the large classiﬁcation problems (k > 6). Nonetheless, AdaBoost.MH clearly
outperforms both methods on all subsets.
In the second set of multi-label experiments with Reuters, we partitioned the dataset into
the classes constituting the leaves of the hierarchy of topics. We chose all classes which
include at least 100 articles. This subset includes 19 different classes which sum to 3,631
documents labeled by 5,173 different labels. In the full subset with 19 classes about 40% of
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Left: Comparison of the various boosting algorithms for text categorization on the second multilabel subset of Reuters-21450. Right: Comparison of real AdaBoost.MH with Naive-Bayes probabilistic TF-IDF
Sleeping-experts and Rocchio on the same dataset.
the articles have more than one label. As before, we performed experiments with subsets of
growing size and classes, for k = 3, . . . , 19. A detailed description of the dataset is given in
Table A.9. As before we used 3-fold cross-validation to estimate the performance. Again,
we ran the real-valued version for 10,000 rounds and the discrete for 40,000.
A summary of the results is given in Table A.10 and ﬁgure 9. Here again we see comparable performance of the different boosting algorithms. Also, real AdaBoost.MH is better
than all competitor algorithms, especially with respect to one-error and average-precision.
For this dataset, Rocchio seems to be the best alternative. In fact, it achieves coverage values
which are comparable to real AdaBoost.MH on most, if not all, of the subsets.
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
The last experiment with multi-labeled text data was performed with newsgroup articles.
Here we followed the experimental methodology used in previous studies with this dataset.
We used 3-fold cross validation. For each fold we held the test set ﬁxed and varied the
size of the training set by sub-sampling the full training set for each fold. We ran the
different algorithms for training sets of size 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000, and 12,977
(two thirds of the total number of articles available for this dataset). We compared real
AdaBoost.MH with the two methods which in previous studies achieved the best results on
this dataset, namely, Naive-Bayes and probabilistic TF-IDF. We allowed weak hypotheses
(and features for Naive-Bayes and probabilistic TF-IDF) of single words and word pairs. We
set the number of rounds for AdaBoost.MH to be twice the number of training documents.
Hence, we ran AdaBoost.MH as little as 400 rounds and at most 26,000 rounds.
The results comparing real AdaBoost.MH, probabilistic TF-IDF and Naive-Bayes for
the three evaluation measures as a function of the training set size are shown in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10.
Comparison of real AdaBoost.MH Naive-Bayes and probabilistic TF-IDF as a function of the number
of training examples on the UseNet data.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
For training sets of size smaller than 10,000, real AdaBoost.MH is clearly inferior to probabilistic TF-IDF and Naive-Bayes. The performance of AdaBoost.MH is especially poor
for training sets of size smaller than a thousand. When the training set is large enough,
we again see that AdaBoost.MH outperforms both probabilistic TF-IDF and Naive-Bayes
with respect to all three measures. However, the difference in performance is not as signiﬁcant as in the previous datasets. One possible explanation for these results is that, in
contrast to probabilistic TF-IDF and Naive-Bayes, AdaBoost.MH incorporates very little
prior knowledge. Thus, although AdaBoost.MH is minimizing the Hamming loss on the
training set, the generalization error is rather poor, as indeed implied by theoretical studies.
Once there are enough examples, the prior knowledge, incorporated via the term weights in
probabilistic TF-IDF and Naive-Bayes, is much less crucial and AdaBoost.MH does a better
job in driving the training error down, and therefore also the generalization error decreases.
These results suggest that the new boosting algorithms for text categorization would be best
utilized in complex multiclass problems with a large number of training examples.
An experiment with a large number of classes
Weconcludethissectionontextcategorizationexperimentswithamulti-labelcategorization
experiment using a dataset that contains a large number of classes. In this experiment
we used the partition of Reuters-21450 that was prepared by Apt´e, Damerau, and Weiss
 for their experiments with the SWAP-1 rule learner. The Reuters-21450 corpus was
partitioned into a training set of 7,789 documents and a test set containing 3,309 document.
This partition includes all classes with at least two documents in the training set and at
least one document in the test set. There are 93 such classes. Yang (to appear), who refers
to this partition of Reuters as version-3, performed extensive comparisons with various
algorithms that were evaluated on this partition. Here we compare AdaBoost.MH with
the two classiﬁcation algorithms that achieved the best performance results according to
Yang; these are a k-nearest-neighbor (KNN) classiﬁer and a linear classiﬁer based on a least
squares ﬁt of term weights to the class labels (LLSF).
We processed the text as described in Section 6.1. Each document was labeled with a
subset of the 93 possible classes. The average number of labels per document is 1.24. This
problem requires a vast amount of memory; to maintain the distribution Dt(i, j), we need
a table of size mk = 7789 × 93 which amounts to over 700,000 numbers. As in previous
experiments, we ran AdaBoost.MH for 10,000 rounds which took about 3 days of cpu time
to complete. The smoothing value ε was set using 3-fold cross validation on the training
set. We would like to note however that using the default value yielded only slightly worse
results. (For instance, the 11-point average precision is 0.932 when using the default value
for ε compared to 0.934 when using cross-validation to determine ε.) On the left hand-side
of ﬁgure 11 we plot the one-error on the training and test data as a function of the number of
rounds. Note that the one-error on the training set reaches its minimal value, which is very
close to zero, after about 1000 rounds of boosting while the test error continues to decrease
even after 10,000 rounds, apparently without overﬁtting. This behavior was also observed
in other experiments with boosting algorithms and is partially motivated by theoretical
analysis .
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Figure 11.
Left: The one-error on the training and test data for the Reuters partition with 93 classes. Right:
Precision-Recall curve for AdaBoost.MH on the test collection of the same dataset.
Summary of results obtained for Reuters-21450 with 93 classes.
(Threshold adjusted
11-pt Avg. precision
on data) F1
(Threshold = 0) F1
Mircro-avg. BEP
AdaBoost.MH
To make our results on this dataset comparable with previously published results, we used
the three evaluation measures that were used by Yang (to appear) and others, namely, 11point interpolated average precision , F1 ,
and micro-averaged break-even point. The ﬁrst and the third performance measures asses
the general quality of the label ranking while the second measure evaluates the classiﬁcation
quality. For further details on these evaluation measures see Yang (to appear). To use the F1
measure we need to set a threshold for the label-rankings and decide which labels should
be associated with a document. We evaluated the performance using two thresholds: the
zero threshold and a threshold that was adjusted so as to maximize F1 on the training data
after AdaBoost.MH completed 10,000 rounds. In Table 2 we summarize the results and
compare them to the best results obtained by Yang. report a break-even point of 87% using the Reuters-
21578 dataset.) We also give on the right hand side of ﬁgure 2 a precision-recall graph for
AdaBoost.MH together with the break-even points of three other classiﬁcation algorithms
evaluated on this dataset. The performance of AdaBoost.MH is state-of-the-art: it achieves
the highest 11-point interpolated average precision and break-even point and comes very
close to the best F1 value obtained on this partition of Reuters. However, it is difﬁcult to
asses the statistical signiﬁcance of these results since the performance measures used are
highly nonlinear and non-additive. Nonetheless, the good performance of AdaBoost.MH
on this well-studied dataset provides further empirical evidence that boosting algorithms
can serve as a viable alternative to existing algorithms for text categorization.
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Figure 12.
Results on a call-type identiﬁcation task.
Speech categorization experiments
In the ﬁnal set of experiments, we tested our system on a call-classiﬁcation task. The purpose
of this task is to automatically identify the type of call requested in response to the greeting,
“How may I help you?” For instance, if the response is, “Yes, I would like to charge this call
to my Visa card,” then the call should be classiﬁed as a calling-card call. There are fourteen
call types, plus an ‘other’ category. Some calls can be of more than one type (for instance,
a call can be both collect and person-to-person).
This task was previously studied by Gorin and others , and we used
the same data, namely, a collection of 8,000 training utterances and 1,000 test utterances. Both the training and test utterances were all transcribed by humans from actual
spoken responses. The test utterances are also available in a form produced by an automatic speech recognizer; this, of course, is the only form that would be available in a real
Following others who have worked on this dataset, we present our results in the form of
an ROC curve. For this, each algorithm needs to produce a conﬁdence in its own predictions.
The curve is then produced by varying a reject threshold which speciﬁes that examples with
conﬁdence below the given threshold should be rejected (for this task, this would mean that
the call would have to be handled by a human operator). We then plot the accuracy of the
classiﬁer on non-rejected examples as a function of the false rejection rate, which is the
fraction of examples incorrectly rejected. A classiﬁcation by the system of ‘other’ is also
considered equivalent to rejection.
To get a conﬁdence level for the predictions of AdaBoost.MH, we used the difference
between the ﬁnal scores of the ﬁrst and second ranked labels. That is, if f is the ﬁnal
classiﬁer produced by AdaBoost.MH, then the conﬁdence assigned to the prediction of f
on a test example x is f (x, ℓ1) −f (x, ℓ2) where ℓ1 and ℓ2 are the ﬁrst and second ranked
labels according to f (x, ·).
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
We trained real AdaBoost.MH on this data using 300 rounds of boosting, and allowing
sparse word trigrams for the terms used in forming the weak hypotheses. We compared our
system to the best previous published work on this dataset, namely, that of Wright, Gorin,
and Riccardi . The results are shown in ﬁgure 12 as a set of ROC curves. For the top
set of curves, the algorithms were tested using human-transcribed test data. For the bottom
set of curves, the test data were generated using an automatic speech recognizer (based on
the same spoken utterances). The solid curves are for AdaBoost.MH, and the dashed curves
are those of Wright, Gorin, and Riccardi .
The performance of the two algorithms is strikingly similar for most reject levels. However, AdaBoost.MH does signiﬁcantly better on the transcribed data for moderately large
reject levels of 40% or more. These results indicate that for slightly less than half of the
examples, AdaBoost.MH can produce predictions that are almost certainly correct.
Note that the training set is the same, whether we test on manually transcribed or automatically recognized data. AdaBoost.MH, like other learning algorithms, attempts to minimize
the classiﬁcation error on the training data and thus employs the tacit assumption that the
test data are generated by the same source as the training data. This is clearly not true when
we use the automatically transcribed data for testing. We believe that we can improve the
performance of our system using training data that is automatically generated by a speech
recognizer.
Appendix A:
Description of text datasets and summary of results
Table A.1.
Description of the classes constituting the single-label subset of Reuters-21450.
Cum. #docs
Earnings and Earnings Forecasts (EARN)
Mergers/Acquisitions (ACQ)
Commodity Codes (COM)
Economic Indicator Codes (ECON)
General Articles (GNRL)
Energy Codes (ENRG)
Table A.2.
Results for the single-label subset of Reuters-21450 (Table A.1).
Real AdaBoost.MH
Naive-Bayes
Sleeping-experts
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Table A.3.
Description of the classes constituting the ﬁrst single-label subset of AP titles.
Cum. #docs
Cum. #docs
yugoslavia
dollargold
tickertalk
Table A.4.
Results for the ﬁrst single-label subset of AP titles (Table A.3).
Real AdaBoost.MH
Naive-Bayes
Sleeping-experts
5.87 0.0789
11.53 0.1397 0.9383 24.79 0.4144 0.8483
5.20 0.0661 0.9716
9.34 0.1517
16.90 0.2503 0.9035 33.15 0.6365 0.7886
9.48 0.1501 0.9446
5 11.39 0.2075
21.04 0.3528 0.8757 30.98 0.7888 0.7867 11.92 0.2161 0.9281
6 13.19 0.2782
23.86 0.4525 0.8545 31.28 0.9386 0.7789 13.90 0.2972 0.9123
7 12.43 0.2671
21.89 0.4204 0.8664 29.23 0.9002 0.7935 13.36 0.2861 0.9162
8 12.04 0.2606
21.29 0.4084 0.8701 27.77 0.8480 0.8047 13.25 0.2954 0.9161
9 12.57 0.2887
21.71 0.4383 0.8661 28.00 0.9541 0.8004 13.99 0.3230 0.9109
10 13.27 0.3098
22.77 0.4788 0.8587 28.38 1.0103 0.7977 14.89 0.3600 0.9049
11 14.24 0.3461
23.80 0.5301 0.8504 30.02 1.1412 0.7861 15.75 0.4163 0.8974
12 13.97 0.3500
24.82 0.5636 0.8441 29.76 1.1892 0.7873 16.08 0.4356 0.8953
13 14.71 0.3949
25.03 0.5940 0.8415 30.24 1.2752 0.7838 16.49 0.4675 0.8921
14 15.01 0.4050
26.25 0.6570 0.8322 30.32 1.3229 0.7828 16.97 0.5019 0.8884
15 15.53 0.4372
26.65 0.6888 0.8289 30.44 1.3933 0.7811 17.08 0.5248 0.8869
16 15.58 0.4647
26.87 0.7191 0.8268 30.63 1.4676 0.7786 17.33 0.5510 0.8849
17 16.00 0.4915
27.09 0.7483 0.8245 31.04 1.4875 0.7760 17.59 0.5697 0.8829
18 15.93 0.5008
27.02 0.7722 0.8239 30.98 1.4955 0.7768 17.93 0.5940 0.8806
19 15.91 0.5041
27.07 0.7948 0.8229 31.04 1.5212 0.7759 17.58 0.6035 0.8824
20 16.29 0.5483
27.04 0.8365 0.8218 32.11 1.6277 0.7674 18.01 0.6430 0.8788
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Table A.5.
Description of the classes constituting the second single-label subset of AP titles.
#Docs train
#Docs test
International
Washington
Entertainment
Table A.6.
Error rates for the different algorithms on the second single-label subset of AP titles (Table A.5).
(30,000 Rounds)
(180,000 Rounds)
real AdaBoost.MH
discrete AdaBoost.MH
Sleeping-experts
Table A.7.
Description of the classes constituting the ﬁrst multi-label subset of Reuters-21450.
Cum. #docs
Avg. no. labels/docs
Acquisitions
Table A.8.
Results for the ﬁrst multi-labeled subset of Reuters-21450 (Table A.7).
Real AdaBoost.MH
Naive-Bayes
Sleeping-experts
A BOOSTING-BASED SYSTEM FOR TEXT CATEGORIZATION
Table A.9.
Description of the classes constituting the second multi-label subset of Reuters-21450.
Cum. #docs
labels/docs
Cum. #docs
labels/docs
Table A.10.
Results for the second multi-labeled subset of Reuters-21450 (Table A.9).
Real AdaBoost.MH
Naive-Bayes
Sleeping-experts
R.E. SCHAPIRE AND Y. SINGER
Table A.11.
List of the newsgroups and the number of articles posted to the newsgroups. (An article may be
posted to multiple groups.).
alt.atheism
rec.sport.hockey
comp.graphics
comp.os.ms-windows.misc
sci.electronics
comp.sys.ibm.pc.hardware
comp.sys.mac.hardware
comp.windows.x
soc.religion.christian
misc.forsale
talk.politics.guns
talk.politics.mideast
rec.motorcycles
talk.politics.misc
rec.sport.baseball
talk.religion.misc
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Allen Gorin, David Lewis, Andrew McCallum, Fernando Pereira,
Amit Singhal and Jerry Wright for useful discussions and for help with our experiments.
1. Arbitrary long (sparse) n-grams but we restrict ourselves to words and word bigrams for comparison purposes.
2. “Function words” include high frequency but contentless words like ‘of’ and ‘the’. We used the stop-list given
by Lewis .
3. 
4. There are actually 15 categories but only 6 of them contain more than 40 articles. We discarded the 9 categories
(and the corresponding articles) with only a few articles.