Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
1999, 6 (lj, 57-86
Theoretical and empirical review of multinomial
process tree modeling
WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER
University ofCalifornia, Irvine, California
DAVID M. RIEFER
California State University, San Bernardino, California
We review a current and popular class of cognitive models called multinomial processing tree
(MPT) models. MPTmodels are simple, substantively motivated statistical models that can be applied
to categorical data. They are useful as data-analysis tools for measuring underlying or latent cognitive
capacities and as simple models for representing and testing competing psychological theories. Weformally describe the cognitive structure and parametric properties of the class of MPT models and provide an inferential statistical analysis for the entire class. Following this, we provide a comprehensive
review of over 80 applications ofMPTmodels to a variety of substantive areas in cognitive psychology,
including various types of human memory, visual and auditory perception, and logical reasoning. We
then address a number of theoretical issues relevant to the creation and evaluation of MPTmodels, including model development, model validity, discrete-state assumptions, statistical issues, and the relation between MPTmodels and other mathematical models. In the conclusion, we consider the current role of MPTmodels in psychological research and possible future directions.
This article presents a detailed review of a current and
popular class ofcognitive models called multinomialprocessing tree (MPT) models. MPT models have been described formally in Riefer and Batchelder and in
Hu and Batchelder , although models ofthis type
have been around well before the class was first formalized in 1988 . However, the last 10 years have witnessed a deeper
understanding and an accelerated use of these models
within psychology. This increased popularity of MPT
models has resulted not only in the application of these
models to new areas in psychology but has also led to a
variety ofnew statistical techniques and a certain amount
of theoretical debate. Because of these developments, a
review article on this class ofmodels seems timely both for
researchers already working in this area and for others
who might benefit from using this type of modeling.
MPT models are simple, substantively motivated statistical models that can be used to measure underlying or
latent cognitive capacities. Psychological data often result
from multiple, interacting processes, and operationally
This research was supported by NSF Grant SBR-9309667. The authors thank Associate Editor Richard Schweickert and Richard Chechile,
Mark Howe. Kevin Murnane. and James Townsend for helpful reviews
of an earlier draft of this paper. The authors also thank Ece Batchelder.
Edgar Erdfelder, Xiangen Hu, and Christoph Klauer for comments on
various aspects ofthis project. Correspondence should be addressed to
W.H. Batchelder. Department ofCognitive Sciences. University of California. Irvine. CA 92697 (e-mail: ).
defined statistics are quite limited in determining which
of these processes are involved in a particular experimental paradigm. One primary use ofMPT models is as dataanalysis tools, capable of disentangling and measuring
the separate contribution ofdifferent cognitive processes
underlying observed data. This approach can be helpful
in settling theoretical issues, because psychological theories often focus on one process or another as the fundamental cause ofa particular psychological phenomenon.
The structural simplicity ofthe class ofMPT models also
makes it a useful framework for developing and testing
quantitative theories. It is possible to make theoretical assumptions precise when incorporating them into MPT
models, and testing these assumptions is relatively straightforward using standard statistical theory.
An important characteristic ofMPT models is that they
are developed exclusively for categorical data (i.e., situations in which each experimental observation falls into
one and only one ofa finite set ofcategories). Categorical
data are convenient to model because it is not necessary
to model measurement error, which is a source ofconcern
with continuous data. With categorical data, there is virtually no uncertainty as to the appropriate category for each
observation, and, thus, the probabilistic structure of the
data can be thought to arise from underlying processes of
interest uncontaminated by error variance.
In the case of categorical data, the most general and
theoretically neutral statistical distribution is the multinomial distribution, a natural generalization of the binomial distribution to more than two categories. In the
multinomial distribution, observations are independent
and identically distributed over the categories. and each
Copyright 1999 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
category has a parameter representing the probability that
a random observation falls into it. Viewed generally, statistical models for categorical data express the probability
parameters for each category as functions of the model's
parameters (i.e., they reparameterize the multinomial
distribution). Models of this type have a long history in
scientific research and include such standard model families as log-linear and logit models . Log-linear and logit
models are routinely used for categorical data in a number offields in the social, behavioral, and biological sciences, and their development has paralleled developments
in modeling continuous data (e.g., analysis of variance
[ANOVA]and the general linear model). As with ANOVA
models, all that is required is a suitable factorial experimental design, and then a model can be selected without
much regard to the substantive nature of the paradigm
being modeled.
In contrast, MPT models are tailored explicitly to particular psychological paradigms. Each MPT model is a
reparameterization of the category probabilities of the
multinomial distribution; however, unlike log-linear and
logit models, the reparameterization is in terms ofparameters that are designed to represent underlying psychological processes, rather than a canonical decomposition
in terms of main effects and various interactions. MPT
models reflect a particular type ofcognitive architecture,
one that is represented as a tree with a single root . Each branch ofthe tree represents a different hypothesized sequence ofprocessing stages, resulting in a specific response category. Thus, MPT models
are designed to represent situations in which an observed
response category can arise from one or more unobserved
processing sequences, represented by branches in the tree
structure. Both the sequential character of processing
stages and the many-to-one mapping of processing sequences into response categories are psychological properties that are conveniently represented in the rooted tree
architecture.
One important consequence ofthis architecture is that
category probabilities are generally expressed as nonlinear functions of the underlying psychological parameters. This contrasts with the usual models for categorical
data mentioned earlier that have linearity built in at some
level. Thus, even though MPT models parameterize latent
processing events in a straightforward way, the manifest
category probabilities are usually nonlinear polynomial
functions ofthe processing event parameters. In this sense,
MPT models share a property with most successful scientific models in the behavioral sciences-namely, that
simplicity at the theoretical level may have more complex
consequences at the behavioral level.
Even though MPT models are more substantively based
than are off-the-shelfstatistical models, they are usually
much less detailed than are more theoretical cognitive
models, such as global memory models or neural network (connectionist) models
 . MPT models capture some ofthe
psychologically important variables in a paradigm, but
they are necessarily approximate and incomplete and are
usually confined to particular paradigms. In this way,
MPT modeling may be viewed as a type ofcognitive psychometrics in the spirit of such approaches as pairedcomparison scaling , signal detection models , or informationintegration models . Despite their disadvantage as approximations to
psychological theory, MPT models share the advantage
with other psychometric models of being statistically
tractable and thus provide clear choices for data analysis
over standard, multipurpose statistical models.
The article is organized as follows. First, we present a
description oftwo previous applications ofMPT modeling from our own laboratory. The purpose is to familiarize the reader with the ideas behind MPT models and,
later, to use these examples to help illustrate important
theoretical and statistical points. Next, we formally describe the cognitive structure and parametric properties
ofthe class ofMPT models, providing an explicit statistical analysis of this class. Following this, we provide a
comprehensive review of the applications ofMPT modeling to a variety of substantive areas in cognitive psychology. The purpose of this review is twofold. First, it
will give the reader an idea of the scope ofMPT modeling as it is currently applied in psychology, with references for researchers who want to learn more about a
particular area or application. Second, the applications
that we describe raise a number oftheoretical and statistical issues related to MPT modeling. These issues will
be discussed in the section following the review, and they
should be relevant to researchers who wish to develop
and use this type of modeling. Finally, we consider the
current role of MPT models in psychological research
and possible future directions.
TWO EXAMPLES
Batchelder and Riefer's Pair-Clustering Model
The first example ofMPT modeling is a model that we
designed to disentangle cluster storage from cluster retrieval in a standard free-recall paradigm . The paradigm involves a study list
consisting of two types of items, clusterable pairs (e.g.,
lawyer, teacher) and singletons (items without a category
partner), followed by free recall of the list. Recall ofthe
pairs is scored into four mutually exclusive categories: (1)
both items recalled adjacently, E j , (2) both items recalled
nonadjacently, E2, (3) one and only one item recalled, E3,
and (4) neither item recalled, E4. Singletons are scored
into two categories: (1) recalled, FI' and (2) not recalled,
F2. As we indicated earlier, MPT models can be represented by processing trees, and Figure 1presents the tree
diagram for the pair-clustering model. The model in Figure 1 postulates two processing trees-one for the pairs
and one for the singletons-which technically makes it
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
CATEGORY PAIRS
I-c~ 2U pair-clustering model for
measuring storage and retrieval processes.
a joint MPT model , a variety of MPT
model described formally in the next section.
The model contains three parameters, c, r, and u, each
designed to measure a different cognitive process. Parameter c measures the probability that the members of a pair
are clustered and that the cluster is stored in memory during study. Parameter r is the conditional probability that
a stored cluster is subsequently retrieved from memory
during free recall. Because both parameters are probabilities, they must satisfy 0 ::5 c, r ::5 1. The top branch in
Figure 1 has a probability cr, which is the probability of
both storing and retrieving the cluster. The model assigns
this branch to category E1 on the assumption that retrieved clusters are recalled adjacently. The next branch
has probability c (1 - r), representing successful cluster
storage but unsuccessful retrieval. This branch is assigned
to category E4, indicating recall of neither item in the
pair. Notice that this is one of two branches that lead to
category E4, the other being at the lowest branch of the
tree representing unsuccessful cluster storage. This illustrates one of the main characteristics ofMPT models
mentioned earlier-namely, that a particular response
category can be obtained by more than one processing sequence or branch.
The third parameter, u, is the joint probability that a
singleton is stored and retrieved. The tree for singletons
is simple, reflecting a basic Bernoulli process in which
singletons are either recalled or not with probability U or
1 - u, respectively. Notice, however, that parameter u
also appears in the tree for clusterable pairs. Here, it reflects a deeper assumption of the model-namely, that
each item in a pair that is not clustered (with probability
I - c) is processed independently, with the same probability of recall as a singleton. In this case, u is the probability of storing and retrieving an item in a pair, conditional on it not being stored as a cluster. This dual
interpretation of parameter u is a strong assumption, but
it can be evaluated by testing the model in Figure I,
which has three parameters and four degrees offreedom
(three for the pairs and one for the singletons), against
the more general model that allows the value of u for pairs
to be different from that of the singletons.
Another strong assumption in the model concerns the
recall ofnonclustered pairs. Notice that with probability
(I - c)u 2, items in a pair are not clustered, and they are
both recalled independently. This branch is assigned to
category E2 , reflecting nonadjacent recall of the pair.
This assumption is surely wrong in detail, because there
is a random possibility for two nonclustered items to be
recalled adjacently.The assumption is therefore clearly an
approximation, but one that greatly simplifies the analysis of the model and still allows the model to reflect the
main processing stages in the task. Even with this simplifying assumption, the model equations, representing category probabilities in terms of parameters, can be complicated. For example, for event E4,
P(E4) = c(1 - r) + (I - c)(1 - u)2,
which is a third-degree polynomial in the model's parameters. Among other things, this means that if P(E4) varies
between groups in an experiment, it could be from changes
in any subset of the three parameters.
Batchelder and Riefer's Source-Monitoring Model
The second example of MPT modeling is our model
for source monitoring . Source
monitoring concerns the ability to remember the source
of information acquired earlier. In a typical sourcemonitoring experiment, subjects study a list ofitems from
two sources, A and B (e.g., List I or List 2, male or female
voice). Subjects are then given a recognition-type test in
which they must respond to old items and new distractors
by classifying them as Source A, Source B, or New. The
model for this paradigm is presented in Figure 2, and it
specifies a processing tree for each of the three types of
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
SOURCE A ITEMS
SOURCE B ITEMS
I-d l source-monitoring model.
items. Considering all three trees, there is a total of7 parameters in the model, 15 processing branches, and 9 response categories (3 for each tree, A, B, and N).
The model assumes that subjects first "detect" whether
an item is old with probabilities D!, D 2, or b for old A,
old B, or new items, respectively. If an old item is detected
as old, then d, and d2 measure the capacity to discriminate
the source of old A and B items, respectively. On the
other hand, if the item is new but incorrectly detected as
old, then only a guessing process, measured by parameter g, determines which source the item is assigned to.
If discrimination of the source ofan old item fails (with
probability 1 - d., i = 1,2), then another guessing process determines the source assignment, this time measured by parameter a. Finally, if an old item is not detected as old (with probability 1 - D i ) , it is treated as a
new item, and the new-item tree is the continuation of
the tree on the 1 - D, branches.
There are a number of points that emerge from the
model in Figure 2. First, it embeds some fairly strong psychological theory. For example, the model assumes that
old-new detection precedes source discrimination and
that correct source discrimination of an old item (apart
from guessing) can occur only if the item is detected as
old. A secondpoint is that some parameters appear in more
than one tree (i.e., a, g, and b). Most of these parameters
can be interpreted as conditional probabilities, because
they appear on links later in the tree, conditional on the
success or failure ofother processes. For example, in the
two trees for old items, b is the conditional probability of
deciding that an old item is old, given that it was not detected as old. But notice that b also appears in the tree for
new items as an unconditional probability, that a new item
is "detected" (biased) to be old. Thus, b plays a similar
role in all trees (i.e., as a bias for responding "old").
However, it is evoked in the trees in different places and
with different meanings when viewed as an event probability. A third point is that, as with most MPT models,
the event probabilities are sums ofproducts ofthe underlying parameters, a particular type ofnonlinear function.
For example, the probability of correctly identifying an
item from Source A is
P("A"I A) = D, d, + D!(1 - d})a + (1 - D! )bg,
which is technically a third-degree polynomial in D!, d,
a, g, and b and represents an interaction of all the cognitive processes postulated in the model.
STRUCTURE OF MPT MODELS
Structural Properties
The structural characteristics of MPT models have
been described in detail in two previous articles. In Riefer
and Batchelder , we discuss statistical inference
for parametric multinomial models and give three examples. All three examples are represented in a tree diagram,
and they satisfy strong structural properties. Hu and
Batchelder formally capture these structural properties for a class ofmodels, which they term general processing tree (GPT) models. In this paper, we use the term
multinomialprocessing tree (MPT) models to cover GPT
models, as well as a slight extension described later in this
The formal requirements for constructing MPT models
cover two aspects: (I) generating the tree structure, and
(2) parameterizing the tree structure. We start by considering a single category system. For the tree structure,
there are J observable categories, C" C2, ..., CJ ; for each
category, there is one or more processing branches that
lead to that category. Each branch is composed of a sequence of one or more directed links. Formally, the tree
itself has three kinds of nodes: the root, the intermediate
nodes, and the terminal nodes. The root is the starting
point and is the unique node where there are no incoming links. The intermediate nodes correspond to various
states of processing that may occur. The terminal nodes
are the categories themselves. At any node, except for
the category end nodes, there may be two or more directed links (out arcs), and these correspond to various
directions that the processing sequence can take at that
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
where Bij is the ith branch that leads to category Cj, Cij
is a positive number, and aijsand bijs are nonnegative integers (see Hu & Batchelder, I 994b, for details). The requirements in Equation 2 are often met by having many
of the values for the ailSand bijsequal to zero.
To illustrate, consider the pair-clustering model in Figure I. The tree reveals that categories E I' Ez, and E3 have
only one branch, whereas E4 has two branches. The parameter vector is 0 = (c, r, u), and, to take one example,
the branch probabilities for category E4 in terms ofEquation 2 are
point. Thus, the processing tree consists of a single root
and a collection or processing branches, each terminating in a particular response category.
To parameterize the tree structure, the model must
specify S functionally independent parameters, as' s = I,
..., S, and a parameter space 0
, .,Os'" .,Os) E
[O,I]S (i.e., the S dimensional unit hypercube). The reason
for the restriction that°:::; Os :::; I is that the parameters
are interpreted as probabilities of various underlying
cognitive processes. At each nonterminal category node,
there is a probability distribution over the directed links
that proceed from that node, and these distributions are
required to satisfy a certain functional form in the underlying parameters, described in Hu and Batchelder .
These requirements on the functional form of the link
probabilities lead to a particular form for the branch
probabilities, given by
P(Bij;0)=cijIIO;u'(I-Os)ij"
P(B 1,4;0 ) = I XCi rOu0(l - c)0(l - r)'(1 - u)O
P(B2,4;0 ) = 1 X cOrou0(l - C)l(l - r)°(l - u)2
= (l - c)(l - u)2.
In practice, the tree structure of many MPT models
has a binary, single-parameter form where there are only
two directed links from any nonterminal node, with one
link having probability Os and the other I -
Os' In this
case of binary, single-parameter links, it is easy to see
that Equation 2 holds, with cij = I, because aijs and bijS
are just the number oflinks in the branch that have Os and
I - 0" respectively, This is the case with all the MPT models depicted in the figures, except Figure I, and the tree for
clusterable pairs in Figure I is easily redesigned to meet
the binary structure if the extension of the I - c link is
rewritten as two successive binary, single-parameter links
with parameter u.
Once the tree structure of the model has been established, the category probabilities are given, from Equation 2, by
which is a derivation of Equation I.
The key to the statistical analysis ofMPT models is the
fact that, ifthe branch frequencies are known in addition
to the category frequencies, then the maximum likelihood
estimates (MLEs) ofall the parameters can be written in
a simple closed-form expression. Hu and Batchelder
 show this in general, but to illustrate suppose that
we have an MPT model written as a binary, singleparameter tree. Further suppose that each branch leads to
a unique category (i.e.'!j = I for all) = 1,2, ... ,J), and,
thus, the branch frequencies, ~, are all known. Then, it is
easy to see that the MLEs of the Os are given by
where s = 1,2, ... , S. Equation 4 is easily interpreted: It
is the number oftimes a link with probability Os is taken,
divided by the number of times a binary link with parameter Os is encountered. In other words, Equation 4 is
just a version of the well-known fact that the proportion
of"successes" is the MLE for the probability ofa success
in a Bernoulli process.
The structural and parametric requirements of MPT
models, especially those of Equations 2 and 3, are sufficiently restrictive to yield many consequences that are
described in detail by Hu and Batchelder . Most
importantly, they show that statistical inference, including goodness offit, point and interval parameter estimation, and hypothesis testing, is straightforward for members of the model family by employing the expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm . The EM algorithm
is a well-known iterative method for obtaining MLEs for
certain statistical models, in which some of the data can
be regarded as missing. In this case, the missing data are
assumed to be the branch frequencies, subject to constraint
by the category frequencies (which are known), The EM
algorithm starts by selecting initial estimates for the
branch frequencies, then MLEs of the parameters are
computed by a formula, such as Equation 4, then the
branch frequencies are reestimated, and so on. Under
where I; is the number of branches terminating in Category}, and} = I, ...,J. Finally, the probabilistic structure
of the model requires that L P; (0)
= I, for all e =
(a" .. "Os' .. .,Os)E [0,I] s, which allows each parameter
to vary independently in . Thus, the parameters are
functionally independent, and each has its full range in
 . Given the restrictions on the branch probabilities, it
is easy to see that the category probabilities are polynomial
functions of the parameters. To illustrate from Figure I,
P(E 4) = PCB 1,4; 0) + P(Bz,4 ; 0)
= c(1 - r) + (l - c)(l - u)2,
Pj (0) = I,P(Bij;0),
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
fairly general conditions, this algorithm necessarily leads
to at least a local maximum in the likelihood function for
MPT models, as shown in Hu and Batchelder .
The EM algorithm has a number of statistical advantages in working with MPT models over ad hoc iterative
search routines, such as STEPIT . First,
it is not necessary to specify step size. Second, it provides
asymptotic approximations to the variance-covariance
matrix of the parameter estimators at the end ofthe search.
Third, for the class of MPT models, it is guaranteed to
produce a local minimum of the loglikelihood measure
G2, the quantity whose global minimization yields the
MLEs. Fourth, it enables statistical inference to be accomplished within a single framework.
There are two potential disadvantages ofthe EM algorithm that Hu and Batchelder have shown do not
apply in the case ofMPT models. First, for some classes
of models, the EM algorithm is slow relative to other iterative search routines, such as ones based on gradient
search methods. However, for the MPT class, both the
expectation step and the maximization step are in simple,
closed-form expressions; so no iterative search is required
within each cycle ofthe algorithm. Second, the EM algorithm is designed to obtain only MLEs; however, in Hu
and Batchelder , it is extended to the entire Read
and Cressie family of goodness-of-fit statistics for categorical models .
This family includes not only G2 but other traditional fit
methods, such as minimum chi-square and modified minimum chi-square.
There exists computer software based on the EM algorithm that has been developed by Xiangen Hu to handle
all forms ofMPT models. Researchers can use the graphic
capabilities of this program to construct and display
model trees, modify the trees, and combine many trees
to form joint MPT models. Multiple data sets for analysis by the model can be input and saved, and the program
performs all of the basic statistical calculations needed
for MPT modeling, including parameter estimation (with
confidence intervals), hypothesis testing, and model
simulation. The program can be obtained by accessing
the GPT website established in 1996 at 
memphis.eduigpt/, where researchers can view documentation and download the program. Other computer programs specifically designed for other models can also be
downloaded from this site, such as a program based on
Batchelder and Riefer's source-monitoring model.
Global Identifiability
The statistical inference results for MPT models described above require that models satisfy a property called
global identifiability. To illustrate, the source-monitoring
model in Figure 2 has seven parameters, but there are only
6 degrees offreedom (df) in the data (i.e., each item type
is scored into three response categories, so each item type
yields 2 df). One consequence ofthis surplus ofparameters is that it is not possible to uniquely estimate the model's parameters from data. Global identifiability ofa model
holds if there is at most one parameter vector underlying
a given probability distribution over the categories.
More formally, suppose one has an MPT model with
categories Cj, ..., CJ and parameters 8
= (el , ... , es).
Letp(8) = [p,(8), ...,p;(8)] express the category probabilities as a function of the parameter vector 8. Then,
the model is globally identifiable ifp(8) =p(8*) implies
8 = 8* for all 8,8* E (0, I)s. A consequence of global
identifiability is that if a probability distribution p =
(PI' ... ,pJ) is satisfied by the MPT model, then it is satisfied uniquely for some 8. Thus, ifthe model holds, then,
in principle, one can identify the latent parameter vector
8 given knowledge ofthe category probabilities. Global
identifiability is a desirable condition for using the model
as a measurement tool, because the process of deriving parameter values from category data leads to unique parameter estimates. Of course, a model may be testable (i.e.,
falsifiable) even if it fails to satisfy global identifiability
 .
Batchelder and Riefer were able to achieve
global identifiability for the source-monitoring model in
Figure 2 by considering several psychologically motivated
ways to reduce the number of parameters. In particular,
they considered three restrictions ofthe model: (I) equal
source detection probabilities (D, = D2 ) , (2) equal source
discrimination probabilities (d, = d 2 ), and (3) equal response-bias probabilities (a = g). By imposing one or
more of these restrictions, a family of seven new models
can be generated (six ofwhich are globally identifiable);
Batchelder and Riefer have proposed that this family,rather than a single model, be used to analyze sourcemonitoring data.
Joint MPT Models
Psychological paradigms yielding categorical data
often involve more than one system of categories-for
example, where each category system reflects a particular
type of item. If responses to item types are independent,
then the most general statistical model is a product of
multinomial distributions, one for each category system.
Joint MPT models postulate a separate processing tree for
each ofthese category systems; however, if there is some
overlap in processing events among the types of items,
then a given parameter may occur in more than one of
these trees. Another natural way that joint MPT models
arise is the case in which one has data from two or more
groups ofsubjects in the same paradigm. To test hypotheses about possible differences in parameters between
groups, one constructs an identical processing tree for each
group and then compares the fit of the versions where a
given parameter is the same or different between groups.
Joint MPT models join the separate processing trees
by representing the item types or subject groups as initial branches in one tree leading to each of the separate
processing trees. Thus, ajoint MPT model may be viewed
as a hierarchical, two-stage model, in which the first
stage reflects an experimenter assignment of item types
or subject groups, and the second reflects the subjects'
responses to each item. Both the pair-clustering model
and the source-modeling model described above are examples ofjoint MPT models. Hu and Batchelder 
formalize joint MPT models and show that the statistical
inference theory for MPT models extends naturally to
joint MPT models.
Reparameterization
Several MPT models that will be discussed later do
not satisfy the stringent parametric form required in Equations 2 and 3. For example, Batchelder, Hu, and Riefer
 extended the source-monitoring model in Figure 2
to cover the case of three or more sources. The extension
required guessing parameters for each source (e.g., g"
g2' and g3 = 1 - g 1- g2 for three sources). Clearly, this
extension requires that g, + g2 :::; 1, which restricts the
parameter space from the requirement in Equation 3 that
each parameter independently can take any value in .
However, in the case ofthree sources one can reparameterize the model by introducing two new parameters, g, *
and g2*' 0:::; gl*' g2* :::; 1, where g, = gl*' g2 = (1 gl*)g2*' and g , = (1 - g,*)(1 - g2*)' The reparameterized model is equivalent to the original model, in the
sense that it can generate exactly the same set of probability distributions. Furthermore, it has the same number
ofparameters and satisfies the structural requirements of
Equations 2 and 3.
More generally, in this article, we include as MPT models any parametric processing-tree form that can be reparameterized as an equivalent model, with the same number of parameters, satisfying Equations 2 and 3. So far,
all of the models that we classify as MPT models in this
article are easily reparameterized to satisfy these constraints. In fact, using the above definition, the general
multinomial distribution for, say,J categories, is itselfan
MPT model. This is because it is always possible to reparameterize this distribution into MPT form by using an
extension to J categories of the strategy above for reparameterizing the guessing parameters in the sourcemonitoring model for three sources.
It is not the case, however, that all probabilistic models
for categorical data belong to the MPT class. Any model
for J categories corresponds to a particular subset of all
possible probability distributions on J categories, and there
are many subsets (most, in fact) that cannot be modeled
exactly by the MPT form in Equations 2 and 3. Thus, the
MPT class does not contain all parametric models for
categorical data. In this sense, it would be incorrect to view
MPT modeling as a "universal framework," incapable of
being falsified and able to fit categorical data over any
set of experiments.
APPLICATION AREAS
In this section, we review the scope of MPT modeling
by describing its application to a number of different
areas in cognitive psychology. There is a rapidly growing
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
literature on developing and testing MPT models for various paradigms, and the review includes over 80 articles
that involve MPT models. There are several cognitive areas
that utilize these modeling efforts, and we use these to organize the review. The examples below also provide illustrations for various theoretical and statistical issues that
we discuss in subsequent sections.
Models for Traditional Memory Paradigms
Perhaps the most common application of l\1PT modeling has been in the area ofhuman memory. Much ofour
own published work has been in this area, including the
two MPT models in the previous section. In this section,
we describe a series ofmodels that have been developed
for three long-standing and traditional issues in memory
research: interference, association, and short-term memory (STM).
Interference effects. One of the first examples of an
MPT type of model is a model for proactive inhibition
developed by DaPolito . The experimental paradigm behind the model is
known as modified-modified free recall (MMFR), involving a paired-associate task in which subjects learn a
list of A-B pairs, followed by a second list containing
the same stimuli paired with different responses (A-C).
Subjects are given the stimuli and asked to generate both
responses. Proactive inhibition occurs when the recall of
the C terms is poorer than a control group that does not
study the A-B list. The basic idea behind the DaPolito
model is that items sharing a common stimulus are stored
within the same retrieval network, which is accessed with
probabilityp. Ifthe network is successfully accessed, then
retrieval of each item occurs independently, with probability q for Item Band r for Item C. Although Greeno et al.
 never presented or analyzed the model in MPT
form, Riefer and Batchelder demonstrated how an
MPT structure for the model could be generated and derived closed-form MLEs and asymptotic confidence intervals for the model's parameters.
A version of the DaPolito model is shown in
Figure 3. The model in Figure 3 is a general version that
is appropriate not only for situations involving two distinct
types ofitems (such as the DaPolito application) but also
for some tasks involving two successive tests ofmemory.
Like the DaPolito model, the model assumes that items
are stored in memory with probability s, and then retrieval
is conditionally independent on successful storage, with
probability r1 for the first test and r2 for the second. It
should be easy to see that parameters p, q, and r in the
DaPolito model correspond respectively to parameters s,
r" and r2 here. There are four recall events for the model:
successful recall on both tests (SS), successful recall on
Test 1 but not Test 2 (SF), successful recall on Test 2 but
not Test I (FS), and recall failure on both tests (FF). Both
Riefer and Batchelder and Bender, Wallsten, and
Ornstein have used this model for situations involving repeated testing of memory, and details of these
applications will be reviewed later.
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
Figure 3. An MPT model for measuring storage and retrieval
processes in paradigms involving two type of items or two successive memory tests.
Greeno et al. were interested in investigating
the independent retrieval phenomenon, which is the observation that the recall of Band C is stochastically independent evenwhen strong interference effects occur. They
applied the model to an experiment in which they manipulated the number of A-B presentations before the A-C
list. Even though strong interference effects were obtained
in the experiment, the number ofA-B presentations did
not significantly influence the probability ofrecalling C.
In terms ofthe model's parameters, Riefer and Batchelder
 were able to show that the number of A-B presentations significantly increased parameter q but had no
reliable effect on parameter r. This pattern ofresults provided strong support for the retrieval independence theory of proactive inhibition.
Riefer and Batchelder have also explored a paradigm similar to the one for proactive inhibition described
above. In their experimental task, subjects were presented with two lists in which similar stimuli were paired
with different responses (e.g., taxi-"2" and cab-''T').
This paradigm therefore involves an A-B, A'-C task, in
contrast to the A-B, A-C task used by Greeno et al.
 . In addition, both presentation and testing were
alternated between the A-B and A'-C items, unlike the
Greeno et al. task in which all study trials on the A-B list
occurred before the study trials ofthe A-C list. Because
the stimulus terms in the Riefer-Batchelder task
were related and potentially confusable, subjects had to
learn to discriminate between A and A' before they could
successfully associate the proper responses.
A key component in Riefer and Batchelder's 
analysis was their expansion of the traditional errorsuccess data to include confusion errors. These are errors
in which the response for one stimulus is actually given
for the related stimulus (e.g., responding "7" to taxi).
They also included data from unique paired associates
(i.e., ones with stimulus terms that were distinct from
one another). This yielded enough response events for the
creation ofan MPT model capable ofmeasuring the pro-
cess ofstimulus-response learning separately from stimulus discrimination. Riefer and Batchelder were
able to derive closed-form solutions for the parameter estimates, including asymptotic confidence regions. The
model was applied to a repeated-trials experiment, and it
showedthat, over early trials, the A'-C pairs exhibited less
stimulus-response learning and more stimulus confusion than did the A-B pairs, which had the advantage of
being presented first on each trial. This difference disappeared over later trials, however, as subjects learned to discriminate between the similar stimuli.
Associative recall. The study of memory for related
or associated information has a long history in psychological research. B. H. Ross and Bower explored
different theoretical accounts of associative memory in
order to determine which theories do the best job of describing empirical data. Their basic paradigm required
subjects to memorize clusters offour or five words related
by a common theme (e.g., apron, chair, brush, clip: haircut), followed by a memory test in which one, two, or
three words from the cluster were provided as retrieval
cues. As B. H. Ross and Bower noted, this task goes beyond the traditional paired-associate methodology in
which items consist ofword pairs, with one of the words
cuing the other. The purpose ofusing larger clusters and
potentially more cues was to provide a more detailed set
of data for discriminating between different theories.
B. H. Ross and Bower tested three formal models ofassociative recall: the horizontal model, the schema
model, and Jones's fragment model. For the horizontal
model, items are stored separately but have direct associations to each other. The two parameters of the model
represent the probability that each item is stored within
the associative structure and the probability that a stored
item leads to retrieval of an associated item. For the
schema model, items are also stored separately but are
connected to a common schema instead ofbeing directly
associated to each other. This model also has two parameters: the probability that an item has access to the schema,
and the conditional probability that an accessed schema
leads to retrieval of an associated item. The final model
tested was Jones's fragment model. This model assumes
that items are not stored separately but instead are associated within fragments, or "chunks," of different sizes,
with no associated links between the fragments. Parameters of the model represent the probabilities that each
type of fragment is stored within memory. The structure
ofeach fragment determines whether one item will successfully cue another, because an item can cue another
item only if they share the same fragment.
All three models can be represented in the MPT class,
and B. H. Ross and Bower were able to obtain
minimum chi-square parameter estimates and assess the
goodness of fit of the models. They accomplished this
by using STEPIT to minimize the chisquare difference between the models' predictions and the
actual data frequencies. In general, the fragment model
performed poorly across a series of three experiments.
The horizontal model fared somewhat better, providing
a good quantitative fit to data in one experiment but poor
fits on two others. The best overall results occurred for
the schema model, which provided the best fits over the
three studies. B. H. Ross and Bower discuss the difficulty of choosing a specific theoretical framework when
exploring the underlying structure of semantic memory,
and they conclude that the schema model "may be recommended for use by investigators working on associative learning but wishing to avoid the strong commitment to specific structural representations of memories
made by extant theories of the day" (p. 15).
Short-term memory. Schweickert has developed a simple MPT model designed to capture the basic
processes in immediate recall ofshort lists ofitems from
STM. The model assumes that ifa memory trace is intact
(with probability I), then an item is directly recalled. If
the trace is too degraded for a direct readout (with probability I - I), it may be reconstructed (with probability
R) using other cognitive processes. This model predicts
that successful recall from STM has the function
P(recall) = 1+(1 - I)R, an equation in the same form
as the one originally proposed by Waugh and Norman
 . The model itselfdoes not have enough degrees of
freedom to obtain separate estimates for both I and R from
a single set ofempirical data. However,Hulme et al. 
were able to apply the model to a series of experiments
examining the effects ofword frequency and word length
on serial position curves. By making two assumptionsthat the value ofI is the same for low- and high-frequency
words, and that R is a constant across serial position-
Hulme et al. were able to apply the model to data, estimate
parameter values, and measure goodness offit. The model
did a generally good job of fitting the data and correctly
predicted that recall differences between high- and lowfrequency words would increase across serial position.
Storage-Retrieval Models
Figure 1 presents an MPT model for separately measuring cluster storage from cluster retrieval. In general, the
measurement ofstorage and retrieval processes in memory represents one of the most common applications of
MPT models. This is because a storage-retrieval account
ofmemory allows for memory failure to be explained by
more than one process (e.g., storage failure, or retrieval
failure despite successful storage). A recurring issue in
memory research is whether memory phenomena are
caused primarily by differences in storage or retrieval capacities, and a wide variety ofstorage-retrieval hypotheses has been proposed in many areas ofmemory research
 . The MPT models reviewedbelow represent different attempts to measure these
two processes separately. As will be seen, each model is
applied to a different paradigm, and, thus, each makes different theoretical assumptions about how empirical statistics can be translated into measures of storage and retrieval. Most of the following models are motivated by
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
informal assumptions that have been previously used by
researchers to make qualitative evaluations ofstorage and
retrieval. The advantage ofthe models is that they are able
to take these informal assumptions and make them more
explicit, thus providing quantitative measures of these
processes that may vary as a function ofexperimental manipulations.
Chechile's storage-retrieval model. One of the first
explicit applications ofprocess-tree modeling in psychology was a storage-retrieval model developed by Chechile
 . The experimental paradigm for the model involves a standard memory task in
which recall trials are randomly supplemented with recognition trials. On the recognition trials, subjects are required to give a "yes"-"no" response along with a confidence rating on a 3-point scale. The data events for the
model arise from the combination ofrecall data, recognition data, and confidence ratings, and these data provide
enough information to estimate storage (Os), retrieval
(OR)' and various guessing and response-bias parameters.
The basic idea behind the Chechile model rests on a
common assumption in memory research-that recall
requires both storage and retrieval (represented as Os and
OR in the model), whereas recognition depends only on
sufficient storage. By incorporating these assumptions
into a formal model, measurement ofstorage and retrieval
capacities becomes possible. More recently, Chechile
 has extended this modeling approach to measure
fractional storage. The assumption behind this new work
is that storage failure (1 -
Os) can be subdivided into
fractional (or partial) storage and no storage. Thus, the
new model does not make storage an all-or-none process, and, therefore, it gives a more detailed and possibly more correct measure of storage processes.
One advantage of the Chechile model is that it
can be applied to a number of different memory paradigms. For example, the model has been used to measure
storage and retrieval processes in serial list learning , paired-associate learning , and the Brown-Peterson paradigm
 .
Furthermore, Chechile and his associates have applied the
model to a wide range of basic memory issues, including interference effects , the
serial position curve , acoustic
similarity , semantic memory , and others. This corpus of experimental results also provides a number of validation tests of
the model as a tool for separately measuring storage and
retrieval factors. Experimental manipulations have been
shown to have a selective influence on specific parameters; for example, increasing search time improves OR
without affecting Os , acoustic
similarity influences Os but not OR' and manipulating the
similarity of foils in the recognition task changes the
guessing parameter without influencing Os or OR'
Riefer and Rouder . The Chechile 
model uses the contrast between recall and recognition to
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
measure storage and retrieval. Riefer and Rouder 
have proposed a model for measuring storage and retrieval
that examines the contrast between free and cued recall.
The model is based on the assumption that free recall reflects both storage and retrieval processes, whereas cued
recall is a more direct indicator ofstorage alone. The experimental paradigm behind the model involves a pairedassociate task in which memory for noun pairs is tested
successively with free recall followed by cued recall. For
free recall, there are three possible responses-both nouns,
one noun, or neither noun in a pair can be recalledwhereas cued recall results in successful or unsuccessful
recall of the second noun given the first as the cue. This
results in six (3 X 2) response categories when performance is combined across both free recall and cued recall.
Rouder and Batchelder have developed a family
of closely related alternative versions of this model and
have explored a number of their statistical properties.
Riefer and Rouder used the model to investigate the bizarreness effect, the observation that bizarre or
unusual stimuli are recalled better than common stimuli.
The model revealed that bizarre stimuli are retrieved better from memory, but not stored better, than common
stimuli. Conversely, Riefer and LaMay demonstrated in a follow-up study that common stimuli are
stored in memory better than bizarre stimuli. These findings help explain why the bizarreness effect has been
weak or nonexistent in many previous studies that have
relied solely on traditional statistical analyses, such as
ANOVA. Depending on the relative contribution ofstorage and retrieval processes, the combined empirical effect ofthese two factors, as measured by ad hoc statistics,
such as percent correct, can produce conflicting memory
results that may be hard to interpret. The above examples
are good illustrations ofhow MPT models can disentangle the relative contributions of separate cognitive processes, especially when these processes have opposite effects on the empirical data.
Batchelder and Riefer . Earlier, we described in detail our pair-clustering model for measuring
storage and retrieval (see Figure I). The basic assumption behind that model is that adjacent recall is taken as
an indication ofsuccessful storage and retrieval ofa pair
cluster, whereas nonadjacent recall is an indication of
failure to store a pair as a cluster. Variations ofthis model
include an extension by Riefer to clusters ofmore
than two items and Markov versions of the model by
Batchelder and Riefer and Bauml . Like
the Chechile model, the Batchelder-Riefer model
has been applied to a number of different theoretical issues and experimental variables. For example, Riefer and
Batchelder showed that memory loss caused by
retroactive inhibition (RI) is due to poorer retrievability
and not storage, a finding that was replicated by Bauml
 . However, another experiment by Bauml 
revealed that storage factors can playa role in RI when
spaced presentation of the word lists is used, in contrast
to the blocked presentation used by Riefer and Batchelder
 . The model has also been used to conduct storageretrieval analyses on a number ofbasic variables that are
known to affect memory. For example, we have
shown that storage capacity is improved by longer presentation rates, higher category association, and smaller
interitem lags. In contrast, retrieval capacity benefits from
cuing during recall and large interitem lags. These findings are consistent with reasonable psychological assumptions about the separate effects ofthese variables on storage and retrieval.
Children's memory. Issues of storage and retrieval
play an important role in theories of children's memory.
The question is whether the main developmental changes
in memory are due to changes in storage or retrieval capacities, or possibly both. For example, the Chechile
 model has been applied to this issue, showing that
both storage and retrieval abilities improve across age
groups, although not necessarily at the same rate . A number ofother MPT models have
been proposed to measure these processes in children.
The models use different memory paradigms; however,
they all involve repeated recall, in which the child's memory for an event or word list is tested over a series ofsuccessive recall tests.
Howe strace-integrity model. The most extensive application ofMPT modeling to children's memory has been
conducted by Howe and his associates . In their experimental paradigm, children learn a list ofwords to criterion, followed
at various delays by four successive recall attempts ofthe
list. The data events consist ofthe 16 (24) four-tuples that
result when all combinations of successful and unsuccessful recall are tabulated for each item across the four
trials. The model itself is based on trace-integrity theory
 , which assumes that stored
memory traces can be forgotten but that it is also possible
to restore decayed memory traces through reminiscence.
The model thus contains storage and retrieval parameters,
as well as parameters for various forms ofreminiscence.
The trace-integrity model has been used by Howe and
his associates to examine developmental trends in a large
corpus of experiments . The overall results of these studies are argued to support the hypothesis that age-related memory
differences tend to reflect storage capacity more strongly
than retrieval capacity. This is based on experiments in
which developmental differences are found for storage but
not retrieval , as well as studies in which storage and retrieval both increase with age
but with stronger changes for storage . In addition to age differences, the trace-integrity model has also been applied
to a number of other factors that have been previously
known to influence memory, with theoretically plausible
results. For example, the model has shown that pictures
are both stored and retrieved better than words , that semantically related items are stored better
in memory than unrelated items ,
and that extra presentation trials benefit storage but not
retrieval . Other studies have examined the
influence of postevent information on children's memories. Howe, Courage, and Bryant-Brown found that
reinstating memories after a 3-week interval improves
storage and retrieval rates, but with a stronger effect on
storage, whereas Howe observed that RI adversely
affects storage capacity, with weak or no effects on retrieval capacity.
Memory in language-impaired children. A model similar to Howe's was developed earlier by Kail, Hale,
Leonard, and Nippold . Their model is also based
on the theoretical framework that stored traces can be
strengthened by recall procedures, although the specifics
of their model differ somewhat from Howe's. In addition,
the experimental task behind the Kail et al. model involves only three successive recall attempts instead of
four,resulting in eight (23) data events. Despite fewer data
categories, there are still enough degrees of freedom in
the data to estimate the model's parameters.
Kail et al. used this model to explore memory
deficits in language-impaired children. Their empirical
analysis focused on the differences between free and cued
recall performance and indicated the presence of strong
storage deficits. However,these empirical results were not
clear-cut concerning whether retrieval deficits were also
a contributing factor. The model clearly revealed that
memory problems in language-impaired children were
the result of both storage and retrieval deficits. This example and the previous studies by Howe and his associates nicely illustrate the advantages of formal modeling
over ad hoc statistics in the measurement ofcognitive processes. When multiple cognitive processes influence behavior, it is sometimes difficult using traditional statistical techniques to determine whether a single factor or a
combination offactors is the primary cause of the behavior. MPT models can provide a more formal and quantitative measure of each cognitive process, which can be
helpful in establishing their relative contributions in different experimental situations.
Memoryfor personal experiences. Bender et al. 
have also applied a storage-retrieval model to children's
memory; however, unlike the above studies, they examined memory for the real-life events experienced during
a visit to the doctor. Children (3-7 years old) made two
recall attempts for these events, one immediately after
the visit and one after a delay. This created four (22) possibilities for successful (S) or unsuccessful (F) recall: SS,
SF, FS, and FE As Bender et al. pointed out, the model
they developed was equivalent in form to the one developed by DaPolito for proactive inhibition, represented in Figure 3. As stated earlier, the model has three
parameters, a storage parameter plus a conditional retrieval parameter for each of the two recalls. Thus, there
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
are enough degrees of freedom (3) to uniquely estimate
parameter values,but not enough to testthe fit ofthe model
to data from a single group of subjects.
However, Bender et al. were able to generate a
nested hierarchy of models by constraining certain parameters to be equal across age and recall attempts. By
doing so, they were able to test the fit of different nested
models, especially those making assumptions about storage or retrieval changes across age groups. The results
showed that while storage capacity improved significantly
with age, the strongest developmental improvements
were due to retrieval. This finding contrasts to the analyses based on Howe's model discussed earlier, which has
recorded developmental gains for both storage and retrieval abilities in a different paradigm. However, Howe's
research suggests that storage improvements across age
tend to be much larger than improvements in retrieval.
Of course, the memory paradigms differ in the two studies, and further research and modeling analysis will be
needed to determine the precise circumstances leading to
storage or retrieval differences across age groups.
Recognition failure. A curious observation in memory research is that it is possible to correctly recall words
that earlier could not be recognized, a phenomenon
known as recognition failure of recallable words. This
occurs within the recognition-failure paradigm, in which
paired associates (A-B) are presented to subjects followed by two memory tests: a recognition test for the B
terms, followed by a cued recall test ofthe B terms given
the A terms as cues. The data consist of a 2 X 2 table of
correct and incorrect responses for both recognition and
recall. Riefer and Batchelder have used a simple
MPT model to measure storage and retrieval processes in
this paradigm and, in particular, to explore the Tulving-
Wiseman function, which
predicts a systematic relationship between recognition
versus recognition given recall. One version of the model
is structurally equivalent to the one in Figure 3, where r,
and ": are the retrieval probabilities of recognition and
cued recall, respectively. Riefer and Batchelder 
show that this model is actually a special case of the more
elaborate retrieval-independence theory of recognition
failure , which assumes that
item retrieval during recognition and during cued recall are
conditionally independent events, given that the item is
successfully stored.
In particular, we have applied the model in Figure 3 to
a large corpus of data from recognition-failure studies
collected by Nilsson and Gardiner . The simplicity
ofthe model allowed us to explore some of the basic properties of this paradigm, as well as the Tulving-Wiseman
function itself. For example, we were able to generate
specific predictions, in the form ofmodel equations, as a
function of certain theoretical assumptions. Among other
things, the model revealed that exceptions to the Tulving-
Wiseman function occur only when weak storage is coupled with strong retrieval. By assuming that storage and
retrieval capacities are positively correlated within a par-
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
ticular condition, we were able to show that the MPT
model sheds light on why the Tulving-Wiseman function appears to fit data so well. However, we also showed
that the Tulving-Wiseman function has surprising consequences for data that are not satisfied, and, thus, the
function itself (but not the MPT model) has a questionable status.
Another application of MPT
modeling to the
recognition-failure paradigm has been conducted by
Humphreys and Bowyer . Their contention is that
priming during the recognition test plays a significant
role in this paradigm, due to the fact that the presentation
ofthe B term during recognition could boost the memory
for B on the subsequent recall task. To explore this,
Humphreys and Bowyer developed an MPT model that
incorporates a parameter for priming, as well as parameters for storing items and correctly recognizing them
given sufficient or insufficient storage. Given the precise
structure of the model, they were able to incorporate different theoretical assumptions and then determine the precise predictions ofthe model based on those assumptions.
For example, retrieval independence was incorporated in
the model by constraining two ofthe model's parameters
to be equal. By comparing the model's predictions with
the actual data, Humphreys and Bowyer were able to
argue that priming is in fact an important factor in the
recognition-failure paradigm. A related MPT model for
this paradigm can be found in Humphreys and Bain
Models of Source Memory
A common experimental task in memory research requires subjects to memorize information that comes from
multiple sources. An example of this is the sourcemonitoring paradigm described earlier. Sometimes, subjects are aware of these sources and are specifically instructed to keep track of which items come from which
sources. At other times, subjects are not informed that
different information may be coming from other sources,
such as occurs when inaccurate text information is presented in the eyewitness suggestibility effect . In either case, memory performance can be evaluated not only by accuracy on source memory but also by
the types of errors made when information is attributed
to the wrong source. The combination of successes and
errors to different sources yields a potentially rich set of
categorical data for the creation ofMPT models. In turn,
these models are capable of measuring basic cognitive
processes in these tasks, such as item detection, source
discrimination, and the cognitive effect that information
from one source can have on memories based on a different source.
Source monitoring. Our source-monitoring model
described in Figure 2 has been used in several studies to
investigate a variety of theoretical issues. For example,
Johnson, Kounios, and Reeder used a speededresponse paradigm to
compare the time course of source-monitoring judgments.
Subjects were required to make source judgments at lags
ranging from 300 to 1,500msec, and analysis bythe model
showed that recognition accuracy (as measured by D) develops more quickly than source accuracy (as measured
by d). This is consistent with the model's assumption that
item detection necessarilyprecedes source discrimination.
In another study, Mulligan examined the influence
of perceptual interference (e.g., briefexposure to stimuli
followed by a pattern mask) on various aspects ofmemory, including source monitoring. He found, somewhat
surprisingly, that certain levels ofperceptual interference
during encoding can actually enhance later recognition
memory, although it has no effect on source memory.
Other studies have used the model, as a supplement to
more traditional analyses, to investigate age differences
in source monitoring and
discrimination between true and false statements .
The source-monitoring model in Figure 2 has also
been extended in a number of important ways. Batchelder,
Hu, and Riefer have expanded the model to handle situations involving any number of sources, and, in
particular, Riefer, Hu, and Batchelder used a threesource version of this model to explore the role that response bias plays in source judgment. Batchelder, Riefer,
and Hu have proposed a low-threshold version of
the model, as well as one based on signal-detection theory.
In a more extensive study, Bayen, Murnane, and Erdfelder compared the original source-monitoring
model with various high- and low-threshold variations and
tested these models on data from a factorial experiment
manipulating item similarity and source similarity. They
argue that the only model to accurately account for their
data in a psychologically plausible way was a two-highthreshold (2HT) version, which differs from the original
model by postulating an additional parameter, D3, representing the probability that new distractors can be detected
as new. Bayen and Murnane successfully used
this model to investigate how older adults use perceptual
and temporal information to make source-monitoring
judgments. Erdfelder and Bredenkamp used a
variation of the 2HT model to study source memory for
script-typical versus script-atypical information, presentedin either whole or fragmentary form. Finally, Klauer
and Wegener provide an important new model for
the "Who said what?" paradigm in social categorization.
Process dissociation. An area closely related to source
monitoring is the process-dissociation paradigm. Jacoby
and coworkers have developed a two-process theory
of recognition memory based on Mandler's idea
that recognition of an item can occur either through a specific, conscious "recollection" ofthe item or from a sufficient feeling of "familiarity." Arguments for this distinction come from experiments designed to show that these
two processes can be dissociated (i.e., that they can be
affected differentially by experimental factors or individual differences). In an effort to separately measure recollection and familiarity, Jacoby invented the process-dissociation procedure. Two groups of subjects each
study two successive lists, followed by a "yes"-"no"
recognition test with old list items and new distractors.
Group 1 (the inclusion group) is instructed to say "yes"
for old items in either list, whereas Group 2 (the exclusion group) is instructed to say "yes" only to old List 2
items and to say "no" to old List 1 items and to distractors.
Jacoby developed a model for this paradigm,
which assumes there is a probability R that a list item is
recollected and probability F that it has sufficient familiarity to be called "old." The model further assumes that
the two processes are independent, yielding the equations
PI = P("yes" I List 1 item, Group 1)
Estimates ofRand F are generated by solving for Equations 5 and 6, yielding R = PI - P2and F = P2 / (1 - R).
As Buchner, Erdfelder, and Vaterrodt-Plunnecke
 note, it is easy to view the model in Equations 5
and 6 as a simple MPT model, with separate trees for
Group 1and Group 2 responses. But Buchner et al. 
also argue that there need to be trees for List 2 items as
well as distractors. In addition, unlike most MPT models
for recognition memory, there are no guessing probabilities in Jacoby's original formulation. On the other
hand, because ofthe experimental design, it might be expected that the exclusion group would have a lower bias
for "yes" responses than the inclusion group. As a consequence, Buchner et al. expanded the model to
include identifiable guessing probabilities and argued
that the model fit the data in a series of experiments designed to influence guessing but not memory processes.
They also challenged the necessity of postulating that
recollection and familiarity are independent processes.
In fact, Buchner and Erdfelder discuss models
that make recollection and familiarity mutually exclusive
processes, as well as ones in which one process is conditional on the other.
Yonelinas and Jacoby have proposed an alternative processing-tree model in which familiarity is handled by a Gaussian signal detection model, rather than a
discrete-state process characteristic of Buchner et al.s
MPT model. Yonelinas and Jacoby's model is motivated
by the desire to account for receiver operator characteristics (ROCs) based on confidence ratings, where subjects
indicate the confidence of their response assignment on
a discrete scale. With the addition ofconfidence ratings,
the data structure is still categorical, and, in fact, there are
= R + (l-R)F
P2 = P("yes" I List 1 item, Group 2)
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
even more categories to support a richer model. Yonelinas and Jacoby argue that the Buchner et al.
model is based on "high-threshold" assumptions (discussed later), which predict linear ROCs based on confidence ratings. In a well-argued reply, Erdfelder and
Buchner show that this is not the case, and they
extend their MPT model to predict confidence rating data,
as well as the more traditional data structure in the processdissociation paradigm.
Currently, the process-dissociation paradigm is very
popular, and a number ofresearchers are developing models, including MPT models, to handle data in this and a
variety ofrelated paradigms . An interesting application comes from Buchner,
Erdfelder, Steffens, and Martensen , who directly
compared the process dissociation and source-monitoring
paradigms. They point out the close correspondence between the response categories in each paradigm, and, by
constructing related MPT models, they argue from an
analysis of experimental data that both paradigms share
the same psychological processes. In general, the processdissociation paradigm appears to be an area where MPT
models, with their structural simplicity and statistical advantages, are likely to have a substantial impact.
Eyewitness memory. The eyewitness suggestibility
effect is the observation that misleading information presented after an event can distort the memory for that
event. In a typical experiment, subjects are presented with
information about an event (e.g., a car approaching a
traffic light) and later read a text containing information
that is consistent (traffic light), inconsistent (stop sign),
or neutral (intersection). An important theoretical question concerns what happens to the memory trace of the
original stimulus. Loftus has theorized that original information can be destroyed and updated with postevent
information , whereas McCloskey and Zaragoza claim
that the original information is still intact.
Wagenaar and Boer explored this issue by representing these informal theories as formal models,
which they referred to as event-tree models. Each of the
models satisfied the MPT properties described earlier.
Three theories were examined: (1) destructive updating,
in which the original stimulus can be erased and replaced,
(2) coexistence theory, in which the original stimulus is
always intact but sometimes inaccessible, and (3) noconflict theory, in which inaccurate memories only occur
on those portion of trials when the original information
is insufficiently encoded. The experimental paradigm
was as described above, except that Wagenaar and Boer
added a final "second-guess" phase in which subjects
were informed that a traffic light was in fact the correct
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
response and were then asked to state the color ofthe light.
The data events consisted of the combination of correct
and incorrect responses to questions about the traffic light
and its color.
The advantage ofrepresenting each theory in the form
of an MPT model was to make the assumptions behind
each theory explicit, thereby providing a more precise
test of each theory's ability to account for experimental
results. In particular, Wagenaar and Boer were
able to generate a series of equations representing the
specific predictions made by each theory. The results
showed that the no-conflict theory produced the best fit
to the data with the fewest parameters.
Hindsight bias. Situations sometimes arise in which
people make predictions or judgments about an event,
followed by feedback on the event's actual outcome.
Under these conditions, it is necessary to discriminate between two sources ofinformation: one's originaljudgment
and the true outcome. However, research shows that people's memory for their original judgment often tends to
be skewed in the direction ofthe true outcome, a phenomenon known as hindsight bias .
Erdfelder and Buchner (l998a) examined hindsight
bias using an experimental task in which subjects gave
their best answers to a series of difficult questions requiring unique numerical responses (e.g., "What is the
melting temperature of lead?"). After a delay, subjects
were provided with feedback of the correct answers for
half of the questions, with the other half serving as controls. Subjects' recall oftheir original responses was later
tested in a final memory test. The data events consisted
of the rank ordering of three numerical judgments: the
original judgment (OJ), the correct judgment (CJ), and
recollection ofthe original judgment (ROJ). Hindsight bias
occurs, for example, when the recollectedjudgment is different from the original judgment, and in the direction of
the correct judgment (e.g., OJ < ROJ < CJ). Allowing
for ties between judgments, and assuming that subjects'
original responses are incorrect (i.e., OJ *' CJ), there are
10 possible rank orderings. This creates a total of 20 response categories when both the feedback and the control
items are analyzed.
Erdfelder and Buchner identified a number of
cognitive factors that can be instrumental in causing
hindsight bias and developed an MPT model that incorporated these factors as parameters ofthe model. The full
version ofthe model contained 13 parameters, representing processes of recollection, biased and unbiased reconstructions ofthe original judgment, and guessing. To
test the model, Erdfelder and Buchner conducted
a series of validation experiments designed to show that
certain experimental manipulations selectively influence
some parameters but not others. Among other things,
these tests showed that (I) providing the correct answers
at the time of the final recall test increased reconstruction bias without affecting other parameters, (2) casting
doubt on the accuracy of the correct answers reduced
hindsight bias by improving the recollection parameters,
and (3) manipulating the number ofresponse alternatives
on the final memory test affected only the model's guessing parameters. On the basis of these and other experimental validation studies with the model, Erdfelder and
Buchner concluded that reconstruction bias seems
to playa larger role in creating hindsight bias than recollection bias. All of these results are psychologically
plausible and help validate the model as a viable tool for
measuring cognitive processes in hindsight bias. In a
follow-up paper, Dehn and Erdfelder have proposed a modification ofthe Erdfelder-Buchner model to
handle situations lacking unique correct judgments.
Models of Perception
It should be evident from the examples so far that many
ofthe applications ofMPT models have been in the area
of human memory. But MPT modeling is a framework
that, in principle, can be applied to measure any type of
cognitive processing, provided those processes result in
categorical data. This is illustrated with three MPT models that have been developed to study attention and perceptual processes.
Object perception. Ashby, Prinzmetal, Ivry, and
Maddox have proposed an MPT model for feature
binding in object perception. When subjects are briefly
exposed to two stimuli, they may occasionally report percepts in which the visual features of the stimuli are perceived correctly but combined incorrectly, a phenomenon known as illusory conjunction . For example, iftwo letters ofdifferent colors (e.g.,
a blue C and a red X) are presented quickly, subjects may
report "seeing" a blue X. In tasks such as this, subjects can
respond with the correct target, a distractor error (based on
the other letter in the display), or a nondistractor error (a
letter or color not on the current display). These types of
responses can be combined for both letter and color features, resulting in a large number ofresponse categories.
One issue in this research area concerns whether illusory conjunctions occur though some specific cognitive
mechanism or whether they result purely from guessing
errors. Ashby et al. assert that traditional empirical measures of illusory conjunctions have been fundamentally flawed, precisely because they fail to adequately
account for guessing. For this reason, Ashby et al. developed a series ofmodels that incorporated different assumptions about guessing and feature-binding processes.
Models that incorporated a specific parameter for feature
binding provided the best account of the data, whereas
pure guessing models performed poorly. This provided
strong, theoretically based evidence for a cognitive basis
to illusory conjunctions that previously could not be established using purely empirical measures. Moreover, an
MPT model based on Ashby et al.s location-uncertainty
theory provided a better fit to the data than one based on
Treisman and Schmidt's feature-integration theory.
One advantage ofthe Ashby et al. model is that
it allows researchers to measure feature perception separately from feature binding. This can prove to be useful
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
Figure 4. A version ofBatchelder and Crowther's joint MPT representation ofthe fuzzy
logic model of perception.
in research on illusory conjunctions because it allows investigators to measure the effect ofexperimental variables
more precisely for each process. For example, Ashby et al.
found that increasing the interstimulus distance reduced
correct feature detection and created more feature-binding
errors. Prinzmetal, Henderson, and Ivry observed
that lengthening exposure durations and reducing attentional demands had no significant effect on feature detection and still resulted in illusory conjunction errors (as
measured by the feature-binding parameter). This is an
important result because it demonstrates that illusory
conjunctions can be obtained without extremely briefexposures and attention-demanding tasks.
Speech perception. Batchelder and Crowther 
have recently applied MPT modeling to the area ofspeech
perception. In one oftheir experiments, synthetic speech
stimuli were generated by combining two acoustic factors:
9 levels of vowel duration with 3 levels of the Fl offset
frequency of the vowel, creating 27 stimuli, <i,j>, 1 :::;
i :::; 9, 1 :::; j :::; 3. Subjects listened to each stimulus 30
times and were required to classify each stimulus as one of
four syllables: [b 1\. k] ("buck"), [bak] ("bock"), [b 1\. g]
("bug"), and [bag] ("bog"). This specific experimental task
is an example of a more general paradigm calledfactorial categorization. In factorial-categorization experiments
subjects classify stimuli into a small set of response categories. Each stimulus factor has a finite number oflevels, and the stimuli are obtained by combining all possible ways of conjoining one level from each factor. Many
areas ofcognitive psychology employ such paradigms, including concept identification, pattern recognition, and
speech perception .
Batchelder and Crowther constructed a nested
family ofMPT models for the special case oftwo factors
and four responses, in which the most specific model was
equivalent to a version ofMassaro and Oden's fuzzy logic
model of perception . In
particular, Crowther, Batchelder, and Hu showed
that the FLMP for any four-response, two-factor paradigm
is equivalent to an MPT model depicted in Figure 4 (i.e.,
it generates identical parametric probability functions).
The model for the experiment above has a total of 12 parameters, ai' bj for 1 :::; i :::; 9, 1 :::; j :::; 3; because there
are four response categories (and thus 3 df) per stimulus,
it is ajoint MPT model with 69 df [(3 X 27) - 12]. The
left panel of Figure 4 depicts its 27 separate trees, Vij,
corresponding to each stimulus; the right panel depicts
the processing tree for stimulus < i.j >, where the Tk (k =
1,2,3,4) correspond to the four syllable responses discussed earlier. The idea behind the MPT representation
is that each factor-level defines its own scale value, and
the decision process on conjointly defined stimuli depends
on the joint presence or absence of two latent cognitive
events-namely, support for vowel [1\.] or [a] ("u" or "0")
and support for final consonant [k] or [g]. In Batchelder
and Crowther , the model in Figure 4 was a special
case of a more general model, called the conditional independence model, where the a, and bj in the right panel
of Figure 4 were replaced with aij and bi j , allowing both
factor levels to influence the probability of each latent
event. In this case, the joint MPT model has 54 parameters
(the aij and bij ) and 27 cif(8l - 54). Interestingly, the
data strongly supported the conditional independence
model but not the FLMP in Figure 4.
Object identification. A recent study by Brown 
has addressed the issue of whether object identification
in a multiobject array is a parallel or a sequential process.
The purpose was to test a strong sequential assumption
made by LaBerge and Brown that only one object
at a time in a visual scene is identified by the visual attention system. In Brown's paradigm, observers were
given a fixed set oftarget letters and then tried to identify
the number oftarget letters in a series of horizontal twoletter displays. The duration and luminance of each display were varied, as was the distance between the two letters. There were four possible stimulus arrangements for
each two-letter display (two targets, one target on left, one
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
target on right, no targets) and, in turn, four corresponding responses that observers could make. This created a
rich data structure represented by a 4 X 4 item-byresponse table of category frequencies.
Brown developed and tested four MPT models,
two with a parallel-processing interpretation and two
with a sequential-processing interpretation. The parallel
models (in Brown's terminology) satisfied the condition
that the order of processes could be interchanged in the
tree without affecting the category probabilities. In contrast, the sequential models had a fixed order to the processes in the tree. Brown concluded that the best-fitting
model was a parallel version, in which observers may
"chunk" the letters and process the stimuli as a whole or
process the letters independently in parallel ifthe chunking process fails. It is encouraging that different plausible accounts ofobject recognition can be sharply differentiated when formulated as MPT models applied to the
entire data structure.
Models of Reasoning
A number of standard tasks exist for the study of logical reasoning abilities, working with forms such as syllogisms, the propositional calculus, analogies, and so on.
Performance on these tasks is often measured simply in
terms of whether or not the logically correct response is
given. However,restricting the data analysis to correct versus incorrect responding ignores a wide range of different response errors that can be made to these problems.
A more careful analysis ofresponse errors can potentially
reveal important insights into the underlying reasoning
processes that produce them. As can be seen in the examples to follow, MPT modeling provides a useful tool
for accomplishing this.
Wason card-selection task. The card-selection task
is a method developed by Wason for studying
propositional reasoning. In this paradigm, subjects are
presented with a rule in the form ifp then q, followed by
four cards. Subjects are told that each card depicts the
status ofp on one side and q on the other, but subjects can
see only one side ofeach card. The four possible card sides
represent p, not p, q, and not q, and the subject's task is
to indicate which cards need to be turned over to verify
if the rule is true or false. Because subjects can choose
any combination ofcards to turn over, there are 24, or 16,
possible responses to this task (the correct response being
the choice of cards p and not q). However,as Evans 
pointed out, most studies using this task fail to report
their results in such detail, and some report only whether
performance is correct or incorrect.
Evans also noted that formal mathematical modeling is rare in the area ofthinking and reasoning, and he
set as his goal to develop a simple stochastic model for
the card-selection task based on the assumption that subjects' choices for each of the four cards are made independently, although with different marginal probabilities.
The parameters of the model represent the probabilities
of making responses based on logical reasoning versus
nonlogical response tendencies. In generating data for
this model, Evans not only considered the selection or
nonselection of each card but also included rules other than
ifp then q, created by adding negative statements (e.g.,
ifnot p then not q). This generates a large set ofresponse
categories for developing and interpreting the model. Although not presented in tree form, Evans' model is in
fact an MPT model; specifically, it is ajoint MPT model,
because 16 separate trees can be generated for the selection ofthe four cards across four different types ofrules.
Evans used the model to reanalyze data from
an experiment by Evans and Lynch and found that
the independence model did a goodjob of accounting for
the data with logically interpretable parameter values. In
a follow-up study,Krauth reformulated the model,
adding parameters for specific cognitive processes. These
included parameters for the logical operations offalsification and verification and for nonlogical processes, such
as matching. Krauth's model revealed that logical and
nonlogical processes both occur in the card-selection task,
a result that is not directly evident from prior analyses of
this paradigm.
Klauer and Oberauer . A more comprehensive MPT modeling approach for studying propositional
reasoning has been developed by Klauer and Oberauer.
In their task, subjects read a major premise involving
propositions p and q and then a minor premise giving the
state of one of these two propositions (true or false).
Subjects had to categorize the state ofthe other proposition ("true" or "false") if it could be inferred and otherwise
select a "nothing follows" response. There were four major
premise types, corresponding not only to the conditional
form used in the Wason card-selection task but
also exclusive disjunction, inclusive disjunction, and biconditional. When these were coupled with the four forms
of the minor premise and the three response categories,
the data structure was a 16 X 3 product multinomial, with
32 df iot modeling. Klauer and Oberauer constructed a
joint MPT model based on a general theory of propositional reasoning proposed by Johnson-Laird, Byrne, and
Schaeken . The model included cognitiveprocesses
reflecting "reasoning difficulty," "inconsistent interpretation" (e.g., reading a conditional as a biconditional), and
response bias. The model fit the data well and allowed
for the separate measurement of parameters for these
three cognitive processes. Furthermore, the rank ordering
of the reasoning-difficulty parameters was consistent
with that predicted by the Johnson-Laird et al. theory.
Rips's ANDS model. One of the most elaborate information-processing theories for propositional
reasoning has been developed by Rips, called ANDS (a
natural deductive system). Rips's model can handle a wider
set of inferences than those of Wason and Klauer
and Oberauer , and it has been implemented in a
computer program in the LISP programming language.
The model makes assumptions about memory and control processes and couples these with mental inference
rules. It also constructs proofs for a variety of inferences,
and Rips found the model's proofs to be similar to subjects' proofs in many settings.
In one application, Rips decided to make
ANDS probabilistic and fit the proportion of valid responses to a set of32 inference problems. These problems
were created by using different combinations of qualifiers such as and, not, or, if...then, and so on . The data structure was a product binomial
with 32 problems and two response categories for each
problem ("valid" or "invalid"), thus creating 32 df The
model was made probabilistic by postulating that each of
12inference rules mayor may not be available for a given
problem. To simplify the calculations, Rips assumed that
each rule had its own fixed probability ofavailability and
that rule availability is independent. With these assumptions, explicit expressions of the response probabilities for
each problem were derived in terms of the 12 availability parameters, plus one guessing parameter, and the data
were fit using the STEPIT program 
with a least squares criterion. The fit was judged to be
satisfactory.
With the above assumptions, ANDS can be viewed as
ajoint MPT model with 32 trees, where each branch reflects a sequence of available and unavailable reference
rules. In fact, a reanalysis of the data within the MPT
framework would provide statistically interpretable fit
measures and confidence intervals for the estimates. What
we think is interesting in this case is that a very detailed
information-processing model can be reduced to MPT
form with a few simplifying assumptions, such as rule
independence and availability probabilities that are identical over problems. These assumptions are, at best, approximations; however,the gain in statistical analysis may
compensate for the degree of simplification. In any event,
analyses like the one Rips provides supplements
the analyses ofthe information-processing model in a productive way.
Class inclusion. Piaget has developed a number
of simple tasks to study reasoning abilities in children.
One set of tasks examines children's understanding of
the concept of class inclusion. For example, a child may
be informed that there are five black dogs and three orange cats and then asked the question, "Are there more
dogs or more animals?" Rabinowitz, Howe, and Lawrence
 have developed a model that satisfies the MPT
constraints and is capable of separately measuring memory and reasoning processes in this task. They extend Piaget's standard paradigm by asking additional questions
concerning the subclasses (e.g., "Are there more dogs
than cats?") plus a series of more complicated questions
about the color ofthe class members (e.g., "Is the blackest dog the same color as the blackest animal?"). Altogether, there are II different questions that can be asked
in these formats. Moreover, responses can be categorized
into successes ("more animals") and two types of errors
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
("more dogs" or "same number"). This generates a fairly
rich set of response categories for MPT modeling.
Rabinowitz et al. did not explicitly represent
their model in processing-tree form, but, in essence, their
model can be constructed as a series ofjoint MPT models
when applied to each different question. Their two main
goals were to assess the relative contributions of memory
and reasoning processes in the class-inclusion task and
to examine how these processes change across the life
span. The results of their analysis showed that children
were poorer than adults on both memory and reasoning
abilities. In fact, 7- and IO-year-old children exhibited
no understanding at all of class-inclusion logic, on the
basis ofthe finding that the model parameter measuring
that process was estimated to be zero. This conclusion,
based on the model's analysis, is the type of result that is
often difficult to extract from ad hoc statistics because they
are typically confounded by guessing and response-bias
In a more extensive study, Howe and Rabinowitz 
found that the main developmental trend is the emergence of more sophisticated reasoning processes with
the decline of less sophisticated strategies. Howe and
Rabinowitz also manipulated memory load (having the
original statement available or not at the time ofquestioning) and information load (one or two dimensions per
statement), and these manipulations affected both memory and reasoning parameters. From this, they concluded
that memory and reasoning processes are not independent, contrary to some earlier theories.
Psychometric Models
An area ofpsychology that has seen great use ofprobabilistic models is psychometrics. Psychometric models,
unlike most models in cognitive psychology, generally
involve individual-difference parameters and item parameters. One large subarea ofpsychometric modeling is test
theory, in which the data structure consists ofthe performance of a set ofsubjects who each answer the same set
ofquestions. Although most ofthe models in this area are
not MPT models, two applications ofMPT modeling are
described below.
Cultural consensus analysis. In a series of papers,
Batchelder and Romney developed a set of formal models for information pooling called cultural consensus analysis. The
paradigm involves a set of respondents, each answering
the same set of objective questions. Neither the answers
to the questions nor the relative knowledge of the respondents is known a priori. This is the case for many situations in the social sciences, especially cultural anthropology, in which researchers attempt to learn about a cultural
group by asking questions to members of the group.
In one of the models designed for multiple-choice questions, each question is assumed to have a single correct
answer, and each respondent is assumed to have a com-
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
petency parameter that measures the probability that the
respondent "knows" the correct answer to any particular
question. The model allows the researcher to estimate both
the competency parameters for each respondent and the
correct answer to each item, by using information from
the question-response matrix. Klauer and Batchelder
 showed that the multiple-choice model described
above can be formulated as an MPT model. More specifically, they explored the two-respondent case and applied
it to the problem of interjudge reliability in subjective categorization. The model extendsprevious work on this issue
by explicitly postulating and measuring category response biases and interjudge reliability.
In another application, Batchelder, Kumbasar, and Boyd
 have constructed a consensus-analysis MPT
model for sociometric measurement. The paradigm requires each member of a social network to provide information about the friendship ties between every pair of
members in the network. If the network has N members,
then the data consist of N friendship digraphs on the
same set ofN nodes, one from each member. The model
permits one to estimate a "consensus" digraph ofthe network, as well as competency and response-bias parameters for each member ofthe network. Interestingly, these
member-competency parameters can vary from region to
region in the digraph, reflecting the fact that one's social
knowledge and biases can depend on how close one is tied
to other members of the social network.
Item-response theory. A popular psychometric approach to test theory is item-response theory, where
models postulate subject-ability parameters and itemcharacteristic parameters . The models are applied to a subject X
item matrix, in which each entry is a measure ofthe performance of a particular subject to a particular item. In
most cases, models of this type are designed for categorical data but, in general, are not MPT models . One exception are
the finite-state models of Hutchinson and their
elaboration by Garcia-Perez . In one version ofthese models, the test taker is assumed to know the status of each
alternative in a multiple-choice test independently with
probability 'A, 0 ::S 'A ::S 1. For an item with, say, three response alternatives (only one ofwhich is correct), the test
taker can know the status of k of the items with probability Pk = n) 'Ak(l - 'A)3 - k, for k = 0,1,2,3. The
model takes into account whether the correct answer is
among the known ones, and the model includes guessing
parameters if it is not.
In another application, Garcia-Perez constructed an MPT model for the case in which the last option is "none ofthe above." He used the model to compare
the confidence-interval estimates ofthe test taker's abilities for the case of"none-of-the-above" items compared
with more conventional items involving an equal number
of options. Interestingly, Garcia-Perez's analysis
using the MPT model showed that a "none-of-the-above"
option can reduce the size of the confidence interval of
'A, which is a different conclusion from some earlier
work claiming that there is no statistical advantage to including such items.
THEORETICAL ISSUES
In this section, we address a number of theoretical issues relevant to the application of MPT modeling. We
start by outlining some basic considerations that are important in the development and testing of new models.
Following this, we address a series of topics that have
generated some recent debate, including high-threshold
and discrete-state assumptions behind MPT models and
their role as approximations to more complete psychological theory. Finally, we compare MPT modeling with
other general classes of mathematical models.
Model Development
It is generally the case that given a category system
C t, C2, ..., CJ , many potential MPT models can be developed. There is no algorithm for creating models; however, there are a few useful heuristics. If one wishes to
develop an MPT model for a particular research paradigm,
three basic steps must be accomplished. First, a category
system of possible response events must be established.
Second, it is necessary to identify which cognitive processes are involved in the paradigm. Third, one must specify how these processes lead to each ofthe response categories (i.e., the construction of the tree model itself).
Response categories. A crucial step in the success of
any MPT model is to define response categories in a way
that creates a rich and informative data structure. A detailed, fine-grained analysis ofdata into psychologically
meaningful categories provides more information with
which to extract the contribution of different cognitive
processes. Also, the more response categories that can
be meaningfully identified, the more degrees offreedom
that can be created for estimating parameters and testing
the fit ofthe model. Ifthere are J categories, then an identifiable model can have at most J -
1 parameters. This
poses quite a constraint on the modeler. If one is interested in measuring a particular cognitive capacity, other
things being equal, it makes sense to seek relevant paradigms in which there are many more degrees offreedom
to permit more model parameters.
One solution to this problem is to select paradigms involving more than one category system. Sometimes, each
separate category system can be represented by a different
tree, creating a joint MPT model. The advantage of this
strategy is that if certain cognitive processes operate in
more than one tree, it may be possible to capture these
multiple processes using a single parameter. This, in turn,
keeps the number of parameters to a minimum, creating
more degrees of freedom.
Fortunately, there are several standard ways to develop
research paradigms with multiple category systems. One
common method is to investigate research situations that
involve more than one type of stimulus item. The sourcemonitoring model in Figure 2 is a good example, because
separate trees are generated for Source A, Source B, and
New items. The fact that the response-bias parameters
(a, g, and b) occur in more than one tree helps to reduce
the total number of parameters needed for the model.
Other examples ofjoint MPT models based on multiple
stimuli include our pair-clustering model in Figure 1,
which examines the recall of clusterable pairs and singleton items and creates separate trees for each. The various models of reasoning reviewed earlier also fall into
this category. For example, Rabinowitz et al. expanded the standard Piagetian paradigm by asking their
subjects multiple questions about class inclusion, creating
a different tree structure for each equation. Evans 
and Krauth created multiple items by including
both positive and negative propositional statements,
whereas Rips created 32 inference problems by
combining different logical arguments.
A special case involving multiple items is the factorial
categorization paradigm described earlier in the section
on speech perception. For example, in a two-factor experiment with I levels of one factor and J levels of the other,
there are I X J factorially generated stimuli, with only I +
J factor levels. Ifa subject repeatedly classifies each stimulus into one ofK categories, there are I X J X (K - 1)
degrees offreedom in the data structure. If a modeler can
assign individual parameters to each of the I + J levels
and postulate a simple combining rule , then there may be
a large surplus of degrees of freedom.
Using paradigms with multiple category systems is
one method for creating a large set ofresponse categories
for MPT modeling. However, there are other techniques
that can be used for this purpose that do not necessarily
lead to the creation of a joint MPT model. For example,
many of the memory models reviewed earlier create a sufficient number ofresponse categories by giving subjects
multiple tests of their memory. Howe's 
model and Kail et al.'s model achieved this by
using repeated recall tests of the same material. Other
models have examined memory performance using a
combination ofdifferent testing procedures. For example,
Riefer and Rouder's model examines both free recall and cued recall, whereas Chechile's model
looks at both recall and recognition along with confidence judgments.
Another useful heuristic is to examine stimuli that are
multidimensional (i.e., items that have more than one attribute or characteristic). If subjects' responses are classified according to these multiple characteristics, this
can lead to a potentially large set of response categories
for model development. The pair-clustering model in Figure 1is one example ofthis, in that recall ofpair clusters
is examined both in terms of the number of items recalled and in terms of whether the items are recalled adjacently. Along similar lines, the B. H. Ross and Bower's
 model of associate recall examines memory sets
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
containing multiple items and probes these sets with one
or more cues. Brown's paradigm varies the number and positioning oftargets in a two-letter display,thus
creating different display arrangements with multiple response categories. Perhaps the most prototypical example of this approach is the model of object perception by
Ashby et al. . In their paradigm, items are classified by such attributes as letter, color, and location, and
Ashby et al. were able to generate a large set ofresponse
categories from this classification system.
Cognitive processes. Given a sufficiently rich data
structure, the next step is to identify and parameterize
the cognitive processes contributing to those data. One
can usually imagine a large number ofpsychological processes that may be operating in concert to produce categorical data in a given research paradigm. Some ofthese
processes will be more important than others and, thus,
will explain more ofthe variance in the data. However, it
is often the case that even if less central processes are
eliminated from the model, there may still remain more
processes than categories. The consequence of this is
that if the model includes all of these processes, then it
will not be globally identifiable as defined earlier.
In dealing with this problem, one useful heuristic is to
build a more complete but nonidentifiable model and
then create a series ofnested submodels based on certain
restrictions on the parameters. This will result in a family of identifiable models. For example, we were able to create identifiable versions
of the source-monitoring model in Figure 2 by equating
detection (D] = D 2) , discrimination (d, = d2) or response
bias parameters (a = g). Other examples ofthis strategy
can be found in Rouder and Batchelder , Hulme
et al. , and Bender et al. . In particular, Bender et al. created nested submodels by collecting data on
three different age groups of children. They were able to
test the goodness of fit for different submodels by assuming that various parameters were constant across the
three groups. Of course, when a model's parameters are
restricted in this way, any comparisons between experimental conditions must be made under the same set of
restrictions. This has the potential to limit theoretical
conclusions, depending on which parameters are constrained. However, one can usually place restrictions on
ancillary parameters, leaving crucial parameters free to
vary for comparisons across conditions.
In general, the process of model building certainly involves a compromise between the goals of having an incomplete but identifiable model, which permits unique
measurement ofthe model's parameters, and a more compete and psychologically valid model, which represents
all ofthe relevant cognitive processes. Each MPT model
is at best an approximation to a complete process description ofcategorical data, and the task of the modeler
is to select the most important processes and capture
them in a valid way.
Tree structure. There are, ofcourse, many MPT models that could be constructed for a given categorical data
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
structure. Unlike general linear models that routinely decompose data into main effects and interactions, there is
no algorithm for generating useful processing trees or
even for discovering if they exist for a given set of data.
MPT model building for a particular paradigm is a creative process that requires a researcher to commit to certain processes and how they are arranged structurally in
a conditional processing tree. Furthermore, because
there are many possible tree structures, there will often be
psychologically uninterpretable MPT models that nevertheless fit a given set of data well. Thus, the process of
developing a valid model requires that one fit a number
of data sets in the same paradigm and that the resulting
parameter estimates be interpretable in terms of the underlying processing assumptions.
As a consequence, a key question in the development
ofan MPT model is whether the model's parameters are,
in fact, valid measures of their respective cognitive capacities. Ideally, a parameter designed to measure, say,
storage capacity should reflect only storage factors and
should not be influenced by the operation of other cognitive processes. Therefore, in the course of developing
and testing a new MPT model, it is necessary to conduct
validity testing ofthe model's parameters. This typically
involves a series of experiments in which basic independent variables are manipulated and shown to have a selective influence on certain processes that is interpretable
on theoretical or logical grounds. In memory research,
for example, it is relatively straightforward to find variables that should have their primary influence on storage
and not retrieval, or vice versa. In general, validity testing
of a model's parameters is essential if one wishes to have
confidence in an MPT model as a valid measurement tool.
If validity tests reveal that parameter values are affected
by variables in a psychologically implausible manner, it is
at least an indication that the current tree structure ofthe
model is wrong or, more seriously, that the basic assumptions behind the model are incorrect.
Numerous examples of validity testing can be found in
the applications ofMPT modeling reviewed earlier. Both
the storage-retrieval models ofChechile and Howe have
been applied to a number ofdata sets examining basic experimental manipulations. Riefer and Batchelder applied the model in Figure 3 to a large
corpus of experiments on recognition failure and generally found the model's parameters to behave logically as a
function of many experimental variables. Bayen et al.
 manipulated item similarity and source similarity
in a factorial design to test different models of source
memory and concluded that only a 2HT model adequately accounted for their data. Buchner et al. 
validated their MPT model for the process-dissociation
procedure by showing that experimental manipulations
designed to effect response bias did, in fact, have a selective influence on the response-bias parameters in their
model. Prinzmetal et al. applied their featurebinding model to experiments that manipulated stimulus
duration, interstimulus distance, and levels of attention,
and they observed that the parameter values were affected in a theoretically interpretable manner as a function of these manipulations.
Another important facet of validity is to connect the
assumptions ofan MPT model for a particular paradigm
to those ofa more complete and accepted formal theory,
if one exists. In the best of worlds, the MPT model will be
a special case, or a provable mathematical approximation,
of the more complete theory. One example of this type of
connection is our model of the recognition-failure paradigm in Figure 3, which is
a special case of the retrieval-independence theory of
Flexser and Tulving . A second example is the pairclustering model in Figure I, which is mathematically
related to Markov models ofpair clustering in multitrial
free recall .
Of course, it is not reasonable to expect that a tight,
mathematical connection can always be drawn between
an MPT model and a more complete theory for any given
phenomenon. In such cases, it is still important that there
be a connection at some level between the processes in
the MPT model and those of the more complex theory.
For example, we have seen this in Klauer and Oberauer's
 model for propositional reasoning, which was directly motivated by the more general theory of propositional reasoning by Johnson-Laird et al. . The probabilistic version ofRips's information-processing
ANDS model is another example of a close connection
between an MPT model and a more elaborate processing
Statistical Issues
Earlier, we discussed the statistical inference for MPT
models, as described in Hu and Batchelder . This
approach is based on the classical theory of inference
that utilizes asymptotic approximations requiring large
data samples . The idea is that
as sample size increases, and if a model is true, then,
under rather mild mathematical conditions, goodness-offit measures such as G2or minimum chi-square discussed
earlier have approximate chi-square distributions when
minimized over the parameter space. This is the idea behind the efficiency ofMLEs, confidence intervals of the
estimators based on the observed Fisher information matrix, and likelihood ratio tests of nested models. Thus, if
the sample is suitably large, then goodness offit and hypothesis tests can be conducted with reference to standard
chi-square tables.
However, there is good reason to doubt that any statistical model is "true" in the sense that the observations
are independent and identically distributed and with a
probability distribution exactly consistent with the model.
Furthermore, one often has to deal with situations in which
the sample size is smaller than desired for asymptotic
approximations. It is natural to consider some ofthese issues and how to deal with them. The next subsections take
up the use of computer simulations to supplement asymptotic inference theory, how to deal with approximate
models, and whether the MPT model framework is falsifiable in principle.
Computer simulation. A useful technique in the statistical analysis ofan MPT model is to conduct computer
simulations. Basically, this technique involves setting the
values of the model's parameters and then conducting a
series of simulated runs using various sample sizes. Parameter estimates, confidence intervals, and hypothesis
tests from these simulations can be compared with the
results of asymptotic estimates based on standard statistical theory. A number of important issues can be addressed in this way, such as the effect of small sample
sizes or the amount of error (bias) in parameter estimates.
Another use ofcomputer simulation is to introduce small
extensions of the model, such as allowing individual differences in the parameters (discussed in detail in the next
subsection) or adding an additional cognitive process.
The ability ofthe original model to account for data from
these extensions is a measure of the robustness of the
model. Riefer and Batchelder provide a detailed
illustration of how these techniques can be applied to the
pair-clustering model in Figure I. Other examples of
using computer simulations to explore MPT models include Bender et al. , Erdfelder and Buchner , Riefer and Batchelder , and
Riefer and Rouder .
What is especially beneficial about computer simulations is that they can be used to explore the sample size
necessary to achieve sufficient statistical power when
using a particular MPT model. Of course, the issue of
power and sample size is an important one in research
generally, but it is particularly relevant to MPT modeling
because, as we discuss later, MPT models are simple and
approximate models of cognitive processing. Large samples sizes may be necessary to reveal significant differences between groups in terms of the model's parameters; however, sample sizes that are too large also inflate
goodness-of-fit statistics. Computer simulations can be
used to explore the potentially complicated relationship
between sample size, power, and choice of Type I error
probability for any particular MPT model. A very useful
approach to assessing power in MPT models has been
developed by Erdfelder, Faul, and Buchner based
in part on the extensivework by Cohen .Their
computer program, called GPOWER, performs power
analysis for a range of common statistical tests and can
be used to establish significance levels when applied to
MPT modeling . In several of these applications of GPOWER, it
is shown that sufficient power to test hypotheses about
the parameters of a model can be achieved using much
lower levels ofType I error for goodness-of-fit tests than
the conventional a = .05. This approach is especially
reasonable when the model has already been shown to
fit data in prior studies.
Approximation. Because of the requirement on a useful MPT model to be globally identifiable, the number of
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
categories places an upper bound on the number of parameters an MPT model can have. As we have stated earlier, unless the paradigm provides many categories, only
an incomplete processing account is possible. In this case,
it is important to select processes that control most ofthe
variance in category responses and then to regard the
model as approximate. However, even if a model is only
approximate, there is reason to believe that estimates of
the parameters may provide measurements that are valid
and useful. More technically, most MPT models, especially ones that have a surplus ofdegrees of freedom, are
"misspecified," A misspecified statistical model is one
that cannot exactly model the "true" probability distribution over the categories (i.e., the probability distribution
is not in the set that is generated by varying the model's
parameters). Most stochastic modelers wouldreadilyagree
that all statistical models with a surplus of degrees offreedom (technically called unsaturated) are misspecified,
and this remains true for more complex and detailed accounts, such as neural network or connectionist models
 or global memory models .
There is a technical theory ofstatistical inference with
misspecified models that is well developed in statistics
and econometrics ; however, this
work has yet to make an impact in psychological modeling . White presents the theory
of misspecification from the standpoint of classical statistics, as opposed to a Bayesian approach, and his early
work shows that MLEs computed
from misspecified models, called pseudo-MLEs, nevertheless have useful asymptotic properties under mild
regularity conditions.
One way that an MPT model may be misspecified is
that there may be parameter heterogeneity underlying the
observations. In this case, even if the processing account
is accurate, the multinomial assumption that observations are identically distributed over the categories is violated. In the past, there have been many concerns raised
in the cognitive modeling area about parameter heterogeneity over subjects, items, and even subject-item interactions . However, there have been only a few
efforts to productively incorporate parameter heterogeneity into cognitive models .
Fortunately, Riefer and Batchelder describe a
straightforward way to augment an MPT model to handle
parameter heterogeneity. The idea is to assume that each
parameter is a random variable that has a marginal beta
distribution across the experimental observations. More
specifically, suppose es is a parameter of an MPT model.
The beta distribution on e, takes the form
eO',-I(I_e){3-:-1
r(a, )r(f3,)
, otherwise,
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
where as' f3s > O. The beta distribution has mean,
E«()J = asl[as + f3sJ, and variance
Var «()s)=
(as + f3s +l)(as+ f3s)2
The idea in Riefer and Batchelder is to assume
independence of the parameters, but with marginal beta
distributions. Observations are then produced from the
MPT model conditional on the value of the parameter
vector, creating a conditional MPT model. This extension
ofthe MPT model family is explicitly analyzed in Hu and
Batchelder . The idea is well known in stochastic
modeling , and it was used for adding individual differences to the all-or-none and linear operator learning
models in Batchelder .
The approach ofcreating a conditional MPT model has
the effect of doubling the number of parameters, in that
each ()s yields as and f3s for the beta distribution. Sometimes, when there are many degrees of freedom remaining after modeling, specifically S :s (J - 1)/2, the resulting conditional MPT model may be an identifiable
model, and it can be analyzed in the usual way. But,
in practice, it is more usual that S > (J - 1)/2; thus, this
approach yields a nonidentifiable model. Nevertheless,
there is a useful strategy in data analysis that can still be
accomplished. The recommended approach, illustrated in
Riefer and Batchelder , is to first analyze the empirical data with the identifiable ,!\1PT model obtaining,
among other things, the MLE Os for each parameter.
Next, select as and f3s' sSJ that the mean as1[as + f3.l is
approximately equal to Os, and the variance in Equation
7 is set to some prespecified level. Finally, simulate
many data sets, each the size ofthe original, from the resulting conditional MPT model. By examining goodness
of fit, MLEs, and confidence intervals, one can explore
the robustness of the original MPT model against controlled amounts of parameter heterogeneity. This strategy is straightforward and computationally fast on the
current generation of personal computers, and Xiangen
Hu's MPT software program described earlier incorporates this option.
Analysis of several MPT models by our group has led to some optimism that MPT
models may be rather robust under realistic levels of'parameter heterogeneity. In particular, the MLEs are often
quite robust under individual-difference assumptions;
however, the size ofthe asymptotic confidence intervals
is more sensitive to individual differences. Also, it is
clear that robustness may not hold for MPT models that
contain many levels of the tree structure. To see this,
suppose there are large individual differences in overall
processing ability in a subject pool. To reach any particular node near the terminal node ofthe tree requires a sequence of conditional processing steps. Because some
nodes are reached through accurate processing and others through imperfect processing or even guessing, the
structure will tend to separate or select good processors
(i.e.,ones with high values of the process parameters) from
poor processors as conditional processing nodes are successively encountered in the tree. A consequence ofthis is
that the estimates of the parameters that occur only near
the terminal nodes ofthe tree may be severely biased one
way or the other by subject selection.
Falsifiability. The fact that many MPT models can be
developed for a given set of categories raises the question ofwhether the class ofMPT models can be falsified
with data. Falsifiability is an important issue that has
been raised, for example, with connectionist models. It has
been proved that the connectionist framework can model
any mapping of stimuli into response categories, each
represented by one-zero vectors, ifno bounds are placed
on the model . However, MPT models are
not like connectionist models in this sense because, as
we noted earlier in the section on reparameterization,
there are many models for categorical data that are not in
the MPT class. If one of these models accounts for data
in a particular paradigm, then, technically, one can infer
that the MPT class is falsified for that paradigm. Of
course, it may be possible to design an MPT model that
closely mimics or approximates the successful fits of the
non-MPT model; thus, it may be difficult to argue that
the MPT framework is falsifiable in practice.
On the other hand, an acceptable MPT model must not
only be able to fit data but its parameters must be globally identifiable, must be psychologically interpretable,
and must pass appropriate validation experiments. When
these criteria are imposed, we see no reason to expect
that an MPT model satisfying these constraints can always be found for a given paradigm. In fact, we ourselves have tried and failed to adequately model several
cognitive paradigms with MPT models, despite some
promising initial ideas. Thus, we argue that MPT models are a useful, but by no means a universal, family of
cognitively interpretable statistical models.
High-Threshold, All-or-None,
and Discrete-State Assumptions
MPT models on occasion have been described as postulating high-threshold or all-or-none assumptions . It is true that a particular model may evidence
one ofthese characteristics, but it is important to realize
that MPT models as a general class are neither highthreshold nor all-or-none. The high-threshold (HT) model
ofyes-no signal detection can be viewed as ajoint MPT,
with a separate tree for old and new items. It is "high
threshold" in the sense that new distractors are never detected or recognized as "old." Kinchla describes
the source-monitoring model in Figure 2 as an HT model
because if old Source A and old Source B responses are
collapsed into a single "old" category, then the model reduces to the HT model. However,because subjects are re-
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
quired to distinguish Source A and Source B responses,
Batchelder, Riefer, and Hu argue that this collapsing may not result in a psychologically meaningful
If the term high threshold is to be applicable to MPT
models in general, a wider definition is needed. For example, it is possible to formally define this term for MPT
models as applied to certain types of recognition paradigms. Suppose subjects study a list of various types of
items and are then given a recognition test that includes
new distractors. Suppose also that the processing tree for
new distractors is a subtree of the processing trees for each
type of old item, so that when old items are undetected
and require guessing, the responses are governed by the
distractor processing tree. (This can be seen in Figure 2,
in which the tree for new items constitutes a part of the
tree for Source A and Source B items.)
The preceding definition clearly classifies the HT
model, as well as the source-monitoring model in Figure 2,
as having a high-threshold assumption. In the latter case,
it provides a logical sense to Kinchla's claim that
the source-monitoring model in Figure 2 is an HT model.
However, it seems to us that it would be difficult to capture the essence ofthis informal definition in a useful and
precise way, especially for a wider class ofmodels. In any
event, many MPT models for recognition memory do not
satisfy this definition. For example, Luce's lowthreshold model and Bayen and Murnane's sourcemonitoring model based on the "double-high-threshold"
model, are both joint MPT models that fail to satisfy the
collapsing condition suggested by this informal definition.
The attribute ofall-or-none as applied to MPT models
is also difficult to formalize. The term all-or-none was
popular in the literature on Markov learning models, and
it refers to a particular model by Bower and others,
in which subjects either completely master an item on a
study trial or learn nothing. In other Markov models, the
term all-or-none is more restrictive and refers to the assumption that transitions to the next stages in the learning process occur either completely or not at all. Most
Markov learning models for a finite number of learning
trials, including the all-or-none model of Bower, belong
to the MPT model family. However, outside ofrepeatedtrial learning and memory experiments, the notion ofallor-none as used with Markov models does not apply to
MPT models.
One way that the term all-or-none might be applied to
an MPT model of memory is the assumption that memory storage is either completely successful or completely
unsuccessful. This assumption is embodied in several
MPT models (e.g., the model in Figure 3). However, several other models allow for memory storage to be in one
or more intermediate states. Examples include the
Schweickert model of STM, in which traces can
be intact or degraded, Chechile's model offractional storage, Howe's model, which allows
redintegration of nonstored information, and the pairclustering model in Figure I, which assumes that clusterable pairs can be stored as clusters or as two separate individual traces.
In summary, neither the attribute high-threshold nor
the attribute all-or-none can be applied to MPT models
in general, and, outside of the learning-model context,
they can be reasonably applied only to a few special cases.
What, then, is the best way to describe the basic characteristics ofMPT models? In our opinion, MPT models are
best characterized as a particular class of discrete-state
models .
They are discrete models in the sense that they postulate
only a finite number of processing states, characterized
by the nodes of the processing trees. The assumption of
finitely many discrete processing stages may seem restrictive and incorrect to some theorists, but it seems to us
quite plausible, at least as an approximation ofmore complete processing accounts.
The tension between finite-state and "continuous"
processing models is reflected in the literature on signal
detection models .
Some theorists have argued that recognition memory cannot be modeled with a
finite-state processing model and instead claim that evidence supports a Gaussian signal detection model that
separates hits and false alarms into d' and a response criterion. However,the Gaussian assumption itselfis, at best,
a convenient approximation, especially with the assumption of equal variances for the signal and noise distributions. Furthermore, many other models, such as ones obtained by substituting a logistic distribution for the
Gaussian or even some finite-state models, are practically
indistinguishable from each other on recognition-memory
data .
Despite considerable discussion on this issue , we know of
no conclusive empirical argument that finite-state models can be ruled out or that cognitive psychology has discovered that processing is continuous and not discrete.
Even ifthe discreteness assumption is found unacceptable
in detail, that does not argue against its usefulness as an
approximation in modeling. Of course, there may exist
arguments against specific models, both finite-state and
continuous, but these arguments do not support a generalization to all such models. In much of the theoretical
work since the 1980s, continuous processing models
have been the dominant variety. The issue, we think, rests
with one's goals and has a more pragmatic than scientific rationale. In particular, if the goal is to model a variety of empirical phenomena with the same theoretical
system, continuous processing models of global matching, such as CHARM, TODAM, SAM, and MINERVA
 , or various connectionist
models have proven the more
successful. However, ifthe goal is to measure processing
capacities in precisely defined categorical paradigms,
the MPT class of models has demonstrated success in
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
Figure 5. Serial and parallel versions of a simple MPT model. The left
panel portrays a serial model in which the a process occurs before (and determines) the band c processes. The right panel reconstructs the tree under
the assumption that b = c, with no necessary serial ordering to the a process and the b process.
part because it has a well-worked-out and computationally simple statistical inference theory. From the measurement point of view, it is essential to have an apparatus for workable statistical inference, and it is in this area
that the more complex models have yet to be developed.
Parallel and Serial Processes
An important issue in MPT modeling is the nature of
the processing architecture assumed. For example, the
branches ofan MPT model are designed to represent possibleprocessing pathways that lead to a particular response
category. Each link in a branch is interpreted substantially as one stage in a hypothetical sequence ofstages that
results in a particular response. This interpretation raises
the issue of whether these stages are necessarily accomplished serially, as suggested by the directed graph representation of the tree or ifone or more processes can occur
in parallel.
Actually, it is quite easy to represent parallel processes
as well as serial ones in tree form. Consider the simple tree
in the left panel of Figure 5, with parameter vector e =
(a,b,c) and response categories c., C2 , C3 , and C4. In
this representation, the first process governed by parameter a occurs before the ones governed by band c, because
the result of the first process determines which of the
other processes operates. But if we assume that b = c,
then the tree can be restructured to create the tree in the
right panel ofFigure 5. It should be easy to see, under this
assumption, that the two MPT models in Figure 5 are
equivalent models. For this reason, the model with b = c
can be thought of as representing a case in which there
is no necessary serial ordering ofthe a process and the b
process, perhaps a case of parallel processing. In general, ifthere is a node in a tree where each link from the
node leads to an identically parameterized node, then
one can restructure the model by reversing the two processes as in Figure 5. In this case, an MPT model is necessarily neutral concerning whether two underlying processes occur in series or in parallel. This observation led
Ashby et al. to conclude from their models
of object perception that it was not possible to order the
processes of perceiving a target's form from perceiving
its color. This is also the logic that Brown used to
differentiate parallel versus serial models of object identification, discussed earlier.
A related approach to representing sequential versus
nonsequential processes in MPT models can be found in
the model ofSTM by Schweickert , discussed earlier. In one version of this model, reconstruction of the
short-term trace can occur through either phonological
processes (with probability S) or lexical processes (probability L). The question is whether these phonological
and lexical processes occur sequentially. Figure 6 presents two versions of this model, with a nonsequential
version on the left and a sequential (or serial) version on
the right. The sequential version assumes that lexical processes occur only after successful completion ofphonological processes. The nonsequential version assumes
that correct responding is determined by lexical processes with probability A or by semantic processes with
probability 1 - A. Thus, only one ofthese two processes
is instrumental in determining any given response.
Schweickert has shown that the two models in Figure 6
make qualitatively different predictions in specially designed factorial experiments.
Comparisons to Other Mathematical Models
As we have indicated above, MPT models share some
of the goals of psychometric measurement models. For
example, consider the areas ofpaired-comparison scaling
 or item-response models of testing . In both ofthese paradigms, the goal is to estimate
parameters that reflect latent factors underlying the manifest data, and these models typically have many parameters. In the case ofpaired-comparison scaling, the model
of Bradley, Terry, and Luce defines a
nonnegative parameter Vi for each choice object i, and the
model postulates that the paired comparison probabilities
are given by Pij = Vi/(Vi + Vj), where p., is the probability that object i is chosen over object j. If there are N
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
Figure 6. Two versions of Schweickert's MPT model for short-term memory. The left panel depicts a version in which the lexical process (L) and phonological process (S) occur nonsequentially. The right panel depicts a
sequential version in which the phonological process S occurs before the lexical process L.
choice objects, then there are N(N -
1)/2 choice probabilities Pi} and N parameters (actually N - 1 identifiable
parameters). Despite the large number of parameters,
nothing about the detailed cognitive processes of choice
is modeled, only the basic fact that some objects are more
attractive than others.
A similar situation can be found in models of itemresponse theory. In this paradigm, N examinees each takes
a test consisting of M items, and the data consist of an
N X M matrix, where the ij term is given by
1 if subject i is correct on item j
ootherwise.
One very highly studied model for this situation is the
Rasch model. In one version of this model, there
are N subject-ability parameters (Si) and M item-difficulty
parameters (d), andthe model postulates that
P(X. = 1)=
si(l-d) +(l-s)dj
where 0 -s; s., dj -s; 1. Again, the purpose of the Rasch
model is not to account for the complex cognitive processes that subjects use to answer questions. Instead, it is
a measurement model with only the most rudimentary psychological assumptions behind it-namely, that there are
individual differences at both the subject-ability and
item-difficulty levels and that ability and difficulty are
unidimensional and trade off in a simple way.
There is a vast literature concerning the statistical theory
behind both the Bradley-Terry-Luce model and the Rasch
model, including statistical inference issues such as parameter estimation, goodness of fit, and robustness. The
reason why we have described these two psychometric
models in some detail is to contrast them to most of the
modeling work in cognitive psychology, in which complex models are created that are rich in psychological assumptions. Yet, for these complex models, it is often the
case that very little is known about the statistical inference
issues that are relevant to using the parameter estimates
as measurements of underlying or latent processes.
Our pair-clustering model in Figure 1 provides a good
illustration of the use of MPT models as psychometric
tools and how they contrast with more complex cognitive
models. Note that the tree for singletons merely models
free recall as a Bernoulli process, in order to complete the
model that focuses on item pairs. It provides no insight
into the actual processing stages for single item recall. Our
model is therefore completely unsatisfactory ifviewed as
a deep theory ofmemory. What our model does instead is
provide a means of separately measuring two latent processes in free recall that are confounded in observable
data-namely, cluster storage and cluster retrieval. The
goal ofmodels like the one in Figure I is to separately measure latent processes such as these without commitment to
a strong processing account of recall. Like psychometric
models, this allows for a certain simplicity in the service
ofstatistical analysis. In fact, we have been able to provide
a complete asymptotic analysis of the model in the maximum likelihood framework, and have studied the model
from a preasymptotic viewpoint and under conditions of
individual differences in the parameters .
Because they are designed to be used as measurement
tools, MPT models may be viewed as less parsimonious in
their description ofdata than complex mathematical theories. As we have discussed previously, MPT models are
designed for very specific experimental paradigms, which
may yield only a limited set ofresponse categories. Moreover, parameters for a model need to capture the main
cognitive factors, including noncentral processes such as
guessing, response bias, singleton recall, and so on. As a
consequence, there is usually a large number ofparameters
used to account for a small number ofcategories, leaving
few, ifany, degrees offreedom for testing the model's fit.
It is not unusual for researchers who have developed MPT
models to express concern that their models do not provide a particularly parsimonious account ofthe data. For
example, Wagenaar and Boer felt that applying
their four-parameter model to an experimental paradigm
BATCHELDER AND RIEFER
with six data points was "verging on triviality." Kail et al.
 considered it a "drawback" that their model accounted for 14dfacross two experimental conditions with
12parameters. However, in our opinion, it is the measurement ofthe cognitive processes in the form ofparameter
estimates, and not the data-fitting capacity, that characterizes the usefulness of MPT models.
The issue ofparsimony depends primarily on the purpose ofa mathematical model. Complex theoretical models attempt a detailed account of cognitive processing,
often by specifically modeling the dynamics ofhow this
processing changes across the levels of continuous variables, such as serial position, lag, trials, or time. They
provide a theoretically based account for these changes,
usually with only a few central assumptions and parameters. In contrast, MPT models in their capacity as measurement tools normally do not specify the precise theoretical mechanisms that account for why parameters
increase or decrease as a function of different variables.
Once an MPT model has been established as a valid measurement tool, the purpose of the model is to measure
changes in parameters over experimental conditions, and
this typically requires a separate measure of each parameter for each condition. The result is a proliferation
of estimated parameters and a model that appears not to
provide a very parsimonious description of the data.
We do not view this as an inherent problem for MPT
models, at least no more than it is for other mathematical
models for measurement. Models ofsignal detection, for
example, derive separate measures for item detection and
response bias from only two data observations (hits and
false alarms). These models yield many estimates of the
parameters across conditions, and, in general, there are
no degrees offreedom to evaluate the model's fit to data.
The same can be said about some of the psychometric
models mentioned earlier; however, little concern is expressed about the parsimony of these models. The main
reason for this, of course, is that all ofthe above models
have been extensively and rigorously tested, and they have
proven to offer useful and valid measures oftheir underlying cognitive constructs. This brings us back to the
point of validity testing for MPT models. As important
as it is to determine whether or not an MPT model fits the
data, we believe that an even more crucial test ofa model's
validity is to show that the model performs well under
basic experimental manipulations. Ifthe model's parameters behave in a psychologically interpretable fashion,
then the model gains credence as a valid measurement tool.
Researchers should then be able to use the model without concern, even ifit does contain many parameters that
have to be estimated when applied to data.
CURRENT AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this article, we have described a general class ofstatistical models, discussed some relevant theoretical issues related to this type of modeling, and given a broad
overview of its many applications in psychology. MPT
models have been applied to a wide range ofdifferent content areas and to a number of diverse theoretical issues
within memory and cognition. In general, however, most
ofthese applications can be classified into one or both of
two broad categories: (I) models that formalize psychological theory, and (2) models designed to measure cognitive capacities. In this section, we discuss these two general
uses for MPT models plus one other that we feel holds
great potential for future applications.
MPT modeling is particularly suitable as a methodology for formally representing psychological theory. As
Ashby et al. have pointed out, MPT
models are flexible and easy to modify for the purpose of
incorporating and testing different theoretical assumptions. Their simple mathematical properties allow one to
evaluate in detail the consequences that theories have on
empirical data. This approach has been used successfully,
for example, by Riefer and Batchelder to explore
the recognition-failure paradigm, by Schweickert 
to investigate STM, and by Evans and Krauth
 to study propositional reasoning. Along these lines,
MPT models are also particularly useful for directly comparing different theories. The studies by Wagenaar and
Boer , B. H. Ross and Bower (198 I), and Ashby
et al. are all excellent examples of how precise comparisons between competing theories can be made when put
into MPT form.
As stated earlier, an equally important use of MPT
models is as a tool for the measurement of cognitive capacities. MPT models can be used to disentangle the empirical effects ofopposing latent processes and, thus, can
extract information from data in ways that ad hoc statistical techniques, such as ANOYA, cannot. Numerous examples of this approach have appeared in the literature,
including models for measuring storage versus retrieval
in memory , detection versus discrimination in source
monitoring , recollection versus familiarity in process dissociation , and perception versus binding
in object perception . Because
their mathematical properties have been worked out in detail, a large number of convenient statistical techniques
are available to researchers when analyzing data using
MPT models, including confidence intervals, hypothesis
testing, goodness of fit, and computer simulations. MPT
models are capable ofproviding specific measures for different cognitive processes and, as such, have been used
with great success to explore a variety of important theoretical issues.
However, in our opinion, there is one other application
ofMPT modeling that has great potential. Because they
are designed to measure cognitive functioning, MPT
models can also be used as diagnostic tools to evaluate
cognitive deficits in clinical populations . There have, on a few occasions, been studies in
which MPT models have been applied to special populations. For example, both Riefer and Batchelder (199 Ia)
and Howe and Hunter have applied storageretrieval models to measure cognitive deficits in elderly
populations. In terms of clinical applications, Chechile's
model has been applied to measure storage and retrieval
deficits due to alcohol-induced amnesia , developmental dyslexia , and in mildly retarded adults . Kail et al. conducted a storageretrieval analysis of cognitive deficits in languageimpaired children, and finite-trial Markov models have
been used to measure storage and retrieval deficits in dementia due to alcoholism and Alzheimer's disease .
Perhaps a prototypical example of a clinical application of MPT models can be found in a recent study by
Batchelder, Chosak-Reiter, Shankle, and Dick .
Batchelder, Chosak-Reiter, et al. examined multitrial, freerecall data taken from the CERAD (consortium to establish a registry for Alzheimer's disease), and analyzed
these data using both traditional statistics and an MPT
model. The specific experimental task involved a memory test consisting of three study-test trials, followed by
two delayed test trials. However, unlike the usual way
that data are obtained from controlled experimental conditions, these data were extracted from a large data bank
of individuals undergoing a test battery to assess possible memory deficits. Nine groups ofsubjects were compared on this task, representing different severity levels of
Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia, plus a control group ofhealthy elderly adults. The traditional analysis involved an ANaYA conducted on the aggregate
group means, which revealed significant improvement
in memory performance across trials and significant
memory differences between some ofthe clinical groups.
However, Batchelder, Chosak-Reiter, et al. 
demonstrated that, by analyzing the error success patterns for individual items, more information could be obtained from this task than by analyzing the aggregate data
with ANaYA. Specifically, examining the successful or
unsuccessful recall of items over the three study-test trials creates eight (23) response protocols. This data structure is similar to the one examined by Kail et al. ,
except their experiment involved three successive recalls
following a single study presentation. Batchelder, Chosak-
Reiter, et al. developed an MPT model to analyze these
data on the basis of assumptions taken from traditional
Markov learning models . The model
postulates that items can reside in an unlearned, a temporary, or a permanent state of storage and contains parameters for the
transitions between these states, as well as memory retrieval parameters for both intermediate and long-term
learning states. When applied to the response protocols,
including the two delayed test trials, the model revealed
significant differences between the groups that were not
evident using the traditional ANaYA.
As indicated in the introduction, in the 10 years since
Riefer and Batchelder's study, there has been a
great increase in the development and application of
MPT models. In fact, approximately two thirds of all the
MULTINOMIAL PROCESSING TREE MODELS
empirical articles dealing with models in this class and
almost all of the theoretical articles dealing specifically
with statistical inference for MPT models have been produced during this period. So far, the vast majority of
MPT models have been developed within the area of
human memory and cognition. However, categorical data
are not the exclusive domain of cognitive psychology,
and, as MPT modeling continues to grow in popularity,
it is reasonable to expect an even wider range ofnew applications. It is our hope that in the future, even more
substantive areas ofpsychology will benefit from the application of MPT models.