The Seventh AAAI Conference on Human
Computation and Crowdsourcing (HCOMP-19)
Beyond Accuracy: The Role of Mental Models in Human-AI Team Performance
Gagan Bansal, Besmira Nushi,† Ece Kamar,† Walter S. Lasecki,‡
Daniel S. Weld, Eric Horvitz†
University of Washington, Seattle, †Microsoft Research, Redmond, ‡University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Decisions made by human-AI teams (e.g., AI-advised humans) are increasingly common in high-stakes domains such
as healthcare, criminal justice, and ﬁnance. Achieving high
team performance depends on more than just the accuracy of
the AI system: Since the human and the AI may have different expertise, the highest team performance is often reached
when they both know how and when to complement one another. We focus on a factor that is crucial to supporting such
complementary: the human’s mental model of the AI capabilities, speciﬁcally the AI system’s error boundary (i.e. knowing “When does the AI err?”). Awareness of this lets the human decide when to accept or override the AI’s recommendation. We highlight two key properties of an AI’s error boundary, parsimony and stochasticity, and a property of the task,
dimensionality. We show experimentally how these properties affect humans’ mental models of AI capabilities and the
resulting team performance. We connect our evaluations to
related work and propose goals, beyond accuracy, that merit
consideration during model selection and optimization to improve overall human-AI team performance.
Introduction
While many AI applications address automation, numerous others aim to team with people to improve joint performance or accomplish tasks that neither the AI nor people can solve alone . In fact, many real-world, high-stakes
applications deploy AI inferences to help human experts
make better decisions, e.g., with respect to medical diagnoses, recidivism prediction, and credit assessment. Recommendations from AI systems—even if imperfect—can
result in human-AI teams that perform better than either
the human or the AI system alone .
Successfully creating human-AI teams puts additional demands on AI capabilities beyond task-level accuracy . Speciﬁcally, even though team performance depends
on individual human and AI performance, the team performance will not exceed individual performance levels if hu-
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: AI-advised human decision making for readmission prediction: The doctor makes ﬁnal decisions using the classiﬁer’s recommendations. Check marks denote
cases where the AI system renders a correct prediction, and
crosses denote instances where the AI inference is erroneous. The solid line represents the AI error boundary, while
the dashed line shows a potential human mental model of the
error boundary.
man and the AI cannot account for each other’s strengths
and weaknesses. In fact, recent research shows that AI accuracy does not always translate to end-to-end team performance .
Despite this, and even for applications where people are involved, most AI techniques continue to optimize solely for
accuracy of inferences and ignore team performance.
While many factors inﬂuence team performance, we study
one critical factor in this work: humans’ mental model of
the AI system that they are working with. In settings where
the human is tasked with deciding when and how to make
use of the AI system’s recommendation, extracting beneﬁts
from the collaboration requires the human to build insights
(i.e., a mental model) about multiple aspects of the capabilities of AI systems. A fundamental attribute is recognition
of whether the AI system will succeed or fail for a particular input or set of inputs. For situations where the human
uses the AI’s output to make decisions, this mental model of
the AI’s error boundary—which describes the regions where
it is correct versus incorrect—enables the human to predict
when the AI will err and decide when to override the automated inference.
We focus here on AI-advised human decision making, a
simple but widespread form of human-AI team, for example,
in domains like medical diagnosis, candidate screening for
hiring, and loan approvals. Figure 1 illustrates an example of
AI-advised human decision making for healthcare . A doctor,
using advice from a binary classiﬁer, must decide whether
to place a patient in a special (but costly) outpatient program. For a given input, the AI ﬁrst recommends an action
and the human then decides whether to trust or override it to
make a ﬁnal decision. This kind of human-AI collaboration
is one formulation of teaming, where there is a binary trust
model where the human either trusts or distrusts (and discards) the output of the AI system’s inﬂuences. We consider
the binary trust model instead of situations where the output
of the AI system can have varying inﬂuence on human decision makers. Team performance in AI-advised human decision making depends on how well the human understands
the AI’s error boundary. A mismatch between the human’s
mental model and the true error boundary can lead to suboptimal decisions, such as: (1) the human may trust the AI
when it makes an erroneous recommendation, (2) the human
may not trust the AI when it makes a correct recommendation. These decision can lower productivity and/or accuracy.
We deﬁne properties of an AI’s error boundary that affect
human’s ability to form an accurate mental model, such as
parsimony and non-stochasticity. Intuitively, an error boundary is parsimonious if it is simple to represent. For example, an error boundary that can be described via a minimal
number of features or conjunctive expressions on those features is considered to be parsimonious. A non-stochastic error boundary can be modeled with a small set of features
that reliably and cleanly distinguishes successes from errors
without uncertainty. Another factor that relates to a humans’
ability to create a mental model of the error boundary is the
task dimensionality, which we characterize by the number
of features deﬁning each instance.
We investigate the effect of these properties by conducting
controlled user studies using CAJA, which is an open-source
and conﬁgurable platform that implements an abstract version of AI-advised human decision making . Our results demonstrate that parsimony and nonstochasticity of error boundaries improve people’s ability to
create a mental model. Moreover, the experiments characterize traits of how people create and update mental models over time, highlighting the need for potential guidance
in this process. Given the importance of mental models for
the ultimate goal of team performance, this work advocates
for increased attention to properties necessary for effective
human-centered AI. We make the following contributions:
1. We highlight an under-explored but signiﬁcant research
challenge at the intersection of AI and human computation research—the role of humans’ mental models in
team performance in AI-advised human decision making.
2. We identify two attributes of AI systems, parsimony and
non-stochasticity of error boundaries, that may help humans learn better mental models of AI competence and
therefore improve team performance.
3. Using an open-source, game-centric platform, we show
that humans’ mental models of AI competence are a critical component of achieving high team performance, provide insights into how humans build mental models in
different settings, and demonstrate the desirability of parsimonious and non-stochastic error boundaries.
4. We integrate these results with those of previous work to
create a new set of guidelines to help developers maximize the team performance of human-centered AI systems that provide advice to people.
In Section 2 we formally deﬁne various concepts: AIadvised human decision making, error boundaries of AI, and
mental models of error boundaries. In Section 3, we formulate desirable properties of error boundaries. In Section 4
we study their effect on mental models. We conclude with a
discussion of recommendations for developing more humancentered ML.
Background
AI-advised human decision making
Following Bansal et al. , we focus on a simple form
of human-AI teamwork that is common in many real-world
settings, such as a 30-day readmission classiﬁer supporting
a doctor or a recidivism predictor supporting judges in courts . We refer to
situations where an AI system provides a recommendation
but the human makes the ﬁnal decision as AI-advised human
decision making (Figure 1). The team solves a sequence of
tasks, repeating the following cycle for each time, t.
S1: The environment provides an input, xt.
S2: The AI (possibly mistaken) suggests an action, h(xt).
S3: Based on this input, the human makes a decision, ut.
S4: The environment returns a reward, rt, which is a function of the user’s action, the (hidden) best action, and
other costs of the human’s decision (e.g., time taken).
The reward feedback in S4 lets the human learn when to trust
the AI’s recommendation. The cumulative reward R over T
cycles is the team’s performance. Throughout this paper, we
will assume that the AI system is a machine learning (ML)
classiﬁer that maps an input x ∈X to an action y from the
set of actions Y.
Error boundaries of ML models
The error boundary of model h is a function f that describes
for each input x whether model output h(x) is the correct
action for that input: f : (x, h(x)) →{T, F}. In other
words, the error boundary deﬁnes the instances for which
the model is correct. Note that this is not to be confused with
the model’s decision boundary, which outputs model predictions. The success of teamwork hinges on the human’s
recognizing whether to trust the AI model, making error
boundaries a critical component of AI-advised human decision making. In fact, appropriate trust in automation is a
topic that has received early attention as
determinant factor for designing systems that require people
to manage and intervene during imperfect automation.
Human mental models of error boundaries
People create mental models for any system they interact
with , including AI agents . In AI-advised human decision making, a simple definition for such a model would be m : x′ →{T, F}, indicating which inputs the human trusts the AI to solve correctly. Here, x′ indicates the features that are available to
the human. A more complex model might compute a probability and include additional arguments, such as the AI’s
output and its conﬁdence. Further, there may exist a representation mismatch– the human may create a mental model
in terms of features that are not identical to the ones used by
the ML model. In fact, in real-world deployments, different
team members may have access to different features. For example, a doctor may know information about a patient that is
missing from electronic health records (e.g., patient’s compliance with taking medications), while an AI system may
have access to the most recent results and trends in physiological state. However, mental models can be challenging to develop. Even when working within the same feature
space, they may not be perfect because users develop them
through a limited number of interactions, and humans have
memory and computation limitations. To illustrate, the solid
line in Figure 1 represents the AI error boundary, while the
dashed line shows a possible human mental model of the
error boundary.
Characterizing AI Error Boundaries
We now deﬁne properties that may inﬂuence peoples’ ability
to create a mental model of an AI’s error boundary. The ﬁrst
two are the properties of the error boundary itself, while the
third is a property of the task.
The parsimony of an error boundary f is inversely related
to it representational complexity. For example, in Figure 1
parsimony corresponds to the geometric complexity of the
error boundary (solid line). For AI error boundaries formulated in mathematical logic using disjunctive normal form,
complexity depends on the number of conjuncts and literals in f. For example, a hypothetical model may yield incorrect recommendations for older patients with high blood
pressure or younger patients with low blood pressure. In this
case, the error boundary f would be expressed as {(age =
old ∧bloodPressure = high) ∨(age = young ∧
bloodPressure = low)}, which has two conjunctions with
two literals each. This error boundary is more complex and
less parsimonious than one that instead uses only one conjunction and two literals.
In reality, an error boundary f may belong to any arbitrary function class. In this work, we choose to express f
as a disjunction of conjunctions, where literals are pairs of
features and values, so that in our controlled experiments we
can vary the complexity of the error boundary and measure
how it affects the accuracy of humans modeling the true error boundary. Any other choice of f would make it harder to
do such a comparison and would make additional assumptions about the human representation.
Marvin Correct
Marvin Wrong
Table 1: Payoff matrix for the studies. As in high-stakes decisions, workers get 4 cents if they accept Marvin when it is
correct, and lose 16 cents if they accept Marvin when wrong.
Stochasticity
An error boundary f is non-stochastic if it separates all mistakes from correct predictions. For example, suppose that for
the application in Figure 1, the error boundary f1 : {age =
young ∧blood pressure = low} is non-stochastic; this
means that the readmission classiﬁer always errs for young
patients with low blood pressure and is always correct for
other patients. In contrast, consider another boundary, f2,
that separates only 90% of the inputs that satisfy f1. That is,
the model will now be correct for 10% of the young patients
with low blood pressure, making f2 a more stochastic error
boundary than f1.
In practice, an error boundary of a given model might be
stochastic for three different reasons: generalization, representation mismatch between the AI and human, and inherent
stochasticity in the outcome being predicted. Generalization
may avoid overﬁtting by sacriﬁcing instances close to the
decision boundary for the sake of using a less complex, and
hence more parsimonious, model (e.g. a polynomial of a
lower degree). However, this may lead to a more stochastic error boundaries. Representation mismatch, for example,
may result in a case where many instances that differ for the
model appear equal to the human, who cannot understand
why the model occasionally fails or succeeds. Finally, the
learning model itself might also not be able to completely
model the real-world phenomenon due to missing features
or imperfect understanding of feature interactions.
In addition to the properties of the error boundary, the dimensionality of the task itself may affect the human’s discoverability of the error boundary.
Task dimensionality
We quantify task dimensionality using the number of features deﬁning each instance. With larger numbers of deﬁning features, the search space of all possible error boundaries increases, which may affect how humans create mental
models about error boundaries. In practice, using a larger
number of features may improve AI accuracy but adversely
affect mental models and thus team performance.
Experiments
We now present user studies we performed to build insights
about the factors that may affect peoples’ abilities to create a mental model of the AI. The studies were conducted
using CAJA, an open-source, game-like platform that mimics AI-advised human decision making .
CAJA is set up in an assembly line scenario, where the task
Figure 2: For each object, a subject can either choose to
use Marvin’s recommendation or perform the task independently.
of human subjects is to decide whether or not the objects going over the pipeline are defective (Figure 2). To decide on
these labels, for each instance, subjects take a recommendation from an AI system called Marvin and, based on their
mental model of Marvin, decide whether they should accept
the AI recommendation or override it by clicking the compute button. After submitting a choice, the human receives
feedback and monetary reward based on her ﬁnal decision.
Table 1 shows the payoff scheme used across these experiments, which aims to simulate high-stake decision making
(i.e., the penalty for an incorrect action is much higher than
the reward for a correct one). In this game, subjects are not
supposed to learn how to solve the task. In fact, the decision
boundary is generated randomly and the only way for a participant to earn a high score is by learning the error boundary
and relying on the Compute button to acquire the right prediction if Marvin is not to be trusted. This abstracts away
human expertise in problem solving so the focus remains on
the ability to learn the error boundary.
The CAJA platform enables control over many parameters relevant to AI-advised human decision making: task dimensionality, AI performance, length of interaction, parsimony and stochasticity of the error boundary, cost of mistakes, etc. In the human studies, we systematically vary these
parameters and measure team performance to study the factors that affect humans’ ability in developing mental models.
Note that game parameters also distinguish between features
that the machine reasons about and those that the human has
access to. More speciﬁcally, the platform currently allows
conﬁgurations where machine-visible features are a superset
of human-visible ones, which is also the type of conﬁguration we use in the next experiments.
All studies were conducted on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
For every condition we hired 25 workers and on average
workers were paid an hourly wage of $20. To remove spam,
we removed observations from workers whose performance
was in the bottom quartile. We explain results in a question
Figure 3: With more rounds of interaction, users perform
closer to the optimal policy. Blue indicates the rounds when
the AI system (Marvin) is correct and red indicates rounds
when the AI makes an error. As mistakes are more costly
(Table 1), in the beginning and when Marvin makes a mistake the difference between the optimal reward and reward
earned by average worker is higher because the users have
an incorrect mental model and fail to override the AI.
and answer format.
Q1: Do people create mental models of the error boundary?
How do mental models evolve with interaction?
We visualize action logs collected by CAJA to understand
the evolution of mental models with more rounds of interaction. Figure 3 shows the average simple regret (i.e., difference between the optimal and observed reward) of workers’
actions over time (i.e., rounds). The optimal policy is an oracle with access to Marvin’s true error boundary that can thus
always correctly choose when to trust Marvin. We observe
that the simple regret decreases with more interactions, indicating that, on average, workers gradually learn the correct
mental model and perform closer to the optimal policy.
Figure 4 shows the evolution of the mental model for
one particular worker when Marvin’s true error boundary is
non-stochastic, uses one conjunction and two literals, and
task dimensionality is three, i.e., three features describe the
problem space visible to the human. In the beginning, the
worker makes more mistakes (more red crosses) because the
mental model thus far is only partially correct. Eventually,
the worker learns the correct model and successfully compensate for the AI (more red checks). Note that a mental
model may be partially correct for two reasons: it is either
over-generalized or over-ﬁtted. An over-generalized mental
model includes more cases in the error boundary than it
should, for example, when the true error boundary is small
circles, and the over-generalized mental model includes all
small shapes. In contrast, an over-ﬁtted mental model misses
cases that the true error boundary contains. For example,
point (c) of Figure 4 shows where the worker over-ﬁt to





  
  
   
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 4: A visualization of a worker’s behavior that shows how their mental model is reﬁned with continuing interaction.
Here, the score indicates the cumulative reward, and Marvin makes mistakes whenever the object is a small circle. Red markers
indicate such rounds. Cross markers indicate if the worker’s ﬁnal decision was wrong. Hence, red crosses indicate a false accept
(e.g., (a), (c), and (e)) and result in large negative reward. On the other hand, blue checks indicate a successful accept and result
in a positive reward. Blue crosses indicate a false override and red checks indicate a true override. The ﬁgure contains a lot
more crosses before round 45 than after. This indicates that the worker makes most of the wrong decisions in the ﬁrst half
of the interaction but eventually learns to act optimally. Annotations 1-5 describe the different stages of the worker’s mental
model. For example, by (1) the worker learns to override small red circles presumably because she learned from a previous
wrong decision (a). However, since this mental model is only partially correct, in subsequent rounds (c, e, f) the worker makes
wrong decisions for small blue circles. This causes surprise and confusion at ﬁrst, but she eventually learns to override small
blue circles by (4). But then in subsequent rounds she makes a wrong decision for a small red circle (5). After this mistake, the
worker ﬁnally ties together lessons from all of her previous mistakes, ﬁgures out that small circles are problematic irrespective
of the color, and acts optimally thereafter.
small red circles when in fact errors occur for small circles.
Clearly, a combination of both impartialities can also occur
if the human tries to generalize too early on the incorrect
feature literal.
Q2: Do more parsimonious error boundaries facilitate mental model creation?
To answer this question, we compare team performance
of many conditions that vary parsimony by changing the
number of conjunctions and literals. We additionally vary
the number of features to study the effect of parsimony for
different task dimensionality. Figure 5 shows the overall
team performance (cumulative score) for two boundaries of
different complexity: a single conjunction with two literals
(e.g., red and square), and two conjunctions with two literals
each (e.g., red and square or small and circle). Different
features may have different salience; therefore, for the same
formula, we randomly assign different workers isomorphic
error boundaries. For example, the error boundary (red and
square) is isomorphic with the error boundary described
by (blue and circle). Since error boundary complexity
increases with the number of conjunctions, we observe
that a more parsimonious error boundary (i.e., a single
conjunction) results in a higher team performance. Thus,
our results demonstrate the value for learning ML models
with parsimonious error boundaries, for example, by
minimizing the number of conjunctions. In Figure 6, we
observe that team performance generally decreases as
the number of human-visible features increases, which is
consistent with previous ﬁndings on human reasoning about
features .
Q3: Do less stochastic error boundaries lead to better mental models?
In the previous experiments, Marvin’s error boundary was
non-stochastic (i.e., Marvin made a mistake if and only if the
object satisﬁed the formula). In practice, error boundaries
may be fuzzier and not as clean. To understand the effect
of stochasticity, we vary two parameters: P(err|¬f), the
conditional probability of error if the object does not satisfy
 

Figure 5: Team performance decreases as the number of conjuncts in the error boundary is increased. Number of literals
were ﬁxed to 2.
the formula, and P(err|f), the conditional probability of error if the object satisﬁes the formula. In the non-stochastic
experiments, we use a P((err|¬f) = 0, P(err|f) = 1))
conﬁguration. The other conditions that we experiment with
are (0, 0.85), (0, 0.7), and (0.15, 0.85). Of these, only the
last condition is two-sided, meaning that errors can occur
on both sides of the boundary although with less probability
when the formula is not satisﬁed. All other conditions are
one-sided.
Figure 7 shows that for the one-sided error case, the percentage of workers who make the correct decision (vertical axis) increases over time. In contrast, for two-sided error
boundaries, workers ﬁnd it challenging to learn the true error boundary. In addition, we observe that even for one-sided
error case, increased stochasticity makes it difﬁcult for participants to trust Marvin and learn a correct mental model.
For example, the (0, 0.7) condition has clearly more rounds
where Marvin was correct (indicated by circles) and the percentage of people who trusted Marvin is less than 50%.
Related Work
Mental models for collaboration. Early work explored the
importance of mental models for achieving high performance in group work , human-system collaboration , and interface
design . More recently, the impact
of mental models has been revisited for better understanding
human-in-the-loop systems and for grounding human-AI collaboration within traditional HCI work . Our
work builds upon these foundations and studies the problem
for AI-advised human decision making. While there exist
many forms of mental modeling (i.e., How does the system
work?) and they are relevant for collaboration, this work focuses particularly on mental models about system performance (i.e., When does the system err?), which are learned
upon context and past experiences.
Backward compatibility. The closest relevant work to this
study that also operates on mental models about error boundaries is presented in and focuses on the
usefulness of such models during AI updates highlighting
the importance of remaining backward compatible while deploying a new model. Backward compatibility is measured
through comparing the errors of the previous and the updated version of the model and quantifying the percentage of
all input instances that were correct in the previous version
that remain correct in the updated one. The work showed
that error boundaries that are not backward compatible with
previous versions of the model breaks mental models human
have created in the process of collaboration, and showed that
updates to a more accurate model that is not backward compatible can hurt team performance.
In traditional software design, backward compatibility
is a well-studied software property , used to denote software that remains compatible
with a larger legacy ecosystem even after an update. In
the ﬁeld of AI/ML, a related notion to backward compatibility is catastrophic forgetting , which
is an anomalous behavior of neural network models that occurs when they are sequentially trained on more instances
and forget to solve earlier instances over time. While forgetting in sequential learning is an important problem, backward compatibility is applicable to a larger set of update
scenarios that do not necessarily require more data (e.g. different architecture or the same architecture but with different
parameters).
Interpretability for decision-making. As learning models are being deployed to assist humans in taking highstake decisions, the explainability of machine predictions
is crucial for facilitating human understanding. Ongoing
and prior research has contributed to improving the interpretability of such predictions either by building more
interpretable models or by imitating complex models via simpler
but more explainable ones . However, while explanations help
with understanding, it is not yet clear under which conditions they improve collaboration and human productivity . For example, some explanations may describe how the system works but they do
clearly disclose when it will fail and needs human intervention. In other cases, inspecting an explanation might take
just as much time as solving the task from scratch (i.e.,
high cognitive load). Both challenges motivate the need for
predictable and easy-to-learn error boundaries, properties of
which we study in our experimental evaluation. A promising direction is generating explanations of error boundaries
themselves as a tool for users to quickly learn and remember
various failure conditions. Recent work , uses decision trees to predict and visualize
error boundaries for the purpose of debugging ML models
 
Figure 6: a) Team performance decreases as the task dimensionality increases (i.e., number of features). b) Re-visualization of
a) that shows that, for a given number of features, team performance increases with the number of literals in the error boundary,
because the errors become more speciﬁc. The solid red lines show this trend. Number of conjuncts was ﬁxed to 1.
but more work is needed on deploying and evaluating such
tools for decision-making.
Modeling and communicating uncertainty in ML. Con-
ﬁdence calibration has been a topic of extensive research,
especially for embracing and communicating uncertainty
in models that are inherently non-probabilistic. Foundational work in this space has proposed techniques for calibrating output scores for support vector machines , decision trees and Na¨ıve Bayes models , and deep neural networks . Later work has proposed data collection algorithms
for addressing overconﬁdent predictions . While conﬁdence estimation
and reporting is informative for decision-making, research
in human-centered machine learning 
and HCI shows that people have difﬁculties with correctly
interpreting probabilistic statements and even system accuracy itself . Research in the intersection of AI and
HCI has found that interaction improves when setting expectations right about what the system can do and how
well it performs . This paper takes a step forward by
proposing properties of ML models that can assist with setting the right expectations and evaluating them through controlled user studies. Moreover, we envision this line of work
on making error boundaries predictable as complementary
but also valuable for designing better conﬁdence models
as the deﬁned properties. For example, parsimonious error
boundaries are easier to generalize also from a statistical
learning point of view, which would help with calibration.
Recommendations for Human-Centered AI
When developing ML models current practices solely target
AI accuracy, even in contexts where models support human
decision making. Our experiments reveal that error boundaries and task complexity can inﬂuence the success of teamwork. The user studies presented suggest the following considerations when developing ML models to be used in AIadvised human decision making:
1. Build AI systems with parsimonious error boundaries.
2. Minimize the stochasticity of system errors.
3. Reduce task dimensionality when possible either by eliminating features that are irrelevant for both machine and
human reasoning or most importantly by analyzing the
trade-off between the marginal gain of machine performance per added feature and the marginal loss of the accuracy of human mental models per added feature.
4. Based on results from Bansal et al. , during
model updates, deploy models whose error boundaries
are backward compatible, i.e. by regularizing in order
to minimize the introduction of new errors on instances
where the user has learned to trust the system.
Given the importance of these properties on overall team
performance, and potentially of other properties to be discovered in future work, it is essential to make such properties
a part of considerations during model selection. For example, if a practitioner is presented with two different models,
h1 and h2, of similar accuracy (e.g., such a situation could
arise as a result of a grid search for hyper-parameter selection), and the error boundary f1 is more stochastic than f2,
clearly h2 would be the better choice. In a more complex
situation, where h2’s accuracy is slightly inferior to h1’s,
the practitioner must carefully estimate the potential loss in
team accuracy attributed to human mistakes (i.e., trusting the
 
Figure 7: For one-sided error boundaries (the top three rows), the percentage of workers who choose the optimal action improves
with time and reaches 100% – the positive slope of the best ﬁt line shows this increasing trend. For the two-sided stochastic
boundary (bottom row), the improvement is minimal and stays close to 50% – the slope of the best ﬁt line is close to 0.
model when it is incorrect) due to stochasticity and compare
this loss to the difference in accuracy between the two candidate models. Often, a negligible compromise in ML accuracy, can lead to for a higher gain in accuracy of overall
teamwork. The same analysis could be employed to appraise
the optimal tradeoffs when one human-aware property may
be at odds with another (e.g., making an error boundary
more parsimonious might also make it more stochastic).
Model selection decisions also depend on the type of tools
made available to users for learning and remembering error
boundaries. For example, if users can access a scratchpad
that records and summarizes the observed error boundary in
real time, then they might be able to afford a slightly more
complex error boundary.
Human-aware model selection should also be supported
by making the presented properties part of the optimization problem is formulation while training either by including human-aware considerations in loss functions or by posing additional optimization constraints. The former technique has been used to combine backward compatibility in
the loss function and to combine treebased regularization to learn a more interpretable model ; the latter has found application in domains
like fair classiﬁcation and healtcare . More effort is
needed to algorithmically ensure error boundary parsimony
and non-stochasticity and combine such efforts for generating actionable conﬁdence scores. This would reshape learning techniques to optimize for both the human in the loop
or any other part of the ecosystem that requires reliable trust
contracts to cooperate with the AI.
Finally, as human-AI collaboration becomes more pervasive, we foresee further opportunities to study human-AI
team behavior in the open world, and for richer and more
general forms of human-AI teams, for example, cases where
AI recommendation directly updates human’s belief in the
ﬁnal decision in contrast to our simpliﬁed notion of accept
or override. Other opportunities include making interaction
more natural by building computational models about what
users have learned and by simplifying mental model creation
using explanatory tools.
Conclusion
We studied the role of human mental models on the human-
AI team performance for AI-advised human decision making for situations where people either rely upon or reject AI
inferences. Our results revealed important properties that describe the error boundaries of inferences that can inﬂuence
how well people can collaborate with an AI system and how
efﬁciently they can override the AI when it fails. We ﬁnd that
systems with exactly the same accuracy can lead to different team performance depending upon the parsimony, nonstochasticity, and dimensionality of error boundaries. Future
research opportunities include developing methods for integrating these considerations into algorithmic optimization
techniques. While AI accuracy has been traditionally considered a convenient proxy for predicting human-AI team
performance, our ﬁndings motivate investing effort to understand how to develop AI systems to support teamwork,
in particular, in making properties of error boundaries more
understandable and learnable when selecting an AI model
for deployment.
Acknowledgements
We thank M. Ribeiro, M. Czerwinski, Q. Chen, and anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback. This work was supported by Microsoft Research, ONR grant N00014-18-1-
2193, the Future of Life Foundation, the WRF/Cable Professorship, and a DARPA Young Faculty Award.