Joint Detection and Recounting of Abnormal Events
by Learning Deep Generic Knowledge∗
Ryota Hinami1,2, Tao Mei3, and Shin’ichi Satoh2,1
1The University of Tokyo, 2National Institute of Infomatics, 3Microsoft Research Asia
 , , 
This paper addresses the problem of joint detection and
recounting of abnormal events in videos. Recounting of abnormal events, i.e., explaining why they are judged to be abnormal, is an unexplored but critical task in video surveillance, because it helps human observers quickly judge if
they are false alarms or not. To describe the events in the
human-understandable form for event recounting, learning
generic knowledge about visual concepts (e.g., object and
action) is crucial. Although convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved promising results in learning such
concepts, it remains an open question as to how to effectively use CNNs for abnormal event detection, mainly due to
the environment-dependent nature of the anomaly detection.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by integrating a generic
CNN model and environment-dependent anomaly detectors.
Our approach ﬁrst learns CNN with multiple visual tasks to
exploit semantic information that is useful for detecting and
recounting abnormal events. By appropriately plugging the
model into anomaly detectors, we can detect and recount
abnormal events while taking advantage of the discriminative power of CNNs. Our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art on Avenue and UCSD Ped2 benchmarks for abnormal event detection and also produces promising results
of abnormal event recounting.
1. Introduction
Detecting abnormal events in videos is crucial for video
surveillance. While automatic anomaly detection can free
people from having to monitor videos, we still have to check
videos when the systems raise alerts, and this still involves
immense costs.
If systems can explain what is happening and assess why events are abnormal, we can quickly
identify unimportant events without having to check videos.
Such processes that explain the evidence in detecting events
is called event recounting, which was attempted as a multi-
∗This work was conducted when the ﬁrst author was a research intern
at Microsoft Research Asia.
recounting
anomaly score
Figure 1. Our approach detects abnormal events and also recounts
why they were judged to be abnormal by predicting visual concepts and anomaly scores of each concept.
media event recounting (MER) task in TRECVid 1 but has
not been explored in the ﬁeld of abnormal event detection.
Recounting abnormal events is also useful in understanding
the behavior of algorithms. Analyzing the evidence of detecting abnormal events should disclose potential problems
with current algorithms and indicate possible future directions. The main goal of the research presented in this paper
was to develop a framework that could jointly detect and
recount abnormal events, as shown in Fig. 1.
Abnormal events are generally deﬁned as irregular
events that deviate from normal ones. Since normal behavior differs according to the environment, the target of
detection in abnormal event detection depends on the environment (e.g., ‘riding a bike’ is abnormal indoors while
it is normal on cycling roads).
In other words, positive in anomaly detection has the nature of environmentdependent, wherein only negative samples are given as
training data and positive in the environment is deﬁned by
these negative samples. This is different from most other
computer vision tasks (e.g., ‘pedestrian’ is always positive on a pedestrian detection task). Since positive samples
are not given in anomaly detection, detectors of abnormal
events cannot be learned in a supervised way. Instead, the
standard approach to anomaly detection is 1) learning an
environment-dependent normal model using training samples, and 2) detecting outliers from the learned model.
However, learning knowledge about basic visual concepts is essential for event recounting. The event in the
1 
 
example in Fig. 1 is explained as ‘person’, ‘bending’,
and ‘young’, because it has knowledge of these concepts.
We call such knowledge generic knowledge. We consider
generic knowledge to be essential for recounting and also
to contribute to accurately detecting abnormal events. Since
people also detect anomalies after recognizing the objects
and actions, employing generic knowledge in abnormal
event detection ﬁts in well with our intuition.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have proven successful in learning visual concepts such as object categories
and actions. CNNs classify or detect target concepts with
high degrees of accuracy by learning them with numerous
positive samples. However, positive samples are not given
in anomaly detection due to its environment-dependent nature. This is the main reason that CNNs still have not been
successful in anomaly detection and most approaches still
rely on low-level hand-crafted features. If we can fully exploit the representation power of CNNs, the performance of
anomaly detection will be signiﬁcantly improved as it is in
other tasks. Moreover, its learned generic knowledge will
help to recount abnormal events.
This paper presents a framework that jointly detects
and recounts abnormal events by integrating generic and
environment-speciﬁc knowledge into a uniﬁed framework.
A model based on Fast R-CNN is trained on large supervised datasets to learn generic knowledge. Multi-task
learning is incorporated into Fast R-CNN to learn three
types of concepts, actions, objects, and attributes, in one
model. Then, environment-speciﬁc knowledge is learned
using anomaly detectors. Unlike previous approaches that
have trained anomaly detectors on low-level features, our
anomaly detector is trained on more semantic spaces by
using CNN outputs (i.e., deep features and classiﬁcation
scores) as features. Our main contributions are:
• We address a new problem, i.e., joint abnormal event
detection and recounting, which is important for practical surveillance applications as well as understanding
the behavior of the abnormal event detection algorithm.
• We incorporate the learning of basic visual concepts into
the abnormal event detection framework. Our conceptaware model opens up interesting directions for higherlevel abnormal event detection.
• Our approach based on multi-task Fast R-CNN achieves
superior performance over other methods on several
benchmarks and demonstrates the effectiveness of deep
CNN features in abnormal event detection.
2. Related Work
The approach of anomaly detection ﬁrst involves modeling normal behavior and then detecting samples that deviate
from it. Modeling normal patterns of object trajectories is
one standard approach to anomaly detection
in videos. While it can capture long-term object-level semantics, tracking fails in crowded or cluttered scenes. An
alternative approach is modeling appearance and activity
patterns using low-level features extracted from local regions, which is a current standard approach, especially in
crowded scenes. This approach can be divided into two
stages: local anomaly detection assigning anomaly score
to each local region independently, and globally consistent
inference integrating local anomaly scores into a globally
consistent anomaly map with statistical inferences.
Local anomaly detection can be seen as a simple novelty
detection problem : a model of normality is inferred
using a set of normal features X as training data, and used
to assign novelty scores (anomaly scores) z(x) to test sample x. Novelty detectors used in video anomaly detection
include distance-based , reconstruction-based (e.g., autoencoders , sparse coding ), domainbased (one-class SVM ), and probabilistic methods
(e.g., mixture of dynamic texture , mixture of probabilistic PCA ), following the categories in the review by
Pimentel et al. . These models are generally built on
the low-level features (e.g., HOG and HOF) extracted from
densely sampled local patches. Several recent approaches
have investigated the learning-based features using autoencoders , which minimize reconstruction errors without using any labeled data for training.
Antic and Ommer detected object hypotheses by video parsing instead
of dense sampling, although they relied on background subtraction that was not robust to illumination changes.
Globally consistent inference was introduced in several
approaches to guarantee the consistency of local anomaly
scores. Kratz et al. enforce temporal consistency by
modeling temporal sequences with hidden Markov models
(HMM). The spatial consistency is also introduced in several studies using Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) 
to capture spatial interdependencies between local regions.
While recent approaches have placed emphasis on global
consistency , it is deﬁned on top of the local
anomaly scores as explained above. Besides, several critical issues remain in local anomaly detection. Despite the
great success of CNN approaches in many visual tasks, the
application of CNN to abnormal event detection is yet to be
explored. Normally CNN requires rich supervised information (positive/negative, ranking, etc.) and abundant training
data. However, supervised information is unavailable for
anomaly detection by deﬁnition. Hasan et al. learned
temporal regularity in videos with a convolutional autoencoder and used it for anomaly detection. However, we consider that autoencoders that are only learned with unlabeled
data do not fully leverage the expressive power of CNN. Besides, recounting of abnormal events is yet to be considered,
while several approaches have been proposed for multimedia event recounting by localizing key evidence or
summarizing the evidence of detected events by text .
generic model
environment-speciﬁc
(b) testing procedures
activation
(1) detect object
labeled image datasets
skateboarding
unlabeled data of
target environment
(2) extract features
and scores
(3) detect
abnormal events
(4) recount events
(a) learning procedures
(1) learn multi-task Fast R-CNN (generic model)
(2) learn anomaly detectors (environment-speciﬁc model)
Multi-task
Fast R-CNN
Multi-task
Fast R-CNN
fc7 features
classiﬁcation scores
if abnormal
Recounting result of
learn normal behavior
→ running is the evidence
to be abnormal
Detection result
abnormal RoI
anomaly score
predicted concepts
Figure 2. Overview of our approach. (a) illustrates our learning procedures of two types of models: generic and environment-speciﬁc
models, and (b) shows our testing procedure of joint detection and recounting abnormal events.
3. Abnormal Event Detection and Recounting
We propose a method of detecting and recounting abnormal events. As shown in Fig. 2 (a), we learn generic
knowledge about visual concepts in addition to learning
environment-speciﬁc anomaly detectors.
Although most
existing approaches use only environment-speciﬁc models,
they cannot extract semantic information and thus not suf-
ﬁcient to recount abnormal events. Therefore, we learn the
generic knowledge that is required for abnormal event recounting by using large-scale supervised image datasets.
Since we learn the model with object, action, and attribute
detection task that are highly related to abnormal event detection, this generic model can be used to improve anomaly
detection performance as shown in .
First, multi-task Fast R-CNN is learned with large supervised datasets, which corresponds to the generic model that
can be commonly used, irrespective of the environment. It
is used to extract deep features (we call it a semantic feature) and visual concept classiﬁcation scores from multiple
local regions. Second, anomaly detectors are learned on
these features and scores for each environment, which models the normal behavior of the target environment and predict anomaly scores of test samples. The anomaly detectors
of features and classiﬁcation scores are used for abnormal
event detection and recounting, respectively.
Our abnormal event detection and recounting are performed using a combination of two learned models. Figure 2 (b) outlines the four steps in the pipeline.
1. Detect object proposal: Object proposals are detected
for each frame by geodesic object and moving object proposals .
2. Extract features: Semantic features and classiﬁcation
scores are simultaneously extracted from all object proposals by the multi-task Fast R-CNN.
3. Classify normal/abnormal:
The anomaly scores of
each proposal are computed by applying the anomaly
detector to semantic features of the proposal. The object proposals with anomaly scores above a threshold are
determined as source regions of abnormal events.
4. Recount abnormal events:
Visual concepts of the
three types (objects, actions, and attributes) of abnormal events are predicted from classiﬁcation scores. The
anomaly scores of each predicted concept are computed
by the anomaly detector for classiﬁcation scores to recount the evidence of anomaly detection. This phase is
explained in more detail in Sec. 3.2.
3.1. Learning of Generic Knowledge
We learn the generic knowledge about visual concepts to
use it for event recounting and to improve the performance
of abnormal event detection. To exploit semantic information that is effective in these tasks, we learn three types of
concepts, i.e., objects, actions, and attributes, that are important to describe events. Since these concepts are jointly
learned by multi-task learning, features that are useful to
detect any type of abnormality (abnormal objects, actions,
or attributes) can be extracted. Our model is based on Fast
R-CNN because it can efﬁciently predict categories and output features of multiple region-of-interests (RoIs) by sharing computation at convolutional layers.
Network architecture.
Figure 2 (b) illustrates the architecture of the proposed multi-task Fast R-CNN (shaded
in red), which is the same as that for the Fast R-CNN except for the last classiﬁcation layers. It takes image and
RoIs as inputs. A whole image is ﬁrst processed by convolutional layers and its outputs are then processed by the
RoI pooling layer and two fully-connected layers to extract
ﬁxed length features from each RoI. We used the feature at
the last fully-connected layer (fc7 feature) as the semantic
feature for learning abnormal event detector. The features
were fed into three classiﬁcation layers, i.e., object, action,
and attribute classiﬁcation layers, each of which consisted
of fully-connected layers and activation. A sigmoid was
used for activation in attribute and action classiﬁcation to
optimize multi-label classiﬁcation while softmax was used
in object classiﬁcation as in Girshick . The bounding
box regression was not used because it depends on the class
to detect, which is not determined in abnormal event detection. We used Alexnet as the base network, which is
commonly used as a feature extraction network and is computationally more efﬁcient than that of VGG model .
Training datasets.
We used Microsoft COCO 
training set to learn object and Visual Genome datasets 
to learn attributes and actions because both datasets contain
sufﬁciently large variations in objects with bounding box
annotations. Visual Genome was also used for the evaluation, as will be explained later in Sec. 5, and to seek for the
fairness, the intersection of Visual Genome and COCO validation (COCO-val) set was excluded. We used all 80 object
categories in the COCO while 45 attributes and 25 actions
that appeared the most frequently were selected from the Visual Genome dataset. Our model only learned static image
information using image datasets instead of video datasets
because motion information (e.g., optical ﬂow) from the
static camera was signiﬁcantly different from that from the
moving camera, and large datasets from the static camera
with rich annotations were unavailable.
Learning details. We used almost the same learning
strategy and parameters as that for Fast R-CNN . Here,
we only describe differences from Fast R-CNN. First, since
we removed bounding box regression, our model was only
trained with classiﬁcation loss.
Second, our model was
trained to predict multiple tasks, viz., object, action, and
attribute detection. A task was ﬁrst randomly selected out
of three tasks for each iteration, and a mini-batch was sampled from the dataset of the selected task following the same
strategy as that for Fast R-CNN. The loss of each task was
applied to its classiﬁcation layer and shared layers. Since
multi-task model converged more slowly than the singletask model in , we set the learning rate of SGD as 0.001
for ﬁrst 200K iterations, and 0.0001 for the next 100K,
which are larger numbers of iterations for each step of the
learning rate than those for the single-task model. All models are trained and tested with Chainer .
3.2. Abnormal Event Recounting
Abnormal event recounting is expected to predict concepts and also to provide evidence as to why the event was
detected as an anomaly, which is not a simple classiﬁcation
task. In the case in Fig. 1 above, predicting category (object=‘person’, attribute=‘young’, and action=‘bending’) is
not enough. It is important to predict which concept is an
anomaly (bending is an anomaly) to recount the evidence
of abnormal events. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 1, the proposed abnormal event recounting system predicts:
• the categories of three types of visual concepts (object,
action, and attribute) of the detected event, and
• the anomaly scores for each concept to determine
whether the evidence of detecting it as an anomaly.
The approach to these predictions is straightforward. We
ﬁrst predict categories by simply selecting the category
with the highest classiﬁcation score for each concept. The
anomaly score of each predicted category is then computed.
At training time, the distribution of classiﬁcation scores under the target environment is modeled for each category by
using kernel density estimation (KDE) with a Gaussian kernel and a bandwidth calculated with Scott’s rules . At
test time, the density at the predicted classiﬁcation score is
estimated by KDE for each predicted concept and the reciprocals of density are used as anomaly scores.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
UCSD Ped2 and Avenue datasets were used to
evaluate the performance of our method. The UCSD pedestrian dataset is the standard benchmark for abnormal event
detection, where only pedestrians appear in normal events,
while bikes, trucks, etc., appear in abnormal events. The
UCSD dataset consists of two subsets, i.e., Ped1 and Ped2.
We selected Ped2 because Ped1 has a signiﬁcantly lower
frame resolution of 158 × 240, which would have made it
difﬁcult to capture objects in our framework based on object
proposal+CNN. Since inexpensive higher resolution cameras have recently become commercially available, we considered that this was not a critical drawback in our framework. Avenue datasets are challenging datasets that
contain various types of abnormal events such as ‘throwing
bag’, ‘pushing bike’, and ‘wrong direction’. Since the pixellevel annotation in some complex events is subjective (e.g.,
only the bag is annotated in a throwing bag event), we evaluated Avenue with only frame-level metrics. In addition,
while the Avenue dataset focuses on moving objects as abnormal events, our focus included static objects. Therefore,
we evaluated the subset excluding ﬁve clips out of 22 clips
that contained static but abnormal objects, viz., a red bag on
the grass, and a person standing in front of a camera, which
are regarded as normal in the Avenue dataset. We called
this subset Avenue17, which we will describe in more detail in the supplemental material. We used standard metrics
in abnormal event detection, ROC curve, area under curve
(AUC), and equal error rate (EER), as was explained in Li
et al. for both frame-level and pixel-level detection.
4.2. Implementation details
Abnormal event detection procedure. Given the input
video, we ﬁrst detected object proposals from each frame
MT-FRCN: AUC=89.2, EER=17.2
FRCN object: AUC=88.8, EER=16.7
FRCN attribute: AUC=85.5, EER=22.4
FRCN action: AUC=89.8, EER=17.5
SDAE: AUC=84.2, EER=25.8
HOG: AUC=66.7, EER=38.3
(a) Avenue17
MT-FRCN: AUC=90.8, EER=17.1
FRCN object: AUC=89.5, EER=15.8
FRCN attribute: AUC=88.5, EER=18.8
FRCN action: AUC=92.2, EER=13.9
SDAE: AUC=59.2, EER=46.4
HOG: AUC=59.3, EER=44.4
(b) UCSD Ped2 (frame-level)
MT-FRCN: AUC=87.3, EER=19.3
FRCN object: AUC=86.3, EER=17.9
FRCN attribute: AUC=85.3, EER=21.2
FRCN action: AUC=89.1, EER=15.9
SDAE: AUC=39.1, EER=61.6
HOG: AUC=33.1, EER=62.4
(c) UCSD Ped2 (pixel-level)
Figure 3. Comparison of ROC curves between different appearance features on standard benchmarks.
using GOP and MOP as in (around 2500 proposals per frame). The frame images and detected object
proposals were input into Fast R-CNN to obtain semantic
features and classiﬁcation scores for all proposals. The semantic features were fed into the trained anomaly detector (described below) to classify each proposal into normal
or abnormal, which computed an anomaly score for each
proposal. Object proposals with anomaly scores above the
threshold were detected as abnormal events. The threshold
parameter was varied to plot the ROC curve in our evaluation. Each detected event was ﬁnally processed for recounting, as was explained in Sec. 3.2.
Anomaly detectors for semantic features.
training set extracted from training samples, anomaly detectors were learned to model ‘normal’ behavior. The anomaly
detector took semantic features in testing as an input to output an anomaly score. Three anomaly detectors were used.
1) Nearest neighbor-based method (NN): An anomaly
score was the distance between the test sample and its nearest training sample.2) One-class SVM (OC-SVM): The
anomaly score of test samples was the distance from the decision boundary of OC-SVM with RBF kernel. Since
we did not have validation data, we did tests with several parameter combinations and used parameters that performed
best (σ=0.001 and ν=0.1). 3) Kernel density estimation
(KDE): Anomaly scores were computed as a reciprocal of
density of test samples estimated by KDE with a Gaussian
kernel and a bandwidth calculated with Scott’s rules .
To reduce computational cost, we separated frames into
a 3×4 grid with the same cell size, and learned the anomaly
detectors for each location (12 detectors in total). The coordinates of the bounding box center determined the cell
that each object proposal belonged to. In addition, features
were compressed using product quantization (PQ) with
a code length of 128 bits in NN and features were reduced
down to 16-dims using PCA in OC-SVM and KDE.
4.3. Comparison of Appearance Features
We compare our framework using following different appearance features to demonstrate the effectiveness of Fast
R-CNN (FRCN) features in abnormal event detection:
• HOG: HOG extracted from a 32×32 resized patch.
• SDAE: features of a stacked denoising autoencoder with
the same architecture and training procedure as in .
• FRCN objects, attributes, and actions: The fc7 feature of single-task FRCN trained on one dataset.
• MT-FRCN: The fc7 feature of multi-task FRCN.
We used the same settings for other components including
those for object proposal generation and anomaly detectors
to evaluate the effects of appearance features alone.
ROC curves. Figure 3 plots the ROC curves on Avenue17 and UCSD Ped2 datasets. These experiments used
NN as novelty detector. The curves indicate that FRCN
features signiﬁcantly outperformed HOG and SDAE in all
benchmarks. The main reason is FRCN features could discriminate different visual concepts while HOG and SDAE
features could not.
In the supplemental material, the t-
SNE map of feature space qualitatively justiﬁes discriminability of each feature. The FRCN action performs
slightly better than the others because the most challenging
abnormal events in the benchmarks are related to actions.
Compatibility with different anomaly detectors. We
measured performance using the three anomaly detectors
explained in Sec. 4.2 to clarify that FRCN features were
compatible with various anomaly detectors, Figure 4 compares AUC tested on varied anomaly detectors on Avenue17
and Ped2 datasets. The results indicate that FRCN features
always outperformed HOG and SDAE features and our
performance was insensitive to anomaly detectors. Since
FRCN features were compatible with various anomaly detectors, they can replace conventional appearance features
in any framework for abnormal event detection.
4.4. Comparison with State-of-the-art Methods
We compared our entire pipeline of abnormal event detection pipeline with state-of-the-art methods, viz., local
motion histogram (LMH) , MPPCA , social force
model , MDT , AMDN , and video parsing 
on the Ped2 dataset. We also made comparisons with Lu et
al. (sparse 150 fps) , and Hasan et al. (Conv-AE) 
on the Avenue17 dataset. We measured the performance of
Avenue17 using the codes provided by the authors.
FRCN object
FRCN attribute
FRCN action
FRCN joint
(a) Avenue17
FRCN object
FRCN attribute
FRCN action
FRCN joint
(b) UCSD Ped2 (frame-level)
FRCN object
FRCN attribute
FRCN action
FRCN joint
(c) UCSD Ped2 (pixel-level)
Figure 4. Comparison of AUC (%) on standard benchmarks by
varing anomaly detectors and appearance features.
Results. Table 1 summarize the AUC/EER on Avenue17
and UCSD Ped2 datasets, which demonstrates our framework outperformed all other methods on all benchmarks.
Especially, AUC of Ped2 was 89.2%, which signiﬁcantly
outperformed the state-of-the-art method (66.5% in ).
Since our method was based on object proposals and captured object-level semantics by using FRCN features, we
accurately localized abnormal objects. Moreover, the Avenue17 dataset contained objects and actions that were not
included in Fast R-CNN’s training data (e.g., white paper
and throwing bag). This indicated that FRCN features generalized the detection of untrained categories. Note that our
method performed best without using any motion features
while others used motion features based on optical ﬂows.
Learning motion features with two-stream CNN or 3D-
CNN remains to be undertaken in future work. Also,
our performance on Ped1 is much worse than state-of-theart (69.9/35.9 in AUC/EER) because of the low resolution
issue as stated above, which should be solved in the future.
4.5. Qualitative Evaluation of Evidence Recounting
Figure 5 has examples of recounting results obtained
with our framework where the predicted categories and
anomaly scores of each category (red bars) have been presented. Figures 5 (a)–(e) present successfully recounted results. Our method could predict abnormal concepts such
as ‘riding’, ‘truck’, and ‘bending’ while assigning lower
anomaly scores to normal concepts such as ‘person’ and
The anomaly score of ‘young’ in (e) is much
higher than that in (d) because a high classiﬁcation score
Ped2 (frame)
Ped2 (pixel)
MPPCA 
Social force 
Video parsing 
Sparse 150fps 
Conv-AE 
FRCN object
FRCN attribute
FRCN action
Table 1. Abnormal event detection accuracy in AUC/EER (%).
for ‘young’ was assigned to the child in (e), which is rare.
Figures 5 (f)–(j) reveal the limitations of our approach. The
event in (f) is a false positive detection.
Since we only
used appearance information, a person walking in a different direction from the other people is predicted as standing. The events in (g) and (h), viz., scattered papers and
the person in the wrong direction, could not be recounted
with our approach because they were outside the knowledge
we learned. Nevertheless, the results provided some clues
to understanding events; the event (g) is something ‘white’
and the anomaly in the event (h) is not due to basic visual
concepts. The events in (i) and (j) that correspond to ‘throwing a bag’ and ‘pushing a bicycle’ include the interaction of
objects, which could be captured with our approach. Since
large datasets for object interactions is available ,
our framework could be extended to learn such knowledge,
and this could be another direction for future work.
5. Evaluation with Artiﬁcial Datasets
5.1. Settings
The current benchmark in abnormal event detection has
three main drawbacks when evaluating our methods. 1) The
dataset size is too small and variations in abnormalities are
limited because collecting data on abnormal events is dif-
ﬁcult due to privacy issues in surveillance videos and the
scarcity of abnormal events. 2) The deﬁnition of abnormal
is subjective because it depends on applications. 3) Since
ground truth labels on the categories of abnormal events are
not annotated, it is difﬁcult to evaluate recounting.
The experiments described in this subsection were designed to evaluate the performance of unseen (novel) visual
concept detection, i.e., detect basic visual concepts that did
not appear in the training data, which represent an important portion of abnormal event detection. Although most
events in the UCSD pedestrian dataset belong to this category, the variations in concepts are limited (e.g., person,
bikes, and trucks). We artiﬁcially generated the dataset of
unseen visual concept detection with large variations based
detection result
(f) person is walking
(g) person is throwing papers
(h) wrong direction
(i) person is throwing bag
(j) person is pushing bike
(a) person is riding bike
(b) truck is running
(d) person is bending
(e) child is romping around
(c) person is riding bike
Figure 5. Examples of recounting. Each example shows the recounting result of one detected event shaded in red. Its predicted categories
and anomaly scores of each category (red bars) are indicated as recounting results. ‘-’ corresponds to where classiﬁcation scores of all
categories are under 0.1.
on image dataset. Its evaluation scheme was more objective
than abnormal event detection benchmarks.
Task Settings. This task was evaluated on the dataset
with the bounding box annotations of objects, actions, or
attributes. The nseen categories were selected from all n
annotated categories and the dataset was split into training and test sets so that training set only contained nseen
categories.
The main objective of this task was to ﬁnd
nunseen = n −nseen categories from the test set. In other
words, we detected unseen categories that did not appear
in the training set, which had similar settings to abnormal
event detection benchmarks. We speciﬁcally propose two
tasks to evaluate our method. Task 1 (Sec. 5.2): Detect objects that have annotations of unseen categories using our
abnormal event detection framework (anomaly detector +
fc7 features). Task 2 (Sec. 5.3): Detect and classify unseen objects with our method of abnormal event recounting
(kernel density estimation + classiﬁcation scores).
5.2. Evaluation of Unseen Concept Detection
We evaluated this task on the datasets based on COCO
and PASCAL datasets. We used the COCO-val set for objects, and the intersection of COCO-val and Visual Genome
for actions and attributes. We used the same categories that
were used to train Fast R-CNN. As for PASCAL dataset, of-
ﬁcial PASCAL VOC 2012 datasets were used for object and
action detection, while the a-PASCAL dataset was used
for attribute detection. Each dataset was split into training
and test sets in the following procedure: 1) randomly select
unseen categories (nunseen is set to be around n/4), 2) assign images with unseen category objects to training sets, 3)
assign randomly sampled images to training sets as distractors (so that # of test images equal to # of training images),
and 4) assign remaining images to test sets. We repeated
this to create ﬁve sets of training–test pairs for each dataset.
We used the same method of detection as that in the experiments in Sec. 4.3; unseen categories were detected as
regions with high anomaly scores computed by a nearest
neighbor-based anomaly detector trained for each training
We used the ground truth bounding boxes as input
RoIs instead of using object proposals because some proposals contained unannotated but unseen categories, which
made it difﬁcult to evaluate our framework. To evaluate
performance, detection results are ranked by the anomaly
score and average precision (AP) was calculated similarly
to PASCAL detection (objects with the annotations of unseen categories are positive in our evaluation). The ﬁnal
performance values were computed as mean average precision (mAP) over the ﬁve sets of unseen categories.
Table 2 summarizes the mAP of our framework with different appearance features. The training data to train each
feature have also been listed as check marks. We trained
two SDAE: a generic model trained on the dataset used in
Fast R-CNN learning, and a speciﬁc model trained on the
training data for feature learning
mAP (COCO)
mAP (PASCAL)
FRCN object
FRCN attribute
FRCN action
Table 2. Performance of unseen visual concept detection on artiﬁcially created dataset based on COCO and PASCAL datasets. Training
data used for feature learning are also indicated by check marks.
training data of each set (that only contained ‘seen’ categories). The results demonstrated that Fast R-CNN signiﬁcantly outperformed HOG and SDAE, which indicated that
unseen visual concept detection is a difﬁcult task without
learning with labeled data. The single-task Fast R-CNN
trained on the same task as the evaluation task performed
best in all tasks while the proposed multi-task Fast R-CNN
gained the second highest mAP in all tasks, which was
signiﬁcantly better than models trained on different tasks.
Since the types of abnormal concepts to be detected were
not ﬁxed in practice, multi-task Fast R-CNN is an excellent
choice for abnormal event detection.
5.3. Evaluation of Unseen Concept Recounting
We quantitatively evaluated our recounting method by
using the COCO-based unseen concept detection dataset
in Sec. 5.2. For each candidate region of test sample, our
framework outputs the classiﬁcation scores and anomaly
scores computed by KDE learned from the train set. The
performance values were computed as AUC of TPR versus FPR. For a certain threshold of anomaly scores, unseen
categories were predicted for each region, i.e., categories
with the anomaly scores above the threshold and classiﬁcation scores above 0.1. Unlike the experiments described in
Sec. 4.5, multiple categories were sometimes predicted for
each concept in this evaluation. An object was true positive if 1) ground truth unseen categories were annotated (it
was positive), and 2) the predicted unseen categories agreed
with the ground truth. An object was false positive if 1)
ground truth unseen categories were not annotated (it was
negative), and 2) any category was predicted as being unseen. The threshold was varied to compute AUC. We compared our method with HOG and SDAE features combined
with a linear SVM classiﬁer. The SVM classiﬁcation scores
were used as the input for the anomaly detector in these
methods. SVMs were trained on the COCO-training set that
was used in Fast R-CNN training.
Table 3 compares AUC on the COCO-based unseen concept detection datasets. We can see that multi-task Fast R-
MT-FRCN+SVM
MT-FRCN output
Table 3. AUC of recounting on artiﬁcially created abnormal concept detection dataset based on COCO.
CNN outperformed best with all types of concepts while
HOG and SDAE could hardly recount unseen concepts.
This demonstrates that deeply learned generic knowledge is
essential for concept-level recounting of abnormal events.
6. Conclusion
We addressed the problem of joint abnormal event detection and recounting. To solve this problem, we incorporate
the learning of generic knowledge, which is required for
recounting, and environment-speciﬁc knowledge, which is
required for anomaly detection, into a uniﬁed framework.
Multi-task Fast R-CNN is ﬁrst trained on richly annotated
image datasets to learn generic knowledge about visual concepts. Anomaly detectors are then trained on the outputs of
this model to learn environment-speciﬁc knowledge. Our
experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of our method
for abnormal event detection and recounting by improving
the state-of-the-art performance on challenging benchmarks
and providing successful examples of recounting.
Although this paper investigated basic concepts such as
actions, our approach could be extended further to complex
concepts such as object interactions. This work is the ﬁrst
step in abnormal event detection using generic knowledge
of visual concepts and sheds light on future directions for
such higher-level abnormal event detection.
Acknowledgements: We thank Cewu Lu, Allison Del
Giorno, and Mahmudul Hasan for sharing their code and
This work was supported by JST CREST JP-
MJCR1686 and JSPS KAKENHI 17J08378.