Repositorio Institucional de la Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
 
Esta es la versión de autor de la comunicación de congreso publicada en:
This is an author produced version of a paper published in:
RecSys '11: Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on Recommender
systems, ACM, 2011. 109-116
DOI: 
Copyright: © 2011 ACM
El acceso a la versión del editor puede requerir la suscripción del recurso
Access to the published version may require subscription
Rank and Relevance in Novelty and Diversity Metrics
for Recommender Systems
Saúl Vargas and Pablo Castells
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Escuela Politécnica Superior, Departamento de Ingeniería Informática
{saul.vargas,pablo.castells}@uam.es
The Recommender Systems community is paying increasing attention to novelty and diversity as key qualities beyond accuracy in
real recommendation scenarios. Despite the raise of interest and
work on the topic in recent years, we find that a clear common
methodological and conceptual ground for the evaluation of these
dimensions is still to be consolidated. Different evaluation metrics
have been reported in the literature but the precise relation, distinction or equivalence between them has not been explicitly studied.
Furthermore, the metrics reported so far miss important properties
such as taking into consideration the ranking of recommended
items, or whether items are relevant or not, when assessing the
novelty and diversity of recommendations.
We present a formal framework for the definition of novelty and
diversity metrics that unifies and generalizes several state of the art
metrics. We identify three essential ground concepts at the roots of
novelty and diversity: choice, discovery and relevance, upon which
the framework is built. Item rank and relevance are introduced
through a probabilistic recommendation browsing model, building
upon the same three basic concepts. Based on the combination of
ground elements, and the assumptions of the browsing model, different metrics and variants unfold. We report experimental observations
which validate and illustrate the properties of the proposed metrics.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: information filtering.
General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Performance, Theory, Experimentation,
Standardization.
Novelty, diversity, metrics, evaluation, recommender systems.
1. INTRODUCTION
While most research in the Recommender Systems has focused on
accuracy in matching user interests, there is increasing consensus
in the community that accuracy alone is not enough to assess the
practical effectiveness and added-value of recommendations
 . In particular, novelty and diversity are being identified as
key dimensions of recommendation utility in real scenarios, and a
fundamental research direction to keep making progress in the
field. Businesses are accounting for these aspects when engineering recommendation functionalities, and researchers have started to
seek principled foundations for incorporating novelty and diversity
in the recommendation models, algorithms, theories, and evaluation methodologies .
In this context, we identify the consolidation of a set of sound, well
understood evaluation methodologies and metrics as a key issue to
foster progress in this direction. Despite the raise of interest and
work on the topic in recent years, we find that a clear common
methodological and conceptual ground is still to be laid. Different
evaluation metrics have been proposed in the literature but the relation, distinction or equivalence between them has not been explicitly
studied. Furthermore, the metrics reported so far miss important
properties such as taking into consideration the ranking of recommended items, or whether items are relevant or not, when assessing
the novelty and diversity of recommendations. There is also variety
in the principles and perspectives on which different studies build,
which would deserve analysis in order to better understand the potential connections and essential distinctions between them, fostering
consensus and methodological convergence.
Our research aims to contribute to the identification of some of
these connections and provide a formal ground for the unification of
different ways to measure novelty and diversity. We propose a formal metric framework that unifies and generalizes several state of
the art measures, and enhances them with configurable properties not
present in previously reported evaluations. Specifically, the proposed
scheme supports metrics that take into account the ranking and
relevance of recommended items. These properties are introduced by
taking into account how users interact with recommendations –top
items get more attention– and user subjectivity –items the user does
not like add little to the effective diversity of the recommendation,
no matter how novel the items were objectively.
The proposed framework roots recommendation novelty and diversity metrics on a few ground concepts and formal models. We
identify three essential concepts: choice, discovery and relevance,
upon which the framework is built. The metric scheme takes at its
core an item novelty model –discovery-based or distance-based–
which mainly determines the nature of the resulting recommendation
metric. Item rank and relevance are introduced through a probabilistic recommendation browsing model, building upon the same three
basic concepts. Based on the combination of ground elements, and
the assumptions in the browsing model, different metrics and variants unfold. We provide model estimation approaches on available
observations of the interaction between users and items, thus providing for the practical computation of the metrics upon both explicit
and implicit data. We report experimental observations validating
and illustrating the properties of the proposed metrics.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We briefly revise
the related work in the next section. The general principles of the
proposed metric scheme are introduced after that in Section 3. In
Section 4 we define the item novelty models upon which the metrics are built. Section 5 describes how a browsing model can be
developed on the notion of choice. Model estimation methods for
discovery and relevance are defined in Section 6. The relevant
metric configurations resulting from these developments are presented in Section 7, with an illustrative example in Section 8.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
RecSys’11, October 23–27, 2011, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0683-6/11/10...$10.00.
Experimental observations on the proposed metrics are reported in
Section 9. We end with some final conclusions in Section 10.
2. NOVELTY AND DIVERSITY IN
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS
Novelty is a highly desirable feature for recommendation: in most
scenarios, the purpose of recommendation is inherently linked to a
notion of discovery, as recommendation makes most sense when it
exposes the user to a relevant experience that she would not have
found by herself –obvious, however accurate recommendations are
generally of little use. Besides, user interest prediction involves
inherent uncertainty, since it is based on implicit, incomplete evidence of interests, where the latter are moreover subject to change.
Therefore, avoiding a too narrow array of choice is generally a good
approach to enhance the chances that the user is pleased by at least
some recommended item. Sales diversity may enhance businesses
as well, leveraging revenues from market niches .
Reported contributions in this area involve the definition of algorithms and strategies to enhance novelty and diversity, as well as
methodologies and metrics to assess how well this is achieved. From
the common understanding that novelty and diversity play a fundamental part as dimensions of recommendation utility, most authors
have dealt with these properties as opposing goals to accuracy, stating the problem as a multi-objective optimization issue, where an
optimal trade-off between accuracy and diversity is sought.
Novelty and diversity are different though related notions. The
novelty of a piece of information generally refers to how different it
is with respect to “what has been previously seen”, by a specific
user, or by a community as a whole. Diversity generally applies to a
set of items, and is related to how different the items are with respect to each other. This is related to novelty in that when a set is
diverse, each item is “novel” with respect to the rest of the set.
Moreover, a system that promotes novel results tends to generate
global diversity over time in the user experience; and also enhances
the global “diversity of sales” from the system perspective.
A common specific definition of diversity in the literature is the
average pairwise dissimilarity between recommended items. Using
this notion, Ziegler et al define a greedy re-ranking algorithm,
which diversifies baseline recommendations by iteratively selecting
items that maximize a trade-off between the original recommendation value and the average distance to the new list under construction. This approach is similar to the Maximal Marginal Relevance
scheme proposed in Information Retrieval (IR) for search diversification and automatic summarization . The approach is evaluated
by using complementary accuracy metrics (recall and precision) and
studying the decrease of accuracy as diversity increases, the tradeoff
being controlled by a specific parameter.
Zhang and Hurley bring intra-list diversity to a more formal
formulation and problem statement. Diversification is explicitly
addressed as the joint optimization of two objective functions reflecting preference similarity and item diversity, which is solved by
linear and quadratic programming algorithms. The authors introduce
an interesting evaluation approach consisting of the biased selection
of novel test items, whereby evaluating for novelty is achieved by
studying the accuracy on such difficult items.
Recommending long-tail items, which few users have accessed to,
is a common way in which novelty is understood. Zhou et al 
define novelty as the average self-information of recommended
items, which amounts to the average log inverse ratio of users who
like the item (also known as “inverse user frequency”). They target
this metric by means of hybrid strategies combining collaborative
filtering with graph spreading techniques. Celma and Herrera 
take an interesting alternative view on long-tail novelty. Rather than
assessing novelty just in terms of the long-tail items that are directly
recommended, they analyze the paths leading from recommendations to the long tail through similarity links.
Lathia et al take yet another angle on the diversity problem.
They consider the novelty that a system delivers with respect to
recommendations that it produced in the past. In a way, they measure the ability of a recommender system to evolve over time and
adapt to the changing conditions of real settings.
Other authors have addressed the topic from the point of view of
the recommender system, or the business behind it . Adomavicius and Kwon address diversity as the ability of a system to
recommend as many different items as possible over the whole
population –a form of aggregate diversity, defined as the union of
sets of recommended items to all users in the system. The authors
improve recommendations on this metric while keeping accuracy
loss to a minimum, by a controlled promotion of less popular items
towards the top of the recommendation rankings.
Taking on from such works, our research seeks progress towards
a unification of views, and the identification of essential elements
and principles on which a theory of diversity could be built. Moreover, we seek specific improvements on the limitations of the metrics
proposed so far. The reported metrics generally ignore the ranking
of recommended items –except for the obvious application of diversity metrics at different top-n cutoffs. As a consequence, the measured diversity does not notice whether the most novel items are
ranked at the top or the bottom of the recommendations. Second,
the metrics do not care for the relevance of items, and focus strictly
on their novelty and diversity qualities. The evaluation methodologies therefore rely on a separate accuracy metric for this purpose.
We argue that it may be beneficial to handle novelty and relevance
together, which is not equivalent to a combination of two separate
assessments, as we shall analyze. Our view draws perspectives from
the recent research on search diversity in the IR field, where diversity and accuracy are seen as two sides of the same coin that build on
common principles .
3. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The proposed metric framework is founded on three fundamental
relations between users and items:
 Discovery: an item is seen by (or is familiar to) a user. We
consider this fact independently from the degree of enjoyment /
dislike, or whether the user consumed the item or not.
 Choice: an item is used, picked, selected, consumed, bought,
etc., by a user.
 Relevance: an item is liked, useful, enjoyed, etc., by a user.
We model these three relations as binary random variables over
the set of users and the set of items:
{ }. These three variables are naturally related: a chosen item
must obviously be seen, and relevant items are more likely to be
chosen than irrelevant ones. As a simplification, we assume relevant items are always chosen if they are seen (as illustrated in
Figure 1), irrelevant items are never chosen, and items are discovered independently from their relevance. In terms of probability
distribution, all these assumptions can be expressed as:
( ) ( ) ( )
where is a shorthand for , and same for the
other two variables. Discovery, choice and relevance play different
roles in our framework. Discovery is used as the basis to define
item novelty models. Choice is used to build models of user browsing behavior over recommended lists of items. Together, browsing
models and item novelty models give rise to a fairly wide range of
novelty and diversity metrics and variants, as we shall see.
Figure 1. Discovery, choice and relevance models.
The starting point of the proposed framework is a general scheme
where a recommendation metric is defined as the expected novelty
of the recommended items the user will choose. Given a ranked list
of items recommended to a user , this can be expressed as:
( | ) ∑ ( | ) ( | )
where is a normalizing constant, and stands for a generic contextual variable which will allow for the consideration of different perspectives in the definition of novelty and diversity, as we will describe
in the sections that follow. The metrics are thus determined by two
main components: ( | ), reflecting a browsing model
grounded on item choice, as we shall see; and ( | ), an item
novelty model. In this scheme, the novelty or diversity of a recommendation is thus measured as the aggregate novelty of its constituent
items. But the novelty of each item is considered only inasmuch as the
user will actually want to use this item –as represented by
( | ), denoting the probability that the target user
actually decides to use item , when delivered within a recommendation . This component provides a handle to make the metric sensitive to item relevance, and position in the ranking.
There are different ways in which the recommendation browsing
model and item novelty can be developed. We describe them in
detail in the next sections. For the time being, we intentionally
denote the metric in formula 2 by a generic , as it may reflect
recommendation novelty or diversity depending on how the item
novelty model, the browsing model, and are instantiated.
4. ITEM NOVELTY MODELS
Item novelty is the core element in the definition of recommendation novelty and diversity in our framework. Item novelty can be
understood and defined in different ways, depending on which the
resulting metrics differ considerably. We identify two main relevant approaches to model item novelty, based on discovery and
distance respectively, which we describe next. The framework is
nonetheless open to the modular integration of alternative models.
4.1 Popularity-based Item Novelty
In a generic sense, item novelty can be defined as the difference
between an item and “what has been observed” in some context.
The notion of item discovery introduced in the previous section
enables a formulation of this principle as the probability that an
item was not observed before:
( | ) ( | )
The contextual variable here represents any element on which
item discovery may depend, or relative to which we may want to
particularize novelty. This might include e.g. a specific user, a
group of users, vertical domains, time intervals, sources of item
discovery –such as searching, browsing, past or alternative recommendations, friends, advertisements, etc. The specific instantiation of we develop here consists of the observed interactions
between users and items, available to the system under evaluation.
We will nonetheless briefly discuss in Section 7.3 other interesting
metrics that result when considering alternative contexts.
In general terms, ( | ) reflects a factor of item popularity, whereby high novelty values correspond to long-tail items few
users have interacted with, and low novelty values correspond to
popular head items. If we wish to emphasize highly novel items,
we may also consider the log of the inverse popularity:
( | ) ( | )
Alternatively, one may also consider the Bayesian inversion of the
discovery distribution, ( | ), which provides a relative
measure of how likely items are to be seen with respect to each
other. This leads to an interesting formulation of item novelty:
( | ) ( | )
This corresponds to the notion of self-information or surprisal ( ),
commonly used in Information Theory to measure novelty as the
amount of information the observation of conveys . Interestingly, this distribution –to which we will refer as free discovery– can be
directly connected to the previous one –which we will term forced
discovery. Assuming items are sampled uniformly in the absence of
discovery conditions –i.e. we assume a uniform ( | )–, it can be
seen that ( | ) ( | ) ∑
. The free
and forced discovery models are therefore equivalent except for a
normalizing constant ∑
that depends only on . In
our experiments we have found that this constant does not introduce
a significant difference in the resulting metrics, which suggests that
both models –free and forced discovery– could be used indistinctly.
4.2 Distance-based Item Novelty
The novelty model scheme defined in the previous section considers
how different an item is from past experience in terms of strict
Boolean identity: an item is new if it is absent from past experience
( ) and not new otherwise ( ). There are reasons
however to consider relaxed versions of the Boolean view: the
knowledge available to the system about what users have seen is
partial, and therefore an item might be familiar to a user even if no
interaction between them has been observed in the system. Furthermore, even when a user sees an item for the first time, the resulting information gain –the effective novelty– ranges in practice
over a gradual rather than binary scale (consider for instance the
novelty involved in discovering the movie “Rocky V”).
As an alternative to the popularity-based view, we consider a
similarity-based model where item novelty is defined by a distance
function between the item and a context of experience. If the context can be represented as a set of items, for which we will intentionally reuse the symbol , we can formulate this as the expected
or minimum distance between the item and the set:
( | ) ∑ ( | ) ( )
where ( | ) is the probability that the user chooses
item in the context , when he has already chosen . The distance
measure can be defined e.g. as the complement ( )
( ) of some similarity measure (cosine-based, Pearson correlation, etc., normalized to [ ]) in terms of the item features –
content-based view– or their user interaction patterns –collaborative
view. Assuming a uniform ( | ), it can be seen that:
where the denominator acts as a normalizing constant for . The
forced choice probability is easier to compute than its free counterpart, as we shall see, and has a somewhat clearer interpretation:
( | ) weights the sum in a way that the distance ( )
is only counted if the user actually cared about . This term plays a
similar role as in equation 2, and can be developed as a browsing
model –see next section–, or simplified to ( | ) , in
which case ( | ) just becomes an average distance.
In the context of distance-based novelty, we find two useful instantiations of the reference set: a) the set of items a user has interacted
with –i.e. the items in his profile–, and b) the set of recommended
items itself. In the first case, we get a user-relative novelty version of
equation 6, and in the second case, we get the basis for a generalization of intra-list diversity, as we will show. It is possible to explore
other possibilities for , such as groups of user profiles, browsed
items over an interactive session, items recommended in the past or
by alternative systems, etc., which we leave as future work.
5. BROWSING MODEL
The browsing component of the metric scheme, as introduced in
equation 2, is based on a distribution ( | ) which we
may model in terms of the user behavior in its interaction with a list
of recommended items. There are many ways to model this behavior.
Our approach takes inspiration in related work on user click models
in information retrieval systems , but any other alternative modeling approach could be plugged into our framework.
Our model goes as follows. First, we consider the target user will
use all recommended items which he effectively gets to see and he
finds relevant for his taste. We had already formulated this view in
equation 1, which in the current context becomes:
( | ) ( | ) ( | )
where we assume the relevance of an item is independent from the
recommendation in which it is delivered. The ( | ) component introduces relevance in the definition of the metric: the novelty of a recommended item will be taken into account only as much
as the item is likely to be relevant for the target user.
The ( | ) component represents the probability that the
target user will actually see the item when he is browsing the
ranked list . This component allows for the introduction of a rank
discount by having ( | ) reflect the fact that the lower an
item is ranked in , the less likely it will be seen. A realistic model
may take into consideration that users eventually get tired of browsing, or get satisfied by enough items, or a combination of both, and
stop browsing at some point before the end of the list, leaving a
number of recommended items unread –which would play no part in
the effective recommendation novelty the user will perceive.
In general we assume a so-called cascade model where the
user browses the items by ranking order without jumps, until she
stops. At each position in the ranking, the user makes a decision
whether or not to continue, which we model as a binary random
variable , where ( | ) is the probability that user
decides to continue browsing the next item at position . With
this scheme we have, by recursion:
( | ) ( | ) ( | )
Now there are several ways –of varying complexity– in which
( | ) can be modeled. A simple one is to consider a constant ( | ) , whereby we get an exponential discount
. This is the approach taken in the RBP
search performance metric . We may consider instead that the user
will stop as soon as –and only when– she finds the first item of her
taste. In that case, the discount is ( | ) ∏
( | )), similar to the ERR metric , or the models in . We
might consider more complex and general models, such as:
( | ) ( | ) ∏( ( | ))
similar to , or ( | ) ( | ) ( | )
( | )( ( | )), and so forth. In general, we may
use any decreasing rank discount function ( | )
( ) we deem suitable, even heuristic ones, such as a logarithmic discount as in nDCG, a Zipfian discount, etc., or even no
discount by ( ) , as if the user always browsed the whole
list. Putting all this together, equation 2 can be rewritten as a configurable rank-sensitive, relevance aware metric scheme:
( | ) ∑ ( ) ( | ) ( | )
We are now in a position to define the normalizing constant ,
which is intended to stabilize the metric against unwanted biases.
Two normalization approaches are commonly considered in information retrieval metrics, which define
⁄ respectively as: a) the
maximum metric value obtainable by an ideal recommendation
ranking, e.g. as in nDCG and -nDCG , or b) the expected
browsing depth, as in RBP and discussed in . Computing
the ideal ranking is metric-specific and often costly, sometimes even
NP-hard, though it can be approximated by greedy approaches .
The expected browsing depth is more straightforward to compute:
∑ ( | )( ( | ))
∑ ( ( ) ( ))
where we define ( ) if | | (i.e. ( | ) if
). It can be seen that with no rank discount ( ( ) ) we
(average relevance-weighted item novelty).
In order to make this scheme fully implementable, we need to
provide practical methods to estimate the primary models
–discovery and relevance– upon which we have built the framework, based on observed data. We do this in the next section.
6. ESTIMATION OF GROUND MODELS
6.1 Item Discovery
The estimation of the discovery model depends on our definition of
and the type of available data. If we take as the set of observed
interactions between users and items in the system, and the data
consists of user ratings for items represented as a functional relation , we may take a maximum likelihood model
estimate by:
|{ | ( ) }|
where denotes the set of users who have rated , and ( )
means the rating of for is known. If the available data consists
of implicit preference observations in the form of a set of
user/item/timestamp records, the estimate would be:
|{ | ( ) }|
being the timestamp data type. Note that with these estimates,
item novelty in equation 4 becomes the inverse user frequency
IUF. The free novelty model can also be estimated over ratings or
implicit data, respectively, as:
|{ | ( ) }|
|{( ) | ( ) }|
|{ | ( ) }|
|{( ) | ( ) }| (12)
With the rating-based estimate (equation 11), equation 5 becomes
the so-called inverse collection frequency ICF.
6.2 Item Relevance
Relevance in the context of recommendation is a user-specific
notion which can be equated to the interest of users for items. How
relevance can be modeled depends again on the nature of available
observations. If the available input consists of explicit user ratings,
the probability of items being liked can be modeled by a heuristic
mapping between rating values and probability of relevance. For
instance, drawing from the ERR metric scheme :
where is a utility function to be derived from ratings, e.g.
( ) ( ( ) ), where represents the “indifference”
rating value, as described by Breese et al . In our experiments we
try a slight variation with respect to : we do not subtract 1 in the
numerator in order to avoid a drastic loss of novelty signal by overfitting to zero the probability of unobserved relevance.
For usage logs, a correspondence can be fairly established between item usage counts and user interest, which we account for in
two steps. First, we normalize the observed item access frequencies
of each user to a common rating scale [ ], as proposed in .
Namely, ( ) ( ), where is the number of
times has accessed , and ( ) |{ | }| | |
the cumulative distribution function of over the set of items
in the profile of –denoted as . Then we apply to these ratings the
same mapping as before (equation 13), this time with
–assuming that accessing an item, however infrequently, does not in
general reflect a negative preference.
7. RECOMMENDATION NOVELTY AND
DIVERSITY METRICS
7.1 Novelty
By plugging the popularity-based item novelty models (Section 4.1)
in the general metric scheme (eq. 8), we get discovery-based recommendation novelty metrics. For instance, taking equation 3, we get:
( | ) ∑ ( ) ( | )( ( | ))
which we label as expected popularity complement (EPC). Equations 4 and 5 similarly lead to alternative formulations, to which
we shall refer as expected inverse popularity (EIP), and expected
free discovery (EFD), respectively. All three metrics provide a
measure of the ability of a system to recommend relevant long-tail
items. EPC can be read as the expected number of seen relevant
recommended items not previously seen. EIP and EFD can be read
as the expected IUF and ICF of (relevant and seen) recommended
items, respectively. Note that if we ignore rank and relevance, then
, the mean self-information (MSI)
of the recommended items, a metric reported in .
If we take a distance-based novelty model (equation 6) relative
to the set of items the target user has interacted with –i.e.
the items in his profile– we get an alternative novelty measure
consisting of the expected distance between the recommended
items and the items in the user profile, which we label as the expected profile distance (EPD):
( ) ( | ) ( | ) ( )
. In this case, each term in the
summation is doubly weighted by the relevance of the involved
item pair, and only once by the rank distance function. This is
because we assume ( | ) for items in the user profile.
The metric provides a user-relative measure of novelty which, as
far as we are aware of, has not been reported in the literature.
7.2 Diversity
In the distance-based model, if we take , we get a measure of
recommendation diversity:
∑ ( ) ( | ) ( | ) ( | ) ( )
where ( | ) ( ( )) reflects a relative rank
discount for an item at position knowing that position has been
reached. This general form provides a doubly rank-sensitive and
rank-aware expected intra-list diversity metric. In this case the
normalizing constant is ∑
( | ) ( | )
we remove the rank discount and relevance weighting, the metric
reduces to:
Equation 16 thus generalizes the average intra-list distance (ILD)
 with the introduction of rank-sensitivity and relevance.
Table 1. Unification of state of the art novelty and diversity
metrics in the proposed metric framework.
perspective
Generalizes
(popularity)
or frequencies
Mean selfinformation 
Distancebased
Target user
Recommendation
Intra-list
diversity 
Alternative
Last recommen-
dation 〈 〉
Self-system
diversity 
All previous recommendations 〈 〉
Self-system
novelty 
Recommendations
by other systems 〈 〉
Inter-system
novelty 
Recommendations
to other users 〈 〉
Inter-user
diversity 
7.3 Further Unification
By explicitly modeling novelty as a relative notion, the proposed
framework has a strong unifying potential of further novelty and
diversity conceptions. In other to illustrate this, let us consider the
notion of temporal diversity proposed in , which we will refer to
as self-system diversity (SSD). It is defined as the ratio of recommended items that were not included in a previous recommendation:
being the last recommendation delivered by the system for
before . This notion can be described in our framework in terms
of a discovery model where the source of discovery is the last
recommendation, as follows. Taking 〈 〉 as the context
discovery,
( | ) ( | )
( | ), where the latter represents the discount that corresponds to the position of in ( if ). Thus, the novelty of an item is defined by a browsing model over the last recommendation. Plugging this into the general metric scheme gives:
( | ) ∑ ( ) ( | )( ( | ))
If we ignore rank and relevance in , and rank in –that is, we
take ( | ) ( )– it can be seen that we get the
original SSD expression in equation 17. Thus our framework
provides again a formalization and generalization of the metric
with the possibility to easily introduce rank and relevance.
This scheme can be similarly applied to other novelty and diversity metrics, such as temporal novelty as defined in , intersystem novelty (novelty of recommended items with respect to
recommendations that alternative systems may procure), or interuser diversity (with respect to the recommendations other users are
getting) as defined in . Table 1 summarizes some of the metrics
that can be unified in our framework by different instantiations of
in the item novelty scheme.
8. AN EXAMPLE
In order to illustrate the effects of the proposed metrics, and in
particular the rank discount and relevance weighing, we show here
the computation of some variants over a small artificial example.
We select the EPC metric scheme (equation 14), which for illustrative purposes is representative of similar effects in the other metrics.
Assume we have a system with 1,000 users, and a target user with
8 items in his profile. For simplicity, assume the rating scale is binary
{ }, with indifference value . Assume we have two systems
which deliver recommendations and to respectively, with the
content shown in Table 2. In the example we just show the known
rating value ( ) of each item by the target user (i.e. relevance),
and the popularity of the items in terms of the number of users who
have rated each. It is easy to see that both recommendations do equally well in terms of returned relevant items, but does a better job at
ranking long-tail items (with few ratings) by the top of the list.
Table 2. An illustrative example.
( ) # raters
Based on equations 9 and 13 for discovery and relevance model
estimation respectively, and using a logarithmic rank discount
, we get the metric values shown in
Table 3. The best result is underlined for each metric. According to
EPC ignoring relevance and rank, performs better than ,
because it includes an equal number of relevant items, but a more
novel, long-tail item in position 8 (with 10 vs. 1000 ratings). EPCrel
does not count this difference because the item at that position is
not relevant, whereby both lists get the same metric value. Considering rank but not relevance, EPCrank detects that does a poor
job at ranking the novel items in the list compared to , even if
the novel item at position 8 is appreciated by the metric (which
does not care that the item is non-relevant). Combining both rank
and relevance, scores best, by the highest difference of all
metrics. If we agree that is objectively better than , EPCrank,rel
is the metric that best discriminates this fact.
Table 3. Resulting values of different metrics for the two
example recommendations, combining different rank and
relevance configurations in the EPC novelty metric.
EPCrank,rel
H (nDCG,EPC)
To compensate for the lack of relevance awareness of diversity
metrics, prior work has used complementary accuracy measures.
To further illustrate the utility of a configuration integrating rank
and relevance-awareness in a single metric, as opposed to the
combination of two separate measures, we show in the last row of
the table one such combination: the harmonic mean of nDCG (pure
accuracy, rank aware) and EPC (pure novelty). This combined
metric prefers to because it has one more novel item at
position 8. But the metric fails to realize that this item is not relevant, and furthermore it disregards the fact that all the novel items
aside this one are sorted fairly worse in than in . In contrast,
EPCrank,rel does not suffer from these shortcomings.
9. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We have tested our framework in different metric configurations
on two datasets –explicit and implicit data– with several baseline
recommenders and diversification methods. On the one hand, we
have used the MovieLens 1M dataset, which includes one million
ratings by 6,040 users for 3,900 items. For an implicit preference
dataset, we have used an extract from Last.fm provided by Ò.
Celma , including the full listening history of 992 users till May
2009. The data involves 176,948 artists and a total of 19,150,868
user accesses to music tracks. For the computation of the proposed
metrics, the data are split into training and test sets. In MovieLens
we do 5-fold cross-validation on five 80-20% random training-test
rating splits. In the Last.fm dataset, we apply a temporal split
leaving 80% of scrobblings in the “past” for training, and the 20%
most recent for testing.
We run three representative state of the art recommender system
algorithms on the two datasets, namely, a user-based kNN recommender with 100 neighbors (UB), a matrix factorization algorithm
 with 50 latent factors (MF), and a content-based algorithm
(CB). The latter is only tested on MovieLens using movie genres,
as the Last.fm dataset does not include content features to support
a CB recommender. For further reference, we test two additional
probe baselines: average rating (AVG), and random recommendation (RND). The recommenders are run on Last.fm by mapping
access frequencies to ratings as proposed in , taking artists as
items. In order to give a reference on the behavior of the baselines
in terms of accuracy, we show their nDCG@50 in Table 4.
Table 4. Accuracy of the tested baselines, measured in
nDCG@50 over the two datasets.
MovieLens 1M
The discovery models (equations 3-5) are built on training data –
since they do not involve target users– and the relevance models
(equation 13) on test data. The estimation of the discovery models is
based on equations 9 and 11 for MovieLens (explicit ratings) and
equations 10 and 12 for Last.fm (item access log). The browsing
models build exclusively on test data (for relevance, equation 13)
and recommenders’ output (for recommendation discovery distribution, equation 7). The distance-based metrics compare items in terms
of their genres in MovieLens, and their test ratings in Last.fm, as the
complement of the Jaccard and Pearson similarities (shifted to ),
respectively. We measure all metrics at a top 50 ranking cutoff.
9.1 Pure and Relevance-aware Metrics
Figure 2 shows how the tested recommenders compare on different
metrics, namely EPC, EPD, and EILD (equations 14, 15, 16). We
omit EIP (log of inverse popularity), and EFD (free discovery model)
as they yield equivalent measurements to EPC –aside a matter of
scale– in terms of the relative comparison of recommenders in all
configurations. We first focus on the relevance-unaware metric versions (top two graphics in the figure). A first interesting observation is
that CB is better than the CF recommenders in popularity-based
novelty (confirming findings in ), but is worse at diversity and
user-specific novelty. This is what one would expect: CB concentrates recommendations around the users’ profile, hereby scoring low
on EPD. Being similar to the profile, recommended items are also
similar among themselves, which explains the low EILD. UB and MF
avoid such shortcomings, but they tend to concentrate recommendations on items with enough available ratings to infer recommendations. Hence they have a bias towards popular items –penalized by the
popularity-based metrics– which CB does not suffer from (this is
related to the well-known suitability of CB for cold-start items). AVG
does not show any particular trend, as it is mostly independent from
popularity and the other signals the metrics are sensitive to. Note that
in AVG we apply a linear rating penalization on items with less than
five raters, to avoid single-rater favorites (as low-confidence averages) to swamp the top of recommendations –in which case AVG
would score much higher on novelty. Finally, random recommendation gets the highest values in all relevance-unaware metrics (except
for some near ties on MovieLens), illustrating the fact that pure novelty and diversity metrics alone are not enough –note to this respect that
such configurations of EILD and EPC (insensitive to rank and relevance) correspond to state of the art metrics .
The two bottom graphics in Figure 2 show the relevance-aware
variant of the metrics. With this configuration MF takes the lead on
MovieLens data. It was very similar to UB on pure novelty, but it
beats UB on relevance (see Table 4), and has a good trade-off
between novelty and relevance compared to the other recommenders. The reverse situation occurs on Last.fm, where UB has higher
accuracy than MF. Random gets a drastic drop in both cases for its
lack of accuracy –to which respect this metric variant thus behaves
better than the pure novelty and diversity metrics. CB gets a noticeable decrease as well, for a similar (though not as extreme)
reason. The lesser quality of AVG recommendations –hence their
lower actual ratio of useful diversity– is also evidenced by relevance awareness, particularly in Last.fm.
9.2 Rank-sensitiveness
Rank-aware metric configurations should not discriminate the baselines much further than this, since none of the recommenders target
novelty, and whatever amount they get is by unsought reasons –their
share of novelty is randomly ordered. In order to test rank sensitivity,
we set up three diversification strategies that do optimize for novelty
and diversity. The diversifiers re-rank the top n recommended items
(n = 500 in our experiment) returned by a baseline recommender, by
greedily optimizing an objective function. Specifically, we adapt a)
the diversification strategy proposed in , which we term Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) for its connection to the approach
described in , where the objective function is a trade-off of accuracy and diversity –namely, a linear combination (we take equal
weights ) of the baseline rating prediction (accuracy) and the
average dissimilarity to the items above each position (diversity); b)
a variant of the latter, which we call novelty-based greedy diversification (NGD), where a function targeting unpopularity (IUF as
defined by equation 4) is used in place of the dissimilarity component; and c) an adaptation of the IA-Select algorithm , originally
devised for search diversification (see for more details on this
adaptation). Additionally, we include a random re-ranking.
Table 5 shows the results on diversifying the MF baseline, confirming consistent trends with the sought metric properties. We may
Table 5. Results on EPC, EPD, EILD on different diversifications of the MF baseline recommender, with all relevance and rank discount combinations. For the rank-sensitive variants an exponential discount is used as in , with power base 0.85. Values better than
random are in bold, values below the baseline in italics, and the best recommendation for each metric is underlined. All differences with
respect to random and baseline are statistically significant (Wilcoxon p < 0.001) except when in parenthesis (respect to the MF baseline).
MovieLens 1M
No relevance
Figure 2. Novelty and diversity metrics are shown on four
baselines (content-based, matrix factorization, user-based kNN,
average, and random) over MovieLens 1M –two graphics on the
left– and Last.fm –right. The top two graphics display metrics
that ignore relevance, whereas the bottom ones are relevanceaware. All the metrics in the figure are rank-insensitive.
observe, first, that without relevance, few diversifiers beat the random re-ranking, although some do –e.g. NGD on EPC, consistently
with its quite specific optimization target. However, with relevance,
random is always worst, except for NGD on MovieLens: this diversifier promotes unpopular items, which tend to score low on overall
relevance –still, with rank discount NGD also beats the random
approach. IA-Select seems to be the best diversifier in terms of the
trade-off between relevance and diversity. Its results particularly
stand out on Last.fm with relevance, even better with rank discount,
and best of all on EILD, since this algorithm specifically targets
diversity, above novelty. It can also be seen that the baseline is less
easy to beat in the relevance-aware metrics, although some diversifiers manage to do so, most-notably IA-Select.
We may also observe that the rank discount (we test ( )
based on ) changes the sign of comparison in several
cases. To point out a few: without relevance, this occurs for IA-Select
vs. MMR on EPC and vs. the baseline on EPD, on Last.fm, or IA-
Select vs. the baseline on EPC on MovieLens. On Last.fm with relevance, NGD switches from underperforming to overperforming the
baseline and MMR on all three metrics. The difference in IA-Select
captured by adding rank to EILD with relevance in Last.fm is particularly noteworthy. All these examples show how the rank sensitivity
uncovers improvements that would otherwise go unnoticed.
10. CONCLUSION
The research presented here aims to contribute to a shared characterization and understanding of the basic elements involved in
recommendation novelty and diversity upon a formal foundation.
The proposed framework provides a common ground for the development of metrics based on different perspectives on novelty
and diversity, generalizing metrics reported in the literature, and
deriving new ones. An advantage of the proposed decomposition
into a few essential modular pieces is a high potential for generalization and unification. Two novel features in novelty and diversity
measurement arise from our study: rank sensitivity, and relevance
awareness. Both aspects are introduced in a generalized way by
easy to configure components in any metric supported by our
scheme. Our experiments validate the proposed approach and
provide further observations on the behavior of metric variants. As
future work, we plan to complement our off-line experiments with
on-line tests where the different metric configurations are contrasted to actual user feedback on the recommendation quality and
utility aspects we seek to measure.
The directions to continue the research presented here are manifold.
We plan to develop and test the generalization of further diversity
metrics as described in Section 7.3. We envision the development of
user-specific discovery models, and particularizations to further
contexts, such as user communities and vertical domains. In addition
to the provision of evaluation tools, the underlying models can be
used to build objective functions for novelty and diversity enhancement methods, taking the ratings predicted by baseline recommenders
as a proxy of true relevance. Finally, but not least, we see the connection to the recent work on search diversity in the IR field as a relevant
future research direction. The diversity problem is being stated in the
IR community as an issue of query ambiguity and underspecification,
which is formulated in terms of query aspects, interpretations, or
similar notions . Expressing our relevance model in terms of
some analogous notion of item aspects is straightforward; the main
difficulty lies in the right conception and identification of such aspects
in items and user profiles –first steps in this direction are reported in
 . The introduction of aspects in the discovery models is less direct
in comparison, and worthy of exploration as well.
11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the Spanish Government (TIN2011-
28538-C02-01), and the Government of Madrid (S2009TIC-1542).
12. REFERENCES
 Adomavicius, G. and Kwon, Y. Improving Aggregate Recommendation Diversity Using Ranking-Based Techniques. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. In Press.
 Agrawal, R., Gollapudi, S., Halverson, A., and Ieong, S. Diversifying search results. WSDM 2009, Barcelona, Spain, 5-14.
 Bellogín, A., Cantador, I., and Castells, P. A Study of
Heterogeneity in Recommendations for a Social Music Service.
HetRec Workshop at RecSys 2010, Barcelona, Spain, 1-10.
 Breese, J. S., Heckerman, D., and Kadie, C. Empirical analysis of
predictive algorithms for collaborative filtering. UAI 1998,
Madison, WI, USA, 43-52.
 Carbonell, J. G. and Goldstein, J. The Use of MMR, Diversity-
Based Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing
Summaries. SIGIR 1998, Melbourne, Australia, 335-336.
 Carterette, B. System effectiveness, user models, and user utility:
a conceptual framework for investigation. SIGIR 2011, Beijing,
China, 903-912.
 Celma, O. and Herrera, P. A New Approach to Evaluating Novel
Recommendations. RecSys 2008, Lausanne, Switzerland, 179-186.
 Chapelle, O., Metzler, D., Zhang, Y., and Grinspan, P. Expected
Reciprocal Rank for Graded Relevance. CIKM 2009, Hong
Kong, China, 621-630.
 Clarke, C. L. A., Kolla, M., Cormack, G. V., Vechtomova, O.,
Ashkan, A., Büttcher, S., and MacKinnon, I. Novelty and
diversity in information retrieval evaluation. SIGIR 2008,
Singapore, 659-666.
 Clarke, C. L. A., Craswell, N., Soboroff, I., and Ashkan, A. A
Comparative Analysis of Cascade Measures for Novelty and
Diversity. WSDM 2011, Hong-Kong, China, 75-84.
 Fleder, D. M. and Hosanagar, K. Blockbuster Culture’s Next Rise
or Fall: The Impact of Recommender Systems on Sales Diversity.
Management Science 35, 5, 2009, 697-712.
 Herlocker, J. L., Konstan, J. A., Terveen, L. G., and Riedl, J. T.
Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems 22, 1, 2004, 5-53.
 Hu, B., Zhang, Y., Chen, W., Wang, G., and Yang, Q.
Characterizing Search Intent Diversity into Click Models. WWW
2011, Hyderabad, India, 17-26.
 Koren, Y., Bell, R., Volinsky, C. Matrix Factorization Techniques
for Recommender Systems. IEEE Computer 42, 8, 2009, 30-37.
 Lathia, N., Hailes, S., Capra, L., Amatriain, X. Temporal Diversity
in Recommender Systems. SIGIR 2010, Geneva, 210-217.
 McNee, S. M., Riedl, J., and Konstan, J. A. Being Accurate is
Not Enough: How Accuracy Metrics have hurt Recommender
Systems. CHI 2006, Montréal, Canada, 1097-1101.
 Moffat, A. and Zobel, J. Rank-biased precision for measurement
of retrieval effectiveness. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems 27, 1, 2008.
 Radlinski, F., Kleinberg, R., Joachims, T. Learning diverse rankings
with multi-armed bandits. ICML 2008, Helsinki, Finland, 784-791.
 Vargas, S., Castells, P., and Vallet, D. Intent-Oriented Diversity in
Recommender Systems. SIGIR 2011, Beijing, China, 1211-1212.
 Zhang, M. and Hurley, N. Avoiding Monotony: Improving the
Diversity of Recommendation Lists. RecSys 2008, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 123-130.
 Zhou, T., Kuscsik, Z., Liu, J-G., Medo, M., Wakeling, J. R., and
Zhang, Y-C. Solving the apparent diversity-accuracy dilemma of
recommender systems. Proc. of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 107, 10, 2010, 4511-4515.
 Ziegler, C-N., McNee, S. M., Konstan, J. A., and Lausen, G.
Improving recommendation lists through topic diversification.
WWW 2005, Chiba, Japan, 22-32.