Ofﬂine and Online Evaluation of News Recommender
Systems at swissinfo.ch
Florent Garcin
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne
Switzerland
 
Boi Faltings
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne
Switzerland
 
Olivier Donatsch
SWI swissinfo.ch
Swiss Broadcasting Corp.
Switzerland
Ayar Alazzawi
SWI swissinfo.ch
Swiss Broadcasting Corp.
Switzerland
Christophe Bruttin
SWI swissinfo.ch
Swiss Broadcasting Corp.
Switzerland
SWI swissinfo.ch
Swiss Broadcasting Corp.
Switzerland
We report on the live evaluation of various news recommender systems conducted on the website swissinfo.ch. We
demonstrate that there is a major diﬀerence between oﬄine
and online accuracy evaluations. In an oﬄine setting, recommending most popular stories is the best strategy, while
in a live environment this strategy is the poorest. For online
setting, context-tree recommender systems which proﬁle the
users in real-time improve the click-through rate by up to
35%. The visit length also increases by a factor of 2.5. Our
experience holds important lessons for the evaluation of recommender systems with oﬄine data as well as for the use of
the click-through rate as a performance indicator.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Information ﬁltering
recommender system; news; real-time; live; evaluation
INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of online news creates a need for ﬁltering
to focus on interesting articles. Compared to other products,
however, recommending news has speciﬁc challenges :
news preferences are subject to trends, users do not want to
see multiple articles with similar content, and frequently we
have insuﬃcient information to proﬁle the reader.
We addressed these challenges in our previous research by
introducing a new class of news recommender systems based
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or corecsysercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
RecSys’14, October 6–10, 2014, Foster City, Silicon Valley, CA, USA.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2668-1/14/10 ...$15.00.
 
on Context Trees (CT) . This class of recommender
systems adapts its model to current trends and reader preferences. The model evolves with the read articles such that
it is always up to date and recommendations are generated
in real-time.
Previously, we evaluated the context-tree recommender
systems in an oﬄine setting and showed that there exists
a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and novelty of recommendations . However, this trade-oﬀcan only be answered by
performing a live evaluation. This led us to several open
questions: Which recommender systems should be deployed
in practice? Do CT recommender systems improve the clickthrough rate over baseline methods? Do recommender systems increase the time spent by the users on the news website? Is there a major diﬀerence between oﬄine and online
evaluation? Although we were able to ﬁnd elements of answers in previous works , they do not address
the context-tree technique and so we performed our own live
investigation on the news website swissinfo.ch operated by
the Swiss Broadcasting Corporation.
In this paper, we report on the live evaluation of CT
recommender systems. We show that CT systems signiﬁcantly improve the click-through rate (CTR) on swissinfo.ch,
and also increase the visit length. We also learn important
lessons regarding the usefulness of oﬄine evaluation: the relative performance predicted on oﬄine data was in fact exactly the reverse order of what was actually observed on the
live system. Furthermore, we show that the click-through
rate is not always a good indicator of actual impact.
RELATED WORK
Although the ﬁrst recommender systems were originally
designed for news forums , the literature describing actual implementations and evaluations on live news websites
is not common compared to the general literature on recommender systems .
Liu et al. analyse the deployment of a hybrid recommender system on the news aggregator Google News. They
compare their method against the existing collaborative ﬁltering system implemented by Das et al. , and consider
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
<n3, n2, n1>
<n2, n3, n2>
<n2, n3, n2, n1>
Context tree built with the sequence
⟨n1, n2, n3, n2⟩.
Nodes in red-dashed are contexts
matching the new sequence ⟨n2, n3⟩.
only logged-in users for the evaluation. They show a 30%
improvement over the existing collaborative ﬁltering system.
Kirchenbaum et al. conduct an online evaluation with
logged-in users of several recommender systems for news articles on Forbes.com.
They report that a hybrid system
performs the best, with a 37% improvement over popularitybased methods.
Said et al. study the weekly and hourly impressions and click-through rates in the Plista news recommender
framework , which delivers recommendations to multiple
news websites. They observe that live evaluation is sensitive
to external factors not necessarily related to recommendations. They also identify trends in recommendations related
to the type of news websites (traditional or topic-focused
news sources).
Readers of topic-focused websites are less
likely to take recommendations than readers of traditional
news websites . Unfortunately, it is not clear which recommender algorithm is used in the Plista framework and
their analysis.
Our evaluation is similar to the one of Kirchenbaum et
al. , but diﬀers in two crucial points. First, we consider
anonymous users who are impossible to track across multiple
visits. Second, the nature of the websites (Forbes.com and
swissinfo.ch) is not the same, and thus readers’ behaviours
are diﬀerent .
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS
In our previous research , we have developed a new class
of recommender systems based on Context Trees (CT). CT
recommender systems create context-dependent recommendations by assigning a local prediction model to each context. We brieﬂy recall how CT recommender systems work.
A context-tree recommender system builds a hierarchy of
contexts, arranged in a tree such that a child node completely contains the context of its parents. A context can
be the sequence of stories read by a user, the sequence of
topics, or of topic distributions.
The root node corresponds to the most general context,
i.e. when no information is available to proﬁle the user. In
that case, the recommendations are generated based on the
most popular or most recent stories for instance. However,
the more the user browses the stories, the more contexts
we are able to extract, thus building a deeper context tree.
This results in generating ﬁner-grained recommendations,
not only based on the most popular or most recent stories.
For instance, the sequence su = ⟨n1, n2, n3, n2⟩is the ordered list of news stories ni ∈N read by a user u (her
history). The corresponding context tree is depicted in Figure 1.
A new user v with the browsing sequence sv =
⟨n2, n3⟩matches 3 contexts in that tree: the root context
⟨⟩corresponding to an empty history, the context matching ⟨n3⟩which corresponds to the latest read story by user
v and the context matching ⟨n3, n2⟩corresponding to the
complete history of user v.
Each context has a local prediction model. For instance, a
particular model gives recommendations only for users who
have read a particular sequence of stories, or users who have
read an article that was suﬃciently close to a particular
topic distribution. We consider three possible models. The
ﬁrst model, called std, ignores the temporal dynamics. The
second model, called pop, assumes that users are mainly
looking at popular items, and the last model, called fresh,
that they are interested in recent stories.
Recommendations are made by mixing the predictions of
each local model for the given matching contexts. If a context is making poor recommendations, the CT recommender
system decreases its inﬂuence by adjusting automatically the
weight of the considered context.
A CT recommender system ﬁts better the dynamic domain of news recommendations because it adapts its model
to current trends and reader preferences.
The model for
recommendations changes along with the read articles, using a dynamically evolving context tree. In that way, the
model is always up to date and recommendations are generated in real-time. In addition, CT recommender systems
require only one tree and thus scales very well. They are
not restricted to the history of logged-in users, but considers a one-time session for recommendation, where users do
not log in.
Thanks to oﬄine evaluations, we have shown that there
is a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and novelty of recommendations, and CT recommender systems address it. In this
work, we would like to explore how CT recommender systems perform on a live traﬃc website and how they compare
to standard baselines. Thus, in addition to CT recommender
systems, we consider the following baselines:
Most Popular recommends a set of stories with the highest number of clicks among the last read news items.
This strategy is commonly implemented on most news
websites. It does not recommend any new items, but
only the ones that a reader would have already seen
on the front page.
Random recommends a set of stories at random.
strategy has the advantage of recommending very diverse and potentially novel items.
There exist many news recommender systems , however we decided to select only these baselines for
the following reasons. First, the most popular and random
strategies are de-facto standards, very easy to implement
and compare performance. Researchers can easily compare
their results to ours relative to these baselines. Second, reproducing previous research takes time and correctly implementing an existing approach is tricky, even if it is well
described. Third, most of these algorithms have not been
tested on live traﬃc websites and thus there is no guarantee of scalability and real-time requirements. Last, we need
to limit ourselves to compare simultaneously 3 to 4 algorithms. More algorithms would dilute the clicks and would
not guarantee statistical signiﬁcance of the evaluation.
EVALUATIONS
Since July 2013, we are evaluating CT-based recommender
systems with live traﬃc on the news website swissinfo.ch.
swissinfo.ch is a 10-language news website owned by the
Swiss Broadcasting Corporation.
Its content is produced
speciﬁcally for an international audience with interests in
Switzerland.
swissinfo.ch gives priority to in-depth information on politics, society, business, culture and science &
technology. It has about 3.9 million clicks per month. We
have deployed recommendations only on the English version
of the website.
All recommender systems are deployed with the PEN recsys framework , speciﬁcally designed to conduct multivariate online evaluation of news recommender systems.
With the online evaluation, we want to address the following questions:
Question 1. Do context-tree recommender systems bring
an improvement in click-through rate over baseline methods?
Question 2. Do recommendations in general, and recommendations made by context-tree systems in particular,
increase the page views by the user on the news website?
Question 3. Among all CT-based recommender systems,
which version and set of parameters are optimal?
The answers to these questions are not trivial, and are
speciﬁc to each website. Similar to our study, the results and
conclusion of the evaluation on Forbes.com are unique
to this website. In addition, the reasons behind each study
are not the same.
Before conducting a live evaluation, we evaluated the behaviour of recommender systems on an oﬄine dataset in
order to forecast which methods would work the best and
understand how the parameters inﬂuence the performance.
Only a small set of recommender systems can be evaluated on a live website, and it has to be carefully selected.
An oﬄine evaluation helps us to select the recommender systems and their parameters that are the most likely to bring
good recommendations on swissinfo.ch. To do so, we had
access to a 3-weeks “recommendations-free” clicks log from
swissinfo.ch.
During these 3 weeks, the swissinfo.ch website did not have any recommender systems deployed such
as popularity-based methods (“top 10 popular items”). The
log contains 227’831 clicks on 28’525 stories.
There has been a lot of discussion on the best way of evaluating recommender systems . For our oﬄine evaluation, we use visit histories from the swissinfo.ch website, and
number of candidates
success@3 (%)
most popular
CT (std + pop)
Oﬄine predicted accuracy for diﬀerent
sizes of candidate set.
we can evaluate how well our recommendations match the
news items that readers selected themselves. It is clear that
this is a somewhat inaccurate measure: a) the user may not
have liked all the items she visited; b) the user may have preferred one of the recommended items to the one she clicked,
so the fact that a recommended item was not visited does
not mean the recommendation is bad. However, it is common in recommender systems research to use the prediction
of the visit history to compare the performance of diﬀerent
techniques, and select parameters for the live evaluation.
For a given recommender system and some ﬁxed set of
parameters, we imitated the online environment by sending
clicks in the same sequence as saved in the log to the PEN
recsys framework, and recorded the performance. Based on
the articles last read by the user, the recommender system
generates 3 recommendations. The recommendation is successful if one of these three recommendations is indeed the
one that the user reads next, a measure we call success@3.
While there are many diﬀerent metrics to assess the performance of a recommender systems , we focus on this
metric because it can also be measured online and thus allows a comparison.
In addition to the baselines that recommend most popular
and random items, we implemented a context-tree system
with the std model, and one with a mixture of std and pop
models. We were not able to add the fresh model because
the log does not contain information about freshness.
Figure 2 illustrates the predicted accuracy for various sizes
of the candidate set. When the number of candidates increases, the performance of the random strategy drops because interesting stories are diluted in the set.
an optimal size for recommending the most popular items
around 200 candidates. Increasing the number of candidates
after this point does not improve the performance for the
most popular strategy. However, CT recommender systems
take advantage of more candidates to bring better recommendations. In the rest of the evaluations, we decided to
pursue a conservative approach where we select parameters
such that baselines are optimal, and we pick 200 as size of
candidate set. This conservative choice of parameters is not
in favour of CT recommenders but in that way, the performance of CT recommenders can only be improved.
success@3 (%)
most popular
(a) Oﬄine predicted accuracy
success@3 (%)
most popular
(b) Online actual accuracy
Figure 3: Accuracy of online (bootstrap + phase 1) and oﬄine evaluations.
most popular
Figure 4: Online actual CTR (bootstrap + phase 1).
that although the websites are not the same, the behaviour
of these recommender systems is similar than the one reported in our previous research .
Figure 3(a) shows the predicted accuracy over time. In
this ﬁgure, we only implemented the std model in the CT
recommender as it performs equally good as when we add
the popular model.
It takes about one week to stabilize
the performance. As expected , recommending the most
popular items outperforms other strategies.
The random
strategy is the poorest with an accuracy close to 1%.
The online evaluation is split in two phases where we test
diﬀerent strategies against each other. The ﬁrst phase consists of comparing a standard context-tree system against
the baselines in terms of click-through rate (Question 1)
and page views (Question 2).
The second phase investigates diﬀerent versions of CT recommender systems (Question 3). The recommenders together received 172’013 clicks
on 10’653 stories in the ﬁrst phase and 285’572 clicks on
10’830 stories in the second phase.
For each evaluation phase, we bootstrapped the recommender systems during one week, and evaluated them on
the next two weeks. We estimated this time frame based on
the previous oﬄine evaluation, the expected traﬃc volume,
and the time required to learn the model. It is crucial to run
as many methods as possible in parallel to avoid biases in
the evaluation due to trends and variations in the candidate
However, we had to split the evaluation because we
could not run more than 4 recommender systems in parallel
in order to get statistical signiﬁcant results.
The PEN recsys framework assigned randomly one recommender system to each visit, performing a multivariate
evaluation. Note that visits are anonymous and we were not
able to track a user across multiple visits. For all recommender systems, the candidate set was composed of the last
200 clicked items and 30 fresh items. We chose these conservative parameters based on our previous oﬄine analysis.
When a recommender system receives one click, it returns 3
recommendations.
For the ﬁrst phase, we selected the context-tree recommender system with the standard model. For the baselines,
we implemented the strategies that recommend the most
popular stories and that recommend stories at random.
We evaluate the online performance by two diﬀerent measures. Figure 3(b) shows the percentage of times that the
3 recommendations contain the article the user reads next,
whether through a click on the recommendation or somewhere else.
It is thus analogous to the success@3 metric
used in the oﬄine setting. Figure 4 shows the click-through
rate, i.e. the percentage of times that the user clicked on
a recommended article. The click-through rate is a widely
used metric for evaluating success of recommendation, in
particular in online advertising.
First consider the click-through rate (Figure 4). We can
observe a reversal of the relative performance in comparison
with the oﬄine prediction. The strategy of recommending
most popular articles performs the poorest by barely reaching a CTR of 4%. However, the CTR of the random strategy
is now comparable to the one of the CT recommender, and
it takes about 7 days for the CT recommender to reach the
same CTR. Note that Figure 4 also illustrates nicely the
time required (bootstrap phase) by the context-tree system
to learn the behaviour of the users.
Now consider the success@3 measure (Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b)). In contrast to the click-through rate, it measures
the actual change that the recommender system brings to
the user’s behaviour, since it measures how recommendation inﬂuences the articles actually read. We observe that
for the strategy of recommending the most popular items,
the success rate increases by about 1% from 16.5 to 17.5%.
Thus, about three quarters of the 4% clicks generated by the
recommendation come at the expense of clicks that the user
would have made elsewhere, and there is little use of having
the recommender at all. This supports criticism by Zheng
at al. that the click-through rate for popular items is
inﬂated by their popularity.
In contrast, for the CT recommender, readership of the
recommended articles is increased by 5% from 14 to almost
19%. Here, about 5/6 of the 6% clicks on the recommendations actually increase readership of the recommended articles, and the recommender has more signiﬁcant use. Even
more remarkable is that recommending at random has an
even bigger increase of the success rate from about 1% to
over 7%, so here all of the 6% clicks actually go to increasing
readership on the site.
The fact that random recommendations perform better
than the recommender system is disturbing but actually
explained by the fact that most users have a very short
visit history (see Figure 5) and thus do not allow the recommender to make intelligent recommendations. Figure 6
shows the click-through rate per recommender system and
over the length of the visit.
Context-tree recommenders
slightly outperform the baseline methods in general. When
the visits are very short (exactly 2 articles), recommending random stories hardly increases the click-through rate
(7.7%). However, for medium and long visits, the contexttree system greatly improves the CTR. For medium-length
visits, the CT system has a 10.8% CTR while the random
baseline is at 8.9%. For long visits, CT system is at 13.1%
while the random baseline is at 9.7%. The strategy of recommending the most popular articles is deﬁnitely not the best
solution: regardless of the visit length, the click-through
rate stays below 7%.
This is probably because users will
have already read these stories elsewhere.
Note that the
click-through rate increases with visit length since the visitors with a longer history are also more interested users that
click more in general.
When the visit length increases, CT recommenders outperform baseline methods because they take advantage of
the personalized sequence of each user to create an accurate
proﬁle. No matter what the user’s interest is, the baseline
strategies will always perform the same. Overall, contexttree recommender system brings an 11% improvement over
recommending random items, and more than a 20% improvement when considering medium to long visits (21% and
35% for medium and long visits respectively).
Another way of measuring the impact of a recommender
system is to consider the inﬂuence on the average visit length
as measured by the number of articles read by a user (Question 2).
We break the visits into two groups: visits containing at least one click on a recommendation, and visits
without any click on recommendations. Table 1 summarizes
% of visit
Distribution of visit length (in percent
of the total number of visits) for online and oﬄine
evaluations.
most popular
Figure 6: Online actual CTR over visit length, with
conﬁdence intervals at 95%.
our ﬁndings. The length of the visits without taking a recommendation averages 1.25 clicks, while visits with at least
one click on a recommendations tripled, with an overall average at 3.75 clicks.
Most sessions are very short (Figure 5). Users reach the
swissinfo.ch website through a search engine or a news aggregator, read one article, and leave.
If we remove such
behaviour by considering visits of length at least 3, the visit
length increases by about 1 click, from 4.31 to 5.22 clicks.
90.4% of the visits have only one click, while with recommendations it drops to 85.0% of the visits.
It is possible
that users who click on recommendations are more likely to
have longer visits. Since we are not tracking the users, but
only their current session, it is diﬃcult to answer this question.
In Forbes.com for instance, this tendency has been
observed .
In the second phase, where we compare diﬀerent versions
of CT recommenders (Question 3), the overall click-through
rate of recommendations was slightly lower than during the
Table 1: average visit length with and without recommendations
Recommender system
w/o recommendations
w/ recommendations
Most Popular
std + pop + fresh
std + fresh
(a) bootstrap + phase 2
std + fresh
std + pop + fresh
(b) Phase 2 only, with conﬁdence intervals at 95%.
Figure 7: Online actual CTR of diﬀerent mixtures of experts for phase 2.
ﬁrst phase at 5.0%. Figure 7 illustrates the click-through
rate with diﬀerent mixtures of models. Again, we need a
bootstrap phase of about one week until the model is correctly learnt. Incorporating the popularity model decreases
the click-through rate, except when the visit is very short.
This is not surprising since users with a very short visit are
mostly interested in what is displayed on the main page of
the website, thus reinforcing popular stories. However, when
the length increases, users are no longer interested in popular stories. It is not clear whether the fresh model improves
recommendations. However, this might be due to the fact
that the number of fresh items considered here (30) is not
optimal. We believe that tuning this parameter will improve
the accuracy of recommenders with the fresh model.
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the discrepancies between oﬄine
and online evaluation, and important factors that inﬂuence
directly the recommendations.
Online vs Ofﬂine
We used the oﬄine evaluation to select the recommender
systems and their parameters that could most likely generate
good recommendations in a live environment. However, the
diﬀerence between online and oﬄine evaluations is striking
(Figure 3). In the oﬄine setting, it is diﬃcult to do better than recommending most popular articles because the
recommendations do not directly inﬂuence the users. This
method mimics the best the behaviour of the readers when
no recommender systems are in place because items on the
front page attract the most clicks. In the live evaluation, the
popularity-based strategy is clearly not the most interesting
because users do not want to read articles they have already
seen on the front page.
Some recommender systems could have been ruled out
of the live trial due to their poor performance during the
oﬄine evaluation. However, the conclusion would not have
been the same in a live setting .
Almost all research
in the recommender systems literature is based on oﬄine
evaluation with the assumption that it would at least reﬂect
the relative performance of diﬀerent techniques. However,
at least in this case this turns out to be wrong.
The next step would be to study the relationship of recommendation performance to other criteria such as diversity and novelty. We deﬁne novelty as the fraction of recommended articles that are not among the most popular
items. The CT recommender used here achieves a novelty
of about 50% , whereas the random strategy is at almost
100% and the most popular strategy is at 0%. Thus, a combination of oﬄine accuracy and novelty can predict the true
relative performance of the diﬀerent strategies from oﬄine
data. As the system runs longer, we plan to gather more
data with diﬀerent recommendation strategies to ﬁrm up
what this relation may be.
Click-through Rate
Although there exist many metrics to assess the
performance of a recommender system, the click-through
rate is a de-facto standard in the industry because it is often correlated to the revenues generated by the news website. Indeed, these revenues come from either advertisements
(ads) displayed on the website or paid articles (or sometimes
both). In general for online advertisement, there are two revenue models: pay per impression or pay per click. With the
former, the news website receives monetary compensation
for displaying ads while with the latter every time a user
clicks on the ad. In all cases, news websites are incentivized
in increasing page views. So one way to justify the perfor-
(a) bottom (stories and tickers)
(b) top right (only tickers)
swissinfo.ch’s dynamic recommendation boxes:
bottom and top-right position.
Note that the
number of recommendations is not the same.
mance of a recommender system is through its generated
revenue, or click-through rate.
Zheng et al. suggest that CTR might not be the optimal metric for online evaluation, because some of the clicks
are for popular items that people would have chosen anyway.
We have observed the same phenomenon here: recommending popular items not only results in a lower than expected
CTR, but an even lower increase in the number of reads.
We believe that rather than CTR, it would be better to
measure the actual diﬀerence in success@k rates between of-
ﬂine and online evaluations. This measure would unequivocally indicate the net eﬀect of using the recommender system
on website performance, although it may be more complex
to implement as a business model.
Page Layout
A recommender system is a small piece of a bigger and
complex environment. In our case, we have little to no control over the other elements of the environment in particular the placement of the recommendations on the page and
possible interference with manually-generated recommendations that were also shown on the same page in a more prominent position and may overlap with the ones generated by
the recommender systems.
The layout of the page is extremely important . On
swissinfo.ch, most of the news stories are long and do not
ﬁt on the displayed area of the screen. Thus, the placement
of recommendations on the page plays an important role
in drawing users’ attention.
When recommendations are
placed at the bottom of the article, users need to scroll down
the page to see the recommendation box (Figure 8), and we
believe that users tend not to read articles down to the end.
We were able to conduct a simple A/B evaluation regarding the placement of the recommendations on one part of the
swissinfo.ch website.
We compared the performance with
the same recommendations but placed in diﬀerent positions
on the page: top right and bottom. The top-right version
allows us to display more recommendations (6 stories) than
the bottom version (3 stories, see Figure 8). Figure 9 illustrates the diﬀerence in click-through rate between the two
Figure 9: Online actual CTR on tickers for the two
diﬀerent placements, with conﬁdence intervals at
placements. When the recommendations are at the top-right
corner of the page, the CTR is more than double (2.25) the
one at the bottom. Hence, displaying recommendations at
the top-right is signiﬁcantly (χ2-test with p < 0.01) better
than at the bottom. The placement might not be the only
reason of this improvement. The width of the page limits
the bottom recommendation box to only three items, while
the top-right version contains 6 recommendations. So the
larger choice available to the user might also play a role.
An easy way to verify this claim would be to place the bottom version at the top of the page. Incorporating aspects of
the page layout into the recommender algorithm could also
improve the performance .
Another issue that has a major impact on performance are
other recommendations generated by journalists and placed
on the same page. They take into account only the current
article, but not the history and preferences of the reader. For
technical reasons, we have no access to these recommendations and they may thus overlap with the ones generated
automatically. As they are placed in a more prominent position on the page, they would draw clicks away from our
recommendations.
Thus, our evaluation might underestimate the correct click-through rate because of this bias.
CONCLUSION
We implemented a novel recommendation technique based
on context trees on the news website swissinfo.ch. In
a live evaluation, we demonstrated that context-tree recommender systems signiﬁcantly improved the click-through
rate by up to 35% and the visit length by a factor of 2.5,
with the best performance for users with long enough visits to reveal their preferences. The absolute performance is
somewhat impaired by the poor placement of the recommendation and lack of coordination with manual recommendations on the same site, factors which we could not inﬂuence.
Besides the conﬁrmation of the actual performance, an important message for recommender systems research is that
oﬄine evaluations of accuracy are not always meaningful for
predicting the relative performance of diﬀerent techniques.
In our experience, the ranking of techniques in a live environment is the inverse of what it is in the oﬄine evaluation.
Thus, better models incorporating novelty are needed.
A second important lesson concerns the value of the CTR
as a measure of performance. As in some earlier studies ,
we showed that the CTR overestimates the actual impact
for popular items, and thus gives a skewed impression of
the actual performance. Only comparing the actual article
views can give a true picture of actual performance.
Finally, we observed that the placement of recommendations is important for the click-through rate and should be
carefully selected when deploying recommendations on a live
website. Placing the recommendations at the top of the page
more than doubled the CTR than at the bottom.
With the live evaluation, we plan to reﬁne the users’ pro-
ﬁle by tracing users across multiple visits, and enhance their
proﬁle with socio-demographic data. We believe that algorithms will beneﬁt by incorporating information from the
manual recommendations as well. By doing so, we would
avoid duplicated recommendations in both manual and dynamic lists. We intend to blend the recommendations into
the page design and change their positions to a more visible
place. Finally, an interesting future direction would be to
consider not only news articles, but also video and audio.