Collective Robot Reinforcement Learning with Distributed
Asynchronous Guided Policy Search
Ali Yahya1
Adrian Li1
Mrinal Kalakrishnan1
Yevgen Chebotar2
Sergey Levine3
Abstract— In principle, reinforcement learning and policy
search methods can enable robots to learn highly complex
and general skills that may allow them to function amid the
complexity and diversity of the real world. However, training
a policy that generalizes well across a wide range of realworld conditions requires far greater quantity and diversity
of experience than is practical to collect with a single robot.
Fortunately, it is possible for multiple robots to share their experience with one another, and thereby, learn a policy collectively.
In this work, we explore distributed and asynchronous policy
learning as a means to achieve generalization and improved
training times on challenging, real-world manipulation tasks.
We propose a distributed and asynchronous version of Guided
Policy Search and use it to demonstrate collective policy
learning on a vision-based door opening task using four robots.
We show that it achieves better generalization, utilization, and
training times than the single robot alternative.
I. INTRODUCTION
Policy search techniques show promising ability to learn
feedback control policies for robotic tasks with highdimensional sensory inputs through trial and error .
Most successful applications of policy search, however, rely
on considerable manual engineering of suitable policy representations, perception pipelines, and low-level controllers
to support the learned policy. Recently, deep reinforcement
learning (RL) methods have been used to show that policies
for complex tasks can be trained end-to-end, directly from
raw sensory inputs (like images ) to actions. Such
methods are difﬁcult to apply to real-world robotic applications because of their high sample complexity. Methods
based on Guided Policy Search (GPS) , which convert the
policy search problem into a supervised learning problem,
with a local trajectory-centric RL algorithm acting as a
teacher, reduce sample complexity and thereby help make
said applications tractable. However, training such a policy to
generalize well across a wide variety of real-world conditions
requires far greater quantity and diversity of experience than
is practical to collect with a single robot.
Fortunately, it is possible for multiple robots to share
their experience with one another, and thereby, learn a
policy collectively. In this work, we explore distributed and
asynchronous policy learning (also known hereafter in this
work as collective policy learning) as a means to achieve
generalization and improved training times on challenging,
1Ali Yahya, Adrian Li, and Mrinal Kalakrishnan are with X, Mountain
View, CA 94043, USA. {alive,alhli,kalakris}@x.team
2Yevgen Chebotar is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. This research
was conducted during Yevgen’s internship at X.
3Sergey Levine is with Google Brain, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.
Multiple robots collaborating to learn the door opening skill. Our
system allows the robots to operate continuously to collect a large amount of
diverse experience, while the policy is simultaneously trained with a replay
buffer of the latest trajectory samples.
real-world manipulation tasks. Collective policy learning
presents a number of unique challenges. These challenges
can be broadly categorized as utilization challenges and
synchronization challenges. On one hand, we would like to
maximize robot utilization — the fraction of time that the
robots spend collecting experience for learning. On the other
hand, each robot must allocate compute and bandwidth to
process and communicate its experience to other robots, and
the system as a whole needs to synchronize the assimilation
of each robot’s experience into the collective policy.
The main contribution of this work is a system for collective policy learning. We address the aforementioned utilization and synchronization challenges with a novel distributed
and asynchronous variant of Guided Policy Search. In our
system, multiple robots practice the task simultaneously,
each on a distinct instance of the task, and jointly train
a single policy whose parameters are maintained centrally
by a parameter server. To maximize utilization, each robot
continues to practice and optimize its own local policy while
the single global policy is trained from a buffer of previously
collected experience. For high-dimensional policies such as
those based on neural networks, the increase in utilization
that is conferred by asynchronous training is signiﬁcant.
Consequently, this approach dramatically brings down the
total amount of time required to learn complex visuomotor
policies using GPS, and makes this technique scalable to
more realistic applications which require greater data diversity.
We evaluate our approach in simulation and on a realworld door opening task (shown in Figure 1), where both
the pose and the appearance of the door vary across task
instances. We show that our system achieves better generalization, utilization, and training times than the single robot
alternative.
II. RELATED WORK
Robotic motor skill learning has shown considerable
promise for enabling robots to autonomously learn complex
 
motion skills . However, most successes in robotic
motor skill learning have involved signiﬁcant manual design
of representations in order to enable policies to generalize
effectively. For example, the well-known dynamic movement
primitive representation has been widely used to generalize learned skills by adapting the goal state, but it inherently
restricts the learning process to trajectory-centric behaviors.
Enabling robotic learning with more expressive policy
classes that can represent more complex strategies has the
potential of eliminating the need for the manual design of
representations. Recent years have seen improvement in the
generalizability of passive perception systems, in domains
such as computer vision, natural language processing, and
speech recognition through the use of deep learning techniques . These methods combine deep neural networks
with large datasets to achieve remarkable results on a diverse
range of real-world tasks. However, the requirement of large
labeled datasets has limited the application of such methods
to robotic learning problems. While several works have
extended deep learning methods to simulated and
real-world robotic tasks, the kind of generalization
exhibited by deep learning in passive perception domains has
not yet been demonstrated for robotic skill learning. This
may be due to the fact that robotic learning experiments
tend to use relatively small amounts of data in constrained
domains, with a few hours of experience collected from a
single robot in each experiment.
A central motivation behind our work is the ability to
apply deep learning to robotic manipulation by making it
feasible to collect large amounts of on-policy experience with
real physical platforms. While this may seem impractical for
small-scale laboratory experiments, it becomes much more
realistic when we consider a possible future where robots are
deployed in the real-world to perform a wide variety of skills.
The challenges of asynchrony, utilization, and parallelism,
which we aim to address in this work, are central for such
real-world deployments. The ability of robotic systems to
learn more quickly and effectively by pooling their collective
experience has long been recognized in the domain of cloud
robotics, where it is typically referred to as collective robotic
learning . Our work therefore represents a
step toward more practical and powerful collective learning
with distributed, asynchronous data collection.
Distributed systems have long been an important subject
in deep learning . While distributed asynchronous architectures have previously been used to optimize controllers
for simulated characters , our work is, to the best of
our knowledge, the ﬁrst to experimentally explore distributed
asynchronous training of deep neural network policies for
real-world robotic control. In our work, we parallelize both
data collection and neural network policy training across
multiple machines.
III. PRELIMINARIES ON GUIDED POLICY SEARCH
In this section, we deﬁne the problem formulation and
brieﬂy summarize theb guided policy search (GPS) algorithm, speciﬁcally pointing out computational bottlenecks
that can be alleviated through asynchrony and parallelism. A
more complete description of the theoretical underpinnings
of the method can be found in prior work . The goal
of policy search methods is to optimize the parameters θ
of a policy πθ(ut|xt), which deﬁnes a probability distribution over robot actions ut conditioned on the system
state xt at each time step t of a task execution. Let τ =
(x1, u1, . . . , xT , uT ) be a trajectory of states and actions.
Given a task cost function l(xt, ut), we deﬁne the trajectory
cost l(τ) = PT
t=1 l(xt, ut). Policy optimization is performed
with respect to the expected cost of the policy:
J(θ) = Eπθ [l(τ)] =
l(τ)pπθ(τ)dτ,
where pπθ(τ) is the policy trajectory distribution given the
system dynamics p (xt+1|xt, ut):
pπθ(τ) = p(x1)
p (xt+1|xt, ut) πθ(ut|xt).
Most standard policy search methods aim to directly optimize this objective, for example by estimating the gradient
∇θJ(θ). However, this kind of direct model-free method
can quickly become intractable for very high-dimensional
policies, such as the large neural network policies considered
in this work . An alternative approach is to train the deep
neural network with supervised learning, using a simpler
local policy optimization method to produce supervision. To
that end, guided policy search introduces a two-step approach
for learning high-dimensional policies by combining the beneﬁts of simple, efﬁcient trajectory-centric RL and supervised
learning of high-dimensional, nonlinear policies. Instead of
directly learning the policy parameters with reinforcement
learning, a trajectory-centric algorithm is ﬁrst used to learn
simple local controllers pi(ut|xt) for trajectories with various initial conditions, which might correspond, for instance,
to different poses of a door for a door opening task. We
refer to these controllers as local policies. In this work,
we employ time-varying linear-Gaussian controllers of the
form pi(ut|xt) = N(Ktxt +kt, Ct) to represent these local
policies, following prior work .
After optimizing local policies, the controls from these
policies are used to create a training set for learning a
complex high-dimensional global policy in a supervised
manner. Hence, the ﬁnal global policy generalizes to the
initial conditions of multiple local policies and can contain
thousands of parameters, which can be efﬁciently learned
with supervised learning. Furthermore, while trajectory optimization might require the full state xt of the system to be
known, it is possible to only use the observations ot of the
full state for training a global policy πθ(ut|ot). This allows
the global policy to predict actions from raw observations at
test time .
In this work, we will examine a general asynchronous
framework for guided policy search algorithms, and we will
show how this framework can be instantiated to extend two
prior guided policy search methods: BADMM-based guided
policy search and mirror descent guided policy search
(MDGPS) . Both algorithms share the same overall
structure, with alternating optimization of the local policies
via trajectory-centric RL, which in the case of our system
is either a model-based algorithm based on LQR or a
model-free algorithm based on PI2 , and optimization of
the global policy via supervised learning through stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). The adaptation of PI2 to guided policy search is described in detail in a companion paper .
The difference between the two methods is the mechanism
that is used to keep the local policies close to the global
policy. This is extremely important, since in general not all
local policies can be reproduced effectively by a single global
a) BADMM-based GPS:
In BADMM-based guided
policy search , the alternating optimization is formalized
as a constrained optimization of the form
θ,p1,...,pN
Eτ∼pi[l(τ)] s.t. pi(ut|xt)=πθ(ut|xt) ∀xt, ut, i.
This is equivalent in expectation to optimizing J(θ), since
i=1 Eτ∼pi[l(τ)] = PN
i=1 Eτ∼πθ[l(τ)] when the constraint
is satisﬁed, and PN
i=1 Eτ∼πθ[l(τ)] ≈Ex1∼p(x1),τ∼πθ[l(τ)]
when the initial states xi
1 are sampled from p(x1). The
constrained optimization is then solved using the Bregman
ADMM algorithm , which augments the objective for
both the local and global policies with Lagrange multipliers
that keep them similar in terms of KL-divergence. These
terms are denoted φi(τ, θ, τ) and φθ(pi, θ, τ) for the local
and global policies, respectively, so that the global policy is
optimized with respect to the objective
DKL(πθ(ut|xt)∥pi(ut|xt))+φθ(pi, θ, τ)
and the local policies are optimized with respect to
pi Eτ∼pi(τ)[l(τ)] s.t. DKL(pi(τ)∥¯pi(τ)) < ϵ,
where ¯pi is the local policy at the previous iteration. The
constraint ensures that the local policies only change by a
small amount at each iteration, to prevent divergence of the
trajectory-centric RL algorithm, analogously to other recent
RL methods . The derivations of φi(τ, θ, xt) and
φθ(pi, θ, xt) are provided in prior work .
b) MDGPS: In MDGPS , the local policies are
optimized with respect to
pi Eτ∼pi(τ)[l(τ)] s.t. DKL(pi(τ)∥πθ(τ)) < ϵ,
where the constraint directly limits the deviation of the local
policies from the global policies. This can be interpreted
as the generalized gradient step in mirror descent, which
improves the policy with respect to the objective. The supervised learning step simply minimizes the deviation from the
local policies, without any additional augmentation terms:
DKL(πθ(ut|xt)∥pi(ut|xt))
Algorithm 1 Standard synchronous guided policy search
1: for iteration k ∈{1, . . . , K} do
Generate sample trajectories starting from each xi
executing pi(ut|xt) or πθ(ut|xt) on the robot.
Use samples to optimize each of the local policies
pi(ut|xt) from each xi
1 with respect to Equation (2)
or (3), using either LQR or PI2.
Optimize the global policy πθ(ut|xt) according to
Equation (1) or (4) with SGD.
5: end for
This can be interpreted as the projection step in mirror
descent, such that the overall algorithm optimizes the global
policy subject to the constraint that the policy should lie
within the manifold deﬁned by the policy class, which in
our case corresponds to neural networks.
Both GPS algorithms are summarized in Algorithm 1,
and consist of two alternating phases: optimization of the
local policies with trajectory-centric RL, and optimization
of the global policy with supervised learning. Several different trajectory-centric RL algorithms may be used, and we
summarize the ones used in our experiments below.
A. Local Policy Optimization
The GPS framework is generic with respect to the choice
of local policy optimizer. In this work, we consider two
possible methods for local policy optimization:
c) LQR with local models: To take a model-based
approach to optimization of time-varying linear-Gaussian
local policies, we can observe that, under time-varying linear-
Gaussian dynamics, the local policies can be optimized
analytically using the LQR method, or the iterative LQR
method in the case of non-quadratic costs . However,
this approach requires a linearization of the system dynamics,
which are generally not known for complex robotic manipulation tasks. As described in prior work , we can still
use LQR if we ﬁt a time-varying linear-Gaussian model to
the samples using linear regression. In this approach, the
samples generated on line 1 of Algorithm 1 are used to
ﬁt a time-varying linear-Gaussian dynamics model of the
form p(xt+1|xt, ut) = N(Fx,txt + Fu,tut + ft, Nt). As
suggested in prior work, we can use a Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) prior to reduce the sample complexity of this
linear regression ﬁt, and we can accommodate the constraints
in Equation (2) or (3) with a simple modiﬁcation that uses
LQR within a dual gradient descent loop .
d) PI2: Policy Improvement with Path Integrals (PI2)
is a model-free policy search method based on the principles
of stochastic optimal control . It does not require ﬁtting
of linear dynamics and can be applied to tasks with highly
discontinuous dynamics or non-differentiable costs. In this
work, we employ PI2 to learn feedforward commands kt of
time-varying linear-Gaussian controllers as described in .
The controls at each time step are updated according to
Rollout execution
Local policy optimization
Global policy optimization
inner loop for BADMM only
Diagram of the training loop for synchronous GPS with a single
replica. Rollout execution corresponds to line 2 in Algorithm 1, local
policy optimization to line 3, and global policy optimization to line 4. In
BADMM-based GPS, the algorithm additionally alternates between local
and global policy optimization multiple times before executing new rollouts.
This sequential version of the algorithm requires training to pause while
performing rollouts, and vice versa.
the soft-max probabilities Pi,t based on their cost-to-go Si,t:
Si,t = S(τi,t) =
l(xi,j, ui,j), Pi,t =
where l(xi,j, ui,j) is the cost of sample i at time j. In this
way, trajectories with lower costs become more probable
after the policy update. For learning feedforward commands,
the policy update corresponds to a weighted maximum likelihood estimation of the new mean kt and the noise covariance
Ct. In this work, we use relative entropy optimization to
determine the temperature η at each time step independently,
based on a KL-divergence constraint between policy updates.
Both the LQR model-based method and the PI2 modelfree algorithm require samples in order to improve the local
policies. In the BADMM variant of GPS, these samples
are always generated from the corresponding local policies.
However, in the case of MDGPS, the samples can in fact
be generated directly by the global policy, with the local
policies only existing temporarily within each iteration for
the purpose of policy improvement. In this case, new initial
states can be sampled at each iteration of the algorithm, with
new local policies instantiated for each one . We make
use of this capability in our experiments to train the global
policy on a wider range of initial states in order to improve
generalization.
IV. ASYNCHRONOUS DISTRIBUTED GUIDED POLICY
In synchronous GPS, rollout execution and policy optimization occur sequentially (see Figure 2). This training
regime presents two challenges: (1) there is considerable
downtime for the robot while the policies are being optimized, and (2) there are synchronization issues when extending the global policy optimization to use data collected
across multiple robots.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a modiﬁcation
to GPS which is both asynchronous and distributed (see
Figure 3). In our asynchronous distributed GPS method
(ADGPS), the algorithm is decoupled into global and local
worker threads. The global workers are responsible for
continuously optimizing the global policy using a buffer of
experience data, which we call the replay memory. The local
workers execute the current controllers on their respective
robots, adding the collected data to the replay memory. The
Rollout execution
Local policy optimization
Global policy optimization
Replay memory
Parameter server
Local worker
Global worker
The training loop for ADGPS with multiple replicas. Rollout execution and global policy optimization are decoupled via the replay memory.
Multiple robots concurrently collect data and asynchronously update the
parameter server, allowing maximal utilization of both computational and
robot resources, as well as parallelization across multiple robots and servers.
local workers are also responsible for updating the local
policies. Note, however, that updating the local policies is
very quick when compared to global policy updates, since the
local policy update requires either a small number of LQR
backward passes, or simply a weighted average of the sample
controls, if using the PI2 method. This operation can be
completed in just a few seconds, while global policy training
requires stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimization of a
deep neural network, and can take hours.
The local and global worker threads communicate through
the replay memory, which stores the rollouts and optimized
trajectories from each local worker. Since the rollouts in this
memory are not guaranteed to come from the latest policy,
they are reweighted at every iteration using importance
sampling. The global workers asynchronously read from the
replay memory and apply updates to the global policy. By
decoupling the local and global work, the robots can now
continuously collect data by executing rollouts, while the
global policy is optimized in the background. This system
also makes it easy to add multiple robots into the training
process, by adding additional local workers for every robot.
The global policy itself can be represented with any
function approximator, but in our work, as in prior GPS
methods, we use a deep neural network representation trained
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which can itself
be trained in a distributed manner. The global policy is
stored on a parameter server , allowing multiple robots
to concurrently collect data while multiple machines concurrently apply updates to the same global policy. By utilizing
more robots, we are able to achieve much greater data
diversity than would otherwise be realized with only a single
robot, and by using multiple global worker threads, we can
accelerate global policy training.
The replay memory may be either centralized or dis-
Algorithm 2 Asynchronous distributed guided policy search
(local worker)
1: for iteration k ∈{1, . . . , K} do
Generate sample trajectories starting from each xi
assigned to this worker, by executing either pi(ut|xt)
or πθ(ut|xt) on the robot.
Use samples to optimize each of the local policies
pi(ut|xt) from each xi
1 with respect to Equation (2)
or (3), using either LQR or PI2.
Append optimized trajectories pi(ut|xt) to replay
5: end for
Algorithm 3 Asynchronous distributed guided policy search
(global worker)
1: for step n ∈{1, . . . , N} do
Randomly sample a mini-batch {xj
t} from the replay
memory D, with corresponding labels obtained from
the corresponding local policies pi(ut|xj
t), where i is
the instance from which sample j was obtained.
Optimize the global policy πθ(ut|xt) on this minibatch for one step of SGD with respect to Equation (1)
4: end for
tributed. In our implementation of this system, each physical
machine connected to each physical robot maintains its own
replay memory. This is particularly convenient if we also run
a single global worker thread on each physical machine, since
it removes the need to transmit the high-bandwidth rollout
data between machines during training. Instead, the machines
only need to communicate model parameter updates to
the centralized parameter server, which are typically much
smaller than images or high-frequency joint angle and torque
trajectories. In this case, the only centralized element of this
system is the parameter server. Furthermore, since mini-batch
gradient descent assumes uncorrelated examples within each
batch, we found that distributed training actually improved
stability when aggregating gradients across multiple robots
and machines .
This entire system, which we call asynchronous distributed
guided policy search (ADGPS), was implemented in the
distributed machine learning framework TensorFlow ,
and is summarized in Algorithms 2 and 3. In our implementation, rollout execution and local policy optimization
are still performed sequentially on the local worker as the
optimization is a relatively cheap step; however, this is not
strictly necessary and both steps could also be performed
asynchronously. It is also possible to instantiate this system
with varying numbers of global and local workers, or even
a single centralized global worker. However, as discussed
above, associating a single global worker with each local
worker allows us to avoid transmitting the rollout data
between machines, leading to a particularly efﬁcient and
convenient implementation.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Our experimental evaluation aims to answer two questions
about our proposed asynchronous learning system: (1) does
distributed asynchronous learning accelerate the training of
complex, nonlinear neural network policies, and (2) does
training across an ensemble of multiple robots improve the
generalization of the resulting policies. The answers to these
questions are not trivial: although it may seem natural that
parallelizing experience collection should accelerate learning, it is not at all clear whether the additional bias introduced
by asynchronous training would not outweigh the beneﬁt of
greater dataset size, nor that the amount of data is indeed
the limiting factor.
A. Simulated Evaluation
In simulation, we can systematically vary the number of
robots to evaluate how training times scale with worker
count, as well as study the effect of asynchronous training.
We simulated multiple 7-DoF arms with parallelized simulators that each run in real time, in order to mimic rollout
execution times that would be observed on real robots. The
arms are controlled with torque control in order to perform a
simple Cartesian reaching task that requires placing the endeffector at a commanded position. The robot state vector
consists of joint angles and velocities, as well as its endeffector pose and velocity. We use a 9-DoF parameterization
of pose, containing the positions of three points rigidly
attached to the robot end-effector represented in the base
frame. The Cartesian goal pose uses the same representation,
and is fed to the global policy along with the robot state.
The global policy must be able to place the end-effector at a
variety of different target positions, with each instance of the
task corresponding to a different target. We train the policy
using 8 instances of the task, using 4 additional instances as
a validation set for hyperparameter tuning, and ﬁnally test
the global policy on 4 held-out instances. These experiments
use the LQR variant of BADMM-based GPS.
We ran guided policy search with and without asynchrony,
and with increasing numbers of workers from 1 to 8. Figure 4
shows the average costs across four test instances for each
setting of the algorithm, plotted against the number of trials
and wall-clock time, respectively. ADGPS-4 and ADGPS-8
denote 4 and 8 pairs of local and global workers, respectively,
while AGPS is an asynchronous run with a single pair
of workers. Note that asynchronous training does slightly
reduce the improvement in cost per iteration, since the
local policies are updated against an older version of the
global policy, and the global policy is trained on older data.
However, the iterations themselves take less time, since the
global policy training is parallelized with data collection
and local policy updates. This substantially improves the
learning rate in terms of wall clock time. This is illustrated
in Figure 5, which shows the relative improvement in wallclock time (labeled as “speedup”) compared to standard
GPS, as well as the relative increase in sample complexity
(labeled as “sample count”) due to the slightly reduced policy
improvement per iteration.
Time (minutes)
Average costs of the 4 test instances used in the simulated
reaching task, over number of iterations (left) as well as training duration
(right). ADGPS-4 and ADGPS-8 denote 4 and 8 pairs of local and global
workers, respectively, while AGPS is an asynchronous run with a single
pair of workers. Note that asynchronous training does slightly reduce the
improvement per iteration, but substantially improves training time when
multiple workers are used.
Factor of GPS
Sample count
Speedup in wall-clock training time and sample count comparison
between GPS and the asynchronous variants, measured as the wall-clock
time or sample count needed to reach a threshold cost value. Note that
additional asynchronous workers incur only a modest cost in total sample
count, while providing a substantial improvement in wall-clock training
B. Real-World Evaluation
Our real-world evaluation is aimed at determining whether
our distributed asynchronous system can effectively learn
complex, nonlinear neural network policies, using visual
inputs, and whether the resulting policies can generalize
more effectively than policies learned on a single robot
platform using the standard synchronous variant of GPS. To
that end, we tackle a challenging real-world door opening
task (Figure 6), where the goal is to train a single visuomotor
policy that can open a range of doors with visual and
mechanical differences in the handle (Figure 7), while also
Door task execution. Top: sample robot RGB camera images used
to control the robot. Bottom: side view of one of the robots opening a door.
Variation in door handles used in the experiment described in
Section V-B. The three handles on the left are used during training, and the
handle on the right is used for evaluation.
dealing with variations in the pose of the door with respect
to the robot, variations in camera calibration, and mechanical
variations between robots themselves.
We use four lightweight torque-controlled 7-DoF robotic
arms, each of which is equipped with a two ﬁnger gripper,
and a camera mounted behind the arm looking over the
shoulder. The poses of these cameras are not precisely
calibrated with respect to each robot. The input to the policy
consists of monocular RGB images and the robot state vector
as described in Section V-A. The robots are controlled at a
frequency of 20Hz by directly sending torque commands to
all seven joints. Each robot is assigned a speciﬁc door for
policy training. The cost function is computed based on an
IMU sensor attached to the door handle on the reverse side
of the door. The desired IMU readings, which correspond to
a successfully opened door, are recorded during kinesthetic
teaching of the opening motion from human demonstration.
We additionally add quadratic terms on joint velocities
and commanded torques multiplied by a small constant to
encourage smooth motions.
The architecture of the neural network policy we use is
shown in Figure 8. Our architecture resembles prior work ,
with the visual features represented by feature points produced via a spatial softmax applied to the last convolutional
response maps. Unlike in , our convolutional network
includes multiple stages of pooling and skip connections,
which allows the visual features to incorporate information
at various scales: low-level, high-resolution, local features
as well as higher-level features with larger spatial context.
This allows the network to generate high resolution features
while limiting the amount of computation performed at high
resolutions, enabling evaluation of this deep model at camera
frame rates.
1) Policy pre-training: We train the above neural network
policy in two stages. First, the convolutional layers are
pretrained with a proxy pose detection objective. To create
data for this pretraining phase, we collect camera images
while manually moving each of the training doors into
various poses, and automatically label each image by using
a geometry-based pose estimator based on the point pair
feature (PPF) algorithm . We also collect images of
each robot learning the task with PI2 (without vision), and
label these images with the pose of the robot end-effector
obtained from forward kinematics. Each pose is represented
as a 9-DoF vector, containing the positions of three points
rigidly attached to the object (or robot), represented in the
world frame. The door poses are all labeled in the camera
frame, which allows us to pool this data across robots into
3x3 conv + ReLU
3x3 conv + ReLU
2x2 max pool
3x3 conv + ReLU
2x2 max pool
3x3 conv + ReLU
2x2 max pool
3x3 conv + ReLU
2x2 max pool
3x3 conv + ReLU
1x1 conv + ReLU
1x1 conv + ReLU, upscale
1x1 conv + ReLU, upscale
1x1 conv + ReLU, upscale
1x1 conv + ReLU
1x1 conv + ReLU
Image (256 x 320 x 3)
spatial softmax
(expected 2D location)
Pre-training:
fully connected + ReLU
fully connected
fully connected
spatial feature maps (convolution outputs)
feature vectors (fully connected outputs)
First image
feature points
Pre-training:
robot poses
The architecture of our neural network policy. The input RGB image is passed through a 3x3 convolution with stride 2 to generate 16 features
at a lower resolution. The next 5 layers are 3x3 convolutions followed by 2x2 max-pooling, each of which output 32 features at successively reduced
resolutions and increased receptive ﬁeld. The outputs of these 5 layers are recombined by passing each of them into a 1x1 convolution, converting them
to a size of 125x157 by using nearest-neighbor upscaling, and summation (similar to ). A ﬁnal 1x1 convolution is used to generate 32 feature maps.
The spatial soft-argmax operator computes the expected 2D image coordinates of each feature. A fully connected layer is used to compute the object
and robot poses from these expected 2D feature coordinates for pre-training the vision layers. The feature points for the current image are concatenated
with feature points from the image at the ﬁrst timestep as well as the 33-dimensional robot state vector, before being passed through two fully connected
layers to produce the output joint torques.
a single dataset. However, since the robot endeffector poses
are labeled in the base frame of each robot with an unknown
camera offset, we cannot trivially train a single network to
predict the pose label of any robot from the camera image
alone. Hence, the pose of each robot is predicted using a
separate output using a linear mapping from the feature
points. This ensures that the 2-D image features learnt to
predict the robot and door poses can be shared across all
robots, while the 3-D robot pose predictions are allowed to
vary across robots. The convolutional layers are trained using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum to predict
the robot and door poses, using a standard Euclidean loss.
2) Policy learning: The local policy for each robot is
initialized from its provided kinesthetic demonstration. We
bootstrap the fully connected layers of the network by
running four iterations of BADMM-based ADGPS with the
PI2 local policy optimizer. The pose of each door is kept
ﬁxed during bootstrapping. Next, we run 16 iterations of
asynchronous distributed MDGPS with PI2, where we randomly perturb each door pose at the start of every iteration.
This sampling procedure allows us to train the global policy
on a greater diversity of initial conditions, resulting in better
generalization. The weights of the convolutional layers are
kept frozen during all runs of GPS. In future work, it would
be straightforward to also ﬁne-tune the convolutional layers
end-to-end with guided policy search as in prior work ,
but we found that we could obtain satisfactory performance
without end-to-end training of the vision layers on this task.
3) Results: The trained policy was evaluated on a test
door not seen during training time, by executing 50 trials per
robot over a grid of translations and orientations. Figure 9
shows the results obtained using the policy after training.
We ﬁnd that all four robots are able to open the test door
in most conﬁgurations using a single global policy, showing
generalization over appearance and mechanical properties of
100.0% 100.0%
100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
100.0% 100.0%
100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Door translation
Door orientation
Results from evaluating the visuomotor policy trained using
ADGPS, using 50 trials per robot on a test door whose translations and
orientations are sampled on a grid. Left: Success rates per robot averaged
over the sampling grid. Right: Aggregate success rates across all robots for
varying translations and orientations.
door handles, door position and orientation, camera calibration, and variations in robot dynamics. The lack of precise
camera calibration per robot implies that the policy needs
to visually track the pose of the door handle and the robot
gripper, servoing it to the grasp pose. This is evident when
watching the robot execute the learned policy (see video
attachment): the initial motion of the robot brings the gripper
into the view of the camera, after which the robot is able to
translate and orient the gripper to grasp the handle before
opening the door.
Furthermore, the trained policy was also evaluated with
two test camera positions on the test door. The ﬁrst camera
position was arrived at by displacing the camera of one of
the robots towards the ground by 5cm. The second position
was arrived at by displacement that same camera away from
the door by 4cm. The trained policy had success rates of
52% and 54% respectively with these two camera positions.
In comparison, a successful policy that was trained on only
a single robot and a single door using GPS with PI2 as
in fails to generalize to either an unseen door or different
camera positions.
VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a system for distributed asynchronous policy
learning across multiple robots that can collaborate to learn
a single generalizable motor skill, represented by a deep
neural network. Our method extends the guided policy search
algorithm to the asynchronous setting, where maximal robot
utilization is achieved by parallelizing policy training with
experience collection. The robots continuously collect new
experience and add it to a replay buffer that is used to train
the global neural network policy. At the same time, each
robot individually improves its local policy to succeed on
its own particular instance of the task. Our simulated experiments demonstrate that this approach can reduce training
times, while our real-world evaluation shows that a policy
trained on multiple instances of different doors can improve
the generalization capability of a vision-based door opening
Our method also assumes that each robot can execute the
same policy, which implicitly involves the assumption that
the robots are physically similar or identical. An interesting
future extension of our work is to handle the case where
there is a systematic discrepancy between robotic platforms,
necessitating a public and private component to each policy.
In this case, the private components would be learned locally, while the public components would be trained using
shared experience and pooled across robots. This could
allow distributed asynchronous training to extend even to
heterogeneous populations of robots, where highly dissimilar
robots might share globally useful experience, such as the
statistics of natural images, while robot-speciﬁc knowledge
about, for example, the details of low-level motor control,
would be shared only with physically similar platforms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Peter Pastor and Kurt Konolige
for additional engineering, robot maintenance, and technical
discussions, and Ryan Walker and Gary Vosters for designing
custom hardware for this project.