Facial Expression Analysis under Partial Occlusion: A
Ligang Zhang1, Brijesh Verma1, Dian Tjondronegoro2 and Vinod Chandran3
1Central Queensland University
2Southern Cross University
3Queensland University of Technology
Automatic machine-based Facial Expression Analysis (FEA) has made substantial progress in the past few decades driven
by its importance for applications in psychology, security, health, entertainment and human computer interaction. The
vast majority of completed FEA studies are based on non-occluded faces collected in a controlled laboratory environment.
Automatic expression recognition tolerant to partial occlusion remains less understood, particularly in real-world
scenarios. In recent years, efforts investigating techniques to handle partial occlusion for FEA have seen an increase. The
context is right for a comprehensive perspective of these developments and the state of the art from this perspective. This
survey provides such a comprehensive review of recent advances in dataset creation, algorithm development, and
investigations of the effects of occlusion critical for robust performance in FEA systems. It outlines existing challenges in
overcoming partial occlusion and discusses possible opportunities in advancing the technology. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first FEA survey dedicated to occlusion and aimed at promoting better informed and benchmarked
future work.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: [General and Reference]: Surveys and Overviews; [Artificial Intelligence]:
Computer Vision – Computer Vision Tasks – Scene Understanding
General Terms: Experimentation, Performance, Algorithms
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Facial expression analysis, emotion recognition, partial occlusion, overview, survey
1 Introduction
Facial expressions of emotion are a major channel in daily human-human communication. Machine-based automatic
analysis of expression from human faces is an important part of artificial intelligence capabilities. It has potential
applications in various fields, such as intelligent tutoring systems, emotionally sensitive robots, driver fatigue monitoring,
personalized service provision, interactive game design, and emotion based data retrieval, categorization and management.
However, automatic Facial Expression Analysis (FEA) in an unconstrained real-life situation is still difficult. It encounters
a variety of challenges arising factors such as occlusion, face pose variations, illumination changes, head motion, and
differences in the age, gender, skin color and culture of the subject between training and testing phases of a system. An
ideal FEA system should be able to handle all these challenges. While face and facial expression recognition systems have
addressed most of these factors systematically, occlusion is often overlooked and assumed to be taken care of by
controlled acquisition – which is only true for laboratory or prescribed acquisition conditions.
Partial occlusion presented in the face is one of the major obstacles for accurate FEA in real-world conditions. In reallife situations, there is a high likelihood that some parts of the face become obstructed by sunglasses, a hat, a scarf, hands
moving over the mouth, a moustache or hair, etc. Occlusion can substantially change the visual appearance of the face and
severely deteriorate the performance of FEA systems. The presence of occlusion increases the difficulty of extracting
discriminative features from occluded facial parts due to inaccurate feature location, imprecise face alignment or face
registration error [Ekenel and Stiefelhagen 2009]. It also introduces noise and outliers to extracted features leading to
higher intra-expression variations. An FEA system with occlusion handling capacity aims to achieve accurate emotion
recognition even when a portion of the face is occluded. The system can be useful in various real-life scenarios,
particularly those with frequently occurring occlusion, such as students wearing glasses in online tutoring, patients
wearing medical masks in medical diagnosis, and players with pose variations in game entertainment.
Although the significance of handling facial occlusion has been widely recognized in the research community for a
long time, there has been a significant delay in the development of relevant algorithms and systems. In earlier surveys on
FEA [Pantic and Rothkrantz 2000], [Fasel and Luettin 2003], no study reported specifically designed techniques to
overcome facial occlusion. This situation remained the same in the survey on audio-visual affect recognition in 2009 [Zeng
et al. 2009], which concluded that most human affect recognizers are evaluated using non-occluded facial data and that
1* This material is based on work supported under Australian Research Council's Linkage Project (LP140100939).
Author’s address: Ligang Zhang and Brijesh Verma, Centre for Intelligent Systems, Central Queensland University, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia 4000; emails: {l.zhang, b.verma}@cqu.edu.au; Dian Tjondronegoro,School of Business and Tourism, Southern
Cross University, Bilinga, QLD, Australia 4225; email: ; Vinod Chandran, Science and Engineering
Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4000; email: .
developing methods that are robust to occlusion is an important issue that is yet to be addressed. In recent surveys on FEA
in 2012 [Bettadapura 2012], 2015 [Owusu et al. 2015], [Sariyanidi et al. 2015] and 2016 [Corneanu et al. 2016], several
papers were cited that exploited the most informative facial parts or developed automatic systems for FEA. Current
literature still lacks a comprehensive and focused survey of existing efforts in overcoming partial occlusion for FEA.
This paper aims to bridge this gap. It is expected that it can serve as a good reference for developing techniques toward
robust FEA in the presence of occlusion. The outline of this paper follows the concept map illustrated in Fig.1, and the
remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces background knowledge about FEA under partial
occlusion, including its brief history, methods for representing emotions, and the major types and characteristics of facial
occlusion. Section 3 examines related databases for performance evaluation of FEA systems. Section 4 reviews existing
FEA approaches that can automatically recognize emotional states from occluded faces. We identify top five techniques
that can be used as baselines for performance evaluations of future algorithms. Section 5 summarizes investigations on the
effect of occlusion on the performance of recognizing facial expressions based on computer vision or human perception.
In Section 6, we present discussions about existing challenges and possible opportunities, covering the aspects of data
creation, occlusion detection, feature extraction, context information, and multiple modalities and disciplines. Finally,
Section 7 draws some conclusions.
Reconstruction
Representation
Model Based
Vision Analysis
Human Perception
Facial Expression
Analysis Approaches
Investigations on
Effect of Occlusion
Challenges &
Opportunities
Sub-region
Based Approach
Modalities
Extraction
Background
Information
Representation
Main Characteristics
of Occlusion
Major Type
of Occlusion
Disciplines
Fig. 1. Overview of the structure of the survey on FEA under partial occlusion.
2 Background
2.1 Brief History of Facial Expression Analysis (FEA) under Occlusion
Research on FEA can be tracked back to the study of physiognomy in the 4th century BC, which assessed the character
or personality of a person from his/her outer appearance, primarily the face. This study was later extensively extended to
explore the relationship between facial expressions and the movements of head muscles in the 17th century [Bettadapura
2012]. Since then, one pioneering work that has significantly impacted today’s automatic FEA systems was done by
Charles Darwin, who provided evidence to the existence of some basic emotions universally across cultures and ethnics.
Another work was done by Ekman and his colleagues [Ekman 1978], who designed the Facial Action Coding System
(FACS) to encode the states of facial expressions using facial Action Units (AUs). Until the 1980s, most FEA work was
conducted by philosophers and psychologists . Arguably, Kenade 
and Suwa et al. are two earliest investigators on recognizing facial expressions using computer technologies, and
they developed computer programs to extract facial points for analyzing human faces and representing facial expressions.
After relatively slow progress in the 1970s and 1980s, the 90s witnessed increased development of automatic FEA systems,
moving from analyzing deliberately posed prototypical emotions of near-frontal faces collected in controlled laboratory
settings to spontaneously evoked emotions collected from non-constrained settings .
On the recognition of the big impact of facial occlusion on FEA, since the 1920s, a host of psychosocial studies have investigated the
facial parts that are most important for human perception and recognition of facial expressions from partially occluded
faces. However, the first machine system for FEA in the presence of occlusion was presented in 2001 by Bourel et al.
[Bourel 2001], who recovered geometric facial points for overcoming occlusion in regions of the upper face, mouth, and
left/right half of the face. Inspired by this work, most initial efforts [Bourel et al. 2002], [Towner and Slater 2007] focused
on the recovering of geometric features from occluded faces in static images and the classification of facial expressions
using a single global classifier. More recent advancements [Xia et al. 2009], [Cotter 2011], [Liu et al. 2014c] have shifted to
the adoption of texture features and their combination with geometric features in temporal 2D or 3D video sequences, as
well as the fusion of multiple local classifiers from different facial regions to derive a final classification decision for the
whole face. Kotsia et al. presented, to our best knowledge, the most comprehensive analysis on the impact of facial
occlusion on the recognition of six basic emotions based on FER systems. The results were found to agree in overall with
those from human observers. With the popularity of deep learning techniques, recent studies [Cheng et al. 2014], [Tősér et
al. 2016], [Batista et al. 2017] have focused on the use of deep neural networks to directly perform FEA on occluded facial
images without involving steps of occlusion detection, hand-engineering feature extraction, and classifier design.
Although more types of occlusion and datasets have been included in recent studies, most of existing studies are primarily
based on a limited number of artificially generated types of occlusion and the present progress is relatively slow.
2.2 Methods for Representing Facial Expressions
Representing facial expressions is a prerequisite for evaluating the effectiveness of FEA systems, particularly in the
presence of occlusion. Facial expressions are generally represented using two methods in exiting studies: message based
and movement of facial components based.
The message based method can be further divided into discrete categorical and continuous dimensional methods. The
discrete categorical method is perhaps the most long-standing and widely used way for describing facial expressions by
psychologists. In this method, an expression is assigned to one of pre-defined prototypical categories, including six basic
emotional states - anger (AN), disgust (DI), fear (FE), happiness (HA), sadness (SA), and surprise (SU) [Ekman 1994], and
non-basic emotional states such as depression, agreement, distress and disappointment . This intuitive theory creates a
convenient way of representing observed facial expressions in daily lives using a list of emotion words with concrete
meaning, which is highly consistent with human understanding. However, the theory can represent only a small portion
of possible complicated and mixed emotions in natural communication conditions. Studies [Maja et al. 2005] have shown
that “pure expressions of prototypical emotions are less frequently elicited and blends of emotional displays are often
shown by humans in real-life situations”.
The continuous dimensional method was derived from the field of psychology [Russell 1980]. It describes facial
expressions using continuous axes in a multiple dimensional space and represents each expression as a point or a region
in the space. The most commonly used spaces are composed of two- and three- dimensional representations, such as
activation or arousal, valence, power, and expectancy. The advantage of dimensional spaces over discrete categories and
AUs lies in the use of a set of continuous axis values to represent a large amount of different types of emotions, including
those naturalistic non-prototypical ones that often occur in realistic conditions. They can provide useful insights into the
intensity of emotions, as well as the similarity and contrast between categorical emotions. However, as the dimensional
space is not intuitive, it requires specially trained annotators in emotion labeling using continuous axes. In addition, some
emotions become indistinguishable in a limited number of dimensions and it is not straightforward in directly applying
the analysis results into practical applications.
The movement of facial components based method uses the movements of individual facial muscles to encode facial
expression states. Examples of this method include FACS [Ekman 1978], Emotional Facial Action Coding System
(EMFACS), MAXimally discriminative facial movement coding system (MAX) [Izard et al. 1979], and probability-based AU
space [Zhao et al. 2016]. The FACS, which was originally developed by Paul Ekman and his colleagues in 1978, defines a
total of 44 AUs to encode movements of facial muscles. Each AU corresponds to a contraction or relaxation of individual
or multiple facial muscles that can generate a certain facial action with regard to its location and intensity. A revised
version was published in 2002 [Ekman et al. 2002] comprising of 32 AUs. One advantage of AUs is that a combination of
relatively few AUs can effectively represent a large number (e.g., thousands) of expression states and subtle facial signals
such as wink and frown. Thus, AUs are able to represent a wide variety of emotions and are suitable for describing,
modeling and analyzing real-life facial expressions. In addition, AUs are objective descriptors and thus they are
independent of human interpretation, which consequently reduces the subjectivity of emotion labeling. However, the
challenge lies in the difficulty to accurately choose a set of relevant AUs and their combination for arbitrary naturalistic
emotions, and vice versa it is also challenging to translate emotion related AUs into affective meanings. The EMFACS, as a
selective application of FACS scoring, focuses on scoring only facial actions that are likely to have emotional significance.
The MAX was designed to code discrete emotional states such as interest, joy, surprise, contempt, and physical distress or
pain, based on a set of facial movement formulas. Rather than using binarized AU occurrence in FACS, EMFACS and
MAX, the probability-based AU space treats each basic AU as an individual dimension and uses continuous coordinates on
an AU axis to represent the probability of this AU occurring on a face. A hyperplane can be constructed to divide the
space into regions of emotions or affective states. The space has the advantages of not requiring manual labelling of AUs
from skilled experts and being more robust for AU detection in margin areas.
Another category of facial component movement based methods focuses on the recognition of Micro-Expressions
(MEs). MEs are brief, involuntary facial expressions which reveal hidden emotions and are important for understanding
humans’ deceitful behaviours. Unlike general facial expressions, MEs are very short (i.e., 1/25 to 1/3 second), involve
subtle muscle movements and are difficult to control through one’s willpower. It is still a difficult task, even for humans,
to precisely recognize MEs in real-life environments. Although MEs have been given relatively less attention compared to
general expressions, various types of tools and systems have been developed for recognizing MEs, such as the Micro
Expression Training Tool developed by Ekman [Ekman 2003], the MR recognition system [Wu et al. 2011], and the ME
analysis system (MESR) [Li et al. 2017b]. Encouragingly, some systems such as MESR, were reported to outperform
humans in ME recognition. One possible benefit of using MEs for FEA under occlusion is that, even a part of the face is
occluded intentionally by a subject to hide his/her emotions, the true emotional state may still can be automatically
revealed by recognizing those MEs hidden in unoccluded parts of the face.
2.3 Major Types and Characteristics of Facial Occlusion
Due to the complexity and variability of specific environments where the face presents, the types of facial occlusion
that occur may vary significantly. Generally, there are two major types of partial occlusion: systematic and temporary
[Towner and Slater 2007]. Systematic occlusions are caused by the existence of individual facial components (e.g., hair,
mustache, or a scar), or by people wearing adornments (e.g. glasses, clothes, a hat or surgical mask, or mark-ups) as
displayed in Fig. 2 (a). Temporary occlusions arise from a portion of the face being temporarily obscured by other objects
(e.g., people moving across the face or hands covering the face), or from environmental condition changes (e.g., lighting
and shadows), or self-occlusion due to changes in head pose (e.g., out-of-plane pose variations) or temporarily placing
objects in front of the face as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Due to the necessity of constantly interacting with the environment, selfocclusion might occur more frequently than other types of temporary occlusions in daily lives. Facial occlusion is not
necessarily restricted to be either systematic or temporary; instead, it can be composed of multiple types of occlusion as
shown in Fig.2(c). In special cases as shown in Fig. 2 (d), blurring, pixellation, artificial masks or texts are added
specifically into the face to hide personal identity or provide helpful information.
Fig. 2. Real examples with different types of facial occlusion.
Different from other challenges, such as pose and illumination variations whose main characteristics and the
associated impact can be inferred beforehand, facial occlusion has several distinguishing characteristics that make it
particularly difficult to be handled:
1) Varying type. The type of occlusion may vary significantly dependent on the situation where the face presents.
Unless there is prior knowledge about what type of occlusion is going to occur in a specific context, FEA systems should
consider all possible types, which is very challenging and technically infeasible at least for now.
2) Mixed type. Multiple types of occlusion may co-exist in the face. The existence and prevalence of mixed occlusion
increases the difficulty of handling occlusion and investigating the effect of individual occlusion because the separation of
mixed occlusion is still an unexplored field.
3) Non-fixed location. Most types of occlusion are generally not fixed to a certain location of the face. Although the
location is roughly predictable for some systematic occlusion, such as glasses and a hat, it is still difficult to predict their
precise locations and it is more difficult for temporary occlusion such as hand covering.
4) Varied duration. Different types of occlusion may exist for a different length of duration. Occlusion due to a hand
moving over the face is anticipated to last for only few seconds, while occlusion of sunglasses often exist for the total
duration of the video data. Thus, the duration of occlusion is largely dependent on the nature type of the occlusion.
5) Unpredictable property. Due to the variability of objects leading to occlusion, the visual properties (e.g. shape,
appearance and size) of the resulting occlusion are often unpredictable. For example, there might be big differences in the
visual properties between sunglasses, vision correction glasses, and protective glasses.
6) Local impact. Unlike pose and illumination variations, which often impact the holistic facial region, most types of
occlusion impact only a small portion of the face. This property can be somehow treated as a merit because the effect of
occlusion can be compensated using un-occluded facial parts.
It should be noted that in specific cases, it might be possible to roughly predict the parameters (e.g. type, location,
shape, appearance and time) of occlusion that is likely to occur. For instance, a person’s face is highly likely to be partially
and temporally occluded by a cup and moving hands when he/she is drinking coffee. Prior knowledge about the occlusion
is critical in developing techniques to overcome its impact.
3 Related Databases
Being able to access public facial expression datasets with well-annotated occlusion is a pre-requisite in evaluating FEA
systems. Many databases [Patil et al. 2015] with facial occlusion were generated for face recognition, but very few have
been created specifically for FEA. This section introduces related public databases (samples shown in Fig. 3) that either are
widely used in existing studies with artificially superimposed occlusion, or can be potentially used for future system
evaluations with naturally occurring occlusion. It is worth mentioning that there are also recently released datasets such
as AFEW [Dhall et al. 2012], QUTFER [Zhang et al. 2014a] and BAUM-1 [Zhalehpour et al. 2016] that contain a certain
level of realistic facial occlusion caused by factors such as pose variations and lighting changes, but as these datasets are
not specifically created for evaluating FEA under occlusion and only limited types of occlusion occur occasionally in few
cases, they are not covered here. Readers are referred to [Zafeiriou et al. 2016] for a survey of FEA databases collected in a
wild environment.
1) The JApanese Female Facial Expression (JAFFE) database [Lyons et al. 1998] is a widely used benchmark dataset for
FEA in early work and it includes 213 images of six basic emotions plus neutral that were posed by 10 Japanese female
subjects. Each subject has three or four non-occluded frontal face images per expression and the face is roughly located at
the center of the images. The images have a resolution of 256×256 pixels and have been rated on seven emotion categories
by 60 subjects. Although the JAFFE database has been used less frequently in recent studies, it is still a popular dataset for
evaluating the effect of artificially superimposed occlusion on the FEA.
2) The Cohn-Kanade (CK) database [Kanade et al. 2000] is a popular comprehensive dataset for facial expression
benchmark tests. It is composed of 486 video sequences collected from 97 subjects with neutral to target displays in each
sequence. The frames have a resolution of 640×480 or 640×490 pixels and are fully FACS coded. Annotation of six basic
expressions has also been provided. The extended version (CK+) [Lucey et al. 2010] includes 593 posed expression
sequences from 123 subjects and 122 spontaneous smile sequences from 66 subjects. Similar to JAFFE, CK and CK+ do not
include occluded faces.
3) The BeiHang University Facial Expression (BHUFE) database [Yu-Li et al. 2006] includes 1,600 color videos for the
frontal and 30-degree profile of 25 facial expressions from 32 college students aged 21 to 25. Each video lasts about 6
seconds and has a frame resolution of 480×640 pixels. The database includes four typical complex facial expressions: smile
while hands obscure the face, anger while hand obscure the face, smile while talking, and anger while talking.
4) The Caltech Occluded Faces in the Wild (COFW) dataset [Burgos-Artizzu et al. 2013] comprises of 1,007 facial
images collected from a variety of real-world sources by four people. It was designed to evaluate the performance of face
landmark algorithms in realistic conditions, which have heavy occlusion and large shape variations that arise from the
differences in expression or head pose, using accessories (e.g. hats and sunglasses), and interacting with objects. There are
substantial variations in the type of occlusion and different degrees of occlusion in the faces. The average face occlusion is
over 23%. The occluded/unoccluded state in all images was hand annotated.
5) The Acted Facial Expressions in the Wild (AFEW) database [Dhall, et al. 2012] is a dynamic temporal facial
expressions data corpus that comprises of a total of 957 audio-visual clips extracted from 37 movies. The clips are searched
by their subtitles using a list of expression keywords such as ‘laughs’, ‘smiles’, ‘scared’, etc. The clips are labeled with six
basic emotions and actor information by human observers. The Static Facial Expressions in the Wild (SFEW) database
[Dhall et al.] is a subset of the AFEW database, and it is composed of static frames selected from AFEW video clips. The
SFEW includes 700 images labelled with six basic emotions. The images have unconstrained facial expressions with
variations in pose, subject age and image resolution, as well as real-life occlusions such as glasses, eye mask, beard and hat.
The AFEW (or SFEW) has been used as a benchmark dataset in the Emotion recognition in the Wild (EmotiW) challenge
from 2013 to 2017 [Dhall et al. 2017].
6) The HAPpy PeoplE Images (HAPPEI) database [Dhall et al. 2013] is created to evaluate the happiness intensity of a
group of people. It includes 4,886 images that are collected from Flickr by searching keywords associated with groups of
people and events, such as ‘party + people’, ‘marriage’, ‘reunion’, ‘bar’, etc. All images have more than one subject and are
annotated with group-level mood intensity (from neutral to thrilled). In addition, 8,500 faces in these images are also
annotated for six intensities of happiness (i.e., neutral, small smile, large smile, small laugh, large laugh and thrilled), and
three intensities of occlusion (i.e., face visible, partial occlusion and high occlusion). The dataset has been used as the
benchmark dataset for group-level emotion recognition in the EmotiW 2016 [Dhall et al. 2016b]. Instead of focusing on
only happiness in the HAPPEI database, the Group Affect database [Dhall et al. 2015b] covers images of a group of people
with three emotion categories of positive, negative, and neutral. It has been used in the EmotiW 2017 [Dhall, et al. 2017].
Although partial occlusion such as beard, glasses and hat frequently present in some images, no annotation labels of the
occlusion are provided in the database.
7) The ‘in-the-wild’ database [Zafeiriou, et al. 2016] is a recently developed dataset for facial expression analysis in
naturalistic conditions. It comprises of more than 500 video collected from Youtube with people reacting to different
emotional scenarios including performing an activity, a practical joke, a positive surprise, a particular video, etc. The facial
responses have been annotated with arousal and valance values by three rates using the FeelTrack tool. In addition, the
database also includes more than 10,000 facial images from more than 2,000 people that were collected by performing a tag
based search in Google Image using keywords such as anger, feeling, fear, and pain. The facial images were annotated
with 16 AUs by a trained AU coder. This database contains various types of natural occlusion caused by hands, pose
variations, lighting changes, etc., but no ground truth data regarding the presence/state of occlusion was provided.
8) The Bosphorus database [Savran et al. 2008] is a large multi-expression and multi-pose 3D face dataset with different
types of real-life face occlusions. It comprises of 4,652 face scans from 105 subjects mostly aged between 25 and 35. Facial
expressions were encoded using 28 AUs and six basic emotions, and occlusion of the eyes and mouth were formed
naturally by subjects rubbing their eyes, or putting hands over their mouths. Occlusion of eyeglasses was generated by
asking each subject to wear a pair of eyeglasses chosen from a pool of different eyeglasses. The dataset also includes a
small portion of facial images with partial occlusion by long hair.
9) The University of Cambridge 3D (Cam3D) multimodal corpus [Mahmoud et al. 2011] was specifically collected to
analyze hand-over-face gestures. It includes 108 audio/visual segments of spontaneous facial expressions and hand-overface gestures from 16 participants with 12 natural mental states, such as thinking, unsure, happy, surprise, anger,
frustrated and confused. The data was captured using three sensors of HD cameras, Microsoft Kinect and microphones,
and has a frame resolution of 640×480 or 720×576 pixels. The emotional state was annotated using crowd-sourcing
techniques, and the hand-over-face gestures were annotated into three states of action, hand shape and facial region
10) The University of Milano Bicocca (UMB) 3D database [Colombo et al. 2011] consists of 1,473 2D color images and
3D depth images collected from 143 subjects. Each subject has at least four facial expressions (neutral, smiling, anger and
bored) and occluded faces by scarf, hat or hands in random positions. Most subjects also have partial occlusion arising
from eyeglasses, holding phones, hair, or other miscellaneous objects. 42% of the face area is occluded on average, with the
largest coverage of about 84%. Each acquisition was described by labels such as occluded or non-occluded, occluding
object (if any) and facial expression. In total, there are 578 occluded faces with an image resolution of 640×480 pixels. One
drawback of this database is that all subjects were asked to keep their eyes closed during recordings.
11) The Binghamton University 3D Facial Expression (BU-3DFE) [Lijun et al. 2006] database includes both prototypical
3D facial expression shapes and 2D facial textures of 2,500 models of 100 subjects. For each shape model, the texture
images were captured at two views of approximately +45 and -45 degrees. There are six basic emotions plus neural with
four levels of emotion intensity. The BU-3DFE was later extended to a high-resolution 3D dynamic database – BU-4DFE
[Yin et al. 2008]. The BU-4DFE includes 606 3D facial expression sequences from 101 subjects with 60,600 frame models in
total. Each subject has six model sequences and each sequence shows one of six basic emotions. The databases are useful
for simulating self-occlusion by rotating the 3D model by certain degrees of yaw, pitch, or roll.
12) The Binghamton Pittsburgh 4D spontaneous expression Database (BP4D) [Zhang et al. 2014c] was collected to
analyze facial actions that are not deliberately posed. It contains a total of 328 sequences of high-resolution 3D images
plus 2D texture videos of 1040×1392 pixels. There are eight categorical emotions, including six basic emotions,
embarrassment and pain, from 41 participants (23 women and 18 men). These emotions were elicited from eight tasks. For
each sequence, three types of meta data are provided, including 27 manually annotated AUs, automatically tracked head
pose (pitch, yaw, and roll), and 83 2D/3D facial landmarks. It is noted that the dataset in the Facial Expression Recognition
and Analysis (FERA) 2017 challenge [Valstar et al. 2017] was derived from the 3D model of the BP4D database. The dataset
comprises of 2,952 videos for training, 1,431 videos for validation and 1,080 videos for test. The challenge focuses on the
recognition of 10 frequently occurring AUs and the estimation of six intensity levels (i.e., 0-5) of seven AUs. Nine different
face orientations were also created by rotating 3D sequences by -40, -20 and 0 degrees pitch and -40, 0 and 40 degrees yaw
from a frontal pose.
Table 1 lists main characteristics of related databases. We can see that all databases:
 primarily use discrete categories or AUs to represent facial expressions (except ‘in-the-wild’);
 are largely collected in a laboratory environment (except COFE and ‘in-the-wild’);
 contain both artificially posed and spontaneously elicited;
 focus on occlusion by hands, glasses and hair;
 focus on self-occlusion by head pose variations (3D databases).
Fig. 3. Facial samples from existing related databases.
Table 1. Existing Databases for Validating FEA Algorithms under Facial Occlusion.
Facial Expression
JAFFE1 [Lyons, et al. 1998]
six basic, neutral
CK2 [Kanade, et al. 2000]
six basic, AUs
CK+2 [Lucey, et al. 2010]
six basic, AUs
593 V, 122 V
BHUFE3 [Yu-Li, et al. 2006]
smile, anger
[Burgos-Artizzu, et al. 2013]
sunglass, hat, food,
hands, hair etc.
various emotions (e.g. HA)
In-the-wild
[Zafeiriou, et al. 2016]
hands, hat, pose,
lighting etc.
arousal, valance, 16 AUs
AFEW/SFEW5
[Dhall, et al. 2012]
glasses, eye mask,
beard, hand, hat etc.
[Dhall, et al. 2013]
glasses, beard, people
standing front, hat etc.
HA (six intensities)
Bosphorus6
[Savran, et al. 2008]
hands, eyeglasses, hair,
beard, moustache
six basic, 28 AUs
4,652 scans
[Mahmoud, et al. 2011]
12 mental states, e.g.
thinking, unsure, happy.
[Colombo, et al. 2011]
Scarf, hat, hands,
eyeglasses, phones, hair
neutral, smile, bored,
[Lijun, et al. 2006]
head pose variations
six basic, neutral
2,500 models
BU-4DFE9 [Yin, et al. 2008]
head pose variations
six basic, neutral
60,600 models
BP4D9 [Zhang, et al. 2014c]
head pose variations
eight emotions, 27 AUs
Note: ‘-’ means not available.
Abbreviations: A- Artificially imposed; N – Naturally occurring; P – Posed emotion; S – Spontaneous; I – Image; V – Video.
1: 2: 
3: 4: 
5: 6: 7: 
8: 9: 
4 Automatic Facial Expression Analysis Approaches
Rather than providing a comprehensive survey on all previous approaches on automatic FEA, this paper limits its
attention to only those that have used or investigated face data with partial occlusion. For exhaustive surveys on the past
approaches on FEA and affect recognition in non-occluded faces, as well as face recognition or human detection under
occlusion, readers are referred to the following work:
 Introduction of early FEA approaches [Pantic and Rothkrantz 2000], [Fasel and Luettin 2003].
 Surveys of recent 2D/3D FEA methods [Bettadapura 2012], [Sandbach et al. 2012], [Owusu, et al. 2015], [Sariyanidi,
et al. 2015], [Corneanu, et al. 2016].
 Summaries of affect recognition work using audio, visual, text or physiological modalities [Zeng, et al. 2009], [Calvo
and D'Mello 2010].
 Reviews of dimensional affect analysis methods using audio, visual, and biological modalities [Gunes et al. 2011],
[Gunes and Schuller 2013].
 Overviews of face recognition or human detection methods under partial occlusion [Azeem et al. 2014], [Nguyen et
al. 2016].
 A survey of face detection methods in a wild environment [Zafeiriou et al. 2015].
 A survey of FEA methods using FACS [Martinez et al. 2017].
 A brief review of FEA using deep learning methods [Zafeiriou, et al. 2016].
According to the strategies used for handing facial occlusion, existing FEA approaches can be roughly divided into
feature reconstruction approach, sparse representation approach, sub-region based approach, statistical model based
approach, 3D data based approach, and deep learning approach. Table 2 provides an overview of these approaches with
respect to occlusion detection, feature, classifier, emotion category, occlusion type, occlusion simulation, and performance.
Table 3 summarizes main characteristics of these approaches regarding their pros and cons. It should be noted that sparse
representation and sub-region approaches are often used for static image based FEA, while model based approach is often
employed for temporal video based FEA. The feature reconstruction, 3D data based, and deep learning approaches can be
used for both types of analysis.
Table 2. Summary of Six Categories of FEA approaches in the Presence of Occlusion.
Classifier
Simulation
Feature reconstruction
[Bourel 2001]
Spatio-temp point vector
AN, HA, SA, SU
missing region
upper/left/right face, mouth
>80(except SA)
[Bourel, et al. 2002]
discrete state of point
missing region
upper/left/right face, mouth,
>80(except mouth)
[Towner and Slater
point coordinate
missing point
upper/lower face
[Kapoor et al. 2003]
point coordinate
natural: 80 I
69 (each AU)
63 (all AU)
[Zhang et al. 2015]
point coordinate
18 AUs, 6 basic,
NE, contempt
CK+: 250 I
black mask, reallife
eyes, mouth,
upper/lower face
[Xia, et al. 2009]
JAFFE & BHUFE:
hand, hair, sunglass
[Jiang and Jia]
Eigen-/Fisher face
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
mouth, eyes
[Cornejo et al. 2015]
Gabor/point coordinate
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
CK+: 593 I
black mask
left/right eye, eyes, bottom
left/right face, bottom face
98 (JAFFE)
[Cornejo and Pedrini
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
CK+: 593 I
black mask
92 (JAFFE)
Sparse representation
[Cotter 2010a]
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
adding noise,
black/white
noise, block
[Cotter 2011]*
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
black mask,
random block
mouth, block
[Cotter 2010b]*
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
random block,
upper/lower face, block
64, 77, 68
[Ouyang et al. 2013]*
CK: 1017 I
black mask,
eyes, corruption
[Zhang et al. 2012]
raw pixel, Gabor, LBP
6 basic, NE
noise, replaced
corruption, block
[Zhi et al. 2011]*
black mask
eyes, nose, mouth
93, 94, 91
[Huang et al. 2012]*
6 basic, contempt
CK: 325 I + V
black mask,
random mask
eyes, mouth, lower-face,
93, 79, 74, 80
[Liu et al. 2014d]
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
black mask
random block
87 (JAFFE), 85 (CK)
Sub-region based
[Zhang et al. 2014b]*,
[Zhang et al. 2011]
Gabor-based template
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
CK: 1,615 I
white mask
eyes, mouth, random block,
clear/solid glasses
80,78,49,80, 75(JAFFE)
95,90,75,95, 92 (CK)
[Song and QiuQi 2011]
6 basic, NE
black mask
eyes, mouth
[Shuai-Shi et al. 2013]
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
black bar, reallife mask,
sunglasses
eyes, mouth, left/right face,
scarf, sunglass
86, 92, 90, 91, 88, 83
[Liu, et al. 2014c]
6 basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
black mask
eyes, mouth, left/right face
87, 90, 90, 91
[Lin et al. 2013]
point displacement
5 AUs, AU comb.
grey block
lower face
[Dapogny et al. 2016]
point distance + HOG
6 basic, NE, 14
CK+: 1308 I
noisy mask
eyes, mouth
72,67 (CK+)
BU4D: 1212 I
57,49 (BU4D)
Statistical model
[Yongmian and Qiang
point displacement,
6 basic, AU
missing feature,
real-life hand
missing frame, hand
[Miyakoshi and Kato
point displacement
JAFFE: 183 I
missing feature
eyes, brow, mouth
67, 56, 50
[Tan Dat and Ranganath
2008], [Tan Dat and
Surendra 2008]
point distance
4 grammatical
real-life hand,
hand, blur
[Hammal et al. 2009]
point distance
6 basic, NE
CFE: 100,800 I
3D data based
[Hu et al. 2008]
classifier
HOG, LBP SIFT + PCA,
6 basic, 4
BU3DFE: 12,000
(0, 30, 45, 60, 90)
73.1% (avg.)
73.9% (30o)
71.4% (90o)
[Moore and Bowden
classifier
LBP, LGBP, MSLBP, etc.
6 basic, 4
BU3DFE: 48,000
Multi-pie: 4,200
BU3DFE: (0, 30, 45, 60, 90)
Multi-pie: (0, 15, 30, 45, 60,
LGBP: 68% (BU3DFE)
81% (Multi-pie)
[Tariq et al. 2012]
classifier
generic sparse coding
4/strongest
BU3DFE: 21,000
(0, ±15, ±30, ±45);
(0, ±15, ±30)
69.1% (4 intensity)
76.1% (strongest)
[Vieriu et al. 2015]
haar on 9 channels
6 basic, NE, 4
BU3DFE: 1400
(-90, 90);
[Sun and Yin 2008]
BU4DFE: 34,200
(-180, 180);
(-180, 180)
Deep learning
[Tősér, et al. 2016]
similarity normalized
(-18, 90);
[Cheng, et al. 2014]
Six basic, NE
JAFFE: 213 I
non, eyes, mouth,
lower/upper face
85.7%, 82.9%, 82.9%,
82.9%, 77.1%
[Ranzato et al. 2011]
raw pixel + MRF + DBN
classifier
6 basic, NE
TF: 104,000 I
grey block
eyes, mouth, nose, 70%
random, right/bottom/top
[Batista, et al. 2017]
7 AUs, 6 intensity
challenge (BP4D)
9 different poses
0.399(ICC)
[Zhou et al. 2017]
classifier
multi-task
7 AUs, 6 intensity
challenge (BP4D)
9 different poses
0.879 (RMSE)
0.446(ICC)
Note: “Ocu. Det.” stands for occlusion detection. References with * are the top benchmark approaches identified in Section 4.6.
Abbreviations: N – No, T – Texture, G – Geometry, I – Image, V – Video, N/A – Not Available, ANN – Artificial Neural Network, AU – Action Unit, AUMPNet - Unified CNN, BN – Bayesian Network, CFE –
California Facial Expression database, DBN – Dynamic Bayesian Network, DF – Decision Fusion, DHHFS - Deaf & Hard-of-Hearing Federation of Singapore, EWCCM – Error Weighted Cross-Correlation Model,
HMM – Hidden Markov Model, ICC - Intraclass Correlation Coefficient, KLT – Kanade Lucas Tomasi tracker, KNN – K-Nearest Neighbor, LBCM – Local Binary Covariance Matrices, LGBP - Local Gabor Binary
Pattern, LGBPHS – Local Gabor Binary Pattern Histogram Sequence, MLESR – Maximum Likelihood Estimation Sparse Representation, MKL – Mean rule and multiple Kernel Learning, MUG – Multimedia
Understanding Group database, MSLBP - Multi-Scale LBP, PCC - Pearson Correlation Coefficient, RMSE - Root Mean Square Error, RW-KNN – Rank Weighted KNN, SD – Salient Detector, SRC – Sparse
Representation Classifier, SVM – Support Vector Machine, TBM – Transferable Belief Model, WLDH – Weber Local Descriptor Histogram; WLFF – Weight Learning based Feature Fusion; WLSRF – Weighted Local
Subspace Random Forest Model; WVSRC – ρ-Weighted Voting SRC.
Table 3. Main Characteristics of Six Categories of FEA Approaches in the Presence of Occlusion.
reconstruction
robust feature reconstruction
based on face configuration.
require reliable feature
detector/tracker (G);
require precise face
alignment/normalization (T);
need occlusion detection (T);
loss of texture.
representation
optimal feature representation;
estimate occlusion location.
require precise face
alignment/normalization;
assume test and training data are
linearly correlated.
Sub-region
easy to implement;
good result for small occlusion;
not need occlusion detection.
require precise face
alignment/normalization;
dependent on face subdivision;
dependent on decision fusion.
Statistical
model based
robust via temporal reasoning;
close to real situation.
require robust feature trackers;
difficult to create ground data.
3D data based
depth information;
robust to pose variations.
require face view classifier & viewdependent emotion classifier;
require mapping to frontal view;
heavy computation.
Deep learning
Automatic feature extraction;
no need occlusion detection.
require large training data;
fine-tuning large system parameters;
heavy computation.
Note: “Face Det.”, “Ocu. Det.”, “Face Reg.”, “Feat. Track.” stand for face detection, occlusion detection, face registration and feature
tracking respectively.
Abbreviations: Y – Yes, N – No, T – Texture, G – Geometry, I – Image, V – Video. Take the step of occlusion detection for instance, ‘N(G)'
means that occlusion detection has not been adopted for constructing geometric features in existing studies, and ‘Y/N’ means that
occlusion detection have been used in some existing studies, while not used in other studies.
4.1 Feature Reconstruction Approach
The feature reconstruction approaches attempt to overcome the effect of occlusion by reconstructing missing
geometric and (or) texture features caused by partial occlusion based on the visual configuration of the face, and they are
the most popular approach in early FEA studies on handling occlusion. Approaches in this category can be further
grouped into geometry based and texture based, according to the type of the features used for representing emotions.
4.1.1 Geometry based Approach
One group of geometry based approaches focuses on utilizing coordinates of facial points in static images. Towner and
Slater compared the performance of three PCA based methods in the reconstruction of the positions of missing
feature points at the top and bottom parts of the face. They found that the conditional mean method produced the best
accuracy for recovering random subsets of 22 points on the CK database. The feature points reconstructed from partially
occluded images were then used as the input of a Support Vector Machine (SVM) for classifying six basic emotions. There
is only a 5% and a 3% reduction in overall classification rates for the top and bottom occlusion respectively, compared to
using all facial points. Zhang et al. combined Iterative Closest Point (ICP) features and the Fuzzy C-Means (FCM)
algorithm to reconstruct 54 facial points in an occluded face using prior knowledge of facial elements. The geometry of
facial points was used to predict 18 AUs and eight emotions using Support Vector Regression (SVR) and Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs). The experiments showed more than 78% point detection accuracy under occlusion of the top and
bottom parts of the face. However, the performance for facial expression recognition was not evaluated.
The other group is based on temporal geometric coordinates of facial points in video sequences. Bourel et al. 
proposed using recovered geometric features to handle occlusion in regions of the upper face, mouth, and left/right half of
the face in video sequence (Fig. 4). Their approach adopted an enhanced version of the Kanade-Lucas tracker to
reconstruct drifting or lost facial points during face tracking, and then generated local spatiotemporal vectors based on
geometrical positions of 12 facial points. A rank-weighted K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classifier was further applied
independently to local facial regions to ensure that the occluded region does not affect other regions. A sum fusion of
classifier outputs was finally used to obtain an emotion label for each sequence. The method achieved more than 80%
accuracy for classifying four emotions under four types of occlusion using 100 CK sequences, except for sadness under an
occluded mouth with around 20% accuracy. However, the spatiotemporal vectors in [Bourel 2001] suffer from a lot of
noise. To reduce the noise, Bourel et al. further converted continuous values into three discrete states (increase,
stable and decrease) based on the average motion amplitude of a sequence representing a facial expression. It resulted in
higher accuracy for classifying six basic emotions under the four types of occlusion plus random noise using 300 CK video
sequences. However, both approaches require manual annotation of facial points in the first frames of video sequences,
and need to manually omit the occluded features from feature vectors.
Fig. 4. (left) Recovery of lost or missed geometric facial landmarks using an enhanced Kanade-Lucas tracker
in video sequences. (right) Multiple local classifiers are generated from geometric features and fused to derive
a class label [Bourel 2001].
Different from the above approaches which often depend on data from normal digital camera, Kapoor et al. 
proposed an AU recognition system based an infrared sensitive camera. The camera was employed to robustly detect the
pupil location even under unfavorably lighting conditions, and the pupil location was used to find and normalize the eyes
and brow regions. The x and y coordinates of landmark points from the eyes and brows were then extracted as shape
parameters. The parameters in occluded regions in test images were recovered by finding a linear combination of example
images using Principal Component Analysis (PCA). 69.3% accuracy was achieved for each individual AU classification in
real-life video frames with head motions, occlusion and pose changes. Details about occlusion, however, were not given
by the authors.
4.1.2 Texture based Approach
Existing texture based approaches are mainly based on the Robust PCA (RPCA) algorithm. Xia et al. combined
RPCA and saliency detection for FEA under occlusion. The occlusion was located using a saliency detector by setting a
threshold to the pixel difference between the occluded image and the reconstructed image using RPCA. The occluded
region was then replaced by the corresponding region in the reconstructed face. Haar-like features were further extracted
and fed into AdaBoost for classifying six basic emotions. The method produced 5% and 16% higher accuracies for hands
and sunglasses occlusion respectively than using Adaboost alone on the JAFFE and BHUFE databases. Rather than using
Haar-like features, Cornejo et al. extracted Gabor wavelets and a geometric representation of 22 facial points from
the recovered regions of occlusion using RPCA. A KNN or SVM classifier was adopted for recognizing expressions in the
presence of five types of occlusion, including two eyes, left eye, right eye, bottom left or bottom right part of the face, and
bottom part of the face. The approach achieved more than 98% accuracy for random partial occlusion on the JAFFE, CK+
and MUG databases. In another similar work by Cornejo et al. , the CENsus Transform hISTogram (CENTRIST)
features were extracted from RPCA reconstructed facial regions, and further fed into PCA plus LDA for feature reduction,
and finally SVM for emotion recognition. The approach showed 92% and 90% accuracies on the JAFFE and CK+ datasets.
The RPCA was also found to outperform PCA and perform similarly to probabilistic PCA in reconstructing occluded eyes
and mouth [Jiang and Jia 2011].
The feature reconstruction approaches retain promising robustness against occlusion by recovering the features in
occluded regions based on facial configuration characteristics. However, they are still heavily dependent on reliable face
detection and facial feature tracking. Approaches used for reconstructing geometric features face the challenge of
accurately detecting and robustly tracking geometric points in the presence of partial occlusion. Approaches [Bourel 2001],
[Bourel, et al. 2002] which depend on manual annotation of the coordinates of facial points in the first video frames have
problems in automatic recognition. Approaches to reconstructing texture require pre-locating occluded regions and
precise face alignment, which are still challenging issues. PCA based techniques have difficulty of precisely recovering
dynamically varied local and subtle texture in an unseen facial region based on information learnt from the training data,
which may significantly impact the performance. In brief, current feature reconstruction approaches are heavily
dependent on the accuracy of face detection and tracking. As a result, it is still difficult to achieve fully automatic
implementation of these approaches in real-life applications.
4.2 Sparse Representation Approach
The sparse representation approach was firstly proposed for face recognition tasks in [Wright et al. 2009], and later
applied into FEA, especially from occluded faces [Cotter 2010a],[Cotter 2010b],[Cotter 2011],[Zhang, et al. 2012]. The
approach treats all training samples as a dictionary and performs robust object recognition using a sparse representation
of a test image that is formed by finding a linear combination of training images from the same class. The optimal weights
for combining training images are searched through solving a convex optimization problem via l1 minimization. For the
purpose of handling occlusion, the error caused by occlusion is represented by an individual identity matrix that can be
isolated from the feature matrix of un-occluded training images. For occlusion that is not overly large, the error matrix can
be calculated using l1 minimization. A clear image can be then recovered by subtracting the calculated sparse solution of
the error matrix from the test image at the emotion classification stage.
Cotter [2010a] is one of the first work in applying the Sparse Representation Classifier (SRC) into FEA in noise
corrupted or occluded JAFFE images. The SRC obtains 95% accuracy when 50% pixels are corrupted by noise and over 91%
accuracy for block occlusion with a size ranging from 10×10 to 40×40 pixels. The SRC outperformed Eigenfaces or Gabor
features with an ANN or SVM classifier on average. It was found that the use of a black or a white color in simulating
block occlusion also impacts the performance. To more effectively utilize the local characteristics of facial occlusion, the
SRC was later extended to perform on sub-regions of the face. Cotter proposed the Fusion of Local SRC (FLSRC),
which performs SRC separately in each of three facial regions – the mouth, left eye and right eye. Unoccluded regions are
dynamically determined by setting a threshold to representation errors in SRC. Features from only unoccluded regions are
used to select the most important individual region (or fused region) to make a final classification decision. The tests using
JAFFE images with an occluded mouth and randomly placed block occlusion showed that fusion of all regions leads to
higher accuracy than using each alone. The FLSRC significantly outperformed SRC for an occluded mouth (93.4% vs.
72.8%). For small random block occlusion, they performed similarly, but FLSRC was superior for block occlusion larger
than 35×35 pixels in 96×72 facial regions. Unlike the FLSRC method in [Cotter 2011], which selects only the most
important facial region in making a decision, a ρ-Weighted Voting SRC (WVSRC) scheme was used in [Cotter 2010b]. The
scheme assigns different weights to decisions from nine equally divided facial sub-regions and then combines weighted
decisions. The weights are assigned based on the class representation error of SRC in each sub-region. The WVSRC
significantly outperformed both SRC and Gabor based approaches for occluded upper and lower halves of the face, and
large randomly placed block occlusion. However, a direct comparison between WVSRC and FLSRC was not reported.
The original sparse representation assumes a Gaussian distribution of the coding residual, which may suffer from
inaccuracy in describing errors in practice. Liu et al. [2014d] proposed the Maximum Likelihood Estimation Sparse
Representation (MLESR), which models the sparse coding task as a sparsely constrained regress problem and iteratively
assigns lower weights to pixels in occluded regions until the result converges. A test image was classified into an emotion
which has the minimal spare representation residual with this image. The MLESR outperformed SRC and Gabor based
SRC (GSRC) for all degrees of simulated random occlusion ranging from 0 to 90% of image pixels on the JAFFE and CK
databases. Zhi et al. presented a Graph-preserving Sparse Non-negative Matrix Factorization (GSNMF) algorithm to
utilize both the sparse and graph-preserving properties of facial images. The GSNMF transforms a high-dimensional image
into a low-dimensional locality-preserving subspace to achieve robustness to partial occlusion. The GSNMF with the
nearest neighbor classifier achieved 93.3%, 94.0% and 91.4% accuracies for classifying six basic emotions under the eyes,
nose and mouth occlusion respectively on the CK database.
Unlike the above work that applied SRC directly on raw image pixels, studies also exploited other feature descriptors.
Ouyang et al. suggested using Local Binary Pattern (LBP) maps that generally have good robustness against
illumination variations. Fusion of LBP maps and SRC was found to outperform SRC under non-occlusion, occluded eyes,
and partial corruption conditions on the CK database. The fusion achieved 87.0% accuracy when 35% of the face is
replaced with uniform distributed values and 72.4% accuracy when 30% of the face is occluded in the eyes region. Zhang et
al. performed performance comparisons among raw pixels, Gabor wavelets and LBP features, as well as SRC, ANN,
SVM and the nearest subspace classifiers. Results on CK images indicated that Gabor features with SRC performed the
best for non-occluded images. SRC significantly outperformed ANN, SVM and the nearest subspace at various levels of
random pixel corruption and random block occlusion. Huang et al. investigated the use of Spatio-Temporal LBP
(STLBP) and edge map features for FEA under occlusion in video sequences (Fig. 5). The features were extracted from the
mouth, nose and eyes components and further integrated in sparse representation to generate a binary codebook for
determining occluded components. For expression recognition, the features were also combined via a feature-level fusion
and their optimal weights were learned using multiple kernel learning. The system yielded 93%, 79.1% and 73.5%
accuracies for classifying six basic emotions plus contempt under occlusion of the eyes, mouth and lower-face respectively
in CK+ frames. The integration of occlusion detection led to higher accuracies for most emotions. A recent study [Amirian
et al. 2017] using sparse coding also achieved promising results of AU intensity estimation in the FERA 2017 challenge.
The proposed approach first estimated the head pose using dictionary learning and then computed a sparse representation
of image patches to train a Support Vector Regression for AU intensity estimation. The approach produced Intraclass
Correlation Coefficient (ICC) of 0.295 and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of 0.970 on the test subset of the challenge.
To summarize, the great advantage of the sparse representation approaches is that they are not only robust to small
occlusion and corruption, but also can be used to estimate the occluded or corrupted parts of the face. The approaches
have been demonstrated as one of the most promising techniques in overcoming occlusion for FEA. However, their
performance is largely dependent on whether the test data can be accurately represented using a linear combination of a
subset of training samples from the same emotion, and the availability of a reasonable large number of training samples
with sufficient variations for the emotion. The training dictionary needs not only sufficient information to effectively
represent the test data, but also abundant characteristics to reduce the correlations of training samples from different
classes [Ouyang, et al. 2013]. To ensure accurate feature extraction, the approaches require precise face location,
alignment and normalization, which are done primarily manually in existing work [Cotter 2010a],[Cotter 2010b],[Zhang,
et al. 2012],[Ouyang, et al. 2013]. One important factor in the use of SRC is to choose a proper type of feature descriptor.
Although several feature descriptors such as raw pixels, Gabor and LBP, have been investigated in existing studies, it is
still a largely unexplored field regarding which descriptor works best for handling facial occlusion. It is still worth
investigating other types of descriptors such as Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) and Histogram of Oriented
Gradients (HOG) to further improve the performance.
Fig. 5. An automatic system comprising of occlusion detection using STLBP based sparse representation, and
emotion recognition via multiple feature fusion with weights obtained using multiple kerning learning
[Huang, et al. 2012].
4.3 Sub-region based Approach
The sub-region based approaches treat the whole facial region as comprising of a set of local sub-regions and attempt
to fuse information from only non-occluded sub-regions for FEA. The approaches can be approximately categorized into 1)
feature fusion approach which fuses features from sub-regions, and approaches in this category often adopt a feature
selection mechanism to remove the features extracted from occluded sub-regions, and 2) decision fusion approach which
fuses classification decisions from sub-regions, and approaches in this category often employ a voting strategy to reduce
the weights of decisions derived from occluded sub-regions.
4.3.1 Feature Fusion Approach
Zhang et al. ,[2014b] proposed Gabor based templates for FEA under the eyes, mouth, glasses and randomly
placed block occlusion. A Monte Carlo algorithm was used to collect a group of multi-scale 3D Gabor templates from
randomly selected locations in the gallery images. The collected templates form a pool of local texture features, and thus it
is anticipated that only a small portion of them are significantly impacted by partial occlusion. A template-based matching
process was then performed over a local search area to create distance features which encode high-level expression
information of the face and suffer from limited impact by occlusion. A linear SVM was further used to select a small set of
most effective distance features from the whole feature set. The SVM employs normal based feature selection [Dunja et al.
2004] by treating the normal to the classification hyperplane as weights of features and keeping only those features with
high weights. Those features often have the biggest impact on the classification results and thus are most important. The
six basic emotions plus neutral were finally classified using another linear SVM classifier. The experiments showed that a
larger occlusion has bigger influence on the overall performance of both JAFFE and CK databases. The eyes region and the
mouth region have big effects on JAFFE and CK, respectively. The system showed robustness to changes in parameters of
Gabor filters and template sizes. The work [Zhang, et al. 2011],[Zhang, et al. 2014b] adopted features extracted from a
large number of random local patches to overcome facial occlusion, while another commonly used way is to extract
features from a set of facial sub-regions. Guo and Ruan used a sum function to combine Local Binary Covariance
Matrices (LBCM) features from nine equally sized facial sub-regions. The robustness to occlusion was achieved by
removing the sub-region with the maximal distance between covariance matrices from the gallery and the probe sets.
Using the nearest neighbor classifier, the LBCM outperformed Gabor filters and SRC, and achieved 93.7% and 92.9%
accuracies for occluded eyes and mouth respectively using JAFFE images. Liu et al. investigated a feature-level
fusion of Local Gabor Binary Pattern (LGBP) maps from equally divided facial sub-regions. Tests on occlusion of the
mouth, eyes, left and right face gave 92.1%, 85.5%, 89.5% and 90.8% accuracies respectively on the JAFFE database. An
additional test on 24 natural images from a person with real-life medical mask and sunglasses occlusion showed 87.5% and
83.3% accuracies for classifying four expressions.
4.3.2 Decision Fusion Approach
Liu et al. [2014c] employed a maximum decision fusion of equally sized facial sub-regions (Fig. 6). From each subregion, Weber Local Descriptor Histogram (WLDH) features were extracted and fed into an SVM classifier. The SVM
outputs from all sub-regions were fused using a maximum function. The approach achieved more than 87% accuracy for
occlusion of the mouth, eyes, left and right sides of the face using JAFFE images. Dapogny et al. presented Local
Expression Predictions (LEPs) for categorical FER and AU prediction under partial occlusions. The LEPs were generated by
locally averaging predictions by local trees in random forests which are trained using random facial masks generated in
specific parts of the face. HOG features extracted from facial landmarks were used as the local descriptor of facial masks.
For occlusion-robust FER, local confidence measurements were obtained based on the reconstruction error outputted by a
two-layer autoencoder network to weight LEPs in different facial parts. The network was trained to model the local
manifold of non-occluded faces and to reconstruct feature patterns in an occluded face, providing a confidence
measurement based on the reconstruction error. Occlusions were simulated by overlaying noisy patterns to regions of
eyes and the mouth in facial images. Evaluations on the CK+ and BU4D databases showed around 72% and 57% under
occluded eyes, and 67% and 49% under occluded mouth for categorical FER. Instead of using texture features, Lin et al.
 predicted AUs under mouth occlusion using geometric features of displacements of facial points. A Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM) was employed to model the gray pixel distribution in facial regions for detecting the occluded
region. Facial Deformation Parameters (FDPs) were represented using the displacements of 74 landmark points in six
regions, including the mouth, eyes, eyebrows, nose, cheeks, and jaw. The FDPs in each region and the relationships among
paired regions were modelled using a Cross-Correlation Model (CCM), and the prediction decisions of CCM in all paired
regions were finally combined using a Bayesian weighting scheme. 80.7% accuracy was obtained in predicting five AUs or
AU combinations in CK+ sequences. To optimize the fusion of decisions from nine equally divided facial sub-regions, a ρ
-weighted voting SRC scheme was presented in [Cotter 2010b] to assign a different weight to each sub-region.
Fig. 6. WLDP features and SVM classifier are used to derive a classification decision for each facial sub-region.
The expression classification is achieved using a maximum decision fusion of all sub-regions [Liu, et al. 2014c].
A basic assumption of sub-region based approaches is that occlusion presents only in a small portion of the face, and
thus its effect can be minimized via a feature selection method or a decision voting strategy over all sub-regions. The
approaches are often capable of producing satisfactory performance for small occlusion. However, the granularity of
subdividing the face into local regions, and its effect on the performance is still an open issue, particularly for random
occlusion without a fixed location, shape and size. Similar to feature reconstruction and sparse representation approaches,
the sub-region based approaches are also sensitive to noise due to inaccurate face location, alignment and normalization.
It is still an issue to choose a proper fusion strategy for multiple results [Bourel 2001], such as a linear combination, fuzzy
logic, and ANN. State-of-the-art sub-region based approaches are still at the beginning stage of exploiting the most
effective facial region division method and the best decision or feature fusion strategy.
4.4 Statistical Model based Approach
Unlike the above approaches, the statistical model based approaches do not directly reconstruct the features in
occluded regions nor divide face into sub-regions. Instead, they try to infer occluded features using statistical prediction
models by utilizing the temporal correlations between neighboring video frames or spatial dependent information in nonoccluded parts in static images. A unique feature of statistical model approaches lies in the capacity of robustly inferring
facial features in a current frame based on facial information in neighboring frames, even when the current frame contains
a partially occluded face or is a completely missing frame.
Hammal et al. exploited the usefulness of facial point deformations with a modified Transferable Belief Model
(TBM) for recognizing facial expressions from images with partial occlusion. Five distances from the contours of the
mouth, eyes, and eyebrows were normalized and mapped to symbolic states. The TBM has the advantage of automatically
integrating features from multiple local facial regions and handle uncertain or imprecise data such as occluded facial
regions, and thus it is adopted for modeling the correlation between expressions and symbolic states. The results on 70
facial images with occlusion simulated by bubble masks showed that the use of all five distances obtained the highest rates
for recognizing happiness (100%), anger (100%), surprise (75%) and disgust (75%), but a much lower rate for recognizing
sadness (25%). The behaviors of human observers are different from TBM based models and the human tends to use
“suboptimal” features for FEA under occlusion. Rather than using distances between facial components in static images
[Hammal, et al. 2009], Miyakoshi and Kato improved this by using movement magnitudes of 14 points from a
neutral face to an emotional face in static images. A Bayesian network classifier was employed to learn the dependencies
between target facial expressions and facial features without involving a process of filling in the facial gap due to
occlusion. The causal relationships among facial features and the structural associations between expressions and facial
features were learnt using the K2 algorithm and stepwise feature selection respectively. 67.1%, 56.0%, and 49.5% accuracies
were observed for occlusion of the eyes, brows and mouth in JAFFE images.
Given the limited information available in static images, other statistical model based approaches have focused on
directly processing video sequences. Work [Tan Dat and Ranganath 2008],[Tan Dat and Surendra 2008] designed a
Bayesian tracker to reliably track facial points in the presence of temporal occlusion by head motions or hands (Fig. 7).
The tracker augments the Kanade Lucas Tomasi (KLT) tracker by additionally incorporating a Bayesian feedback
mechanism. Seven eyebrow and four eye distances were extracted from the tracked points and fed into seven individual
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) for classifying four face movement categories and three head motions. The likelihood
outputs of HMMs were further used as inputs into an ANN for classifying four grammatical expressions (Yes/no, Wh,
Topic and Negation). The proposed tracker showed more stable tracking results than KLT. The proposed system had an
accuracy drop from 69% to 62% in the presence of hand occlusion and performed the best when it was trained and tested
using the same tracker. However, the system requires manual annotation of facial features in the first video frames. Unlike
[Tan Dat and Ranganath 2008],[Tan Dat and Surendra 2008], which aimed to generate robust facial point trackers,
Yongmian and Qiang focused on recognizing AUs directly from occluded video frames (Fig. 8). They utilized
temporal reasoning via Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs), which are capable of accounting for information from both
current visual observations and previous visual evidences. Facial features missed in an occluded frame were compensated
by modeling its temporal correlations with neighboring frames. Although no systematic evaluation was conducted,
impressive results were achieved using video examples with undetected or untracked frames and hand occlusion.
Fig. 7. Distance features between facial points are extracted based on a Bayesian tracker, and they are fed into
individual HMMs and ANNs subsequently for classifying four grammatical expressions [Tan Dat and
Ranganath 2008].
Fig. 8. (left) Dynamic Bayesian networks generated for FEA and (right) its accuracy for classifying happiness
under temporal occlusion caused by a moving hand [Yongmian and Qiang 2005].
Image based statistical model approaches generally depend on spatial relationships in facial parts learnt from training
data to recover facial occlusions, but they also require large training data, and heavy computation. On the other hand, the
greatest advantage of video based statistical model approaches is that they are able to utilize temporal information in
video sequences to infer features in occluded facial regions, and thus the results are anticipated to be more robust than
static image based approaches because facial expressions often exhibit strong and unique temporal patterns and
correlations. This approach also shows a good capacity of handling missed frames and is closer to the situation of
handling facial occlusion in real-life applications. The drawbacks lie in the difficulty of creating suitable ground truth
video data that represents a full sequence of a facial expression to train the model, and the requirement of robust facial
feature trackers in occluded frames. To conclude, statistical model based approaches seem to be a robust method for
handling facial occlusion during FEA. However, due to the lack of suitable benchmark databases, direct comparisons of
statistical model based approaches with other approaches are still largely unexplored in existing work. As a result, their
performance advantages over other approaches still need to be further validated.
4.5 3D Data based Approach
Most approaches discussed so far are based on 2D facial data. The 3D data based approaches include the additional
depth information about the facial structure and appearance on top of the normal 2D data. The depth information can be
potentially utilized for generating more robust, discriminative, and view-independent features under facial occlusion,
particularly those caused by head pose changes, or missing parts [Drira et al. 2013]. Although FEA using 3D data has been
researched intensively , the approaches that are
specifically designed to overcome facial occlusion are still limited and largely focus on handling self-occlusion caused by
head pose variations. This part introduces several typical 3D based approaches for FEA with or without facial occlusion.
One typical 3D data based approach is multiple views method, which first estimates the face’s current view angle and
then builds a separate emotion classifier for each angle. Accordingly, there are generally two sequential steps, including
view classification and view dependent FER. Hu et al. adopted a five-class view classifier to determine the view and
trained a separate emotion classifier for each view. Three descriptors - HOG, LBP and SIFT, and three feature dimension
reductions – PCA, LDA and Locality Preserving Projection (LPP), are comparatively used with the same nearest neighbor.
Experiments were conducted on recognizing 6 emotions from 12,000 face data with five yaw angles (0, 30, 45, 60 and 90
degrees) on the BU-3DFE database. The results showed a fusion of SIFT and LPP produced the lowest average error rate of
26.9% for all views. Moore and Bowden compared LBP features with their variations as texture descriptors for both
facial view and expression classification using a multi-class SVM. Face images with five yaw angles (0, 30, 45, 60 and 90
degrees) are projected from a 3D textured model on the BU-3DFE database. Experiments indicated that Local Gabor Binary
Patterns (LGBPs) perform the best, particularly at large yaw angles. Tariq et al. utilized generic sparse coding
features with a linear SVM for multi-view FER. Experiments used 84,000 face data with seven pan angles (0, ±15, ±30 and
±45 degrees) and five title angles (0, ±15 and ±30 degrees) from the BU-3DFE database. The approach achieved 69.1% and
76.1% accuracies of classifying six emotions with four emotion intensities and only the strongest intensity, respectively.
Another type of 3D-based approach is simulated 3D features method. Different from multiple views methods, this
method directly performs FER on 3D non-frontal facial data by feature mapping. The mapping is achieved by transferring
non-frontal features to their counterparts in a frontal view of the same face. Vieriu et al. transformed 3D data of the
face onto a pose invariant 2D cylindrical representation (Fig. 9), where self-occlusion was treated as missing information
in this representation. The representation was later split into multiple overlapping patches, and from each patch, Haar
features were extracted from 9 channel maps and a local random forests classifier was generated. The emotional state of
the face was recognized via a weighting decision scheme which fuses probabilities from patch-specific random forests.
Evaluations showed that the method achieved a recognition rate of 66.2% on faces with (-90, 90) degrees of yaw rotation
and (-60, 60) degrees of tilt rotation on the BU-3DFE database. Rudovic et al. mapped locations of 39 points in a
non-frontal face to their corresponding locations in a frontal view using four regression functions, which were fed into a
frontal face SVM emotion classifier. Evaluations on classifying four emotions from 800 facial images with four views (0, 15,
30 and 45 degrees) on the Multi-PIE database showed that the approach outperformed view-specific classifiers.
Fig. 9. Projection of sampled 3D faces under varying head poses in (f) to a frontal pose-invariant face
representation in (e) using a cylindrical head model in (b) [Vieriu, et al. 2015].
There are also other 3D-based methods that are not specifically designed to handling facial occlusion, but can be
potentially used for FEA under occlusion. Sun and Yin presented a spatio-temporal 3D model-based approach
which integrates 3D facial surface descriptor and HMM for emotion recognition. The surface descriptor included eight
primitive shape types and was generated based on 83 facial landmarks and LDA based feature reduction. The approach
was evaluated on simulated partial occlusion by changing the yaw and pitch angles of a 3D face model. The results
showed over 80% accuracy for raw and pitch angles of 60 degrees, and only limited decreased accuracy for a yaw of close
to 90 degree. However, the accuracy degrades to zero when either pitch or yaw changes to a 150 degree where useful
facial information is completely occluded. The results also indicated that temporal approaches outperformed image based
statistic approaches, implying that motion information helps to compensate the loss of spatial information. In [Zhao et al.
2011], a 3D Statistical Facial feAture Model (SFAM) was presented to locating facial landmarks in the presence of facial
expressions and occlusion. The SFAM combined global variations in 3D face morphology and local variations of texture
and geometry features around each facial landmark, and integrated them in an objective optimization function. To identity
the type of occlusion, a histogram of the similarity map between local shapes of the target face and shape instance from
the SFAM was used with a KNN classifier. The type of occlusion was also integrated in the optimization function to
localize facial landmarks by setting a binary weight (0 for occluded and 1 for unoccluded) to each landmark region.
Experiments on the Bosphorus database demonstrated an accuracy of 93.8% for classifying four types of occlusion (i.e.,
eyes, mouth, glass and non-occlusion) and a precision of 20-mm for locating 97% landmarks. The SFAM also achieved a
precision of less than 10mm for most landmarks on the FRGC V1, V2, and BU-3DFE databases. However, the SFAM was
designed for landmark detection and no result on FER was reported.
Studies also investigated fusion of 2D with 3D feature descriptors to improve FER results. Li et al. represented
the local texture around 2D facial landmarks using histogram of second order gradients and first-order gradient based
SIFT descriptor, and the local geometry around 3D facial landmarks using histogram of mesh gradients and histogram of
mesh shape index. The texture and geometry were fused at both feature-level and score-level to improve FER based on an
SVM classifier. Evaluations on the BU-3DFE and Bosphorus databases show that 2D and 3D descriptors provide
complementary characteristics (Fig. 10). Zhao et al. localized facial landmarks from 2.5D facial data using a
deformable partial face model. Global and local features were extracted from those landmarks and used to represent
coordinates in an AU space, where each region was classified to a specific affective state using SVM. The approach
achieved promising FEA results on the EURECOM, FRGC and Bosphorus databases. However, those studies were not
designed for handling facial occlusion.
Fig. 10. Distribution of top 15 most discriminative 2D (top) and 3D (bottom) landmarks. The 2D and 3D
features provide complementary characteristics for FEA [Li, et al. 2015].
A benefit of using 3D data is the possibility of using a richer set of information about facial structure, texture, and
depth. Thus, 3D data based approaches are more robust in handling facial occlusion, particularly self-occlusion caused by
head pose variations. However, the disadvantages are heavy computational time required and the necessity of designing
algorithms to accurately map non-frontal facial features into a frontal face representation. Existing studies have been
heavily dependent on several available databases collected in controlled laboratory environments. The lack of naturalistic
3D FEA databases with different types of occlusion has largely restricted the current progress on designing 3D data based
approaches and evaluating their performance in realistic conditions.
4.6 Deep Learning Approach
In recent years, deep learning approaches such as Boosted Deep Belief Network [Liu et al. 2014b], Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) [Chang et al. 2017], Long Short-Term Memory [Rodriguez et al. 2017], and fusion of multiple
deep neural networks [Zhang et al. 2017], have gained increasing popularity due to their ability to deliver state-of-the-art
performance on FEA . Deep learning has advantages of learning more
abstract patterns progressively and automatically from raw image pixels in a multiple layer architecture rather than using
hand-engineered features. It is better suited to learn embedded patterns in facial regions and encode geometric
relationships between facial components, and thus it can be used in recovering occluded facial parts in an inherent and
automatic manner.
Existing studies on utilizing deep learning for FEA under occlusion are still very limited, and they mainly focus on
using a single deep learning architecture. Toser et al. employed a 8-layer CNN for AU detection on 3D facial data
with self-occlusion caused by large pose variations. The CNN accepted as input similarity normalized images and
combined gradient descent with selective methods to improve the convergence of its optimization. An augmented data
was created based on the BP4D database using 3D face information and renderings of the face with different rotations,
yielding faces with head poses ranging (-18, 90) degrees for yaw and (-54, 54) degrees for pitch. The CNN produced a mean
F1 score of 0.55 for recognizing 11 AUs on the augmented data. Cheng et al. presented a deep structure for FER
under partial occlusion. Multi-scale and multi-orientation Gabor magnitudes were extracted from facial images using
Gabor filters, and were taken as input to a three-layer Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM) for emotion classification. The
DBM had a structure of 3,500-600-600-7 elements and incorporated a pre-training and a fine-turning process to learn the
best weights for encoding the structure of the face including occlusion. The impact of occlusion was then reduced by
compressing the features from occluded parts in the DBM. The DBM was evaluated for classifying six basic and neutral
emotions from JAFFE images with occlusion simulated by artificially added black bars. It achieved 85.7% and 77.1% for
non-occlusion and occluded upper part of the face, as well as the same accuracy of 82.9% for occluded eyes, mouth and
lower part of the face. Ranzato et al. presented a deep generative model that uses a gated Markov Random Field
(MRF) as the first layer of a DBN for FER under occlusion. The MRF learnt the covariance structure and intensities of
image pixels, while the DBN included several layers of Bernouilli hidden variables to model the statistical structure in the
hidden activities of the MRF. The missing pixels in facial occlusion were filled in by propagating the occluded image
through all layers in the model using a sequence of posterior distributions learnt from training data. From the
reconstructed facial region, features were extracted and used for FER with a linear classifier. Occlusions of the eyes, mouth,
nose, right/bottom/top halves, and 70% of the pixels at random were artificially generated based on the CK and Toronto
Face (TF) databases. The results showed a higher overall accuracy than a Gabor-based, sparse coding, SVM-based
approaches. However, the deep generative model assumes prior knowledge of the location of occlusion, requires large
training data, and is computationally expensive.
Deep learning techniques also showed state-of-the-art performance in the FERA 2017 challenge. The challenge used a
dataset from the BP4D database having six intensity levels of seven AUs and nine head poses, as described in Section 3.
Batista et al. presented a unified CNN (AUMPNet) to detect AUs and estimate their intensity simultaneously from
multi-view facial images through a multi-task loss. The pose estimate was added to the multitask loss to generate features
invariant to head pose changes. The AUMPNet demonstrated better performance than the FERA 2017 baseline, and it
achieved mean F1 scores of 0.521 and 0.506 for AU detection, and mean ICCs of 0.499 and 0.399 for intensity estimation on
the validation and test subsets, respectively. Zhou et al. proposed a Multi-Task Deep Network (MTDN) for AU
intensity estimation. Three pose-dependent AU regressors and one pose estimator were trained, and they shared the same
bottom layers of a deep CNN. The final AU estimate was taken as the dot product between a winning pose regressor and
the output of the pose estimator. The MTDN network achieved a mean RMSE of 0.823, ICC of 0.601, and Pearson
Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of 0.620 on estimating AU intensity on the validation subset, as well as RMSE of 0.879 and
ICC of 0.446 on the test subset. Tang et al. fine-tuned the VGG network for AU detection from multi-view facial
regions that were segmented from facial images using morphology operations. The network achieved F1 of 0.574 and
accuracy of 0.778 on the test subset. Li et al. [2017a] proposed a multi-AUs late fusion approach. The hand-crafted LBP-
TOP features and automatically extracted CNN features were used separately for training three AU classifiers. The
predictions of all classifiers were concatenated and taken as the input of a second-level AU classifier. The approach
achieved F1 of 0.498 and accuracy of 0.694 on the test subset. Similarly, state-of-the-art results have also been observed for
deep learning techniques in the EmotiW 2015 and 2016, where improved versions of RNN, CNN, and LSTM were reported
as the top performers in video based, image based, and group-level emotion recognition.
The power of deep learning techniques is that they can automatically learn the most discriminative feature patterns of
facial expressions from the raw face data. They normally do not require a separate process of occlusion detection or
reconstruction. Specifically, the occlusion information can be inherently embedded in the feature set automatically learnt
by deep learning architectures. Given the state-of-the-art performance of deep learning techniques in various compute
vision tasks, we can anticipate that deep learning will potentially be one of the most effective approaches to handling
occlusion for FEA. However, the use of deep architectures for FEA has to overcome several constraints such as the need of
a large amount of training data to ensure proper feature learning, the difficulty of tuning a large number of system
parameters, and the requirement of expensive computation.
4.7 Summary of FEA Approaches
The state of the art on automatic FEA approaches under partial occlusion can be summarized as follows.
1) The primary types of occlusion include occluded eyes, mouth, left/right, upper/lower face, random placed blocks,
hands, glasses, noise (as shown in Fig. 11), and self-occlusion caused by head pose variations. Few studies have tested
occlusion in brows [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011] or arising from hair [Xia, et al. 2009] and blur [Tan Dat and Ranganath
2008],[Tan Dat and Surendra 2008], as well as missed frames [Yongmian and Qiang 2005].
2) The majority of existing studies focus on artificial occlusion simulated by removing occlusion related features or by
superimposing graphically generated masks into a certain region of the face. Few attempts have been made toward using
naturally occurring occlusion from real-life data, such as mouth masks and sunglasses [Shuai-Shi, et al. 2013], and hand
occlusion [Yongmian and Qiang 2005],[Tan Dat and Ranganath 2008],[Tan Dat and Surendra 2008].
3) Most existing evaluations are based on the JAFFE, CK, and CK+ databases with non-occluded faces. Some initial
efforts were reported on real-life data with natural occlusion arising from sunglasses, medical mask [Shuai-Shi, et al. 2013]
and hands [Yongmian and Qiang 2005], but the results were primarily used for demonstrating the performance of the
system on sample occluded data and no thorough evaluation outcomes such as emotion classification accuracy were
reported on the whole dataset. No work has been found to investigate FEA under occlusion from 3D face data.
4) All existing studies focus on a single type of occlusion in frontal faces, and to our best knowledge, the presence of
co-existed occlusion or multiple faces has not been investigated yet.
5) Most work extracts features directly from occluded facial images without incorporating a pre-processing step of
occlusion detection. Only few attempts [Xia, et al. 2009],[Huang, et al. 2012],[Lin, et al. 2013] have investigated occlusion
detection techniques and integrated them in complete FEA systems. Most approaches require accurate face location and
alignment, and robust facial feature tracking.
6) Features used are largely restricted to texture or geometry from the 2D visual face modality only, and few studies
have investigated fusion of them [Huang, et al. 2012] and utilized skin color features [Lin, et al. 2013]. Existing works on
3D data primarily focus on self-occlusion generated by varying head poses of a 3D face model. Only few studies have been
found on exploiting the fusion of features from multiple modalities.
7) Most studies place emphasis on the six basic emotions plus neutral. Only few studies have been reported on
exploiting non-basic emotions, such as contempt [Huang, et al. 2012], grammatical expressions [Tan Dat and Ranganath
2008],[Tan Dat and Surendra 2008] and AUs [Kapoor, et al. 2003],[Lin, et al. 2013],[Yongmian and Qiang 2005]. No
occlusion-specific work has been found on using dimensional spaces.
8) Although various types of feature descriptors have been used in existing work, there is yet an agreement on the
most effective feature descriptor for handling facial occlusion. For instance, which descriptor works best with the sparse
representation is still largely an unanswered question? From this perspective, it seems that deep learning presents a
unique advantage by automatically leaning the most discriminative features for FEA.
Fig. 11. Illustration of various types of facial occlusion in existing FEA studies.
4.8 Top Five Benchmark Approaches
To facilitate direct performance comparisons of future algorithms with the state-of-the-art results, we identified the
top five approaches from existing studies on the JAFFE and CK/CK+ databases respectively. The criterion for selecting
these approaches is that they achieved the so-far highest overall accuracies of classifying six basic and neutral emotions
on the two databases between 2001 and 2016. In addition, we also included recent approaches from the FERA 2017
challenge. Table 4 lists the accuracies of these approaches under different types of facial occlusion. It should be noted that
the accuracies on the JAFFE and CK/CK+ databases provide a simple indicator of the performance and may not be directly
comparable due to the differences in train-test strategies, face pre-processing steps, occlusion simulation methods, etc. in
these approaches.
Table 4. Accuracy (%) of Top Five Benchmark Approaches under Different Types of Facial Occlusion.
(a) the JAFFE Database
[Cotter 2011]
[Cotter 2010b]
[Cheng, et al. 2014]
[Kotsia, et al. 2008]
[Zhang, et al. 2014b]
Gabor Temp.
(b) the CK/CK+ Database
[Zhang, et al. 2014b]
Gabor Temp.
[Huang, et al. 2012]
[Zhi, et al. 2011]
[Kotsia, et al. 2008]
[Ouyang, et al. 2013]
(c) the BP4D Database 
AU recognition
Intensity estimation
[Zhou, et al. 2017]
[Batista, et al. 2017]
[Li, et al. 2017a]
multi-AU fusion
[Tang, et al. 2017]
[Amirian, et al. 2017]
sparse coding
[Valstar, et al. 2017]
CRF or CORF
Note: ‘-’ means values not available, the facial region in [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011] is set to 30×30 pixels between two eyes, and Ref.
[Valstar, et al. 2017] is the baseline approach for the FERA 2017 Challenge. Abbreviations: CRF – Conditional Random Field (AU
occurrence sub-challenge), CORF – Conditional Ordinal Random Field (intensity sub-challenge), DBM - Deep Boltzmann Machine, VGG -
Oxford Visual Geometry Group network.
5 Effect of Occlusion on Facial Expression
Investigations into the effect of occlusion on the classification performance of facial expressions can provide useful
insights into the most informative facial parts for an expression, and thus can be useful for designing FEA systems.
Existing investigations are from either computer vision or human perception.
5.1 Computer Vision Investigation
Computer vision investigations are generally based on the recognition performance of FEA systems. Buciu et al. 
showed that occlusion of the eyes and mouth have a similar effect on the overall performance on the JAFFE database,
while occlusion of the mouth exerts a larger effect than occluded eyes on the CK database. Occluded eyes and mouth
affect the most sadness and neutral respectively on the JAFFE database, and both anger and sadness on the CK database.
Buciu et al. [Kotsia, et al. 2008] also conducted a machine experiment and a human observer experiment (2 experts and 13
non-experts) on the JAFFE and CK databases. The results demonstrated that an occluded mouth results in a decrease of
more than 50% in the overall classification accuracy than occluded eyes, indicating a more important role of the mouth
than the eyes for FER. Occlusion on the left or right side of the face has little effect on the accuracy. An occluded mouth
affects the classification accuracies of anger, fear, happiness and sadness more, while an occluded eye affects those of
disgust and surprise more. The results are in line with those from human observers, indicating the consistency between
computer vision and human vision in discriminating facial expressions from occluded faces. Azmi and Yegane [Azmi and
Yegane 2012] investigated the effect of occlusion of the mouth, eyes, upper and lower parts of the face. Occluded eyes
were found to affect the overall accuracy more than an occluded mouth. Occluded eyes have more effect on the
classification accuracies of surprise, anger and sadness, while an occluded mouth affects more on those of disgust and fear.
Upper face occlusion affects the classification of sadness, surprise and anger most, while lower face occlusion impacts
more that of disgust, fear and neutral. Regarding train-test strategies, studies [Ranzato, et al. 2011], [Zhang, et al. 2014b]
found that using both training and test data with occlusion produces higher accuracy than using non-occluded training
data and occluded testing data. This indicate the importance of informing the learning model of the presence of occlusion
patterns at the training stage. From the above results, we can find that there is no direct agreement on a more important
role between the mouth and eyes. Take the JAFFE database as an example, some studies [Buciu, et al. 2005] found an
equally important role between them. By contrast, some studies [Kotsia, et al. 2008] found that the mouth is more
important, while some [Shuai-Shi, et al. 2013] indicated that the eyes are more important. One primary reason for the
contrary results is due to different computer vision systems used in those work. Those systems may vary dramatically in
aspects such as data pre-processing step, feature type, classification algorithm, system setting, and train-test strategy.
These differences can have direct big impact on the results of the systems even when the same database with the same
type of occlusion is used for evaluation.
Table 5 presents a summary of the reductions in accuracy owing to facial occlusion in comparison with non-occlusion
for six basic emotions plus neutral, and the overall performance. Almost all present investigations are based on the JAFFE
and CK databases. For studies that have not provided the reductions in accuracy, they are not listed.
From Table 5, we can see that:
 Occlusion of the mouth results in more reduction in accuracy than occlusion of eyes for anger, fear, happiness,
sadness, and the overall performance.
 For disgust, occlusion of eyes leads to more reduction in accuracy than occlusion of the mouth on the CK database,
but less reduction on the JAFFE database.
 Occlusion of the lower face causes significant reduction of the classification accuracies of six basic emotions plus
neutral, and of the overall accuracy.
 Occlusion of the upper face produces large reduction in accuracy for anger and happiness, but small reduction for
neutral and fear.
 Occlusion of the nose leads to little reduction in accuracy for all six basic emotions.
 Occlusion of random blocks causes large reduction of the overall accuracy.
5.2 Human Perception Investigation
Human perception investigations often asked recruited subjects to identify pre-defined facial expressions from a face
with certain parts occluded. The results reveal the visual information that is perceptually necessary and sufficient in the
human recognition. Instead of providing a comprehensive review on previous work (which is not the focus of this survey),
we introduce several typical work.
Early psychological studies [Dunlap 1927],[Ruckmick 1921] focused on the question of whether there is one facial area
which can best distinguish among facial expressions. This question was later largely answered by the predominant
evidence from researchers such as Ekman [Boucher and Ekman 1975],[Ekman et al. 2013] and Hanawalt [Hanawalt 1942]
that the most distinctive facial component varies with each emotion. Using static photographs of posed facial expressions,
it was generally found that the most important facial components are mouth/cheeks, eyes/eyelids, and brows/forehead,
and that disgust is best distinguished from the mouth, fear from the eyes, sadness from both brows and eyes, happiness
from both mouth and eyes, anger from mouth and brows, and surprise from all and eyes, anger from mouth and brows,
and surprise from all three components.
Recent studies on investigating the effect of occlusion on human perception tend to use spontaneous facial expressions,
video sequences, and subjects with different ages. Halliday [Halliday 2008] asked 56 female participants to identity
happiness, sadness and fear from static photographs of genuine and posed facial expressions from a single displayer, with
four regions occluded: the forehead and eyebrows, the nose and cheeks, the eyes, and the mouth. The results revealed that
participants can accurately identify emotions from limited information, and the mouth and eyes are the two most crucial
regions for recognizing genuine emotions. Bassili [Bassili 1979] found that the participants more accurately recognize six
basic emotions using temporal displays in video sequences than static displays of peak emotions, implying the importance
of facial motion in assisting the recognition. The bottom part of the face is able to generate a higher overall recognition
rate than the top part. Using 11 participants, Nusseck [Nusseck et al. 2008] showed that the fusion of the mouth, eyes and
eyebrows regions is sufficient to generate acceptable results for most of nine conversational expressions. By comparing
the recognition rates of facial expressions with simulated sunglasses or masks between younger children, children and
adult students, Roberson et al. [Roberson et al. 2012] observed that the capacity of accurate decoding of facial expressions
under eyes and mouth occlusion grows slowly with ages, but the inversion of sunglasses does not affect the performance
of 5–6 year olds.
Table 5. Summary of Accuracy Deduction (% in Parentheses) for Each Emotion and Overall Performance due to Facial Occlusion.
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
79.3(-2.7)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
80.7(-6.2)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
97.3(-1.4)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
46.7(-16.6)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
81.5(-12.6)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
77.8(-4.2)
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
83.8(-2.9)
85.2(-1.5)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
92.7(-0.6)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
91.3(-3.5)
87.5(-7.3)
94.2(-0.6)
83.3(-11.5)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
48.3(-6.9)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
92.5(-0.5)
87.2(-5.8)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
87.3(-5.6)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
86.8(-6.2)
80.7(-12.3)
92.7(-0.3)
86.8(-6.2)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
56.3(-15.6)
53.1(-18.8)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
88.2(-2.4)
83.2(-7.4)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
93.1(-3.4)
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
93.6(-2.1)
90.9(-4.8)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
93.3(-3.4)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
89.1(-6.5)
97.8(+2.2)
89.1(-6.5)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
56.3(-21.8)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
88.5(-4.5)
87.4(-5.6)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
89.3(-1.1)
88.7(-1.7)
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
86.7(-2.8)
82.8(-6.7)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
94.7(-0.6)
94.7(-0.6)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
95.6(-0.2)
89.1(-6.7)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
66.7(+3.4)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
90.8(-5.9)
93.3(-3.4)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
94.8(-2.2)
95.1(-1.9)
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
92.4(-4.4)
93.3(-3.5)
GSNMF [Zhi, et al. 2011]
89.3(-3.4)
91.3(-1.4)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
78.7(-17.6)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
83.3(-6.7)
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
98.7(-0.3)
98.7(-0.3)
74.3(-24.7)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
86.8(-4.8)
84.4(-7.2)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
84.2(-2.5)
82.9(-3.8)
SVM [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
86.7(-4.7)
CFDWL [Huang, et al. 2012]
79.1(-14.1)
73.5(-19.7)
86.8(-6.4)
Gabor [Zhang, et al. 2014b]
95.1(-0.2)
90.8(-4.5)
MCC [Buciu, et al. 2005]
87.2(-6.4)
92.3(-1.3)
PCA [Towner and Slater 2007]
SRC [Ouyang, et al. 2013]
72.4(-25.3)
Gabor [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
81.5(-6.6)
DNMF [Kotsia, et al. 2008]
82.5(-2.7)
81.5(-3.7)
LGBP [Azmi and Yegane 2012]
88.8(-7.5)
92.8(-3.5)
90.2(-6.1)
89.2(-7.1)
LGBPHS [Shuai-Shi, et al. 2013]
85.5(-7.9)
92.1(-1.3)
Gabor [Zhang, et al. 2014b]
80.3(-0.9)
78.4(-2.8)
48.8(-32.4)
MCC [Buciu, et al. 2005]
83.5(-6.2)
Bayesian [Miyakoshi and Kato 2011]
67.1(-3.2)
49.5(-20.8)
RPCA [Xia, et al. 2009]
68.8(-18.7)
DBN [Cheng, et al. 2014]
82.9(-2.8)
82.9(-2.8)
77.1(-8.6)
82.9(-2.8)
Note: ‘-’ means values not available, and all accuracy reductions (with reference to non-occlusion) larger than 10% are highlighted in bold. Some approaches have higher accuracies under occlusion than nonocclusion. Random block occlusion accounts for a quarter of the face area, and Ref. [Xia, et al. 2009] used a fusion set of JAFFE and BHUFE images.
Abbreviations: CFD - Combination of component-based Facial expression representation and fusion module, CFDWL - CFD based on Weight Learning, DBN – Deep Belief Network, DNMF- Discriminant Nonnegative Matrix Factorization, GSNMF - Graph-preserving Sparse Non-negative Matrix Factorization, LGBP - Local Gabor Binary Pattern, LGBPHS - LGBP Histogram Sequence, MCC- Maximum Correlation
Classifier.
5.3 Summary of Effect of Occlusion
From the above analysis, we can observe that most current investigations focus on 1) six basic emotions and neutral, 2)
occlusion of the mouth, eyes, left or right, upper or lower parts of the face, and random blocks, 3) JAFFE and CK databases,
and 4) emotional stimuli from actors/actresses. Few studies have investigated non-basic emotions such as contempt
[Huang, et al. 2012], and occlusion of noise [Bourel, et al. 2002], nose [Zhi, et al. 2011] and real-life sunglasses [Shuai-Shi,
et al. 2013].
Table 6 summarizes the effect of six types of occlusion on the six basic emotions plus neutral, as well as the overall
performance based on some of existing investigations on computer vision and human perception. The results are listed to
provide readers a first impression on the effect, as an exhaustive survey on this field is out of the scope of this paper. It
can be seen that:
 The left and right halves of the face equally effect the overall performance [Bourel 2001],[Kotsia, et al. 2008],[Bourel,
et al. 2002],[Shuai-Shi, et al. 2013].
 The mouth is the most important facial region and an occluded mouth has large effect on the classification of six
basic emotions and the overall performance, but relatively small effect on that of neutral.
 The eyes are the second most important facial region, and occluded eyes have large effect on the classification of
sadness, disgust, and surprise, but only small effect on that of happiness and neutral.
 The upper face has more impact on the classification of anger [Bourel, et al. 2002],[Towner and Slater 2007],[Azmi
and Yegane 2012], but small impact on the overall performance [Bourel 2001] and classification of fear.
 Occlusion of the lower face significantly impacts the overall performance [Towner and Slater 2007],[Huang, et al.
 Occlusion of the nose has large effect on the classification of sadness, but small effect on the overall performance.
 Occlusion of the eyebrows have small effect on classification of happiness, sadness, fear and disgust.
Overall, there is no absolute consensus on the effect of facial occlusion in both computer vision and human perception
experiments. Occlusion from the same facial part may exert different effects on the classification of the same emotion,
which implies the effect is largely context-dependent, and impacted by local factors specific to a particular experiment,
such as features, classifiers, participants, emotional stimuli and evaluation protocols.
Table 6. Summary of Effect of Occlusion on Classification of Six Basic Emotions + Neutral and Overall Performance.
Note: ‘+’ and ‘-’ indicate large and small effect respectively. Multiple ‘+’ or ‘-’ represents the number of studies with a large or small
effect. Abbreviation: N/A – Not Available.
6 Challenges and Opportunities
Automatic FEA in partially occluded faces is a field that is just at its very beginning stage and has received relatively
less investigations previously. Thus, it is extremely important to discuss existing challenges that form the major obstacles
to the current progress and possible opportunities that should be paid special attention in promoting the future work. This
section presents key unresolved issues identified in Sections 4 and 5, and discuss possible solutions or opportunities to
address these issues. We limit our focus to only those issues closely related to handling facial occlusion, and for uncovered
issues with respect to face location, face normalization, face tracking, feature extraction and classifier design in nonoccluded faces, readers are referred to [Pantic and Rothkrantz 2000],[Fasel and Luettin 2003],[Gunes, et al. 2011],[Gunes
and Schuller 2013].
6.1 Database Creation and Labeling
Most current studies are based on JAFFE, CK or CK+ databases without occluded faces, and are restricted to a limited
number of single types of artificially generated occlusion and to facial expressions of six basic emotions plus neutral. This
is largely due to the lack of comprehensive benchmark datasets that include a dense set of various types of frequent
natural facial occlusion and well annotated labels of facial expressions. The creation of FEA databases with facial occlusion
is a more complicated and time-consuming work than that without occlusion, and it has to overcome the following issues:
1) Decision on what kinds of facial occlusion. It is generally agreed that occlusion from the most informative facial
regions, such as the mouth, eyes, eyebrows and nose, should be included. For a specific application, a certain part of the
face may become crucially important and needs to be considered individually and included as well. Even the facial parts
are determined, it is still unclear what types of specific objects should be utilized to occlude these parts and to what extent
the parts should be occluded in the procedure of occlusion simulation. For a given facial part, there may exist a wide range
of specific objects for selection and these objects may have substantially varied properties such as color, shape, size,
appearance, component and material. For instance, occlusion of the eyes can be simulated by asking subjects taking
different types of eyeshades or glasses, such as sunglasses, vision correction glasses, goggles, protective glasses, and
specified glasses (e.g. Google glasses). Whether a type of occlusion should be simulated by objects with the same property
or different properties, and whether the co-occurrence of multiple occlusion should be considered remain questions.
Although it is generally believed that objects with varied visual and physical properties should be included to simulate
real-life scenarios as closely as possible, the varieties presented in the occlusion may pose a big challenge for effective
training and tests of the FEA algorithms.
2) Collection of spontaneous expressions of facial emotions under occlusion. Human facial expression is a complex process,
involving psychological activities, cognitive understanding and physical behaviors that come together to create the
subjective experience. It is relatively easy to elicit some prototypical emotions such as happiness, sadness and surprise,
from subjects by natural face-to-face communications or showing them proper emotional stimuli. However, it becomes
increasingly difficult when moving beyond prototypical emotions to other uncommon context-dependent expressions that
are seldom used in the normal life and involve small subtle changes in facial components, such as contempt, curiosity and
attentiveness, particularly in the presence of facial occlusion. The occlusion that is either artificially superimposed on the
face or naturally occurring may significantly interfere subjects’ spontaneous reactions to emotional stimuli and influence
their natural ways of expressing facial expressions. This is because subjects may need a certain amount of time to get used
to the presence of occlusion, to accurately express facial movements, and to fully engage themselves to the emotional
stimuli and the contextual environment. Thus, the interference from occlusion may severely influence the reliability and
accuracy of elicited facial expressions.
Except for the common issues such as participant recruitment, participation agreement, ethics and copyright, there are
extra issues and protocols that should be considered during spontaneous facial expression elicitation and data collection.
First, the metadata of the database, such as the types of both occlusion and emotions, the number of subjects and the data
modality, should be determined based on the specific aims, tasks, or applications of the data collection. However, as a
starting point for current academic research, it may be a good idea to include the commonly used types such as six basic
emotions, and occlusions of the mouth, eyes, nose, top half, and bottom half of the face. While it is often beneficial to
include as many subjects as possible, the number of subjects participated should be controlled to a reasonable level which
fits well to the resources available to the data collection project such as budget, time, equipment, staff, etc. To avoid the
necessity of artificially adding occlusion to the face and to reduce the impact of occlusion on the elicited facial expressions,
it is advisable to select only those subjects who have a specific type of occlusion in their normal lives. However, this will
greatly limit the number of subjects and the types of occlusion that can be collected in real practice. With respect to data
modality, decisions should be made on whether the data should cover audio vs. visual modality, visual vs. thermal
modality, 2D vs. 3D data, static images vs. video sequences, body gestures, single vs. multiple faces, single vs. multiple
views, etc. or combinations of them. Next, to elicit facial expressions from subjects as spontaneously as possible, it is
essential to select proper simulating materials that can be relatively easier to arouse natural affective responses from the
subjects. The simulating methods can be story-telling, watching videos, playing games, attending social events, or face-toface communications, etc. Another important aspect is to provide a natural and relax environment, where the participants
are allowed to freely express their feelings and emotions ideally without any constraints on their activities, movements,
positions, gestures, and taking on or off the occlusion. Dependent on the specific requirement of the project, the
participants may or may not be told details about the collection procedure such as where, when, how and how long their
affective responses will be collected. For the purpose of comparing differences in a subject’s affective responses, it may be
also worth collecting two separate sets of data for the same subject - one before and the other after the subject is informed
of those details. After data collection, the collected data undergoes normal procedures such as post-processing, emotion
annotation, experimental validation, and finally may be made accessible by the public.
Spontaneous facial expression collection is not an easy task. To improve the accuracy of the elicited expressions and
label annotation, it is advisable to take into account a list of creative strategies recommended by psychological studies for
inducing emotions, particularly those subtle and contextual-dependent ones [Zeng et al. 2009]. However, this may
increase the difficulty of subject recruitment and greatly limit the type of occlusion that can be collected. The data
collection process is also largely hindered by the lack of awareness by engineers who are actually in charge of the whole
procedure. Rather than collecting spontaneous facial expressions in a controlled laboratory environment, recent studies
[Benitez-Quiroz et al. 2016], [Benitez-Quiroz et al. 2017] have shifted to collecting a large number of images of facial
expressions with associated emotion keywords from the Internet. This approach may also be used for collecting occluded
facial images with spontaneous expressions in ‘wild’ environments.
3) No criterion for how the occlusion should be annotated. Once the data of facial expressions with occlusion was
recorded, which properties of occlusion should be annotated and how to annotate them become a real challenge because
the occlusion may be the results of a wide range of objects with different properties. It is generally accepted that the
location of occlusion is the most important property that has the biggest impact on FEA, which can be annotated by
pixelwise labels of occluded regions. However, whether other properties of the occlusion, such as the specific type (e.g.
sunglasses or eyeglasses), the intensity of occlusion (e.g. 50% vs. 90% of face occluded), components (e.g. lens and frame),
materials (e.g. glass or plastic), colors (e.g. grey or green), transparency (e.g. 20% or 50%), and texture, as well as temporal
changes in these properties in the occluded region should be included in the annotation metadata is a question that is
probably dependent on the aim of the database. These properties may potentially impact the performance of FEA methods.
In the UMB 3D database [Colombo, et al. 2011], the type of object leading to the occlusion was annotated. In the HAPPEI
database [Dhall et al. 2013], the intensity of facial occlusion for each person was manually annotated as one of three levels,
including face visible, partial occlusion and high occlusion. The annotation can be used for evaluating the impact of
different levels of occlusion on both individual- and group-level affect. Studies [Dhall et al. 2015a], [Dhall, et al. 2015b]
have confirmed a big impact of occlusion on the perception and recognition of both levels of affect. Since the annotation
provides just a rough category of the occlusion amount on the face, it may not be suitable for situations where an accurate
percentage of occlusion is required. However, it is one of the earliest efforts towards the annotation of occlusion intensity
in real-life images with multiple people. Studies [Cotter 2010a],[Zhang, et al. 2014b] have also shown that black and white
occlusion lead to different classification accuracies, and occlusion of solid and clear eyeglasses also produce different
results. Once the properties are decided, another issue arising is that how they can be properly annotated and saved in
terms of ground truth labels and formats? One possible solution is to directly use raw pixels of occluded regions as ground
truths, but this may not enable detailed analysis of specific features of the occlusion.
4) Human labeling of emotion is a challenging and difficult task. Human generally have no problem of recognizing a set
of frequently occurring facial expressions (e.g., six basic emotions) from non-occluded clear faces in favorable conditions.
However, they may face increased difficulty of recognizing the same type (or even more subtle and mixed types) of facial
expression in the presence of obscured occlusion. Occlusion may significantly impact the accuracy and reliability of
emotion labeling by humans. Once the most informative facial region was occluded, human labelers may find hard to
correctly identify the predominant type of occlusion based on visual features in the remaining non-occluded parts. This
problem may be relatively easy to be solved for labeling the occluded face into the most frequently prototypical categories
of facial expressions, but may become challenging using uncommon emotion categories, FACS AUs, or continuous
emotional dimensions. The AUs reflect the subtle and local muscle changes in local facial components. Once the most
informative facial part for a certain AU is invisible due to occlusion, it is very difficult to accurately annotate the AU, and
this may also impact the annotation of other AUs because many AUs are closely correlated and many emotions are
represented via a combination of several AUs rather than a single AU. Emotion labeling using continuous dimensions
requires well-trained labelers and detailed quantification of multiple dimensions based on subjective human perception. A
simple solution is to leave the occlusion affected AUs or dimensions unlabeled. Another possible solution is to record both
occluded and non-occluded facial expressions for each subject in the same recording settings, and use the emotion labeling
in the non-occluded face as an estimation of the occluded face. Recent studies [Benitez-Quiroz, et al. 2016] have explored
automatic annotation of AUs, AU intensities and emotion categories for a large number (> a million) of images of facial
expressions collected from wild environments. However, the majority of the annotated images are unoccluded and facial
occlusion was not specifically handled in these studies.
Aside from the above concerns associated with data creation and ground truth labeling, the size of the collected
samples for each occlusion and each emotion, the closeness of the data to real-life scenarios, the time and expense costs,
accessibility, construction and administration of the database are also important issues for consideration. The acquisition
of 3D face data is also a critical step in motivating the investigation of 3D FEA models, particularly with the popularity of
RGB-D cameras such as Microsoft Kinect. Whether other impacting factors such as pose variations and illumination
changes should be jointly incorporated during the recording of facial occlusion is still a question that worthy considering.
It is still arguable whether the occlusion should be imposed after or before facial expression recordings. Artificially
imposed occlusion may solve some issues discussed above, but their capability of simulating real-life scenarios becomes a
big concern.
6.2 Occlusion Detection and System Integration
Most current approaches extract features directly from occluded facial images without incorporating a pre-processing
step of occlusion detection. They typically perform facial feature location, tracking, and extraction directly on the
occluded face, or incorporate human assisted processing to manually crop the face and register facial landmarks.
For automatic FEA systems, the presence of occlusion may lead to imprecise facial feature localization, erroneous
alignment or registration. The capacity of reliably determining the specific parameters of facial occlusion, such as the type,
location, shape, appearance and temporal duration, forms a critical component of FEA systems. Once the parameters of
occlusion were reliably measured or accurately determined, features in occluded parts can be either effectively
reconstructed from training data based on prior knowledge of the face configuration or simply discarded from extracted
features to minimize its effect on the performance. Prior knowledge about the parameters of occlusion has been proved as
being crucial in boosting the performance of face recognition [Jongsun et al. 2005]. The benefit of incorporating occlusion
detection as a pre-processing step in FEA systems have been demonstrated in terms of noticeable improved performance
[Huang, et al. 2012].
Face occlusion detection and recovery is not a new field [Dahua and Xiaoou 2007], and tremendous efforts have been
made towards the investigation of algorithms for robust face region detection [Burgos-Artizzu, et al. 2013],[Lin and Liu
2006], facial landmark localization [Ghiasi and Fowlkes 2014] and tracking [Torre et al. 2015], as well as face alignment
[Heng et al. 2015], [Asthana et al. 2015] under partial occlusion. It is interesting to observe that recently developed face
analyzers such as Intraface [Torre, et al. 2015] and incremental face model [Asthana et al. 2014] have achieved promising
results of detecting, tracking and recognizing facial features even under moderate realistic occlusion. With those face
analyzers, it is arguable that many types of temporal occlusion may not be a problem anymore, however, in our view, this
progress nevertheless reduces the necessity and significance of designing occlusion detection techniques, which can
provide details about the parameters and characteristics of occlusion to support more specific post-processing and analysis.
The design of occlusion detectors is difficult primarily due to the random and varied characteristics of occlusion, and thus
gaining a good understanding of the local context of the occlusion in a specific situation, such as the number of subjects,
the type of occlusion, and the place (e.g. office or playground) becomes crucially important in simplifying the design
process and to some extent, largely determines the performance of the algorithm. Developing an occlusion detector
specific to a particular application might be a smarter choice than implementing a generic detector capable of detecting
any possible type of occlusion in real scenarios.
6.3 Other Features
Existing approaches to handling facial occlusion for FEA are largely based on 2D gray data. There are relatively few
efforts that specifically design 3D models to handle facial occlusion, and they are largely restricted to self-occlusion caused
by pose variations. Very few studies have considered skin color features. For robust FEA with facial occlusion handling, it
is desirable to adopt a richer set of representative and effective features.
1) 3D feature. Facial data in 3D provides additional depth information about the facial structure and appearance on top
of 2D image based facial features. It can be potentially utilized for generating more robust, discriminative, and viewindependent features under facial variations, such as head pose, missing parts and partial occlusion [Drira, et al. 2013]. By
giving insights into the comprehensive physical structure of the face, 3D features contain critical appearance and shape
information for assisting occlusion detection and restoration [Colombo et al. 2010], facial landmark localization and
recovery [Canavan et al. 2015],[Xi et al. 2011] and face alignment [Cao et al. 2014] in the presence of occlusion. They are
also critically important in building a richer set of reliable features for representing facial expressions, and eventually
leads to more accurate recognition. In the case that both occlusion and pose variations are present in the face region, 3D
features can compensate the effect arising from pose movements by reconstructing the face to a frontal view [Kangkan et
al. 2014], and simplify the problem to an occlusion only task. The generation of models using 3D facial features to handle
other types of common occlusions such as a scarf, a mark, and glasses, is still a field that needs further investigation.
2) Color feature. Another valuable feature for reliable FEA under occlusion is color. Although occlusion may present in
a form of varied colors, the skin color in the face can be roughly categorized into several big groups such as European,
Asian and Hispanic. The skin color can be utilized as complementary information to assist the segmentation of occluded
regions from the face and the extraction of a rich set of features. Skin color has already been successfully used to segment
facial regions from complicated background objects [Ban et al. 2014] and detect occluded regions from the face [Lin, et al.
2013],[Lin and Liu 2006]. With respect to FEA, physiological studies [Nakajima et al. 2017] indicated that skin color is a
useful clue for emotional states, for instance, the face often flushes during anger while goes pale for fear. Skin color also
influences the perception of facial expressions by human. In addition, computer vision studies have also proved the
usefulness of skin color for FEA. Ramirez et al. found that facial skin color is a reliable feature for inferring the
valence of emotional states using machine learning algorithms. Studies [Lajevardi and Hong Ren 2012] have shown that
skin color components convey additional features in achieving more robust and effective recognition of facial expressions
in images with low-resolution or illumination variations. However, to our best knowledge, there is not work yet that
directly utilized skin color features to handle facial occlusion for FEA. Thus, a possible future direction in this field is to
explore the ways of using color features to detect and recover facial occlusion.
3) Temporal feature. Temporally dynamic features reflecting subtle or sudden spatio-temporal facial muscle movements
in video sequences are also important for accurate FEA. Human facial expressions involve complex facial muscle
interactions in both the space and time domains [Ziheng et al. 2013], and facial component and head motions can provide
crucial information in assisting the human recognition of certain facial expressions [Bassili 1979],[Nusseck, et al. 2008].
For systematic occlusion (e.g. sunglasses) whose location is often roughly fixed in a certain region of the face, it is
relatively easy to extract the dynamic movements of facial features in non-occluded facial parts. For temporary occlusion
(e.g. hands moving across the face) whose location is usually varied, the missing facial features due to occlusion in a
current frame can be recovered using temporal correlation reasoning on information in neighboring frames [Yongmian
and Qiang 2005],[Miyakoshi and Kato 2011].
6.4 Multiple Modalities and Deep Learning
For occlusion-robust emotion analysis, the structure of the FER system can be extended from combining multiple
modalities (going wider), exploiting multiple layers in a deep architecture (going deeper), or fusing both of them (going
wider and deeper). Nearly all of existing studies on FEA under occlusion focus on visual features from the face only, and
are limited to using a single deep learning architecture. It is anticipated that building a wider and/or deeper structure can
lead to more robust performance.
1) Multiple modalities. It is still an unexplored field that exploits temporal correlations between multiple modalities and
incorporates fused features from them in combating facial occlusion towards FEA. Human expression of emotions is often
the result of interaction and collaboration between multiple modalities of human reactions, such as emotional voice, facial
expressions, body gestures, head and shoulder movements, gaze direction, and physiological signs. Fused features from
audio, visual, text, or physiological modalities have been extensively used for emotion analysis, yielding boosted
performance compared to using a single modality alone [Zeng, et al. 2009],[Calvo and D'Mello 2010]. The great advantage
of incorporating multiple modalities is that features from these modalities can be fully utilized to compensate the
drawbacks of each other to generate more robust methods for handling occlusion. Because facial occlusion mainly impacts
visual features in the face and normally has limited impact on audio, body gestures and physiological signals, integrating
features in less-impacted modalities with facial features is anticipated to be able to identify emotions more robustly from
an occluded face.
Several important issues need to be considered carefully for the fusion of multiple modalities [Zeng, et al. 2009], such
as the selection of reliable modalities, the synchronization between signals with different characteristics (e.g. time scale,
metric level, and temporal structure), extraction of discriminative temporal features from the raw signals, construction of
joint features from multiple modalities, and fusion of classification decisions. Recent studies [Mahmoud et al. 2014] on the
classification of hand-over-face gesture cues in naturalistic facial expression video are good examples towards robust
emotion recognition using fusion of hand gestures and facial expressions under hand occlusion.
2) Deep learning. As reviewed in Section 4.6, current FEA studies on utilizing deep learning to handling facial occlusion
are largely restricted to a single deep architecture. The potential capacity of adopting a wider and/or deeper structure
using multiple data modalities has been evidenced as being the winners of the Wild Challenge and Workshop (EmotiW)
from 2013 to 2016 [Kahou et al. 2013], [Liu et al. 2014a], [Fan et al. 2016]. Among them, Kahou et al. integrated four
deep neural networks in a unique system for emotion recognition in video by capturing facial expressions, audio
information, spatio-temporal patterns of human actions, and features in the mouth region. Liu et al. [Liu, et al. 2014a]
mapped hand-crafted HOG, dense SIFT features, and CNN features into Riemannian manifolds and adopted a score-level
fusion of three visual classifiers and an audio predictor for emotion recognition. Fan et al. [Fan, et al. 2016] presented a
hybrid network that fuses RNNs, 3D convolutional networks, and an SVM based audio system in a late-fusion fashion for
extracting appearance in individual frames, motion between frames, and audio information. It is noted that facial
occlusion was not specifically handled in these work. However, it is anticipated that there will be a growing number of
studies on investigating more complicated deep learning structures for handling occlusion in FEA.
6.5 A Few Additional Issues
1) Multi-disciplinary experiment. FEA is an inherently multi-disciplinary field and its progress is predominantly
dependent on supports, knowledge and advance in closely related fields, including psychology, cognitive science,
psychiatry and computer science. As the performance of contemporary machine systems is still far behind the innate
recognition capability of the human, further investigations on the mechanisms of humans’ recognition behaviors in the
presence of facial occlusion may be a crucially important step in gaining invaluable insights and relevant knowledge that
can potentially inspire the way of designing reliable FEA systems. For instance, it is still not fully understood whether
humans primarily adopt holistic or component-based strategies for recognizing expressions from partially occluded faces,
and how the human brain instantaneously recovers features obscured by occlusion. Studies [Hammal, et al. 2009] revealed
that the human tends to use “suboptimal” features for FEA under occlusion. It is advisable to conduct both computer
vision and human perception experiments on the same type of occlusion and the same dataset so that the results can be
directly comparable and novel insights can be obtained. These insights can be used, for instance, to focus on extracting
features from the most important facial parts for a specific expression.
2) Context. As reviewed in Section 5.3, the effect of partial occlusion on the classification of facial expressions is largely
context-dependent. The local environment (i.e. context) in which facial occlusions are imposed, facial expressions are
elicited and simultaneously recorded may have big impact on the collected expressions in terms of spontaneity and
exaggeration levels. The context also carries prior knowledge about specific parameters (e.g. type, location, appearance
and time) of the occlusion that is going to occur, which is critically important for all procedures of occlusion detection,
feature extraction, and emotion classification in a FEA system specifically designed for handling this type of occlusion.
The contextual information may include the place, time, surrounding people and background in the recording
environment, as well as the subject’s personal backgrounds, such as the age, gender, job, culture and habit. Recent studies
[Rudovic et al. 2015] on context-sensitive modelling of the AU intensity with respect to six context questions (who, when,
what, where, why and how) achieve substantially improved accuracies than without considering the effects of the context.
The incremental face model [Asthana, et al. 2014], which is capable of automatically tailor itself to fit specific person and
imaging conditions, has shown accurate face tracking even under temporal occlusion, fast head movement, shadow, and
pose variation.
3) Group-level expression analysis. Recently, increasing attention has been given to group-level expression analysis,
which aims to identify the type and intensity of emotions from images of a group of people. Aside from ordinary
occlusion such as sunglasses, hat and beard, one frequently occurring occlusion in the images is partial facial occlusion
due to the presence of another person standing in front of the face. The presence of these occlusion was found as one of
the key attributes that affects the perception of the emotion of a group [Dhall, et al. 2015b]. It has also been shown that
people tend to select images with less occlusion of the face in the process of identifying happiness intensity of a group
[Dhall et al. 2015a]. One advantage of group-level expression analysis is that, even the face of one (or more) person is
partially occluded, the dominant emotion of the group still can be inferred by fusing facial information of all group
members in conjunction with the holistic scene context. Such a ‘fusion’ strategy provides another angle of handling facial
occlusion in real-life scenarios, and has been adopted in recent methods for group-level expression analysis, particularly in
the EmotiW 2016. The fusion can be generally either in feature-level or decision-level. In [Li et al. 2016], holistic features
from the whole image scene and local features from multiple faces were learnt using a ResNet-18, and further aggregated
to a feature vector using a LSTM. The aggregated feature vector was fed to linear or ordinal regression to predict grouplevel happiness intensities. In [Huang et al. 2015], Riesz-based Volume LBP features were extracted to represent the local
attribute of each face, and relative sizes and distances between all faces were used to represent the global attribute of the
scene. They were concatenated and fed to continuous conditional random fields for predicting the group mood. As for
decision-level fusion, [Dhall, et al. 2015b] extracted Bag of Words representations of different features from multiple faces
and GIST and census transform histogram features from the scene. Each feature modality was considered as a separate
kernel and all kernels were linearly combined using a Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL) to predict happiness intensity. In
[Sun et al. 2016], facial features were learnt by applying CNN and LSTM consequently to the detected face region. The
features of each face were used to train an individual SVM classifier, and the prediction results of all SVMs were combined
using a decision-level fusion network. Although the above works were not designed specifically to handle facial occlusion,
the occluded part was inherently considered by the feature extraction or fusion techniques such as CNN, LSTM, and MKL.
4) International competition. The international competitions for FEA under non-occluded faces have been very active in
recent years, such as the FERA 2011, 2015 and 2017 challenges [Valstar et al. 2015], [Valstar, et al. 2017], which focus on
expression recognition using discrete emotion categories and estimating the occurrence and intensity of AUs, the
Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge and Workshop (AVEC) 2011-2016 [Ringeval et al. 2015],[Valstar et al. 2016], which focus
on using continuous dimension representations, and the EmotiW 2013-2016 [Dhall et al. 2015c], [Dhall et al. 2016a] which
focus on using data collected from the wild. With recent studies on FEA have shifted towards using continuous
representations [Kaltwang et al. 2015] and spontaneous emotions in a wild environment for practical applications [Zhang,
et al. 2014a],[Zhang et al. 2016], there are still very few international competitions that are specifically designed to
compare FEA systems with partially occluded face data. The EmotiW 2016 includes a group-level emotion recognition
sub-challenge, which aims to compare methods for predicting the happiness intensity of a group of people. The
benchmark HAPPEI database covers various types of realistic occlusion (e.g., sunglasses, hat, and a people standing in
front of another and partially occluding the face) and meta-data of three intensities of facial occlusion, which makes it
possible to evaluate the effect of occlusion on the perception and recognition of emotions of a group [Dhall, et al. 2015a].
The most recent EmotiW 2017 has incorporated images with similar occlusion and three emotions (e.g., positive, negative
and neutral) from the Group Affect database. Another recent international competition - FERA 2017 has also started to
consider self-occlusion caused by pose variations. It is anticipated that joint initiatives similar to FERA, AVEC and
EmotiW will greatly promote the research in this direction by providing a common platform for performance evaluations,
such as benchmark datasets, predefined targets, train-test guidelines, evaluation procedures, performance measures, and
baseline approaches.
7 Conclusion
This paper presents a survey on the state-of-the-art efforts and a discussion about relevant challenges and
opportunities for handling partial occlusion towards automatic Facial Expression Analysis (FEA). In the last decade, while
an increased amount of studies have been recorded on handling occlusion, most FEA systems capable of overcoming
occlusion are still at the early stage, characterized by a very limited number of prototypical emotion categories and
artificially generated occlusion. Features are completely restricted to the visual face modality only, and evaluations are
primarily based on 2D/3D frontal faces. Amongst all types of existing approaches reviewed, the sparse representation and
deep learning approaches have demonstrated the most impressive results in combating facial occlusion.
Existing studies on FEA under partial occlusion still lack of:
- comprehensive benchmark datasets that include a dense set of various types of frequent natural facial occlusion and
well annotated ground truths of facial expressions by not only discrete categories, but also AUs and dimensional axes;
- work on designing face occlusion detection techniques to reliably determine the specific parameters of facial
occlusion, such as the type and location;
- investigations on exploiting temporal correlations between multiple modalities and incorporating fused features from
multiple modalities in combating facial occlusion;
- efforts on thoroughly investigating the effect of facial occlusion on the performance of non-prototypical spontaneous
emotions across multiple realistic datasets.
Future FEA systems in handling facial occlusion are expected to expand from:
- artificially imposed to naturally occurring occlusion;
- 2D to 3D face databases;
- manual face pre-processing to automatic occlusion detection and integration;
- static 2D grey to temporal 3D color features;
- a single face to multiple faces of a group of people;
- a single face modality to multiple audio, visual and physiological modalities;
- a shallow architecture to deeper and wider architectures;
- prototypical emotions to AU-coded, continuously represented emotions, and micro-expressions.
With the emergence of more comprehensive benchmark datasets and the launch of international joint efforts and
initiatives, new algorithms will be developed subsequently, eventually leading to automated machine systems that can
support FEA applications in unconstrained conditions including the presence of occlusion. As a multi-discipline field, FEA
can benefit substantially from advancement in the knowledge in closely related areas of computer science, psychology,
cognitive science, neuroscience, etc. Occlusion as a challenge is not specific to FEA, but also exists in relevant fields such
as face recognition, face detection and face tracking. Studies in these fields share many common techniques, knowledge,
issues, and challenges, and thus any progress in one field can potentially benefit to other fields. A promising direction for
further research is the development of context-sensitive FEA algorithms that take into account the prior knowledge of the
local environment to predict the specific parameters of facial occlusion. It is also worthy conducting further investigations
on the power of deep learning techniques in recovering and handling facial occlusion inherently without human manual
intervention.