Conﬁdence-Based Policy Learning from Demonstration
Using Gaussian Mixture Models
Sonia Chernova
Carnegie Mellon University
Computer Science Department
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 
Manuela Veloso
Carnegie Mellon University
Computer Science Department
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 
We contribute an approach for interactive policy learning
through expert demonstration that allows an agent to actively request and eﬀectively represent demonstration examples. In order to address the inherent uncertainty of human
demonstration, we represent the policy as a set of Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs), where each model, with multiple
Gaussian components, corresponds to a single action. Incrementally received demonstration examples are used as
training data for the GMM set. We then introduce our con-
ﬁdent execution approach, which focuses learning on relevant parts of the domain by enabling the agent to identify
the need for and request demonstrations for speciﬁc parts of
the state space. The agent selects between demonstration
and autonomous execution based on statistical analysis of
the uncertainty of the learned Gaussian mixture set. As it
achieves proﬁciency at its task and gains conﬁdence in its
actions, the agent operates with increasing autonomy, eliminating the need for unnecessary demonstrations of already
acquired behavior, and reducing both the training time and
the demonstration workload of the expert. We validate our
approach with experiments in simulated and real robot domains.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.6 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Learning—Machine Learning
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance
learning from demonstration, imitation, robotics
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
Copyright 2007 IFAAMAS .
INTRODUCTION
Designing robot controllers is a challenging problem due
to sensor complexity, noise, and the non-deterministic eﬀects
of robot actions and the environment. As a result, many
robotic platforms are not used to their full potential due to
the diﬃculty of developing controllers for a wide range of
applications.
To advance robotics and incorporate robots
into our daily lives, natural and intuitive approaches must
be developed that allow new skills to be taught in a timely
Learning from demonstration, a collaborative learning approach based on human-robot interaction, oﬀers a promising solution to this problem. The goal of this approach is
to learn to imitate the behavior of a teacher by observing
a demonstration of the task. In addition to providing an
intuitive training method, it has been shown to signiﬁcantly
reduce learning time compared to exploration-based methods such as reinforcement learning .
We view learning from demonstration as strongly related
to statistical supervised learning since both approaches rely
on labeled training data. Supervised learning techniques are
frequently used in demonstration-based learning to learn a
policy given a ﬁxed set of labeled data . In addition
to this, demonstration learning must also provide a method
for incrementally gathering this training data, ideally in a
way that minimizes the number of demonstrations needed
to acquire the policy.
In this work, we contribute an interactive policy learning approach that reduces the number of required demonstrations by allowing an agent to actively request relevant
demonstration examples. In order to address the inherent
uncertainty of human demonstration, we represent the policy as a set of Gaussian mixture models, where each model,
with multiple Gaussian components, corresponds to a single
action. We then introduce our conﬁdent execution approach,
which focuses learning on relevant parts of the domain by enabling the agent to identify the need for and request demonstrations for speciﬁc parts of the state space.
Our approach relies on expert demonstration, during which
the agent is fully under the control of an expert while continuing to experience the task through its own sensors. Demonstration data is acquired incrementally though conﬁdent execution, during which the agent actively decides between autonomously executing the next action and requesting demonstration from the expert based on statistical analysis of the
uncertainty of the currently learned GMM set. The agent
operates with increasing autonomy as it achieves proﬁciency
at its task, eliminating the need for unnecessary demonstrations of already acquired behavior, and reducing both the
training time and the demonstration workload of the expert.
Additionally, the quality of the learned model is continually
evaluated by comparing its similarity to the demonstrated
behavior, allowing the expert to track the agent’s learning
progress in real time. We validate our approach with experiments in simulated and real robot domains.
RELATED WORK
Learning from demonstration, and related areas such as
learning from observation, imitation, and robot shaping, are
interactive learning methods that utilize expert examples. A
wide variety of demonstration training methods have been
explored in previous work, including teleoperation ,
direct manipulation of the learning agent , and following
robotic or human teachers. In our work we focus
on a direct policy learning approach , in which the agent
experiences the demonstration through its sensors while under the control of an expert.
Nicolescu and Mataric present a learning framework based on demonstration, generalization and teacher
feedback, in which training is performed by having the robot
follow a human and observe its actions. A high-level task
representation is then constructed by analyzing the experience with respect to the robot’s underlying capabilities.
The authors also describe a generalization of the framework
that allows the robot to interactively request help from a
human in order to resolve problems and unexpected situations. This interaction is implicit as the agent has no direct
method of communication; instead, it attempts to convey
its intentions by communicating though its actions.
Lockerd and Breazeal demonstrate a robotic system where high-level tasks are taught through social interaction.
In this framework, the teacher interacts with the
agent through speech and visual inputs, and the learning
agent expresses its internal state through emotive cues such
as facial and body expressions to help guide the teaching
process. The outcome of the learning is a goal-oriented hierarchical task model. In later work , the authors examine ways in which people give feedback when engaged in an
interactive teaching task. Although the study’s focus is to
examine the use of a human-controlled reward signal in reinforcement learning, the authors also ﬁnd that users express
a desire to guide or control the agent while teaching. This
result supports our belief that, for many robotic domains,
teleoperation provides an easy and intuitive human-robot
communication method.
Bentivegna et al. and Saunders et al. present
demonstration learning approaches based on supervised learning methods. Both groups use the k-nearest neighbor (KNN)
 algorithm to classify instances based on similarity to
training examples, resulting in a policy mapping from sensory observations to actions.
Our approach similarly uses supervised learning, in the
form of Gaussian mixture models, for classiﬁcation. Additionally, we contribute an interactive learning approach that
allows the agent to request help from a human, similar to
that of Nicolescu and Mataric . Inamura et al. 
present a similar method based on Bayesian Networks 
limited to a discretely-valued feature set.
Figure 1: A 2-dimensional Gaussian mixture model
with three components.
Contour lines below the
GMM mark the one- and two- standard deviation
GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS
The Gaussian probability density function (pdf) is the
statistical distribution:
N(x; µ, σ) =
completely characterized by the mean µ and variance σ2.
A Gaussian mixture model is a multimodal distribution
resulting from a combination of several Gaussian components . Figure 1 shows an example of a 2-dimensional
GMM with three Gaussian components. The GMM can be
characterized by the vector Θ of the means, variances, and
weights of its C components:
Θ = {µ1, σ1, ω1, ...µC, σC, ωC}
where the weight of each component is the portion of samples belonging to that component, such that 0 < ωc ≤1 and
c=1 ωc = 1.
The probability density function of a GMM, parametrized
by Θ, is deﬁned as a weighted sum over its Gaussian components:
ωcN(x; µc, σc)
Several approaches exist for estimating the parameters of
the GMM given a set of datapoints. The most popular, and
the one used here, is the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm , which iteratively optimizes the model using
maximum likelihood estimates.
We elected to base our approach on Gaussian mixture
models because of previously reported successes using classi-
ﬁcation methods for demonstration learning . GMMs
provide a built-in measure of classiﬁcation conﬁdence, which
is required for our conﬁdent execution approach, and are
also robust to noise, generalize, and capture correlations between continuous features. All of these characteristics make
GMMs a powerful tool for robotic data analysis.
CONFIDENCE-BASED LEARNING
FROM DEMONSTRATION
In this section we present the details of our demonstrationbased learning approach.
Section 4.1 describes our algorithm for learning and using an action policy given a set of
training data. Section 4.2 presents our conﬁdent execution
approach for acquiring training data and focusing learning
on relevant parts of the domain by adjusting the autonomy
of the robot.
Section 4.3 discusses two ways of applying
conﬁdent execution to learning a new task.
Our approach utilizes the learning by experienced demonstration technique, in which the robot is fully under
the expert’s control while continuing to experience the task
through its own sensors. During each training timestep, the
robot records sensory observations about its environment
and executes the action selected by the human expert.
Observations are represented using an n-dimensional feature vector that can be composed of continuous or discrete
values. The agent’s actions are bound to a ﬁnite set A of
action primitives, which are the basic actions that can be
combined together to perform the overall task. Each labeled
training point consists of the pair (o, a), with observation o
and expert-selected action a ∈A. The goal is to learn the
policy π : o →A, mapping observations to action primitives.
Multi-Mixture Policy Learning
We use a set of Gaussian mixture models to generate and
represent the action policy based on the training data. To
learn the policy, all datapoints are separated into classes
based on their action label, so that all observations leading
to the same action are clustered together.
Since a single
action is often associated with a number of distinct domain
states (the action turn left may be taken from several diﬀerent locations), a separate Gaussian mixture is used to represent each action class.
Components within the mixture
represent distinct state regions, and each mixture may have
a diﬀerent number of components. Our policy is therefore
represented by the set {Ga : a ∈|A|}, where Ga is a GMM
representing action a, parameterized by Θa with Ca components, such that:
pa(o|Θa) =
ωcN(o; µc, σc)
The parameters of each mixture model are learned using
the EM algorithm. Since EM requires the number of components in the mixture as input, the algorithm uses the Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC) to ﬁnd the optimal number
of components per mixture. AIC represents a measure of the
goodness of ﬁt of an estimated statistical model, calculated
AICk = 2Ck −2L(Gk)
where L is the likelihood of Gk. The preferred model, represented by the lowest AIC value, is the one that best explains
the data with a minimum number of components. For a set
of mixture models, the optimal parameters are determined
by taking a weighted sum of the AIC values over the entire
AICk Pr(Gk)
where Pr(Gk) is the probability that a point is generated
Algorithm 1 Conﬁdent execution
observation ←GetSensorData()
(gmmAction, conf) ←Classify(observation)
if conf > autonThresh then
ExecuteAction(gmmAction)
expertAction ←GetExpertAction()
LogDatapoint(observation, expertAction)
if numNewDatapoints > maxNew then
UpdateModel()
ExecuteAction(expertAction)
by mixture k based on the portion of datapoints belonging to that mixture. Using the AIC, the optimal number
of components is determined by permuting the number of
components per mixture from one to some ﬁxed maximum
(bound by the number of datapoints in the mixture), and
searching over this space to ﬁnd the combination with the
lowest AIC value. This search ranges from the assumption
that all mixtures are represented by a single Gaussian, to the
assumption that every point in each mixture forms its own
component. Most models, however, have far fewer Gaussian
components than datapoints, and so basic knowledge of the
domain can be used to limit the maximum number of components to a small number to avoid extensive computation.
Once the algorithm learns the parameters of the model,
it classiﬁes a new datapoint by assigning it to the mixture
class m with the maximum likelihood:
m = argmax
pk(o|Θk) Pr(Gk)
The output of the classiﬁcation is the action represented by
the selected GMM. Additionally, the model returns a con-
ﬁdence value representing the certainty of the classiﬁcation
based on the likelihood.
The complete model can be used to control the agent’s
actions through direct execution of the learned policy. The
agent follows the policy by classifying the current observation, and then deterministically executing the action selected by the model.
Conﬁdent Execution
In this section, we describe the method for acquiring the
training data by adjusting the autonomy of the learning
agent. Algorithm 1 presents a pseudocode summary of our
algorithm.
At each learning timestep, the robot uses its learned model
to classify its current observation of the environment. For
each classiﬁcation, the model returns a recommended action and a classiﬁcation conﬁdence. The agent selects between autonomously executing the action and requesting an
expert demonstration by comparing the classiﬁcation con-
ﬁdence value to an autonomy threshold parameter. Classiﬁcation conﬁdence greater than the threshold results in
autonomous execution of the model-selected action by the
agent, while conﬁdence below the threshold interrupts the
execution of the task while the agent waits for the expert to
select the appropriate action. The agent’s model is updated
by relearning the mixture parameters after maxNew new datapoints are obtained.
As the agent performs its task, it alternates between autonomous execution in familiar domain states, and supervised demonstration in areas where further training data is
needed. As it gathers more information about the domain,
more of the agent’s observations are classiﬁed with high con-
ﬁdence and fewer demonstrations become necessary.
The process of alternating between autonomous and supervised execution is referred to as adjustable autonomy,
and this method has been proven eﬀective in a wide range
of robotic applications, from personal assistants to space
exploration . Our algorithm combines learning with adjustable autonomy, resulting in an interactive teaching method
that reduces dependence on the human expert over time.
Adjustable autonomy has a number of advantages over
traditional, one-shot learning approaches.
It reduces the
workload of the human expert by eliminating repetitive demonstrations of already learned elements of the task. Additionally, by requesting demonstrations in low conﬁdence situations the algorithm provides feedback to the expert, calling
attention to areas of the domain where further learning is
As a result, in many domains the expert is able
to adapt the training routine to focus on diﬃcult to learn
areas, reducing the overall learning time of the algorithm.
Finally, partial autonomy can be used to restrict robot activity in complex dynamic environments where human or
robot safety is a concern.
The conﬁdence threshold value that determines the level
of autonomy is set and adapted by the human operator or by
the agent itself. Since the threshold value is continuous, our
approach allows smooth adjustment of the autonomy level.
We can also conﬁgure the algorithm to automatically adjust
the conﬁdence threshold based on the prediction accuracy
of the model using a similar approach to the one presented
Conﬁdent Execution Application
Conﬁdent execution can be applied to learn a new task in
one of two ways. One option is to begin learning directly
with the conﬁdent execution approach, without an existing
prior model. In this case, all initial classiﬁcations return a
conﬁdence of zero, and the agent always requests demonstration until the ﬁrst model estimate is learned.
Alternatively, conﬁdent execution can be preceded by a
non-interactive demonstration phase to build up an initial
model. The expert may prefer this approach for complex
tasks, where generating a long but continuous demonstration is simpler than a large number of interrupted ones (we
found this to be the case for driving, see Section 5). Using
this approach, the transition from non-interactive demonstration to conﬁdent execution is determined by the quality
of the learned policy.
We evaluate the performance of the learned policy by how
closely it matches the behavior of the expert. Prior to updating the model with a new training point (o, a), we classify
the observation o using the current model. We then compare the model-selected action to the demonstrated action
a. Performing this comparison over a window of consecutive training points results in an estimate of the prediction
accuracy of the model that relates how closely the policy
matches the behavior of the expert. This estimate enables
the expert to track the agent’s learning progress in real time,
and to determine when model proﬁciency is high enough to
switch to conﬁdent execution.
The entire learning process is completed when the agent
is able to execute the task under full autonomy, or when the
The corridor navigation domain.
robot’s target path is marked by a black line.
expert is satisﬁed with the performance of the model. At
this point, the robot executes the learned policy directly, as
described in Section 4.1.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We validate our approach by applying the learning framework to two domains. A real-world corridor domain is used
with a Sony AIBO robot to demonstrate characteristics of
the algorithm in a real, sensory-based environment. We then
present results of a complex simulated driving task.
Corridor Navigation Domain
In the corridor navigation task, shown in Figure 2, the
AIBO must navigate the domain in a circular path. The
black line in the ﬁgure marks the navigation path demonstrated by the expert.
The robot observes the environment using the IR sensor
built into the head. By turning its head, the robot calculates distance to the nearest obstacle in three directions –
left, right and front – resulting in a 3-dimensional continuous feature vector. Due to the noise of the IR sensor, the
robot processes all sensor readings when it is stationary and
averages the values over 15 consecutive readings.
The robot has four available actions: forward, turn left,
turn right and u-turn. The forward action moves the robot
approximately 20 cm in the direction it is facing. turn left
and turn right rotate the robot while slowly advancing it
forward, and the u-turn action rotates the robot 180◦. After completing each action, the robot stops to take the next
sensor reading; it requires a minimum of 26 actions to complete one circuit of the domain. The goal of the learning is to
classify each observation into one of the four action classes.
To perform the task correctly, the robot must learn to distinguish between open space, nearby and far away walls.
Figure 2 shows the starting conﬁguration of the robot.
During the initial training phase, the robot was teleoperated by the expert using a wireless joystick until the learned
model achieved 90% prediction accuracy over a 20-move window. Learning then transitioned to the conﬁdent execution
The robot required 46 consecutive demonstration
Turn Right
Figure 3: Corridor navigation domain training data
representing all of the action classes.
Figure 4: Gaussian mixtures ﬁtted to corridor navigation domain training data.
steps, or just under two complete traversals of the environment, to complete this ﬁrst learning phase.
Learning continued with the conﬁdent execution approach
using a classiﬁcation conﬁdence threshold ﬁxed at two standard deviations for the most likely Gaussian component.
During the next circuit, the robot requested help at 3 out of
26 locations, followed by two more queries during the next
two passes. The learning process was completed after the
agent continued to navigate correctly and autonomously for
an additional ten traversals of the domain.
Figure 3 shows data from the four Gaussian mixture models representing the ﬁnal learned policy. In this domain, the
action classes form clear independent clusters, resulting in
non-overlapping Gaussian components as shown in Figure
4. Note that the turn left datapoints form two clusters as
two diﬀerent domain states map to this action. However,
in this case the model uses a single Gaussian component to
represent the data as this over-generalization does not aﬀect
classiﬁcation of the other classes.
We compare the performance of our learning approach to
reinforcement learning within the same domain. During the
RL experiment, the robot learned the task by exploring the
Figure 5: Screenshot of the driving simulator.
domain and learning the policy using the Prioritized Sweeping algorithm . To avoid complex parameters that can affect RL performance in continuous domains, we simplify the
domain by discretizing the real-values sensor data into binary wall/no-wall features typical of most grid-world experiments. Our results show that even with this advantageous
simpliﬁcation, RL takes signiﬁcantly longer to learn the policy than our demonstration-based method while achieving
the same performance. Speciﬁcally, using a reward function
that returns greater reward values for less recently visited
states (thereby encouraging circular movement through the
domain), the Prioritized Sweeping algorithm took an average of 275 steps to learn the optimal policy, compared to
the 53 demonstration steps required by our algorithm.
Driving Domain
We now present results of a challenging simulated car driving domain (Figure 5), inspired by a similar task introduced
in . In this domain, the agent takes the shape of a car
that must be driven by the expert on a busy road. The agent
travels at a ﬁxed speed of 60 mph, while all other cars move
in their lanes at predetermined speeds between 20-40 mph.
Since the agent can not change its speed, it must navigate
between other cars to avoid collision. The agent is limited
to three actions: remaining in the current lane, and shifting
one lane to the left or right of the current position. The road
has three normal lanes and a shoulder lane on both sides;
Accuracy Prediction (%)
Figure 6: Prediction accuracy of the learned model
over the initial training phase. Prediction accuracy
window = 150 timesteps.
the car is allowed to drive on the shoulder but can not go
The environment is represented using four features, a distance to the nearest car in each of the three lanes and the
current lane of the agent. The agent’s lane is represented
using a discrete value symbolizing the lane number. The distance features are continuously valued in the [-25,25] range;
note that the nearest car in a lane can be behind the agent.
A human demonstrated the task by using a keyboard
interface.
Figure 6 shows the prediction accuracy of the
model during the initial training phase.
The expert continued to perform non-interactive demonstrations until the
model reached 80% prediction accuracy over a 150-timestep
window, which resulted in a demonstration length of 500
timesteps, or approximately 2.1 minutes. After transitioning
to the conﬁdent execution phase, the expert concluded the
training after 150 demonstration timesteps when the model
exhibited good performance. During the conﬁdent execution
phase, the expert performed all demonstrations as sequences
of ten consecutive moves.
The ﬁnal learned model consisted of 34 Gaussian components over three mixture models (one for each action class).
The feature space of this domain is much more complex
than that of the corridor domain as the diﬀerent action
classes frequently overlap. Figure 7 shows a sample of the
data representing the policy for driving in the middle lane
The data is split into two regions based on the
relative position (in front or behind) of the nearest car in
the agent’s current lane. No samples appear in the 10 to
-10 distance range along the Lane2 axis as the expert avoids
collisions that would occur from having another car in such
close proximity.
The ﬁnal policy was able to imitate the expert’s driving style and navigate well in the complex driving domain.1
Additionally, our agent’s performance is comparable to that
achieved by Abbeel et al. in a similar domain using Inverse
Reinforcement Learning .
 
Figure 7: Driving training data demonstrating the
agent’s driving policy in the middle lane.
axes represent distance to the nearest car in each of
the three driving lanes.
Figure 8: Policy performance comparison using lane
distribution and collision evaluation metrics.
Evaluation
Since the algorithm aims to imitate the behavior of the
expert, no ’true’ reward function exists to evaluate the performance of a given policy. However, we present two domainspeciﬁc evaluation metrics that capture the key characteristics of the driving task.
Since the demonstrated behavior attempts to navigate the
domain without collisions, our ﬁrst evaluation metric is the
number of collisions caused by the agent. Collisions are measured as the percentage of the total timesteps that the agent
spends in contact with another car. Always driving straight
and colliding with every car in the middle lane results in a
30% collision rate.
Our second evaluation metric is the proportion of the time
the agent spends in each lane over the course of a trial.
This metric captures the driving preferences of the expert
and provides an estimate of the similarity in driving styles.
Each evaluation trial was performed for 1000 timesteps over
an identical road segment.
Figure 8 shows the agent’s performance at diﬀerent stages
Figure 9: Prediction accuracy over the entire noninteractive training sequence. The ﬁrst 500 training
trials are duplicated on the left side of the image.
of the learning process with respect to these metrics. Each
bar in the ﬁgure represents a composite graph showing the
percentage of time spent by the agent in each lane. Collision percentages for each policy are reported to the right
of the bar graphs. The bottom bar in the ﬁgure shows the
performance of the expert over the evaluation road segment
(not used for training). We see that the expert successfully
avoids collisions, and prefers to use the left three lanes, only
rarely using the right lane and right shoulder.
The top section of the graph, containing eight bars, summarizes the agent’s performance throughout the non-interactive
demonstration and conﬁdent execution learning phases. Initially the agent always remains in the center lane, accumulating a 30.4% collision rate in the process.
As learning
progresses, the agent learns to change lanes eﬀectively, beginning to use all ﬁve available lanes after 500 demonstration
instances, with a collision rate of only 1.3%. However, the
agent’s lane preference diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the expert
as the agent spends most of its time avoiding traﬃc by driving on the right shoulder. The next three bars display performance during the conﬁdent execution phase at 50-timestep
intervals. Similarity in lane preference improves over this
ﬁnal training phase, reaching ﬁnal performance very similar
to that of the expert with a low 1.9% collision rate.
Comparison to Non-Interactive
Demonstration Learning
In this section, we compare the performance of the con-
ﬁdent execution approach to training the model using only
non-interactive demonstration. We replace the conﬁdent execution phase with 500 additional non-interactive demonstrations by the expert, resulting in a total of 1000 consecutive demonstrated timesteps. Figure 9 shows the prediction
accuracy over the entire training time.
Note that despite the large number of demonstrations, the
prediction accuracy does not continue to grow. This arises
due to the complexity of the domain and the inconsistency
of the human demonstration as frequently more than one
Classification Confidence
Figure 10:
Gaussian mixture distance values of
the best classiﬁcation over a sequence of timesteps.
Squares mark timesteps during which the agent was
involved in a collision.
action is reasonably applicable for a given situation. Consider for example the case in which the agent is approaching
a car in its own lane. The agent must switch lanes in order
to pass, but in addition to deciding the direction to turn,
the agent must also decide at which timestep to do it. In reality, switching lanes can be successfully accomplished over
a range of states, and a human demonstrator is unlikely to
select the exact same instance every time. As a result, the
model is not able to accurately predict the expert’s actions
and the prediction accuracy is only able to estimate the
quality of the model to some degree.
Five bars in the middle segment of Figure 8 show the
learner’s performance for the 500 additional non-interactive
demonstration timesteps. The agent initially shows a strong
preference for driving in the left shoulder, but achieves a
ﬁnal driving pattern that is again similar to that of the expert, although with a slightly higher collision rate of 4.0%.
In summary, we ﬁnd that the conﬁdent execution approach
achieved slightly better performance while requiring several hundred fewer demonstration trials than non-interactive
demonstration training.
Finally, we present evidence of why conﬁdent execution
works to improve the learning process. Figure 10 plots a
sequence of classiﬁcation conﬁdences reported by the model
that was learned after the ﬁrst 500 demonstrations. Squares
plotted along the curve mark timesteps during which collisions with other cars occur. The majority of collisions occur
shortly after a signiﬁcant drop in classiﬁcation conﬁdence,
indicating that the agent was in a situation of high uncertainty. Conﬁdent execution works not only by preventing
the low conﬁdence action from being executed and leading
to a collision, but also by labeling the uncertain observation
using the action selected by the expert during the resulting
demonstration, increasing the likelihood that the correct action will be selected with high conﬁdence in the future.
CONCLUSION
When creating an intelligent agent, it is often diﬃcult to
encode expert knowledge procedurally. Teaching by demonstration is a direct and intuitive approach aimed at addressing this problem.
In this work, we presented an interactive policy learning approach, based on Gaussian mixture models, that reduces the number of required demonstrations by allowing an agent to actively request and effectively represent the most relevant training data. Using
our approach, the agent operates with increasing autonomy
as it achieves proﬁciency at its task, eliminating the need
for repeated demonstrations of acquired behavior. Our results demonstrate that conﬁdent execution signiﬁcantly reduces the number of training timesteps compared to exploration and non-interactive demonstration based methods,
while achieving equivalent or superior performance levels.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partly sponsored by United States Department of the Interior under Grant No. NBCH-1040007
and by BBNT Solutions under subcontract no. 950008572.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the oﬃcial policies, either expressed or implied,
of any sponsoring institution. We would also like to thank
Paul Rybski for providing his simulator package.