Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 93–98,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Abstractive Sentence Summarization
with Attentive Recurrent Neural Networks
Sumit Chopra
Facebook AI Research
 
Michael Auli
Facebook AI Research
 
Alexander M. Rush
Harvard SEAS
 
Abstractive Sentence Summarization generates a shorter version of a given sentence while
attempting to preserve its meaning. We introduce a conditional recurrent neural network
(RNN) which generates a summary of an input sentence. The conditioning is provided by
a novel convolutional attention-based encoder
which ensures that the decoder focuses on the
appropriate input words at each step of generation. Our model relies only on learned features
and is easy to train in an end-to-end fashion on
large data sets. Our experiments show that the
model signiﬁcantly outperforms the recently
proposed state-of-the-art method on the Gigaword corpus while performing competitively
on the DUC-2004 shared task.
Introduction
Generating a condensed version of a passage while
preserving its meaning is known as text summarization.
Tackling this task is an important step towards natural language understanding. Summarization systems can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories. Extractive models generate summaries by
cropping important segments from the original text
and putting them together to form a coherent summary. Abstractive models generate summaries from
scratch without being constrained to reuse phrases
from the original text.
In this paper we propose a novel recurrent neural network for the problem of abstractive sentence
summarization. Inspired by the recently proposed
architectures for machine translation , our model consists of a conditional recurrent neural network, which acts as a decoder to generate the summary of an input sentence, much like
a standard recurrent language model. In addition, at
every time step the decoder also takes a conditioning input which is the output of an encoder module.
Depending on the current state of the RNN, the encoder computes scores over the words in the input
sentence. These scores can be interpreted as a soft
alignment over the input text, informing the decoder
which part of the input sentence it should focus on
to generate the next word. Both the decoder and encoder are jointly trained on a data set consisting of
sentence-summary pairs. Our model can be seen as
an extension of the recently proposed model for the
same problem by Rush et al. . While they use
a feed-forward neural language model for generation, we use a recurrent neural network. Furthermore, our encoder is more sophisticated, in that it
explicitly encodes the position information of the input words. Lastly, our encoder uses a convolutional
network to encode input words. These extensions
result in improved performance.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel
convolutional attention-based conditional recurrent
neural network model for the problem of abstractive
sentence summarization. Empirically we show that
our model beats the state-of-the-art systems of Rush
et al. on multiple data sets. Particularly notable is the fact that even with a simple generation
module, which does not use any extractive feature
tuning, our model manages to signiﬁcantly outperform their ABS+ system on the Gigaword data set
and is comparable on the DUC-2004 task.
Previous Work
While there is a large body of work for generating extractive summaries of sentences , there has been much less research on abstractive summarization. A count-based
noisy-channel machine translation model was proposed for the problem in Banko et al. . The
task of abstractive sentence summarization was later
formalized around the DUC-2003 and DUC-2004
competitions , where the TOP-
IARY system was the state-ofthe-art.
More recently Cohn and Lapata 
and later Woodsend et al. proposed systems
which made heavy use of the syntactic features of
the sentence-summary pairs. Later, along the lines
of Banko et al. , MOSES was used directly as
a method for text simpliﬁcation by Wubben et al.
 . Other works which have recently been proposed for the problem of sentence summarization include . Very recently
Rush et al. proposed a neural attention model
for this problem using a new data set for training and
showing state-of-the-art performance on the DUC
tasks. Our model can be seen as an extension of
their model.
Attentive Recurrent Architecture
Let x denote the input sentence consisting of a
sequence of M words x = [x1, . . . , xM], where
each word xi is part of vocabulary V, of size
|V| = V . Our task is to generate a target sequence
y = [y1, . . . , yN], of N words, where N < M,
such that the meaning of x is preserved:
argmaxy P(y|x), where y is a random variable denoting a sequence of N words.
Typically the conditional probability is modeled by a parametric function with parameters θ:
P(y|x) = P(y|x; θ). Training involves ﬁnding the
θ which maximizes the conditional probability of
sentence-summary pairs in the training corpus. If
the model is trained to generate the next word of the
summary, given the previous words, then the above
conditional can be factorized into a product of individual conditional probabilities:
P(y|x; θ) =
p(yt|{y1, . . . , yt−1}, x; θ).
In this work we model this conditional probability using an RNN Encoder-Decoder architecture, inspired by Cho et al. and subsequently extended in Bahdanau et al. . We call our model
RAS (Recurrent Attentive Summarizer).
Recurrent Decoder
The above conditional is modeled using an RNN:
P(yt|{y1, . . . , yt−1}, x; θ) = Pt = gθ1(ht, ct),
where ht is the hidden state of the RNN:
ht = gθ1(yt−1, ht−1, ct).
Here ct is the output of the encoder module (detailed
in §3.2). It can be seen as a context vector which is
computed as a function of the current state ht−1 and
the input sequence x.
Our Elman RNN takes the following form :
σ(W1yt−1 + W2ht−1 + W3ct)
ρ(W4ht + W5ct),
where σ is the sigmoid function and ρ is the softmax, deﬁned as:
ρ(ot) = eot/ P
j eoj and Wi
(i = 1, . . . , 5) are matrices of learnable parameters
of sizes W{1,2,3} ∈Rd×d and W{4,5} ∈Rd×V .
The LSTM decoder is deﬁned as :
σ(W1yt−1 + W2ht−1 + W3ct)
tanh(W4yt−1 + W5ht−1 + W6ct)
σ(W7yt−1 + W8ht−1 + W9ct)
σ(W10yt−1 + W11ht−1 + W12ct)
mt−1 ⊙ft + it ⊙i′
ρ(W13ht + W14ct).
Operator ⊙refers to component-wise multiplication, and Wi (i = 1, . . . , 14) are matrices of learnable parameters of sizes W{1,...,12} ∈Rd×d, and
W{13,14} ∈Rd×V .
Attentive Encoder
We now give the details of the encoder which computes the context vector ct for every time step t of
the decoder above. With a slight overload of notation, for an input sentence x we denote by xi the d
dimensional learnable embedding of the i-th word
(xi ∈Rd). In addition the position i of the word
xi is also associated with a learnable embedding li
of size d (li ∈Rd). Then the full embedding for
i-th word in x is given by ai = xi + li. Let us
denote by Bk ∈Rq×d a learnable weight matrix
which is used to convolve over the full embeddings
of consecutive words. Let there be d such matrices
(k ∈{1, . . . , d}). The output of convolution is given
j is the j-th column of the matrix Bk. Thus
the d dimensional aggregate embedding vector zi is
deﬁned as zi = [zi1, . . . , zid]. Note that each word
xi in the input sequence is associated with one aggregate embedding vector zi. The vectors zi can be
seen as a representation of the word which captures
the position in which it occurs in the sentence and
also the context in which it appears in the sentence.
In our experiments the width q of the convolution
matrix Bk was set to 5. To account for words at the
boundaries of x we ﬁrst pad the sequence on both
sides with dummy words before computing the aggregate vectors zi’s.
Given these aggregate vectors of words, we compute the context vector ct (the encoder output) as:
where the weights αj,t−1 are computed as
exp(zj · ht−1)
i=1 exp(zi · ht−1)
Training and Generation
Given a training corpus S = {(xi, yi)}S
sentence-summary pairs, the above model can be
trained end-to-end using stochastic gradient descent
by minimizing the negative conditional log likelihood of the training data with respect to θ:
1, . . . , yi
t−1}, xi; θ),
where the parameters θ constitute the parameters of
the decoder and the encoder.
Once the parametric model is trained we generate
a summary for a new sentence x through a wordbased beam search such that P(y|x) is maximized,
argmax P(yt|{y1, . . . , yt−1}, x). The search is parameterized by the number of paths k that are pursued at each time step.
Experimental Setup
Datasets and Evaluation
Our models are trained on the annotated version of
the Gigaword corpus and we use only the annotations for
tokenization and sentence separation while discarding other annotations such as tags and parses. We
pair the ﬁrst sentence of each article with its headline to form sentence-summary pairs.
is pre-processed in the same way as Rush et al.
 and we use the same splits for training, validation, and testing.
For Gigaword we report results on the same randomly held-out test set of 2000
sentence-summary pairs as .1
We also evaluate our models on the DUC-2004
evaluation data set comprising 500 pairs . Our evaluation is based on three variants of ROUGE , namely, ROUGE-1
(unigrams), ROUGE-2 (bigrams), and ROUGE-L
(longest-common substring).
Architectural Choices
We implemented our models in the Torch library
( 
To optimize our loss (Equation 5) we used stochastic gradient descent with
mini-batches of size 32. During training we measure the perplexity of the summaries in the validation set and adjust our hyper-parameters, such as the
learning rate, based on this number.
1We remove pairs with empty titles resulting in slightly different accuracy compared to Rush et al. for their systems.
2Our code can found at www://github.com/facebook/namas
Perplexity
Bag-of-Words
Convolutional (TDNN)
Attention-based (ABS)
Table 1: Perplexity on the Gigaword validation set. Bag-ofwords, Convolutional (TDNN) and ABS are the different encoders of Rush et. al., 2015.
For the decoder we experimented with both the
Elman RNN and the Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) architecture (as discussed in § 3.1).
chose hyper-parameters based on a grid search and
picked the one which gave the best perplexity on the
validation set. In particular we searched over the
number of hidden units H of the recurrent layer, the
learning rate η, the learning rate annealing schedule
γ (the factor by which to decrease η if the validation perplexity increases), and the gradient clipping
threshold κ.
Our ﬁnal Elman architecture (RAS-
Elman) uses a single layer with H = 512, η = 0.5,
γ = 2, and κ = 10.
The LSTM model (RAS-
LSTM) also has a single layer with H = 512,
η = 0.1, γ = 2, and κ = 10.
On the Gigaword corpus we evaluate our models in
terms of perplexity on a held-out set. We then pick
the model with best perplexity on the held-out set
and use it to compute the F1-score of ROUGE-1,
ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L on the test sets, all of
which we report.
For the DUC corpus however,
inline with the standard, we report the recall-only
ROUGE. As baseline we use the state-of-the-art
attention-based system (ABS) of Rush et al. 
which relies on a feed-forward network decoder.
Additionally, we compare to an enhanced version
of their system (ABS+), which relies on a range of
separate extractive summarization features that are
added as log-linear features in a secondary learning
step with minimum error rate training .
Table 1 shows that both our RAS-Elman and
RAS-LSTM models achieve lower perplexity than
RAS-Elman (k = 1)
RAS-Elman (k = 10)
RAS-LSTM (k = 1)
RAS-LSTM (k = 10)
Table 2: F1 ROUGE scores on the Gigaword test set. ABS and
ABS+ are the systems of Rush et al. 2015. k refers to the size
of the beam for generation; k = 1 implies greedy generation.
RG refers to ROUGE. Rush et al. previously reported
ROUGE recall, while as we use the more balanced F-measure.
RAS-Elman (k = 1)
RAS-Elman (k = 10)
RAS-LSTM (k = 1)
RAS-LSTM (k = 10)
Table 3: ROUGE results (recall-only) on the DUC-2004 test
sets. ABS and ABS+ are the systems of Rush et al. 2015. k
refers to the size of the beam for generation; k = 1 implies
greedy generation. RG refers to ROUGE.
ABS as well as other models reported in Rush et al.
 . The RAS-LSTM performs slightly worse
than RAS-Elman, most likely due to over-ﬁtting.
We attribute this to the relatively simple nature of
this task which can be framed as English-to-English
translation with few long-term dependencies. The
ROUGE results (Table 2) show that our models comfortably outperform both ABS and ABS+ by a wide
margin on all metrics. This is even the case when we
rely only on very fast greedy search (k = 1), while
as ABS uses a much wider beam of size k = 50; the
stronger ABS+ system also uses additional extractive features which our model does not. These features cause ABS+ to copy 92% of words from the
input into the summary, whereas our model copies
only 74% of the words leading to more abstractive
summaries. On DUC-2004 we report recall ROUGE
as is customary on this dataset.
The results (Table 3) show that our models are better than ABS+.
However the improvements are smaller than for Gi-
gaword which is likely due to two reasons: First,
tokenization of DUC-2004 differs slightly from our
training corpus. Second, headlines in Gigaword are
much shorter than in DUC-2004.
For the sake of completeness we also compare
our models to the recently proposed standard Neural Machine Translation (NMT) systems.
In particular, we compare to a smaller re-implementation
of the attentive stacked LSTM encoder-decoder of
Luong et al.
Our implementation uses
two-layer LSTMs for the encoder-decoder with 500
hidden units in each layer. Tables 2 and 3 report
ROUGE scores on the two data sets. From the tables
we observe that the proposed RAS-Elman model is
able to match the performance of the NMT model
of Luong at al.
This is noteworthy because RAS-Elman is signiﬁcantly simpler than the
NMT model at multiple levels. First, the encoder
used by RAS-Elman is extremely light-weight (attention over the convolutional representation of the
input words), compared to Luong’s (a 2 hidden layer
LSTM). Second, the decoder used by RAS-Elman is
a single layer standard (Elman) RNN as opposed to
a multi-layer LSTM. In an independent work, Nallapati et. al also trained a collection of standard
NMT models and report numbers in the same ballpark as RAS-Elman on both datasets.
In order to better understand which component
of the proposed architecture is responsible for the
improvements, we trained the recurrent model with
Rush et. al., ’s ABS encoder on a subset of the
Gigaword dataset. The ABS encoder, which does
not have the position features, achieves a ﬁnal validation perplexity of 38 compared to 29 for the proposed encoder, which uses position features as well
as context information. This clearly shows the bene-
ﬁts of using the position feature in the proposed encoder.
Finally in Figure 1 we highlight anecdotal examples of summaries produced by the RAS-Elman system on the Gigaword dataset. The ﬁrst two examples
highlight typical improvements in the RAS model
over ABS+. Generally the model produces more ﬂuent summaries and is better able to capture the main
actors of the input. For instance in Sentence 1, RAS-
Elman correctly distinguishes the actions of “pepe”
from “ferreira”, and in Sentence 2 it identiﬁes the
correct role of the “think tank”. The ﬁnal two ex-
I(1): brazilian defender pepe is out for the rest of the season with
a knee injury , his porto coach jesualdo ferreira said saturday .
G: football : pepe out for season
A+: ferreira out for rest of season with knee injury
R: brazilian defender pepe out for rest of season with knee injury
I(2): economic growth in toronto will suffer this year because
of sars , a think tank said friday as health authorities insisted the
illness was under control in canada ’s largest city .
G: sars toll on toronto economy estimated at c$ # billion
A+: think tank under control in canada ’s largest city
R: think tank says economic growth in toronto will suffer this year
I(3): colin l. powell said nothing – a silence that spoke volumes
to many in the white house on thursday morning .
G: in meeting with former ofﬁcials bush defends iraq policy
A+: colin powell speaks volumes about silence in white house
R: powell speaks volumes on the white house
I(4): an international terror suspect who had been under a controversial loose form of house arrest is on the run , british home
secretary john reid said tuesday .
G: international terror suspect slips net in britain
A+: reid under house arrest terror suspect on the run
R: international terror suspect under house arrest
Figure 1: Example sentence summaries produced on Gigaword. I is the input, G is the true headline, A is ABS+,
and R is RAS-ELMAN.
amples highlight typical mistakes of the models. In
Sentence 3 both models take literally the ﬁgurative
use of the idiom “a silence that spoke volumes,” and
produce ﬂuent but nonsensical summaries. In Sentence 4 the RAS model mistakes the content of a
relative clause for the main verb, leading to a summary with the opposite meaning of the input. These
difﬁcult cases are somewhat rare in the Gigaword,
but they highlight future challenges for obtaining
human-level sentence summary.
Conclusion
We extend the state-of-the-art model for abstractive sentence summarization 
to a recurrent neural network architecture.
model is a simpliﬁed version of the encoder-decoder
framework for machine translation . The model is trained on the Gigaword corpus
to generate headlines based on the ﬁrst line of each
news article. We comfortably outperform the previous state-of-the-art on both Gigaword data and the
DUC-2004 challenge even though our model does
not rely on additional extractive features.