IMPROVING DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS FOR LVCSR USING RECTIFIED LINEAR UNITS
AND DROPOUT
George E. Dahl ⋆
Tara N. Sainath†
Geoffrey E. Hinton⋆
⋆Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
† IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
Recently, pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) have
outperformed traditional acoustic models based on Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs) on a variety of large vocabulary
speech recognition benchmarks. Deep neural nets have also
achieved excellent results on various computer vision tasks
using a random “dropout” procedure that drastically improves
generalization error by randomly omitting a fraction of the
hidden units in all layers. Since dropout helps avoid over-
ﬁtting, it has also been successful on a small-scale phone
recognition task using larger neural nets. However, training
deep neural net acoustic models for large vocabulary speech
recognition takes a very long time and dropout is likely to
only increase training time. Neural networks with rectiﬁed
linear unit (ReLU) non-linearities have been highly successful for computer vision tasks and proved faster to train than
standard sigmoid units, sometimes also improving discriminative performance. In this work, we show on a 50-hour
English Broadcast News task that modiﬁed deep neural networks using ReLUs trained with dropout during frame level
training provide an 4.2% relative improvement over a DNN
trained with sigmoid units, and a 14.4% relative improvement
over a strong GMM/HMM system. We were able to obtain
our results with minimal human hyper-parameter tuning using
publicly available Bayesian optimization code.
Index Terms— neural networks, deep learning, dropout,
acoustic modeling, broadcast news, LVCSR, rectiﬁed linear
units, Bayesian optimization
1. INTRODUCTION
Up until a few years ago, most state of the art speech recognition systems were based on hidden Markov models (HMMs)
that used mixtures of Gaussians to model the HMM emission
distributions. However, showed that hybrid acoustic models that replaced Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) with pretrained, deep neural networks (DNNs) could drastically improve performance on a small-scale phone recognition task,
results that were later extended to a large vocabulary voice
search task in . Since then, several groups have demonstrated dramatic gains from using deep neural network acoustic models on large vocabulary continuous speech recognition
(LVCSR) tasks (see for a recent review).
Even with unsupervised pre-training and large training
sets, wide and deep neural networks are still vulnerable to
overﬁtting. Dropout is a technique for avoiding overﬁtting in
neural networks that has been highly effective on non-speech
tasks and the small-scale TIMIT phone recognition task ,
although it can increase training time. Rectiﬁed linear units
(ReLUs) in our experience achieve the same training error
faster (as also found) than sigmoid units and, although
sometimes superior to sigmoid units, can often overﬁt more
easily. Rectiﬁed linear units are thus a natural choice to combine with dropout for LVCSR.
In this paper, we explore the behavior of deep neural nets
using ReLUs and dropout on a 50-hour broadcast news (BN)
task , focussing our experiments on using dropout during the frame level training phase. We show that the modi-
ﬁed deep neural networks (DNNs) using ReLUs and dropout
provide a 4.2% relative error reduction over a standard pretrained DNN and a 14.4% relative improvement over a strong
GMM-HMM system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we describe the dropout method, while in Section 3 Rectiﬁed
Linear units (ReLU) are presented. Experiments and results
are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the
paper and discusses future work.
2. DROPOUT
Dropout is a powerful technique introduced in for improving the generalization error of large neural networks. In ,
dropout yielded gains on a highly competitive computer vision benchmark. Although applied dropout to the 3 hour
TIMIT phone recognition task, we are not aware of any application of dropout to LVSR.
Dropout discourages brittle co-adaptations of hidden unit
feature detectors by adding a particular type of noise to the
hidden unit activations during the forward pass of training.
The noise zeros, or “drops out,” a ﬁxed fraction of the activations of the neurons in a given layer, similar to the type of
noise recommended for the input of denoising auto-encoders
in . However, unlike in denoising autoencoder pre-training,
dropout is used in all hidden and input layers and occurs during supervised training with end-to-end backpropagation.
Furthermore, since at test time dropout does not occur and
there may not be additional training with it disabled, during
training we multiply the net input from the layer below by a
1−r, where r is the dropout probability for units in
the layer below. Speciﬁcally, to compute the activation yt of
the tth layer of the net during forward propagation, we use:
1 −ryt−1 ∗mW + b
where f is the activation function for the tth layer, W and b
are respectively the weights and biases for the layer, ∗denotes
element-wise multiplication, and m is a binary mask with entries drawn i.i.d. from Bernoulli(1 −r) indicating which activations are not dropped out. Dropout can also be viewed
as training a very large number of different neural nets with
different connectivity patterns and tied weights for all units
that are not dropped out. By randomly sampling which units
remain anew for each training case, this averaging can be performed in a particularly efﬁcient way. The factor of
during training ensures that at test time, when all units get
used, the correct total input will reach each layer.
Although dropout guards against overﬁtting and produces
far more robust models, adding so much noise during training
slows down learning, in our experience by about a factor of
two. Since overﬁtting is much easier to avoid, larger models
should be used to obtain the best results which also can slow
down training although it enables better results.
3. RECTIFIED LINEAR UNITS
In this paper we use the term rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) to
refer to unit in a neural net that use the activation function
max(0, x). In computer vision research, ReLUs have been
used both as activation functions in more standard neural nets
and as units in restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs), where
they must be dealt with using approximations since they invalidate the probabilistic model . To our knowledge,
the only published use of these units in speech to date was in
 where Gaussian-ReLU RBMs were used to learn features
from raw, unlabeled acoustic data to later use in phone recognition experiments on TIMIT. Our work differs from in
that our focus is on LVSR, we exploit the synergistic effects of
combining ReLUs with dropout, and we experiment with Re-
LUs at all hidden layers in our network instead of only using
them as part of a stand-alone RBM feature extraction module.
Although ReLUs are quite simple to incorporate into a
standard feed-forward neural net, in order to maintain the
RBM probabilistic model we can view a single unit with the
max(0, x) nonlinearity as an approximation to a set of replicated binary units with tied weights and shifted biases .
As in , we perform RBM pre-training with ReLU units
by adding Gaussian noise with sigmoid variance (called an
NReLU unit in ). In other words, during pre-training we
sample a hidden unit state y = max(0, x + ϵ), where x is
the net input to the hidden unit and ϵ is drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance
1+e−x . During
ﬁne-tuning, we simply use the max(0, x) nonlinearity.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1. Baseline
We performed all experiments on 50 hours of English Broadcast News . We used the DARPA EARS rt03 set for
development/validation and performed ﬁnal testing on the
DARPA EARS dev04f evaluation set.
The GMM system is trained using the recipe from ,
which is brieﬂy described below. The raw acoustic features
are 19-dimensional PLP features with speaker-based mean,
variance, and vocal tract length normalization.
context is included by splicing 9 successive frames of PLP
features into supervectors, then projecting to 40 dimensions
using linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The feature space
is further diagonalized using a global semi-tied covariance
(STC) transform. The GMMs are speaker-adaptively trained,
with a feature-space maximum likelihood linear (fMLLR)
transform estimated per speaker in training and testing. Following maximum-likelihood training of the GMMs, featurespace discriminative training (fBMMI) and model-space discriminative training are done using the boosted maximum
mutual information (BMMI) criterion. At test time, unsupervised adaptation using regression tree MLLR is performed.
The GMMs use 2,203 quinphone states and 150K diagonalcovariance Gaussians.
The pre-trained deep neural net (DNN) systems use the
same fMLLR features and 2,203 quinphone states as the
GMM system described above, with an 11-frame context
(±5) around the current frame.
The DNN consists of six
hidden layers, each containing 1,024 sigmoidal units, and a
softmax layer with 2,203 output targets. These features and
DNN architecture were considered optimal in for this
Broadcast News task. The DNN training begins with greedy,
layerwise, generative pre-training and then continues with
cross-entropy discriminative training, followed by Hessianfree sequence-training . To enable fair comparisons with
the large nets we tried in this work, we also trained versions
of the DNN baseline with 2048 and 3072 hidden units per
layer, with 2048 units producing the best results for the basic
pre-trained deep neural net setup.
4.2. Interactions Between Hessian Free Optimization and
Although dropout is trivial to incorporate into minibatched
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the best way of adding it
to 2nd order optimization methods is an open research question. Although all frame level training we performed used
minibatched stochastic gradient descent, we decided to use
the Hessian-free optimizer (HF) of for all full sequence
training in this work since it has large parallelization advantages over the SGD sequence training system we had available. However, one consequence of this choice is the undesirable interaction between dropout and HF. To ﬁnd each search
direction, HF uses the conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm to
iteratively optimizes a local quadratic approximation to the
objective function. CG depends on having reliable curvature
and gradient information computed from large batches since
it makes such strong use of it. Having a single ﬁxed objective
function during CG is even more important than the accuracy
of the estimates. Dropout adds too much noise to the gradient
for CG to function properly if the randomization occurs anew
on each gradient evaluation. However, we do not yet know
the best times to refresh the dropout pattern during HF so we
simply disabled dropout during full sequence training.
4.3. Bayesian Optimization and Training Details
We used the Bayesian optimization method described in 
to optimize training metaparameters and model hyperparameters on the validation set. Bayesian optimization is a gradientfree global optimization method that in the case of Snoek et al.
models the unknown function from hyperparameters to validation word error rate as being drawn from a Gaussian process prior. As experiments complete, the algorithm updates
the posterior distribution for the function and proposes new
experiments to run that optimize the integrated (over Gaussian process covariance function hyperparameters) expected
improvement below the current minimum error achieved by
any experiment so far. We used public code released by the
authors of and enabled a constraint ﬁnding option to deal
with divergent training runs. The constrained Bayesian optimization version has a separate Gaussian process model to
classify points as feasible or not and combines this model with
the Gaussian process regression model when suggesting new
All frame level training used the cross entropy criterion and minibatched stochastic gradient descent.
level training used gnumpy and CUDAMat to
train using a GPU. We allowed Bayesian optimization to
set twelve hyperparameters for frame level supervised training: seven dropout rates r0 . . . r6 (one per non-output layer
with 0 ≤ri ≤0.5), a single global initial learning rate
α ∈[4 × 10−4, 4 × 10−1], a single global momentum
µ ∈[0, 0.95], a number of times to anneal the learning
rate before stopping a ∈ , a minimum improvement
m ∈[0, 0.025] in validation cross entropy required to not
anneal the learning rate, and a factor γ to divide the learning rates by when annealing them. We optimized log2 γ on
[0.5, 2.5]. Every half-epoch we computed validation cross entropy and tested to see if the learning rates should be annealed
according to the schedule.
Since we did not rerun pre-training for each Bayesian optimization job, we set the pre-training metapamaters by hand.
Training ReLU RBMs with CD1 can be more difﬁcult than
training Binary RBMs. We found it useful to only do 2.5
epochs of pre-training for each layer compared to more than
twice that for sigmoid units.
The Bayesian optimization software we used is sufﬁciently effective to remove most of the human judgement
from hyperparameter optimization.
When there are only
a few hyperparameters, it isn’t hard to select reasonable
values by hand, but optimizing more hyperparameters facilitates fairer comparisons between established models that
researchers have experience tuning and new models they have
less intuition about. However, there are still two areas that
require human intervention: deﬁning the search space and
deciding when to terminate Bayesian optimization. Additionally, Bayesian optimization can be accelerated by seeding the
optimization with jobs with hyperparameters selected using
results from related hyperparameter search problems.
example, if one trains a neural net with a thousand units per
hidden layer and ﬁnds good settings for its hyperparameters,
these settings can initialize a Bayesian optimization run that
searches for hyperparameters for a related network using two
thousand hidden units per layer. We selected seed jobs for
our larger nets based on hyperparameter optimizations for
smaller networks.
4.4. Results
Table 1 shows word error rate results on the development (validation) set and test set before full sequence training was performed. Each model listed is the one that performed best on
the validation data given the constraints in the model description. As shown in the table, the single best model uses Re-
LUs, dropout, and relatively large hidden layers with weights
initialized using unsupervised RBM pre-training. This model
achieved a word error rate of 18.5 on the test set, beating other
deep neural net models and the strong discriminatively trained
GMM baseline, even before any full sequence training of the
neural net models.
To conﬁrm that the unsupervised pre-training was worthwhile even with the approximations required for ReLU RBMs
and the smaller number of pre-training epochs used relative to
binary RBMs, we ablated the pre-training and optimized all
remaining hyperparameters. Even without pre-training, the
ReLU nets using dropout had about the same test set performance as the best baseline and somewhat better performance than the best pre-trained sigmoid nets. For the 2k unit
per hidden layer, un-pre-trained ReLU nets, we also added
additional hyperparameters (layer speciﬁc learning rates and
weight costs) and ran extensive Bayesian optimization experiments to conﬁrm that we could not ﬁnd a conﬁguration
with lower validation errors even in the larger hyperparameter search space. Since these experiments alone involved over
ReLUs, 3k, dropout, CE
no PT, ReLUs, 3k, dropout, CE
no PT, ReLUs, 2k, dropout, CE
Sigmoids, 3k, CE
Sigmoids, 2k, CE
Sigmoids, 1k, CE
Table 1. Results without full sequence training (with cross
entropy a.k.a CE). All models used pre-training unless “no
PT” was speciﬁed and used 1k,2k, or 3k hidden units per
GMM baseline
ReLUs, 3k, dropout, sMBR
Sigmoids, 2k, sMBR
Table 2. Results with full sequence training
5000 GPU hours of computation, they were not feasible to
perform on the nets with 3k units per layer, although for those
nets we performed our usual hyperparameter optimization in
the search space described in section 4.3.
The Bayesian optimization procedure rarely turned off
dropout for ReLU nets and typically kept dropout off for sigmoid nets, even with 3k units per layer. This indicates that the
Bayesian optimization procedure learned that dropout wasn’t
helpful for sigmoid nets of the sizes we trained. In general,
ReLUs and dropout seem to work quite well together. Without dropout, ReLU nets can overﬁt very quickly compared to
sigmoid nets. Early stopping is often able to avoid the worst
overﬁtting in sigmoid nets on LVSR tasks, but for ReLU nets,
dropout combined with early stopping worked much better.
Table 2 shows results for the best ReLU net and the best
sigmoid net was trained for an equal amount of wall clock
time using 11 and 16 HF iterations of full sequence training
respectively. We trained the ReLU and sigmoid nets for an
equal amount of time to make a fair comparison in the absence of dropout during full sequence training and because of
the expense of full sequence training with nets of this size.
We expect that the very best results will necessitate the use of
dropout during full sequence training as well and we plan to
explore this in future work. The ReLU net shows a more modest gain over the sigmoid net after full sequence training than
was evident after frame level training, possibly because the
ReLU net no longer gains the beneﬁt of training with dropout
during the full sequence training. Full sequence training for
nets as large as these is very time consuming and will most
likely slow down further if HF is modiﬁed to support dropout
and especially if gradient descent sequence training gets used
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, motivated by successes in computer vision, we
have explored using rectiﬁed linear units and dropout in deep
neural nets for LVCSR for the ﬁrst time. ReLUs and dropout
yielded word error rate improvements relative to a state of
the art baseline and, with the help of Bayesian optimization
software, we were able to obtain these improvements without
much of the hand tuning typically used to obtain the very best
deep neural net results. These Bayesian optimization experiments also gave us evidence that ReLUs and dropout have
synergistic effects and we recommend that they be used together. Although in our experiments we did not detect a large
gain from using dropout with sigmoid nets, on other tasks
or with other network architectures dropout might provide a
larger beneﬁt.
Given the gains from dropout and ReLUs for frame level
training, determining the best way to exploit dropout in full
sequence training is an exciting direction for future work. At
least in principle, dropout can be used with sequence training performed with gradient descent, but there might be better options. The dropout noise can be analytically integrated
out for single layer nets, but this is unlikely to be possible
for deeper nets without some sort of aggressive approximation. Fixing the units that are dropped out during each CG
run within HF might be sufﬁcient to allow dropout to be combined with HF, but to date all uses of dropout in the literature
have been with ﬁrst order optimization algorithms. Extracting
bottleneck features using deep nets trained with dropout
would obviate most of the need for sequence training of the
nets, but would abandon the goal of end-to-end training using a sequence level criterion. Nevertheless, it is a promising
alternative we hope to explore.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Hagen Soltau, Brian Kingsbury,
George Saon and Stanley Chen for their contributions towards the IBM toolkit and recognizer utilized in this paper.
We would also like to thank Jasper Snoek for helping us use
the Bayesian optimization software.
6. REFERENCES
 Abdel rahman Mohamed, George E. Dahl, and Geoffrey E. Hinton, “Acoustic modeling using deep belief
networks,” Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 14 –22, jan.
 Geore E. Dahl, Dong Yu, Li Deng, and Alex Acero,
“Context-dependent pre-trained deep neural networks
for large-vocabulary speech recognition,”
Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 30 –42, jan. 2012.
 Geoffrey E. Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E.
Dahl, Abdel rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, Andrew
Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N.
Sainath, and Brian Kingsbury, “Deep neural networks
for acoustic modeling in speech recognition,”
Processing Magazine, 2012.
 Geoffrey E. Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
“Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors,”
The Computing Research Repository
(CoRR), vol. abs/1207.0580, 2012.
 Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton, “ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional
neural networks,”
in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2012.
 Brian Kingsbury, Tara N. Sainath, and Hagen Soltau,
“Scalable Minimum Bayes Risk Training of Deep
Neural Network Acoustic Models Using Distributed
Hessian-free Optimization,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2012.
 Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and
Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, “Extracting and composing
robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁfth International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML’08), William W. Cohen, Andrew McCallum, and Sam T. Roweis, Eds. 2008, pp.
1096–1103, ACM.
 Kevin Jarrett, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Yann LeCun, “What is the best multi-stage
architecture for object recognition?,”
in Proc. International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV’09).
2009, pp. 2146–2153, IEEE.
 Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton,
“Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines,” in
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML-10), Johannes F¨urnkranz and
Thorsten Joachims, Eds., Haifa, Israel, June 2010, pp.
807–814, Omnipress.
 Navdeep Jaitly and Geoffrey E. Hinton,
“Learning a
better representation of speech soundwaves using restricted Boltzmann machines,”
in ICASSP, 2011, pp.
5884–5887.
 Hagen Soltau, George Saon, and Brian Kingsbury, “The
IBM Attila Speech Recognition Toolkit,” in Proc. SLT,
 Tara N. Sainath, Brian Kingsbury, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Petr Fousek, Petr Novak, and Abdel rahman Mohamed, “Making Deep Belief Networks Effective for
Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition,” in
Proc. ASRU, 2011.
 Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan Prescott
“Practical Bayesian optimization of machine
learning algorithms,” in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2012.
 Tijmen Tieleman, “Gnumpy: an easy way to use GPU
boards in Python,”
Tech. Rep. UTML TR 2010-002,
University of Toronto, Department of Computer Science, 2010.
 Volodymyr Mnih,
“Cudamat: a CUDA-based matrix
class for python,” Tech. Rep. UTML TR 2009-004, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
November 2009.
 Tara N. Sainath, Brian Kingsbury, and Bhuvana Ramabhadran, “Auto-Encoder Bottleneck Features Using Deep
Belief Networks,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2012.