Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 31–36
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
HotFlip: White-Box Adversarial Examples for Text Classiﬁcation
Javid Ebrahimi∗, Anyi Rao†, Daniel Lowd∗, Dejing Dou∗
∗Computer and Information Science Department, University of Oregon, USA
{javid, lowd, dou}@cs.uoregon.edu
†School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, China
{anyirao}@smail.nju.edu.cn
We propose an efﬁcient method to generate white-box adversarial examples to
trick a character-level neural classiﬁer. We
ﬁnd that only a few manipulations are
needed to greatly decrease the accuracy.
Our method relies on an atomic ﬂip operation, which swaps one token for another, based on the gradients of the onehot input vectors. Due to efﬁciency of our
method, we can perform adversarial training which makes the model more robust
to attacks at test time. With the use of a
few semantics-preserving constraints, we
demonstrate that HotFlip can be adapted
to attack a word-level classiﬁer as well.
Introduction
Adversarial examples are inputs to a predictive
machine learning model that are maliciously designed to cause poor performance . Adversarial examples expose regions of the input space where the model performs
poorly, which can aid in understanding and improving the model. By using these examples as
training data, adversarial training learns models
that are more robust, and may even perform better on non-adversarial examples. Interest in understanding vulnerabilities of NLP systems is growing . Previous
work has focused on heuristics for creating adversarial examples in the black-box setting, without
any explicit knowledge of the model parameters.
In the white-box setting, we use complete knowledge of the model to develop worst-case attacks,
which can reveal much larger vulnerabilities.
We propose a white-box adversary against differentiable text classiﬁers. We ﬁnd that only a few
South Africa’s historic Soweto township marks its
100th birthday on Tuesday in a mood of optimism.
South Africa’s historic Soweto township marks its
100th birthday on Tuesday in a mooP of optimism.
95% Sci/Tech
Chancellor Gordon Brown has sought to quell speculation over who should run the Labour Party and
turned the attack on the opposition Conservatives.
Chancellor Gordon Brown has sought to quell speculation over who should run the Labour Party and
turned the attack on the oBposition Conservatives.
94% Business
Table 1: Adversarial examples with a single character change,
which will be misclassiﬁed by a neural classiﬁer.
manipulations are needed to greatly increase the
misclassiﬁcation error. Furthermore, fast generation of adversarial examples allows feasible adversarial training, which helps the model defend
against adversarial examples and improve accuracy on clean examples. At the core of our method
lies an atomic ﬂip operation, which changes one
token to another by using the directional derivatives of the model with respect to the one-hot vector input.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. We propose an efﬁcient gradient-based optimization method to manipulate discrete text
structure at its one-hot representation.
2. We investigate the robustness of a classiﬁer
trained with adversarial examples, by studying its resilience to attacks and its accuracy
on clean test data.
Related Work
Adversarial examples are powerful tools to investigate the vulnerabilities of a deep learning
model . While this line of
research has recently received a lot of attention in
the deep learning community, it has a long history
in machine learning, going back to adversarial attacks on linear spam classiﬁers . Hosseini et al. 
show that simple modiﬁcations, such as adding
spaces or dots between characters, can drastically change the toxicity score from Google’s
perspective API 1. Belinkov and Bisk 
show that character-level machine translation systems are overly sensitive to random character manipulations, such as keyboard typos. They manipulate every word in a sentence with synthetic or natural noise. However, throughout our experiments,
we care about the degree of distortion in a sentence, and look for stronger adversaries which can
increase the loss within a limited budget. Instead
of randomly perturbing text, we propose an efﬁcient method, which can generate adversarial text
using the gradients of the model with respect to
the input.
Adversarial training interleaves training with
generation of adversarial examples . Concretely, after every iteration of
training, adversarial examples are created and
added to the mini-batches. A projected gradientbased approach to create adversarial examples by
Madry et al. has proved to be one of the
most effective defense mechanisms against adversarial attacks for image classiﬁcation. Miyato et
al. create adversarial examples by adding
noise to word embeddings, without creating realworld textual adversarial examples. Our work is
the ﬁrst to propose an efﬁcient method to generate
real-world adversarial examples which can also be
used for effective adversarial training.
HotFlip is a method for generating adversarial examples with character substitutions (“ﬂips”). Hot-
Flip also supports insertion and deletion operations by representing them as sequences of character substitutions. It uses the gradient with respect
to a one-hot input representation to efﬁciently estimate which individual change has the highest estimated loss, and it uses a beam search to ﬁnd a set
of manipulations that work well together to confuse a classiﬁer.
Deﬁnitions
We use J(x, y) to refer to the loss of the model
on input x with true output y. For example,
1 
for classiﬁcation, the loss would be the log-loss
over the output of the softmax unit. Let V be
the alphabet, x be a text of length L characters, and xij ∈{0, 1}|V | denote a one-hot vector
representing the j-th character of the i-th word.
The character sequence can be represented by
x = [(x11,.. x1n);..(xm1,.. xmn)]
wherein a semicolon denotes explicit segmentation between words. The number of words is denoted by m, and n is the number of maximum
characters allowed for a word.
Derivatives of Operations
We represent text operations as vectors in the
input space and estimate the change in loss by
directional derivatives with respect to these operations. Based on these derivatives, the adversary can choose the best loss-increasing direction.
Our algorithm requires just one function evaluation (forward pass) and one gradient computation
(backward pass) to estimate the best possible ﬂip.
A ﬂip of the j-th character of the i-th word
(a →b) can be represented by this vector:
⃗vijb = (⃗0 ,..;(⃗0 ,..(0,..-1,0,..,1,0)j,..⃗0 )i; ⃗0 ,..)
where -1 and 1 are in the corresponding positions for the a-th and b-th characters of the
alphabet, respectively, and x(a)
= 1. A ﬁrst-order
approximation of change in loss can be obtained
from a directional derivative along this vector:
∇⃗vijbJ(x, y) = ∇xJ(x, y)T · ⃗vijb
We choose the vector with biggest increase
max∇xJ(x, y)T · ⃗vijb = max
Using the derivatives as a surrogate loss, we simply need to ﬁnd the best change by calling the
function mentioned in eq. 1, to estimate the best
character change (a →b). This is in contrast to
a naive loss-based approach, which has to query
the classiﬁer for every possible change to compute
the exact loss induced by those changes. In other
words, apart from the overhead of calling the function in eq. 1, one backward pass saves the adversary a large number of forward passes.
Character insertion2 at the j-th position of the
i-th word can also be treated as a character ﬂip,
followed by more ﬂips as characters are shifted to
the right until the end of the word.
max∇xJ(x, y)T ·⃗vijb = max
= 1 and x(b
ij′−1 = 1. Similarly, character deletion can be written as a number of character ﬂips as characters are shifted to the left.
Since the magnitudes of direction vectors (operations) are different, we normalize by the L2 norm
of the vector i.e.,
2N , where N is the number of
total ﬂips.
Multiple Changes
We explained how to estimate the best single
change in text to get the maximum increase in loss.
A greedy or beam search of r steps will give us an
adversarial example with a maximum of r ﬂips, or
more concretely an adversarial example within an
L0 distance of r from the original example. Our
beam search requires only O(br) forward passes
and an equal number of backward passes, with r
being the budget and b, the beam width. We elaborate on this with an example: Consider the loss
function J(.), input x0, and an individual change
cj. We estimate the score for the change as ∂J(x0)
For a sequence of 3 changes [c1,c2,c3], we evaluate the “score” as follows.
score([c1, c2, c3]) = ∂J(x0)
where x1 and x2 are the modiﬁed input after applying [c1] and [c1, c2] respectively. We need b
forward and backward passes to compute derivatives at each step of the path, leading to O(br)
queries. In contrast, a naive loss-based approach
requires computing the exact loss for every possible change at every stage of the beam search, leading to O(brL|V |) queries.
Experiments
In principle, HotFlip could be applied to any differentiable character-based classiﬁer. Here, we focus on the CharCNN-LSTM architecture , which can be adapted for classiﬁcation via a single dense layer after the last recurrent hidden unit. We use the AG’s news dataset3,
which consists of 120,000 training and 7,600 test
instances from four equal-sized classes: World,
Sports, Business, and Science/Technology. The architecture consists of a 2-layer stacked LSTM with
500 hidden units, a character embedding size of
25, and 1000 kernels of width 6 for temporal
convolutions. This classiﬁer was able to outperform , which has achieved
the state-of-the-art result on some benchmarks, on
AG’s news. The model is trained with SGD and
gradient clipping, and the batch size was set to 64.
We used 10% of the training data as the development set, and trained for a maximum of 25 epochs.
We only allow character changes if the new word
does not exist in the vocabulary, to avoid changes
that are more likely to change the meaning of text.
The adversary uses a beam size of 10, and has a
budget of maximum of 10% of characters in the
document. In Figure 1, we plot the success rate
of the adversary against an acceptable conﬁdence
score for the misclassiﬁcation. That is, we consider the adversary successful only if the classiﬁer
misclassiﬁes the instance with a given conﬁdence
score. For this experiment, we create adversarial
examples for 10% of the test set.
We compare with a (greedy) black-box adversary, which does not have access to model parameters, and simply queries the classiﬁer with random character changes. Belinkov and Bisk 
deﬁne an attack, Key, in which a character is replaced with an adjacent character in the keyboard.
We allow a stronger black-box attacker to change a
character to any character in the alphabet, and we
call it Key∗. As expected a white-box adversary
is much more damaging, and has a higher success
rate. As can be seen, the beam-search strategy is
very effective in fooling the classiﬁer even with
an 0.9 conﬁdence constraint, tricking the classi-
ﬁer for more than 90% of the instances. A greedy
search is less effective especially in producing
high-conﬁdence scores. We use a maximum of
10% of characters in the document as the budget
for the adversary, but our adversary changes an average of 4.18% of the characters to trick the classiﬁer at conﬁdence 0.5. The adversary picks the
ﬂip operation around 80% of the times, and favors
delete over insert by two to one.
3 
confidence of prediction
success rate
HotFlip-beam search
HotFlip-greedy
BlackBox (Key*)
Figure 1: Adversary’s success as a function of conﬁdence.
Robustness
For our adversarial training, we use only use the
ﬂip operation, and evaluate models’ robustness
to this operation only. This is because insert and
delete manipulations are n times slower to generate, where n is the number of maximum characters allowed for a word. For these experiments, we
have no constraint on conﬁdence score. We ﬂip r
characters for each training sample, which was set
to 20% of the characters in text after tuning, based
on the accuracy on the development set. In addition, for faster generation of adversarial examples,
we directly apply the top r ﬂips after the ﬁrst backward pass, simultaneously4.
We use the full test set for this experiment, and
we compare HotFlip adversarial training with the
white-box (supervised) adversarial training that perturbs word embeddings,
which we adapt to work with character embeddings. Speciﬁcally, the adversarial noise per character is constrained by the Frobenius norm of the
embedding matrix composed of the sequence of
characters in the word. We also create another
baseline where instead of white-box adversarial
examples, we add black-box adversarial examples
(Key∗) to the mini-batches. As shown in Table
2, our approach decreases misclassiﬁcation error
and dramatically decreases the adversary’s success
rate. In particular, adversarial training on real adversarial examples generated by HotFlip, is more
effective than training on pseudo-adversarial examples created by adding noise to the embeddings.
The current error of our adversarially trained
model is still beyond an acceptable rate; this is
mainly because the adversary that we use at test
time, which uses beam search, is strictly stronger
than our model’s internal adversary. This has been
observed in computer vision where strongest ad-
4The adversary at test time would still use beam search.
Misc. error
Success rate
Adv-tr 
Adv-tr (black-box)
Adv-tr (white-box)
Table 2: Comparison based on misclassiﬁcation error on
clean data and adversary’s success rate.
versaries are not efﬁcient enough for adversarial
training, but can break models trained with weaker
adversaries .
Human Perception
Our human evaluation experiment shows that our
character-based adversarial examples rarely alter
the meaning of a sentence. We conduct an experiment of annotating 600 randomly-picked instances
annotated by at least three crowd workers in Amazon Mechanical Turk. This set contains 150 examples of each class of AG’s-news dataset, all of
which are correctly classiﬁed by the classiﬁer. We
manipulate half of this set by our algorithm, which
can successfully trick the classiﬁer to misclassify
these 300 adversarial examples. The median accuracy of our participants decreased by 1.78% from
87.49% on clean examples to 85.71% on adversarial examples. Similar small drops in human performance have been reported for image classiﬁcation
 and text comprehension .
HotFlip at Word-Level
HotFlip can naturally be adapted to generate adversarial examples for word-level models, by computing derivatives with respect to one-hot word
vectors. After a few character changes, the meaning of the text is very likely to be preserved or
inferred by the reader , which
was also conﬁrmed by our human subjects study.
By contrast, word-level adversarial manipulations
are much more likely to change the meaning of
text, which makes the use of semantics-preserving
constraints necessary. For example, changing the
word good to bad changes the sentiment of the
sentence “this was a good movie”. In fact, we expect the model to predict a different label after
such a change.
To showcase the applicability of HotFlip to a
word-level classiﬁer, we use Kim’s CNN 
trained for binary sentiment classiﬁcation on the
SST dataset . In order to create
adversarial examples, we add constraints so that
one hour photo is an intriguing (interesting) snapshot of one man and his delusions it’s just too bad it doesn’t have
more ﬂashes of insight.
‘enigma’ is a good (terriﬁc) name for a movie this deliberately obtuse and unapproachable.
an intermittently pleasing (satisfying) but mostly routine effort.
an atonal estrogen opera that demonizes feminism while gifting the most sympathetic male of the piece with a nice
(wonderful) vomit bath at his wedding.
culkin exudes (infuses) none of the charm or charisma that might keep a more general audience even vaguely interested in his bratty character.
Table 3: Adversarial examples for sentiment classiﬁcation. The bold words replace the words before them.
past →pas!t
Alps →llps
talk →taln
local →loral
ships →hips
actor →actr
lowered →owered
overpowered
Table 4: Nearest neighbor words (based on cosine similarity) of word representations from CharCNN-LSTM, picked at the
output of the highway layers. A single adversarial change in the word often results in a big change in the embedding, which
would make the word more similar to other words, rather than to the original word.
the resulting sentence is likely to preserve the original meaning; we only ﬂip a word wi to wj only if
these constraints are satisﬁed:
1. The cosine similarity between the embedding
of words is bigger than a threshold (0.8).
2. The two words have the same part-of-speech.
3. We disallow replacing of stop-words, as for
many of the stop-words, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd
cases where replacing them will still render
the sentence grammatically correct. We also
disallow changing a word to another word
with the same lexeme for the same purpose.
Table 3 shows a few adversarial examples with
only one word ﬂip. In the second and the fourth
examples, the adversary ﬂips a positive word (i.e.,
good, nice) with highly positive words (i.e., terriﬁc, wonderful) in an overall very negative review. These examples, albeit interesting and intuitive, are not abundant, and thus pose less threat
to an NLP word-level model. Speciﬁcally, given
the strict set of constraints, we were able to create
only 41 examples (2% of the correctly-classiﬁed
instances of the SST test set) with one or two ﬂips.
For a qualitative analysis of relative brittleness
of character-level models, we study the change in
word embedding as an adversarial ﬂip, insert, or
delete operation occurs in Table 4. We use the output of the highway layer as the word representation, and report the embedding for a few adversarial words, for which the original word is not
among their top 5 nearest neighbors.
In a character-level model, the lookup operation to pick a word from the vocabulary is replaced by a character-sequence feature extractor
which gives an embedding for any input, including OOV words which would be mapped to an
UNK token in a word-level model. This makes the
embedding space induced in character-level representation more dense, which makes characterlevel models more likely to misbehave under small
adversarial perturbations.
Conclusion and Future Work
White-box attacks are among the most serious
forms of attacks an adversary can inﬂict on a machine learning model. We create white-box adversarial examples by computing derivatives with respect to a few character-edit operations (i.e., ﬂip,
insert, delete), which can be used in a beam-search
optimization. While character-edit operations have
little impact on human understanding, we found
that character-level models are highly sensitive to
adversarial perturbations. Employing these adversarial examples in adversarial training renders the
models more robust to such attacks, as well as
more robust to unseen clean data.
Contrasting and evaluating robustness of different character-level models for different tasks is an
important future direction for adversarial NLP. In
addition, the discrete nature of text makes it a more
challenging task to understand the landscape of
adversarial examples. Research in this direction
can shed light on vulnerabilities of NLP models.
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by ARO grant W911NF-
15-1-0265.