HAL Id: hal-01207145
 
Submitted on 30 Sep 2015
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Label-Embedding for Image Classification
Zeynep Akata, Florent Perronnin, Zaid Harchaoui, Cordelia Schmid
To cite this version:
Zeynep Akata, Florent Perronnin, Zaid Harchaoui, Cordelia Schmid. Label-Embedding for Image
Classification. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2016, 38 (7), pp.1425-
1438. ￿10.1109/TPAMI.2015.2487986￿. ￿hal-01207145￿
Label-Embedding for Image Classiﬁcation
Zeynep Akata, Member, IEEE, Florent Perronnin, Member, IEEE, Zaid Harchaoui, Member, IEEE,
and Cordelia Schmid, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Attributes act as intermediate representations that enable parameter sharing between classes, a must when training
data is scarce. We propose to view attribute-based image classiﬁcation as a label-embedding problem: each class is embedded in
the space of attribute vectors. We introduce a function that measures the compatibility between an image and a label embedding.
The parameters of this function are learned on a training set of labeled samples to ensure that, given an image, the correct
classes rank higher than the incorrect ones. Results on the Animals With Attributes and Caltech-UCSD-Birds datasets show that
the proposed framework outperforms the standard Direct Attribute Prediction baseline in a zero-shot learning scenario. Label
embedding enjoys a built-in ability to leverage alternative sources of information instead of or in addition to attributes, such as
e.g. class hierarchies or textual descriptions. Moreover, label embedding encompasses the whole range of learning settings from
zero-shot learning to regular learning with a large number of labeled examples.
Index Terms—Image Classiﬁcation, Label Embedding, Zero-Shot Learning, Attributes.
INTRODUCTION
We consider the image classiﬁcation problem where the
task is to annotate a given image with one (or multiple)
class label(s) describing its visual content. Image classiﬁcation is a prediction task: the goal is to learn from a labeled
training set a function f : X →Y which maps an input x in
the space of images X to an output y in the space of class
labels Y. In this work, we are especially interested in the
case where classes are related (e.g. they all correspond to
animals), but where we do not have any (positive) labeled
sample for some of the classes. This problem is generally
referred to as zero-shot learning , , , . Given
the impossibility to collect labeled training samples in an
exhaustive manner for all possible visual concepts, zeroshot learning is a problem of high practical value.
An elegant solution to zero-shot learning, called attributebased learning, has recently gained popularity in computer
vision. Attribute-based learning consists in introducing an
intermediate space A referred to as attribute layer ,
 . Attributes correspond to high-level properties of the
objects which are shared across multiple classes, which
can be detected by machines and which can be understood
by humans. Each class can be represented as a vector
of class-attribute associations according to the presence
or absence of each attribute for that class. Such class-
• Z. Akata is currently with the Computer Vision and Multimodal
Max-Planck
Informatics,
Saarbrucken, Germany. The vast majority of this work was done while
Z. Akata was jointly with the Computer Vision group of the Xerox
Research Centre Europe and the LEAR group of INRIA Grenoble
Grenoble Rhˆone-Alpes.
• F. Perronnin is currently with Facebook AI Research. The vast majority
of this work was done while F. Perronnin was with the Computer
Vision group of the Xerox Research Centre Europe, Meylan, France.
• Z. Harchaoui and C. Schmid are with the LEAR group of INRIA
Grenoble Rhˆone-Alpes, Montbonnot, France.
Much work in computer vision has been devoted to image embedding (left): how to extract suitable
features from an image. We focus on label embedding
(right): how to embed class labels in a Euclidean
space. We use side information such as attributes for
the label embedding and measure the “compatibility”’
between the embedded inputs and outputs with a
function F.
attribute associations are often binary. As an example, if the
classes correspond to animals, possible attributes include
“has paws”, “has stripes” or “is black”. For the class
“zebra”, the “has paws” entry of the attribute vector is zero
whereas the “has stripes” would be one. The most popular
attribute-based prediction algorithm requires learning one
classiﬁer per attribute. To classify a new image, its attributes
are predicted using the learned classiﬁers and the attribute
scores are combined into class-level scores. This two-step
strategy is referred to as Direct Attribute Prediction (DAP)
DAP suffers from several shortcomings. First, DAP
proceeds in a two-step fashion, learning attribute-speciﬁc
classiﬁers in a ﬁrst step and combining attribute scores into
class-level scores in a second step. Since attribute classi-
ﬁers are learned independently of the end-task the overall
strategy of DAP might be optimal at predicting attributes
but not necessarily at predicting classes. Second, we would
like an approach that can perform zero-shot prediction if
no labeled samples are available for some classes, but that
can also leverage new labeled samples for these classes
as they become available. While DAP is straightforward
to implement for zero-shot learning problems, it is not
straightforward to extend to such an incremental learning
scenario. Third, while attributes can be a useful source
of prior information, they are expensive to obtain and
the human labeling is not always reliable. Therefore, it is
advantageous to seek complementary or alternative sources
of side information such as class hierarchies or textual
descriptions (see section 4). It is not straightforward to
design an efﬁcient way to incorporate these additional
sources of information into DAP. Various solutions have
been proposed to address each of these problems separately
(see section 2). However, we do not know of any existing
solution that addresses all of them in a principled manner.
Our primary contribution is therefore to propose such a
solution by making use of the label embedding framework.
We underline that, while there is an abundant literature in
the computer vision community on image embedding (how
to describe an image) much less work has been devoted
in comparison to label embedding in the Y space (how
to describe a class). We embed each class y ∈Y in the
space of attribute vectors and thus refer to our approach
as Attribute Label Embedding (ALE). We use a structured
output learning formalism and introduce a function which
measures the compatibility between an image x and a label
y (see Figure 1). The parameters of this function are learned
on a training set of labeled samples to ensure that, given an
image, the correct class(es) rank higher than the incorrect
ones. Given a test image, recognition consists in searching
for the class with the highest compatibility.
Another important contribution of this work is to show
that our approach extends far beyond the setting of
attribute-based recognition: it can be readily used for any
side information that can be encoded as vectors in order to
be leveraged by the label embedding framework.
Label embedding addresses in a principled fashion the
three limitations of DAP that were mentioned previously.
First, we optimize directly a class ranking objective,
whereas DAP proceeds in two steps by solving intermediate
problems. We show experimentally that ALE outperforms
DAP in the zero-shot setting. Second, if available, labeled
samples can be used to learn the embedding. Third, other
sources of side information can be combined with attributes
or used as alternative source in place of attributes.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2-3, we review
related work and introduce ALE. In Sec. 4, we study
extensions of label embedding beyond attributes. In Sec. 5,
we present experimental results on Animals with Attributes
(AWA) and Caltech-UCSD-Birds (CUB) . In particular, we compare ALE with competing alternatives, using
the same side information i.e. attribute-class associations
A preliminary version of this article appeared in .
This version adds (1) an expanded related work section;
a detailed description of the learning procedure for
ALE; (3) additional comparisons with random embeddings and embeddings derived automatically from
textual corpora , ; (4) additional zero-short learning
experiments, which show the advantage of using continuous
embeddings; and (5) additional few-shots learning experiments.
RELATED WORK
We now review related work on attributes, zero-shot
learning and label embedding, three research areas which
strongly overlap.
Attributes
Attributes have been used for image description ,
 , , caption generation , , face recognition
 , , , image retrieval , , , action
recognition , , novelty detection and object
classiﬁcation , , , , , , . Since
our task is object classiﬁcation in images, we focus on the
corresponding references.
The most popular approach to attribute-based recognition
is the Direct Attribute Prediction (DAP) model of Lampert
et al. which consists in predicting the presence of attributes
in an image and combining the attribute prediction probabilities into class prediction probabilities . A signiﬁcant
limitation of DAP is the fact that it assumes that attributes
are independent from each other, an assumption which
is generally incorrect (see our experiments on attribute
correlation in section 5.3). Consequently, DAP has been
improved to take into account the correlation between
attributes or between attributes and classes , ,
 , . However, all these models have limitations of
their own. Wang and Forsyth assume that images
are labeled with both classes and attributes. In our work
we only assume that classes are labeled with attributes,
which requires signiﬁcantly less hand-labeling of the data.
Mahajan et al. use transductive learning and, therefore,
assume that the test data is available as a batch, a strong
assumption we do not make. Yu and Aloimonos’s topic
model is only applicable to bag-of-visual-word image
representations and, therefore, cannot leverage recent stateof-the-art image features such as the Fisher vector . We
will use such features in our experiments. Finally, the latent
SVM framework of Wang and Mori is not applicable
to zero-shot learning, the focus of this work.
Several works have also considered the problem of discovering a vocabulary of attributes , , . leverages text and images sampled from the Internet and uses
the mutual information principle to measure the information
of a group of attributes. discovers local attributes
and integrates humans in the loop for recommending the
selection of attributes that are semantically meaningful. 
discovers attributes from images, textual comments and
ratings for the purpose of aesthetic image description. In our
work, we assume that the class-attribute association matrix
is provided. In this sense, our work is complementary to
those previously mentioned.
Zero-shot learning
Zero-shot learning requires the ability to transfer knowledge
from classes for which we have training data to classes
for which we do not. There are two crucial choices when
performing zero-shot learning: the choice of the prior
information and the choice of the recognition model.
Possible sources of prior information include attributes
 , , , , , semantic class taxonomies ,
 , class-to-class similarities , , text features ,
 , , , or class co-occurrence statistics .
Rohrbach et al. compare different sources of information for learning with zero or few samples. However,
since different models are used for the different sources
of prior information, it is unclear whether the observed
differences are due to the prior information itself or the
model. In our work, we compare attributes, class hierarchies
and textual information obtained from the internet using
the exact same learning framework and we can, therefore,
fairly compare different sources of prior information. Other
sources of prior information have been proposed for special
purpose problems. For instance, Larochelle et al. 
encode characters with 7×5 pixel representations. However,
it is difﬁcult to extend such an embedding to the case of
generic visual categories – our focus in this work. For a
recent survey of different output embeddings optimized for
zero-shot learning on ﬁne-grained datasets, the reader may
refer to .
As for the recognition model, there are several alternatives. As mentioned earlier, DAP uses a probabilistic
model which assumes attribute independence . Closest
to the proposed ALE are those works where zero-shot
recognition is performed by assigning an image to its
closest class embedding (see next section). The measure
of distance between an image and a class embedding
is generally measured as the Euclidean distance and a
transformation is learned to map the input image features
to the class embeddings , . The main difference
between these works and ours is that we learn the inputto-output mapping features to optimize directly an image
classiﬁcation criterion: we learn to rank the correct label
higher than incorrect ones. We will see in section 5.3 that
this leads to improved results compared to those works
which optimize a regression criterion such as , .
Few works have considered the problem of transitioning
from zero-shot learning to learning with few shots ,
 , . As mentioned earlier, is only applicable to
bag-of-words type of models. proposes to augment the
attribute-based representation with additional dimensions
for which an autoencoder model is coupled with a large
margin principle. While this extends DAP to learning with
labeled data, this approach does not improve DAP for zeroshot recognition. In contrast, we show that the proposed
ALE can transition from zero-shot to few-shots learning
and improves on DAP in the zero-shot regime. learns
separately the class embeddings and the input-to-output
mapping which is suboptimal. In this paper, we learn jointly
the class embeddings (using attributes as prior) and the
input-to-output mapping to optimize classiﬁcation accuracy.
Label embedding
In computer vision, a vast amount of work has been devoted
to input embedding, i.e. how to represent an image. This
includes work on patch encoding (see for a recent
comparison), on kernel-based methods with a recent
focus on explicit embeddings , , on dimensionality reduction and on compression , , .
Comparatively, much less work has been devoted to label
embedding.
Provided that the embedding function ϕ is chosen correctly – i.e. “similar” classes are close according to the
Euclidean metric in the embedded space – label embedding
can be an effective way to share parameters between
classes. Consequently, the main applications have been
multiclass classiﬁcation with many classes , , ,
 and zero-shot learning , . We now provide a
taxonomy of embeddings. While this taxonomy is valid
for both input θ and output embeddings ϕ, we focus here
on output embeddings. They can be (i) ﬁxed and dataindependent, (ii) learned from data, or (iii) computed from
side information.
Data-Independent Embeddings. Kernel dependency estimation is an example of a strategy where ϕ is
data-independent and deﬁned implicitly through a kernel
in the Y space. The compressed sensing approach of
Hsu et al. , is another example of data-independent
embeddings where ϕ corresponds to random projections.
The Error Correcting Output Codes (ECOC) framework encompasses a large family of embeddings that are built using
information-theoretic arguments . ECOC approaches
allow in particular to tackle multi-class learning problems
as described by Dietterich and Bakiri in . The reader
can refer to for a summary of ECOC methods and
latest developments in the ternary output coding methods.
Other data-independent embeddings are based on pairwise
coupling and variants thereof such as generalized Bradley-
Terry models .
Learned Embeddings. A strategy consists in learning
jointly θ and ϕ to embed the inputs and outputs in a
common intermediate space Z. The most popular example is Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) , which
maximizes the correlation between inputs and outputs.
Other strategies have been investigated which maximize
directly classiﬁcation accuracy, including the nuclear norm
regularized learning of Amit et al. or the WSABIE
algorithm of Weston et al. .
Embeddings Derived From Side Information. There
are situations where side information is available. This
setting is particularly relevant when little training data is
available, as side information and the derived embeddings
can compensate for the lack of data. Side information
can be obtained at an image level or at a class
level . We focus on the latter setting which is more
practical as collecting side information at an image level is
more costly. Side information may include “hand-drawn”
descriptions , text descriptions , , , 
or class taxonomies , . Certainly, the closest work
to ours is that of Frome et al. 
1 which involves
embedding classes using textual corpora and then learning a
mapping between the input and output embeddings using a
ranking objective function. We also use a ranking objective
function and compare different sources of side information
to perform embedding: attributes, class taxonomies and
textual corpora.
While our focus is on embeddings derived from side
information for zero-shot recognition, we also considered
data independent embeddings and learned embeddings (using side information as a prior) for few-shots recognition.
LABEL EMBEDDING WITH ATTRIBUTES
Given a training set S = {(xn, yn), n = 1 . . . N} of
input/output pairs with xn ∈X and yn ∈Y, our goal is to
learn a function f : X →Y by minimizing an empirical
risk of the form
∆(yn, f(xn))
where ∆: Y × Y →R measures the loss incurred from
predicting f(x) when the true label is y, and where the
function f belongs to the function F. We shall use the 0/1
loss as a target loss: ∆(y, z) = 0 if y = z, 1 otherwise, to
measure the test error, while we consider several surrogate
losses commonly used for structured prediction at learning
time (see Sec. 3.3 for details on the surrogate losses used
in this paper).
An elegant framework, initially proposed in , allows
to concisely describe learning problems where both input
and output spaces are jointly or independently mapped
into lower-dimensional spaces. The framework relies on socalled embedding functions θ : X →˜
X and ϕ : Y →˜Y
resp for the inputs and outputs. Thanks to these embedding functions, the learning problem is cast into a regular
learning problem with transformed input/output pairs.
In what follows, we ﬁrst describe our function class
F (section3.1). We then explain how to leverage side
information under the form attributes to compute label
embeddings (section 3.2). We also discuss how to learn
the model parameters (section 3.3). While, for the sake
of simplicity, we focus on attributes in this section, the
approach readily generalizes to any side information that
can be encoded in matrix form (see following section 4).
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed model. Inspired from
the structured prediction formulation , we introduce a
compatibility function F : X × Y →R and deﬁne f as
f(x; w) = arg max
y∈Y F(x, y; w)
1. Note that the work of Frome et al. is posterior to our conference
submission .
where w denotes the model parameter vector of F and
F(x, y; w) measures how compatible is the pair (x, y)
given w. It is generally assumed that F is linear in some
combined feature embedding of inputs/outputs ψ(x, y):
F(x, y; w) = w′ψ(x, y)
and that the joint embedding ψ can be written as the tensor
product between the image embedding θ : X →˜
and the label embedding ϕ : Y →˜Y = RE:
ψ(x, y) = θ(x) ⊗ϕ(y)
and ψ(x, y) : RD × RE →RDE. In this case w is a DEdimensional vector which can be reshaped into a D × E
matrix W. Consequently, we can rewrite F(x, y; w) as a
bilinear form:
F(x, y; W) = θ(x)′Wϕ(y).
Other compatibility functions could have been considered.
For example, the function:
F(x, y; W) = −∥θ(x)′W −ϕ(y)∥2
is typically used in regression problems.
Also, if D and E are large, it might be valuable to
consider a low-rank decomposition W = U ′V to reduce the
effective number of parameters. In such a case, we have:
F(x, y; U, V ) = (Uθ(x))′ (V ϕ(y)) .
CCA , or more recently WSABIE rely, for example, on such a decomposition.
Embedding classes with attributes
We now consider the problem of deﬁning the label embedding function ϕA from attribute side information. In
this case, we refer to our approach as Attribute Label
Embedding (ALE).
We assume that we have C classes, i.e. Y = {1, . . . , C}
and that we have a set of E attributes = {ai, i = 1 . . . E}
to describe the classes. We also assume that we are provided
with an association measure ρy,i between each attribute ai
and each class y. These associations may be binary or realvalued if we have information about the association strength
(e.g. if the association value is obtained by averaging votes).
We embed class y in the E-dim attribute space as follows:
ϕA(y) = [ρy,1, . . . , ρy,E]
and denote ΦA the E × C matrix of attribute embeddings
which stacks the individual ϕA(y)’s.
We note that in equation (5) the image and label embeddings play symmetric roles. In the same way it makes sense
to normalize samples when they are used as input to largemargin classiﬁers, it can make sense to normalize the output
vectors ϕA(y). In section 5.3 we compare (i) continuous
embeddings, (ii) binary embeddings using {0, 1} for the
encoding and (iii) binary embeddings using {−1, +1} for
the encoding. We also explore two normalization strategies:
(i) mean-centering (i.e. compute the mean over all learning
classes and subtract it) and (ii) ℓ2-normalization. We underline that such encoding and normalization choices are not
arbitrary but relate to prior assumptions we might have on
the problem. For instance, underlying the {0, 1} embedding
is the assumption that the presence of the same attribute in
two classes should contribute to their similarity, but not its
absence. Here we assume a dot-product similarity between
attribute embeddings which is consistent with our linear
compatibility function (5). Underlying the {−1, 1} embedding is the assumption that the presence or the absence of
the same attribute in two classes should contribute equally
to their similarity. As for mean-centered attributes, they take
into account the fact that some attributes are more frequent
than others. For instance, if an attribute appears in almost all
classes, then in the mean-centered embedding, its absence
will contribute more to the similarity than its presence. This
is similar to an IDF effect in TF-IDF encoding. As for the
ℓ2-normalization, it enforces that each class is closest to
itself according to the dot-product similarity.
In the case where attributes are redundant, it might be
advantageous to de-correlate them. In such a case, we make
use of the compatibility function (7). The matrix V may
be learned from labeled data jointly with U. As a simpler
alternative, it is possible to ﬁrst learn the decorrelation, e.g.
by performing a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) on
the ΦA matrix, and then to learn U. We will study the effect
of attribute de-correlation in our experiments.
Learning algorithm
We now turn to the estimation of the model parameters W
from a labeled training set S. The simplest learning strategy
is to maximize directly the compatibility between the input
and output embeddings:
F(xn, yn; W)
with potentially some constraints and regularizations on
W. This is exactly the strategy adopted in regression ,
 . However, such an objective function does not optimize
directly our end-goal which is image classiﬁcation. Therefore, we draw inspiration from the WSABIE algorithm 
that learns jointly image and label embeddings from data
to optimize classiﬁcation accuracy. The crucial difference
between WSABIE and ALE is the fact that the latter uses
attributes as side information. Note that the proposed
ALE is not tied to WSABIE and that we report results
in 5.3 with other objective functions including regression
and structured SVM (SSVM). We chose to focus on the
WSABIE objective function with ALE because it yields
good results and is scalable.
In what follows, we brieﬂy review the WSABIE objective
function . Then, we present ALE which allows to do (i)
zero-shot learning with side information and (ii) learning
with few (or more) examples with side information. We,
then, detail the proposed learning procedures for ALE. In
what follows, Φ is the matrix which stacks the embeddings
WSABIE. Let 1(u) = 1 if u is true and 0 otherwise. Let:
ℓ(xn, yn, y) = ∆(yn, y) + θ(x)′W[ϕ(y) −ϕ(yn)]
Let r(xn, yn) be the rank of label yn for image xn.
Finally, let α1, α2, . . . , αC be a sequence of C non-negative
coefﬁcients and let βk = Pk
j=1 αj. Usunier et al. 
propose to use the following ranking loss for S:
βr(xn,yn) ,
where βr(xn,yn) := Pr(xn,yn)
αj. Since the βk’s are increasing with k, minimizing βr(xn,yn) enforces to minimize
the r(xn, yn)’s, i.e. it enforces correct labels to rank higher
than incorrect ones. αk quantiﬁes the penalty incurred by
going from rank k to k + 1. Hence, a decreasing sequence
α1 ≥α2 ≥. . . ≥αC ≥0 implies that a mistake on the
rank when the true rank is at the top of the list incurs a
higher loss than a mistake on the rank when the true rank is
lower in the list – a desirable property. Following Usunier
et al., we choose αk = 1/k.
Instead of optimizing an upper-bound on (11), Weston
et al. propose to optimize the following approximation of
objective (11):
R(S; W, Φ) = 1
βr∆(xn,yn)
max{0, ℓ(xn, yn, y)}
r∆(xn, yn) =
1(ℓ(xn, yn, y) > 0)
is an upper-bound on the rank of label yn for image xn.
The main advantage of the formulation (12) is that it
can be optimized efﬁciently through Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD), as described in Algorithm 1. The label
embedding space dimensionality is a parameter to set,
for instance using cross-validation. Note that the previous
objective function does not incorporate any regularization
term. Regularization is achieved implicitly by early stopping, i.e. the learning is terminated once the accuracy stops
increasing on the validation set.
ALE: Zero-Shot Learning. We now describe the ALE
objective for zero-shot learning. In such a case, we cannot
learn Φ from labeled data, but rely on side information. This
is in contrast to WSABIE. Therefore, the matrix Φ is ﬁxed
and set to ΦA (see section 3.2 for details on ΦA). We only
optimize the objective (12) with respect to W. We note that,
when Φ is ﬁxed and only W is learned, the objective (12)
is closely related to the (unregularized) structured SVM
(SSVM) objective :
y∈Y ℓ(xn, yn, y)
The main difference is the loss function, which is the
multi-class loss function for SSVM. The multi-class loss
function focuses on the score with the highest rank, while
Algorithm 1 ALE stochastic training
Intitialize W (0) randomly.
for t = 1 to T do
Draw (x,y) from S.
for k = 1, 2, . . . , C −1 do
Draw ¯y ̸= y from Y
if ℓ(x, y, ¯y) > 0 then
// Update W
W (t) = W (t−1) + ηtβ⌊C−1
⌋θ(x)[ϕ(y) −ϕ(¯y)]′
// Update Φ (not applicable to zero-shot)
(1 −ηtµ)ϕ(t−1)(y) + ηtµϕA(y)
(1 −ηtµ)ϕ(t−1)(¯y) + ηtµϕA(¯y)
ALE considers all scores in a weighted fashion. Similar to
WSABIE, a major advantage of ALE is its scalability to
large datasets , .
ALE: Few-Shots Learning. We now describe the ALE
objective to the case where we have labeled data and side
information. In such a case, we want to learn the class
embeddings using as prior information ΦA. We, therefore,
add to the objective (12) a regularizer:
R(S; W, Φ) + µ
2 ||Φ −ΦA||2
and optimize jointly with respect to W and Φ. Note that the
previous equation is somewhat reminiscent of the ranking
model adaptation of .
Training. For the optimization of the zero-shot as well as
the few-shots learning, we follow and use Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). Training with SGD consists at
each step t in (i) choosing a sample (x, y) at random, (ii)
repeatedly sampling a negative class denoted ¯y with ¯y ̸=
y until a violating class is found, i.e. until ℓ(x, y, ¯y) >
0, and (iii) updating the projection matrix (and the class
embeddings in case of few-shots learning) using a samplewise estimate of the regularized risk. Following , ,
we use a constant step size ηt = η. The detailed algorithm
is provided in Algorithm 1.
LABEL EMBEDDING BEYOND ATTRIBUTES
A wealth of label embedding methods have been proposed
over the years, in several communities and most often for
different purpose. Previous works considered either ﬁxed
(data-independent) or learned-from-data embeddings. Data
used for learning could be either restricted to the task-athand or could also be complemented by side information
from other modalities. The purpose of this paper is to
propose a general framework that encompasses all these
Illustration of Hierarchical Label Embedding
(HLE). In this example, given 7 classes (including
a “root” class), class 6 is encoded in a binary 7dimensional space as ϕH(6) = .
approaches, and compare the empirical performance on
image classiﬁcation tasks. Label embedding methods could
be organized according to two criteria: i) task-focused or
using other sources of side information; ii) ﬁxed or datadependent embedding.
Side information in label embedding
A ﬁrst criterion to discriminate among the different approaches for label embedding is whether the method is
using only the training data for the task at hand, that is the
examples (images) along with their class labels, or if it is
using other sources of information. In the latter option, side
information impacts the outputs, and can rely on several
types of modalities. In our setting, these modalities could
be i) attributes, ii) class taxonomies or iii) textual corpora.
i) was the focus of the previous section (see especially 3.2).
In what follows, we focus on ii) and iii).
Class hierarchical structures explicitly use expert knowledge to group the image classes into a hierarchy, such as
knowledge from ornithology for birds datasets. A hierarchical structure on the classes requires an ordering operation
≺in Y: z ≺y means that z is an ancestor of y in the tree
hierarchy. Given this tree structure, we can deﬁne ξy,z = 1
if z ≺y or z = y. The hierarchy embedding ϕH(y) can be
deﬁned as the C dimensional vector:
ϕH(y) = [ξy,1, . . . , ξy,C].
Here, ξy,i is the association measure of the ith node in the
hierarchy with class y. See Figure 2 for an illustration. We
refer to this embedding as Hierarchy Label Embedding
(HLE). Note that HLE was ﬁrst proposed in the context of
structured learning . Note also that, if classes are not
organized in a tree structure but form a graph, other types
of embeddings can be used, for instance by performing a
kernel PCA on the commute time kernel .
The co-occurrence of class names in textual corpora
can be automatically extracted using ﬁeld guides or public
resources such as Wikipedia
2. Co-occurences of class
names can be leveraged to infer relationships between
classes, leading to an embedding of the classes. Standard approaches to produce word embeddings from coocurrences include Latent Semantic Analyis (LSA) ,
probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (pLSA) or
2. 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) . In this work, we use
the recent state-of-the-art approach of Mikolov et al. ,
also referred to as “Word2Vec”. It uses a skip-gram model
that enforces a word (or a phrase) to be a good predictor
of its surrounding words, i.e. it enforces neighboring words
(or phrases) to be close to each other in the embedded
space. Such an embedding , which we refer to as Word2Vec
Label Embedding (WLE), was recently used for zero-shot
recognition on ﬁne-grained datasets .
In section 5, we compare attributes, class hierarchies
and textual information (i.e. resp. ALE, HLE and WLE)
as sources of side information for zero-shot recognition.
Data-dependence of label embedding
A second criterion is whether the label embedding used
at prediction time was ﬁt to training data at training
time or not. Here, being data-dependent refers to the
training data, putting aside all other possibles sources of
information. There are several types of approaches in this
respect: i) ﬁxed and data-independent label embeddings;
ii) data-dependent, learnt solely from training data; iii)
data-dependent, learnt jointly from training data and side
information.
Fixed and data-independent correspond to ﬁxed mappings of the original class labels to a lower-dimensional
space. In our experiments, we explore three of such kind
of embeddings: i) trivial label embedding corresponding to
identity mapping, which boils down to plain one-versusrest classiﬁcation (OVR); ii) Gaussian Label Embedding
(GLE), using Gaussian random projection matrices and
assuming Johnson-Lindenstrauss properties; iii) Hadamard
Label embedding, similarly, using Hadamard matrices for
building the random projection matrices. None of these
three label embedding approaches use the training data (nor
any side information) to build the label embedding. It is
worthwhile to note that the underlying dimensions of these
label embedding do rely on training data, since they are
usually cross-validated; we shall however ignore this fact
here for simplicity of the exposition.
Data-dependent label embedding use the training data to
build the label embedding used at prediction time. Popular
methods in this family are principal component analysis
on the outputs, and canonical correlation analysis, and the
plain WSABIE approach.
Note that it is possible to use both the available training
data and side information to learn the embedding functions. The proposed family of approaches, Attribute Label
Embedding (ALE), belongs to this latter category.
Combining embeddings. Different embeddings can be
easily combined in the label embedding framework, e.g.
through simple concatenation of the different embeddings
or through more complex operations such as a CCA of
the embeddings. This is to be contrasted with DAP which
cannot accommodate so easily other sources of prior information.
EXPERIMENTS
We now evaluate the proposed ALE framework on two
public benchmarks: Animal With Attributes (AWA) and
CUB-200-2011 (CUB). AWA contains roughly 30,000
images of 50 animal classes. CUB contains roughly
11,800 images of 200 bird classes.
We ﬁrst describe in sections 5.1 and 5.2 respectively
the input embeddings (i.e. image features) and output
embeddings that we have used in our experiments. In
section 5.3, we present zero-shot recognition experiments,
where training and test classes are disjoint. In section 5.4,
we go beyond zero-shot learning and consider the case
where we have plenty of training data for some classes
and little training data for others. Finally, in section 5.5 we
report results in the case where we have equal amounts of
training data for all classes.
Input embeddings
Images are resized to 100K pixels if larger while keeping
the aspect ratio. We extract 128-dim SIFT descriptors 
and 96-dim color descriptors from regular grids at
multiple scales. Both of them are reduced to 64-dim using
PCA. These descriptors are, then, aggregated into an imagelevel representation using the Fisher Vector (FV) ,
shown to be a state-of-the-art patch encoding technique
in . Therefore, our input embedding function θ takes
as input an image and outputs a FV representation. Using
Gaussian Mixture Models with 16 or 256 Gaussians, we
compute one SIFT FV and one color FV per image and
concatenate them into either 4,096 (4K) or 65,536-dim
(64K) FVs. As opposed to , we do not apply PQcompression which explains why we report better results
in the current work (e.g. on average 2% better with the
same output embeddings on CUB).
Output Embeddings
In our experiments, we considered three embeddings derived side information: attributes, class taxonomies and
textual corpora. When considering attributes, we use the
attributes (binary, or continuous) as they are provided with
the datasets, with no further side information.
Attribute Label Embedding (ALE). In AWA, each class
was annotated with 85 attributes by 10 students . Continuous class-attribute associations were obtained by averaging the per-student votes and subsequently thresholded
to obtain binary attributes. In CUB, 312 attributes were
obtained from a bird ﬁeld guide. Each image was annotated
according to the presence/absence of these attributes. The
per-image attributes were averaged to obtain continuousvalued class-attribute associations and thresholded with
respect to the overall mean to obtain binary attributes. By
default, we use continuous attribute embeddings in our
experiments on both datasets.
Hierarchical Label Embedding (HLE). We use the Wordnet hierarchy as a source of prior information to compute
output embeddings. We collect the set of ancestors of the
50 AWA (resp. 200 CUB) classes from Wordnet and build
a hierarchy with 150 (resp. 299) nodes3. Hence, the output
dimensionality is 150 (resp. 299) for AWA (resp. CUB).
We compute the binary output codes following : for a
given class, an output dimension is set to {0, 1} according
the absence/presence of the corresponding node among
the ancestors. The class embeddings are subsequently ℓ2normalized.
Word2Vec Label Embedding (WLE). We trained the
skip-gram model on the 13 February 2014 version of the
English-language Wikipedia which was tokenized to 1.5
million words and phrases that contain the names of our
visual object classes. Additionally we use a hierarchical
softmax layer 4. The dimensionality of the output embeddings was cross-validated on a per-dataset basis.
We also considered three data-independent embeddings:
One-Vs-Rest embedding (OVR). The embedding dimensionality is C where C is the number of classes and the
matrix Φ is the C × C identity matrix. This is equivalent
to training independently one classiﬁer per class.
Gaussian Label Embedding (GLE). The class embeddings are drawn from a standard normal distribution, similar
to random projections in compressed sensing . Similarly to WSABIE, the label embedding dimensionality E is
a parameter of GLE which needs to be cross-validated. For
GLE, since the embedding is randomly drawn, we repeat
the experiments 10 times and report the average (as well
as the standard deviation when relevant).
Hadamard Label Embedding. An Hadamard matrix is
a square matrix whose rows/columns are mutually orthogonal and whose entries are {−1, 1} . Hadamard
matrices can be computed iteratively with H1
. In our experiments
Hadamard embedding yielded signiﬁcantly worse results
than GLE. Therefore, we only report GLE results in the
following.
Finally, when labeled training data is available in suf-
ﬁcient quantity, the embeddings can be learned from the
training data. In this work, we considered one data-driven
approach to label embedding:
Web-Scale Annotation By Image Embedding (WSA-
BIE). The objective function of WSABIE is provided
in (12) and the corresponding optimization algorithm is
similar to the one of ALE described in Algorithm 1.
The difference is that WSABIE does not use any prior
information and, therefore, the regularization value µ is set
to 0 in equations (17) and (18). Another difference with
ALE is that the embedding dimensionality E is a parameter
of WSABIE which is obtained through cross-validation.
This is an advantage of WSABIE since it provides an
3. In some cases, some of the nodes have a single child. We did not
clean the automatically obtained hierarchy.
4. We obtain word2vec representations using the publicly available
implementation from 
Comparison of the continuous embedding (cont), the
binary {0, 1} embedding and the binary {+1, −1}
embedding. We also study the impact of
mean-centering (µ) and ℓ2-normalization.
additional free parameter compared to ALE. However, the
cross-validation procedure is computationally intensive.
In summary, in the following we report results for six
label embedding strategies: ALE, HLE, WLE, OVR, GLE
and WSABIE. Note that OVR, GLE and WSABIE are not
applicable to zero-shot learning since they do not rely on
any source of prior information and consequently do not
provide a meaningful way to embed a new class for which
we do not have any training data.
Zero-Shot Learning
Set-up. In this section, we evaluate the proposed ALE in the
zero-shot setting. For AWA, we use the standard zero-shot
setup which consists in learning parameters on 40 classes
and evaluating accuracy on the 10 remaining ones. We use
all the images in 40 learning classes (≈24,700 images) to
learn and cross-validate the model parameters. We then use
all the images in 10 evaluation classes (≈6,200 images)
to measure accuracy. For CUB, we use 150 classes for
learning (≈8,900 images) and 50 for evaluation (≈2,900
Comparison of output encodings for ALE. We ﬁrst
compare three different output encodings: (i) continuous
encoding, i.e. we do not binarize the class-attribute associations, (ii) binary {0, 1} encoding and (iii) binary
{−1, +1} encoding. We also compare two normalizations:
(i) mean-centering of the output embeddings and (ii) ℓ2normalization. We use the same embedding and normalization strategies at training and test time.
Results are shown in Table 1. The conclusions are the
following ones. Signiﬁcantly better results are obtained
with continuous embeddings than with thresholded binary
embeddings. On AWA with 64K-dim FV, the accuracy is
48.5% with continuous and 41.8% with {−1, +1} embeddings. Similarly on CUB with 64K-dim FV, we obtain
26.9% with continuous and 19.6% with {−1, +1} embeddings. This is expected since continuous embeddings
encode the strength of association between a class and an
attribute and, therefore, carry more information. We believe
Comparison of different learning algorithms for ALE:
ridge-regression (RR), multi-class SSVM (SSVM) and
ranking based on WSABIE (RNK).
Obj. pred.
Att. pred.
Comparison of DAP with ALE. Left: object
classiﬁcation accuracy (top-1 %) on the 10 AWA and
50 CUB evaluation classes. Right: attribute prediction
accuracy (AUC %) on the 85 AWA and 312 CUB
attributes. We use 64K FVs.
that this is a major strength of the proposed approach as
other algorithms such as DAP cannot accommodate such
soft values in a straightforward manner. Mean-centering
seems to have little impact with 0.8% (between 48.5% and
47.7%) on AWA and 0.6% (between 26.9% and 26.3%)
on CUB using 64K FV as input and continuous attributes
as output embeddings. On the other hand, ℓ2-normalization
makes a signiﬁcant difference in all conﬁgurations except
from the {−1, +1} encoding (e.g. only 2.4% difference
between 44.8% and 42.4% on AWA, 2.3% difference
between 22.8% and 20.5% on CUB). This is expected,
since all class embeddings already have a constant norm
for {−1, +1} embeddings (the square-root of the number
of output dimensions E). In what follows, we always use
the continuous ℓ2-normalized embeddings without meancentric normalization.
Comparison of learning algorithms. We now compare
three objective functions to learn the mapping between
inputs and outputs. The ﬁrst one is Ridge Regression (RR)
which was used in to map input features to output
attribute labels. In a nutshell, RR consists in optimizing a
regularized quadratic loss for which there exists a closed
form formula. The second one is the standard structured
SVM (SSVM) multiclass objective function of . The
third one is the ranking objective (RNK) of WSABIE 
which is described in detail section 3.3. The results are
provided in Table 2. On AWA, the highest result is 48.5%
obtained with RNK, followed by MUL with 47.9% whereas
RR performs worse with 44.5%. On CUB, RNK and
MUL obtain 26.3% accuracy whereas RR again performs
somewhat worse with 21.6%. Therefore, the conclusion
is that the multiclass and ranking frameworks are on-par
and outperform the simple ridge regression. This is not
surprising since the two former objective functions are more
closely related to our end goal which is classiﬁcation. In
what follows, we always use the ranking framework (RNK)
to learn the parameters of our model, since it both performs
well and was shown to be scalable , .
Comparison with DAP. In this section we compare our
approach to direct attribute prediction (DAP) . We start
by giving a short description of DAP and, then, present the
results of the comparison.
In DAP, an image x is assigned to the class y, which has
the highest posterior probability:
p(ae = ρy,e|x).
ρy,e is the binary association measure between attribute ae
and class y. p(ae = 1|x) is the probability that image x
contains attribute e. We train for each attribute one linear
classiﬁer on the FVs. We use a (regularized) logistic loss
which provides an attribute classiﬁcation accuracy similar
to SVM but with the added beneﬁt that its output is already
a probability.
Table 3(left) compares the proposed ALE to DAP for
64K-dim FVs. Our implementation of DAP obtains 41.0%
accuracy on AWA and 12.3% on CUB. Our result for DAP
on AWA is comparable to the 40.5% accuracy reported by
Lampert. Note however that the features are different. Lampert uses bag-of-features and a non-linear kernel classiﬁer
(χ2 SVMs), whereas we use Fisher vectors and a linear
SVM. Linear SVMs enable us to run experiments more
efﬁciently. We observe that on both datasets, the proposed
ALE outperforms DAP signiﬁcantly: 48.5% vs. 41.0% top-
1 accuracy on AWA and 26.9% vs. 12.3% on CUB.
Attribute Correlation. While correlation in the input space
is a well-studied topic, comparatively little work has been
done to measure the correlation in the output space. Here,
we reduce the output space dimensionality and study the
impact on the classiﬁcation accuracy. It is worth noting
that reducing the output dimensionality leads to signiﬁcant
speed-ups at training and test times. We explore two
different techniques: Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
and attribute sampling. We learn the SVD on AWA (resp.
CUB) on the 50×85 (resp. 200×312) ΦA matrix. For the
sampling, we sub-sample a ﬁxed number of attributes and
repeat the experiments 10 times for 10 different random
sub-samplings. The results of these experiments are presented in Figure 3.
We can conclude that there is a signiﬁcant amount
of correlation between attributes. For instance, on AWA
with 4K-dim FVs (Figure 3(a)) when reducing the output
dimensionality to 25, we lose less than 2% accuracy and
with a reduced dimensionality of 50, we perform even
slightly better than using all the attributes. On the same
dataset with 64K-dim FVs (Figure 3(c)) the accuracy drops
from 48.5% to approximately 45% when reducing from
an 85-dim space to a 25-dim space. More impressively,
on CUB with 4K-dim FVs (Figure 3(b)) with a reduced
dimensionality to 25, 50 or 100 from 312, the accuracy
is better than the conﬁguration that uses all the attributes.
On the same dataset with 64K-dim FVs (Figure 3(d)),
with 25 dimensions the accuracy is on par with the 312dim embedding. SVD outperforms a random sampling of
the attribute dimensions, although there is no guarantee
Number of Attributes
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
All attributes
(a) AWA (FV=4K)
Number of Attributes
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
All attributes
(b) CUB (FV=4K)
Number of Attributes
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
All attributes
(c) AWA (FV=64K)
Number of Attributes
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
All attributes
(d) CUB (FV=64K)
Classiﬁcation accuracy on AWA and CUB as a function of the label embedding dimensionality. We
compare the baseline which uses all attributes, with an SVD dimensionality reduction and a sampling of attributes
(we report the mean and standard deviation over 10 samplings).
Comparison of attributes (ALE), hierarchies (HLE) and
Word2Vec (WLE) for label embedding. We consider
the combination of ALE and HLE by simple
concatenation (AHLE early) or by the averaging of the
scores (AHLE late). We use 64K FVs.
that SVD will select the most informative dimensions (see
for instance the small pit in performance on CUB at 50
dimensions). In random sampling of output embeddings,
the choice of the attributes seems to be an important factor
that affects the descriptive power of output embeddings.
Consequently, the variance is higher (e.g. see Figures 3(a)
and Figure 3(c) with a reduced attribute dimensionality of
5 or 10) when a small number of attributes is selected. In
the following experiments, we do not use dimensionality
reduction of the attribute embeddings.
Attribute interpretability. In ALE, each column of W
can be interpreted as an attribute classiﬁer and θ(x)′W
as a vector of attribute scores of x. However, one major
difference with DAP is that we do not optimize for attribute
classiﬁcation accuracy. This might be viewed as a disadvantage of our approach as we might loose interpretability,
an important property of attribute-based systems when, for
instance, one wants to include a human in the loop , .
We, therefore, measured the attribute prediction accuracy
of DAP and ALE. For each attribute, following , we
measure the AUC on the set of the evaluation classes and
report the mean.
Attribute prediction scores are shown in Table 3(right).
On AWA, the DAP and ALE methods obtain the same AUC
accuracy of 72.7%. On the other hand, on CUB the DAP
method obtains 64.8% AUC whereas ALE is 5.4% lower
with 59.4% AUC. As a summary, the attribute prediction
accuracy of DAP is at least as high as that of ALE.
This is expected since DAP optimizes directly attributeclassiﬁcation accuracy. However, the AUC for ALE is
still reasonable, especially on AWA (performance is on
par). Thus, our learned attribute classiﬁers should still be
interpretable. We provide qualitative results on AWA in
Figure 4: we show the four highest ranked images for
some of the attributes with the highest AUC scores (namely
>90%) and lowest AUC scores (namely <50%).
Comparison of ALE, HLE and WLE. We now compare
different sources of side information. Results are provided
in Table 4. On AWA, ALE obtains 48.5% accuracy, HLE
obtains 40.4% and WLE obtains 32% accuracy. On CUB,
ALE obtains 26.9% accuracy, HLE obtains 18.5% and
WLE obtains 16.8% accuracy. Note that in , we reported
better results on AWA with HLE compared to ALE. The
main difference with the current experiment is that we
use continuous attribute encodings while was using a
binary encoding. Note also that the comparatively poor
performance of WLE with respect to ALE and HLE is
not unexpected: while ALE and HLE rely on strong expert
supervision, WLE is computed in an unsupervised manner
from Wikipedia.
We also consider the combination of attributes and hierarchies (we do not consider the combination of WLE with
other embeddings given its relatively poor performance).
We explore two simple alternatives: the concatenation of
the embeddings (AHLE early) and the late fusion of classi-
ﬁcation scores calculated by averaging the scores obtained
using ALE and HLE separately (AHLE late). On both
datasets, late fusion has a slight edge over early fusion and
leads to a small improvement over ALE alone (+0.9% on
AWA and +0.4% on CUB).
In what follows, we do not report further results with
WLE given its relatively poor performance and focus on
ALE and HLE.
Comparison with the state-of-the-art. We can compare
our results to those published in the literature on AWA
since we are using the standard training/testing protocol
(there is no such zero-shot protocol on CUB). To the best
of our knowledge, the best zero-shot recognition results on
AWA are those of Yu et al. with 48.3% accuracy. We
report 48.5% with ALE and 49.4% with AHLE (late fusion
of ALE and HLE). Note that we use different features.
(a) is quadrapedal
(b) lives in ocean
(c) lives on the ground
(d) lives in plains
(e) hibernates
(f) is weak
Fig. 4. Sample attributes recognized with high (> 90%) accuracy (top) and low (i.e. <50%) accuracy (bottom)
by ALE on AWA. For each attribute we show the images ranked highest. Note that a AUC < 50% means that
the prediction is worse than random on average. The images whose attribute is predicted correctly are circled in
green and those whose attribute is predicted incorrectly are circled in red.
Number of additional training samples
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
(a) AWA (FV=64K)
Number of additional training samples
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
(b) CUB (FV=64K)
Classiﬁcation accuracy on AWA and CUB
as a function of the number of training samples per
class. To train the classiﬁers, we use all the images
of the training “background” classes (used in zero-shot
learning), and a small number of images randomly
drawn from the relevant evaluation classes. Reported
results are 10-way in AWA and 50-way in CUB.
Few-Shots Learning
Set-up. In these experiments, we assume that we have few
(e.g. 2, 5, 10, etc.) training samples for a set of classes
of interest (the 10 AWA and 50 CUB evaluation classes)
in addition to all the samples from a set of “background
classes” (the remaining 40 AWA and 150 CUB classes).
For each evaluation class, we use approximately half of
the images for training (the 2, 5, 10, etc. training samples
are drawn from this pool) and the other half for testing. The
minimum number of images per class in the evaluation set
is 302 (AWA) and 42 (CUB). To have the same number of
training samples, we use 100 images (AWA) and 20 images
(CUB) per class as training set and the remaining images
for testing.
Algorithms. We compare the proposed ALE with three
baselines: OVR, GLE and WSABIE. We are especially
interested in analyzing the following factors: (i) the inﬂuence of parameter sharing (ALE, GLE, WSABIE) vs. no
parameter sharing (OVR), (ii) the inﬂuence of learning the
embedding (WSABIE) vs. having a ﬁxed embedding (ALE,
OVR and GLE), and (iii) the inﬂuence of prior information
(ALE) vs. no prior information (OVR, GLE and WSABIE)
For ALE and WSABIE, W is initialized to the matrix
learned in the zero-shot experiments. For ALE, we experimented with three different learning variations:
• ALE(W) consists in learning the parameters W and
keeping the embedding ﬁxed (Φ = ΦA).
• ALE(Φ) consists in learning the embedding parameters
Φ and keeping W ﬁxed.
• ALE(WΦ) consists in learning both W and Φ.
While both ALE(W) and ALE(Φ) are implemented
by stochastic (sub)gradient descent (see Algorithm 1 in
Sec. 3.3), ALE(WΦ) is implemented by stochastic alternating optimization. Stochastic alternating optimization
alternates between SGD for optimizing over the variable
W and optimizing over the variable Φ. Theoretical convergence of SGD for ALE(W) and ALE(Φ) follows from
standard results in stochastic optimization with convex nonsmooth objectives , . Theoretical convergence of
the stochastic alternating optimization is beyond the scope
of the paper. Experimental results show that the strategy
actually works ﬁne empirically.
Results. We show results in Figure 5 for AWA and CUB
using 64K-dim features. We can draw the following conclusions. First, GLE underperforms all other approaches for
limited training data which shows that random embeddings
are not appropriate in this setting. Second, in general,
WSABIE and ALE outperform OVR and GLE for small
training sets (e.g. for less than 10 training samples) which
shows that learned embeddings (WSABIE) or embeddings
based on prior information (ALE) can be effective when
training data is scarce. Third, for tiny amounts of training
data (e.g. 2-5 training samples per class), ALE outperforms
WSABIE which shows the importance of prior information
in this setting. Fourth, all variations of ALE – ALE(W),
ALE(Φ) and ALE(WΦ) – perform somewhat similarly.
Fifth, as the number of training samples increases, all
algorithms seem to converge to a similar accuracy, i.e. as
expected parameter sharing and prior information are less
crucial when training data is plentiful.
Learning and testing on the full datasets
In these experiments, we learn and test the classiﬁers on
the 50 AWA (resp. 200 CUB) classes. For each class,
we reserve approximately half of the data for training
and cross-validation purposes and half of the data for
test purposes. On CUB, we use the standard training/test
partition provided with the dataset. Since the experimental
protocol in this section is signiﬁcantly different from the
one chosen for zero-shot and few-shots learning, the results
cannot be directly compared with those of the previous
Comparison of output encodings. We ﬁrst compare different encoding techniques (continuous embedding vs. binary embedding) and normalization strategies (with/without
mean centering and with/without ℓ2-normalization). The
results are provided in Table 5. We can draw the following
conclusions.
As is the case for zero-shot learning, mean-centering
has little impact and ℓ2-normalization consistently improves
performance, showing the importance of normalized outputs. On the other hand, a major difference with the zeroshot case is that the {0, 1} and continuous embeddings perform on par. On AWA, in the 64K-dim FVs case, ALE with
continuous embeddings leads to 53.3% accuracy whereas
{0, 1} embeddings leads to 52.5% (0.8% difference). On
CUB with 64K-dim FVs, ALE with continuous embeddings
leads to 21.6% accuracy while {0, 1} embeddings lead
to 21.4% (0.2% difference). This seems to indicate that
the quality of the prior information used to perform label
embedding has less impact when training data is plentiful.
Comparison of output embedding methods. We now
compare on the full training sets several learning algorithms: OVR, GLE with a costly setting E = 2, 500 output
dimensions this was the largest output dimensionality allowing us to run the experiments in a reasonable amount
of time), WSABIE (with cross-validated E), ALE (we use
the ALE(W) variant where the embedding parameters are
kept ﬁxed), HLE and AHLE (with early and late fusion).
Results are provided in Table 6.
We can observe that, in this setting, all methods perform
somewhat similarly. Especially, the simple OVR and GLE
baselines provide a competitive performance: OVR outperforms all other methods on CUB and GLE performs best
on AWA. This conﬁrms that the quality of the embedding
has little importance when training data is plentiful.
Comparison of different output encodings: binary
{0, 1} encoding, continuous encoding, with/without
mean-centering (µ) and with/without ℓ2-normalization
Comparison of different output embedding methods
(OVR, GLE, WSABIE, ALE, HLE, AHLE early and
AHLE late ) on the full AWA and CUB datasets (resp.
50 and 200 classes). We use 64K FVs.
Reducing the training set size. We also studied the effect
of reducing the amount of training data by using only 1/4,
1/2 and 3/4 of the full training set. We therefore sampled
the corresponding fraction of images from the full training
set and repeated the experiments ten times with ten different
samples. For these experiments, we report GLE results with
two settings: using a low-cost setting, i.e. using the same
number of output dimensions E as ALE (i.e. 85 for AWA
and 312 for CUB) and using a high-cost setting, i.e. using
a large number of output dimensions (E = 2, 500 – see
comment above about the choice of the value 2, 500). We
show results in Figure 6.
On AWA, GLE outperforms all alternatives, closely
followed by AHLE late. On CUB, OVR outperforms all
alternatives, closely followed again by AHLE late. ALE,
HLE and GLE with high-dimensional embeddings perform
similarly. For these experiments, a general conclusion is
that, when we use high dimensional features, even simple
algorithms such as the OVR which are not well-justiﬁed
for multi-class classiﬁcation problems can lead to state-ofthe-art performance.
CONCLUSION
We proposed to cast the problem of attribute-based classi-
ﬁcation as one of label-embedding. The proposed Attribute
Label Embedding (ALE) addresses in a principled fashion
the limitations of the original DAP model. First, we solve
directly the problem at hand (image classiﬁcation) without
introducing an intermediate problem (attribute classiﬁcation). Second, our model can leverage labeled training
Partition of Training Data
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
AHLE (early)
AHLE (late)
GLE (2500)
(a) AWA (FV=64K)
Partition of Training Data
Top−1 Accuracy (in %)
AHLE (early)
AHLE (late)
GLE (2500)
(b) CUB (FV=64K)
Learning on AWA and CUB using 1/4, 1/2,
3/4 and all the training data. Compared output embeddings: OVR, GLE, WSABIE, ALE, HLE, AHLE early
and AHLE late. Experiments repeated 10 times for
different sampling of Gaussians. We use 64K FVs.
data (if available) to update the label embedding, using
the attribute embedding as a prior. Third, the label embedding framework is not restricted to attributes and can
accommodate other sources of side information such as
class hierarchies or words embeddings derived from textual
In the zero-shot setting, we improved image classiﬁcation
results with respect to DAP without losing attribute interpretability. Continuous attributes can be effortlessly used
in ALE, leading to a large boost in zero-shot classiﬁcation
accuracy. As an addition, we have shown that the dimensionality of the output space can be signiﬁcantly reduced
with a small loss of accuracy. In the few-shots setting,
we showed improvements with respect to the WSABIE
algorithm, which learns the label embedding from labeled
data but does not leverage prior information.
Another important contribution of this work was to relate
different approaches to label embedding: data-independent
approaches (e.g. OVR, GLE), data-driven approaches (e.g.
WSABIE) and approaches based on side information (e.g.
ALE, HLE and WLE). We present here a uniﬁed framework
allowing to compare them in a systematic manner.
Learning to combine several inputs has been extensively
studied in machine learning and computer vision, whereas
learning to combine outputs is still largely unexplored. We
believe that it is a worthwhile research path to pursue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Computer Vision group at XRCE is funded partially by the
Project Fire-ID (ANR-12-CORD-0016). The LEAR team of Inria
is partially funded by ERC Allegro, and European integrated
project AXES.