Machine Learning, 28, 41–75 
c⃝1997 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Multitask Learning*
RICH CARUANA
 
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Editors: Lorien Pratt and Sebastian Thrun
Abstract. Multitask Learning is an approach to inductive transfer that improves generalization by using the
domain information contained in the training signals of related tasks as an inductive bias. It does this by learning
tasks in parallel while using a shared representation; what is learned for each task can help other tasks be learned
better. This paper reviews prior work on MTL, presents new evidence that MTL in backprop nets discovers task
relatedness without the need of supervisory signals, and presents new results for MTL with k-nearest neighbor and
kernel regression. In this paper we demonstrate multitask learning in three domains. We explain how multitask
learning works, and show that there are many opportunities for multitask learning in real domains. We present an
algorithm and results for multitask learning with case-based methods like k-nearest neighbor and kernel regression,
and sketch an algorithm for multitask learning in decision trees. Because multitask learning works, can be applied
to many different kinds of domains, and can be used with different learning algorithms, we conjecture there will
be many opportunities for its use on real-world problems.
Keywords: inductive transfer, parallel transfer, multitask learning, backpropagation, k-nearest neighbor, kernel
regression, supervised learning, generalization
Introduction
Multitask Learning (MTL) is an inductive transfer mechanism whose principle goal is
to improve generalization performance. MTL improves generalization by leveraging the
domain-speciﬁc information contained in the training signals of related tasks. It does this by
training tasks in parallel while using a shared representation. In effect, the training signals
for the extra tasks serve as an inductive bias. Section 1.2 argues that inductive transfer is
important if we wish to scale tabula rasa learning to complex, real-world tasks. Section 1.3
presents the simplest method we know for doing multitask inductive transfer, adding extra
tasks (i.e., extra outputs) to a backpropagation net. Because the MTL net uses a shared
hidden layer trained in parallel on all the tasks, what is learned for each task can help other
tasks be learned better. Section 1.4 argues that it is reasonable to view training signals as
an inductive bias when they are used this way.
Section 2 demonstrates that MTL works. We compare the performance of single task
learning (STL—learning just one task at a time) and multitask learning in backpropagation
on three problems. One of these problems is a real-world problem created by researchers
other than the author who did not consider using MTL when they collected the data.
This work was supported by ARPA grant F33615-93-1-1330, NSF grant BES-9315428, Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research grant HS06468, and by Justsystem Pittsburgh Research Center.
R. CARUANA
Section 3 explains how MTL in backprop nets works. Section 3.1 suggests mechanisms
that could improve generalization even if the extra tasks’ training signals are not relevant
to the main task. We present an empirical test that rules out these mechanisms and thus
ensures that the beneﬁt from MTL is due to the information in the extra tasks. In section
3.2 we present mechanisms that explain how MTL leverages the information in the extra
training signals to improve generalization. In section 3.3 we show that MTL in backprop
nets is able to determine how tasks are related without being given an explicit training signal
for task relatedness.
Section 4 may be the most important part of this paper. It shows that there are many
opportunities for MTL (and for inductive transfer in general) on real-world problems. At
ﬁrst glance most of the problems one sees in machine learning today do not look like
multitask problems. We believe most current problems in machine learning appear to be
single task because of the way we have been trained. Many—in fact, we believe most—
real-world problems are multitask problems and performance is being sacriﬁced when we
treat them as single task problems.
Sections 1-4 use the simplest MTL algorithm we know of, a backprop net with multiple
outputs sharing a single, fully connected hidden layer. But MTL is a collection of ideas,
techniques, and algorithms, not one algorithm. In Section 5 we present MTL algorithms
for k-nearest neighbor and decision trees. While these algorithms look rather different
from MTL in backprop nets, there is strong overlap of mechanisms and issues; all MTL
algorithms must address essentially the same set of problems, even if the speciﬁc mechanism
in each algorithm is different.
Inductive transfer is not new, and many backprop nets used multiple outputs before MTL
came along. Related work is presented in Section 6. Section 7 discusses many issues that
arise in MTL and brieﬂy mentions future work. Section 8 is a summary.
Motivation
The standard methodology in machine learning is to learn one task at a time. Large problems
are broken into small, reasonably independent subproblems that are learned separately and
then recombined ). This paper argues that sometimes this methodology is counterproductive because it
ignores a potentially rich source of information available in many real-world problems: the
information contained in the training signals of other tasks drawn from the same domain.
An artiﬁcial neural network (or a decision tree, or a ...) trained tabula rasa on a single,
isolated, very difﬁcult task is unlikely to learn it well. For example, a net with a 1000x
1000-pixel input retina is unlikely to learn to recognize complex objects in real-world scenes
given the number of training patterns and training time likely to be available. Might it be
better to require the learner to learn many things simultaneously? Yes. If the tasks can share
what they learn, the learner may ﬁnd it is easier to learn them together than in isolation.
Thus, if we simultaneously train a net to recognize object outlines, shapes, edges, regions,
subregions, textures, reﬂections, highlights, shadows, text, orientation, size, distance, etc., it
may learn better to recognize complex objects in the real world. This approach is Multitask
MULTITASK LEARNING
MTL in Backpropagation Nets
Figure 1 shows four separate artiﬁcial neural nets (ANNs). Each net is a function of the
same inputs, and has one output. Backpropagation is applied to these nets by training each
net in isolation. Because the four nets are not connected, it is not possible for what one net
learns to help another net. We call this approach Single Task Learning (STL).
Figure 1. Single Task Backpropagation (STL) of four tasks with the same inputs.
Figure 2 shows a single net with the same inputs as the four nets in Figure 1, but which
has four outputs, one for each task the nets in Figure 1 were being trained on. Note that
these four outputs are fully connected to a hidden layer that they share.1 Backpropagation
is done in parallel on the four outputs in the MTL net. Because the four outputs share a
common hidden layer, it is possible for internal representations that arise in the hidden layer
for one task to be used by other tasks. Sharing what is learned by different tasks while tasks
are trained in parallel is the central idea in multitask learning .
MTL is an inductive transfer method that uses the domain speciﬁc information contained
in the training signals of related tasks. It does this by learning the multiple tasks in parallel
while using a shared representation. In backpropagation, MTL allows features developed in
the hidden layer for one task to be used by other tasks. It also allows features to be developed
to support several tasks that would not have been developed in any STL net trained on the
tasks in isolation. Importantly, MTL also allows some hidden units to become specialized
for just one or a few tasks; other tasks can ignore hidden units they do not ﬁnd useful by
keeping the weights connected to them small.
Training Signals as an Inductive Bias
MTLisonewayofachievinginductivetransferbetweentasks. Thegoalofinductivetransfer
is to leverage additional sources of information to improve the performance of learning on
the current task. Inductive transfer can be used to improve generalization accuracy, the
speed of learning, and the intelligibility of learned models. In this paper we focus solely on
R. CARUANA
Figure 2. Multitask Backpropagation (MTL) of four tasks with the same inputs.
improving accuracy. We are not concerned about the computational cost of learning nor the
intelligibility of what is learned. One way transfer improves generalization is by providing
a stronger inductive bias than would be available without the extra knowledge. This can
yield better generalization with a ﬁxed training set, or reduce the number of training patterns
needed to achieve some ﬁxed level of performance.
Inductive bias is anything that causes an inductive learner to prefer some hypotheses over
otherhypotheses. Bias-freelearningisimpossible; muchofthepowerofaninductivelearner
follows directly from the power of its inductive bias . Multitask learning
uses the training signals for related tasks as an inductive bias to improve generalization.
One does not usually think of training signals as a bias; but when the training signals are
for tasks other than the main task, it is easy to see that, from the point of view of the main
task, the other tasks may serve as a bias. The multitask bias causes the inductive learner
to prefer hypotheses that explain more than one task. For this multitask bias to exist, the
inductive learner must be biased to prefer hypotheses that have utility across multiple tasks.
Does MTL Work?
Before jumping into how multitask learning works and when to use it, we ﬁrst demonstrate
that it does work. We do this not only to convince the reader that multitask learning is
worthwhile, but because the examples will help the reader develop intuitions about how
multitask learning works and where it is applicable.
In this section we present three applications of MTL in backprop nets. The ﬁrst uses
simulated data for an ALVINN-like road-following domain. The second uses real data
collected with a robot-mounted camera. This data was collected speciﬁcally to demonstrate
MULTITASK LEARNING
MTL. The third domain applies MTL to a medical decision-making domain. The data in
this domain was collected by other researchers who did not consider using MTL when
collecting the data.
1D-ALVINN uses a road image simulator ﬁrst developed by Pomerleau to permit rapid
testing of learning ideas for road-following domains . The original simulator generates synthetic road images based on a number of user-deﬁned parameters such
as the road width, number of lanes, angle and ﬁeld of view of the camera. We modiﬁed the
simulator to generate 1-D road images comprised of a single 32-pixel horizontal scan line
instead of the original 2-D 30x32-pixel image. We did this to speed learning so more thorough experimentation could be done—training moderate sized nets with the full 2-D retina
was computationally too expensive to allow many replications. Nevertheless, 1D-ALVINN
retains much of the complexity of the original 2-D domain; the main complexity lost is that
road curvature is no longer visible, and the smaller input (960 pixels vs. 32 pixels) makes
learning easier.
The principle task in both 1D-ALVINN and 2D-ALVINN is to predict steering direction.
For our MTL experiments, eight additional tasks were used:
• whether the road is one or two lanes
• location of centerline (2-lane roads only)
• location of left edge of road
• location of right edge of road
• location of road center
• intensity of road surface
• intensity of region bordering road
• intensity of centerline (2-lane roads only)
These additional tasks are all computable from the internal variables in the simulator. We
modiﬁed the simulator so that the training signals for these extra tasks were added to the
synthetic data along with the training signal for the main steering task.
Table1showstheperformanceoftenrunsofsingleandmultitasklearningon1D-ALVINN
using nets with one hidden layer. The MTL net has 32 inputs, 16 hidden units, and 9 outputs.
The 36 STL nets have 32 inputs, 2, 4, 8 or 16 hidden units, and 1 output each.2 Note that
the size of the MTL nets was not optimized.
The entries under the STL and MTL headings are the generalization error for nets of the
speciﬁed size when early stopping is used to halt training. The bold STL entries are the
STL runs that yielded best performance. The last two columns compare STL and MTL.
The ﬁrst column is the percent reduction in error of MTL over the best STL run. Negative
percentages indicate MTL performs better. This test is biased in favor of STL because it
compares single runs of MTL on an unoptimized net size with several independent runs of
STL that use different random seeds and are able to ﬁnd near-optimal net size. The last
column is the percent improvement of MTL over the average STL performance. Differences
marked with an “*” are statistically signiﬁcant at 0.05 or better. Note that on the important
steering task MTL outperforms STL 15–30%. It does this without having access to any
extra training patterns: exactly the same training patterns are used for both STL and MTL.
The only difference is that the MTL training patterns have the training signals for all nine
tasks, whereas the STL training patterns have training signals for only one task at a time.
R. CARUANA
Table 1. Performance of STL and MTL with one hidden layer on tasks in the 1D-ALVINN domain. The bold
entries in the STL columns are the STL runs that performed best. Differences statistically signiﬁcant at 0.05 or
better are marked with an *.
ROOT-MEAN SQUARED ERROR ON TEST SET
Single Task Backprop (STL)
Change MTL
Change MTL
to Best STL
to Mean STL
1 or 2 Lanes
Right Edge
Line Center
Road Center
Road Greylevel
Edge Greylevel
Line Greylevel
1D-ALVINN is not a real domain; the data is generated with a simulator. To test MTL on a
more realistic problem, we created an object recognition domain similar in some respects to
1D-ALVINN. In 1D-DOORS, the main tasks are to locate doorknobs and to recognize door
types (single or double) in images of doors collected with a robot-mounted color camera.
Figure 3 shows several door images from the database. As with 1D-ALVINN, the problem
was simpliﬁed by using horizontal stripes from the images, one for the green channel and
one for the blue channel. Each stripe is 30 pixels wide (accomplished by applying Gaussian
smoothing to the original 150 pixel-wide image) and occurs at the vertical height in the
image where the doorknob is located. Ten tasks were used. These are:
• horizontal location of doorknob
• single or double door
• horizontal location of doorway center
• width of doorway
• horizontal location of left door jamb
• horizontal location of right door jamb
• width of left door jamb
• width of right door jamb
• horizontal location of left edge of door
• horizontal location of right edge of door
As this is a real domain, the training signals for these tasks had to be acquired manually.
We used a mouse to click on the appropriate features in each image in the training and test
sets. Since it was necessary to process each image manually to acquire the training signals
for the two main tasks, it was not that difﬁcult to acquire the training signals for the extra
The difﬁculty of 1D-DOORS precludes running as exhaustive a set of experiments as
with 1D-ALVINN; comparison could be done only for the two tasks we considered most
important: doorknob location and door type. STL was tested on nets using 6, 24, and 96
hidden units. MTL was tested on nets with 120 hidden units. The results of ten trials with
STL and MTL are in Table 2.
MTL generalizes 20–30% better than STL on these tasks, even when compared to the
best of three different runs of STL. Once again, note that the training patterns used for STL
MULTITASK LEARNING
Figure 3. Sample single and double doors from the 1D-DOORS domain.
and MTL are identical except that the MTL training patterns contain additional training
signals. It is the information contained in these extra training signals that helps the hidden
layer learn a better internal representation for the door recognition domain, and this better
representation in turn helps the net better learn to recognize door types and the location of
the doorknobs.
Table 2. Performance of STL and MTL on the two main tasks in 1D-DOORS. The bold entries in the STL columns
are the STL runs that performed best. Differences statistically signiﬁcant at 0.05 or better are marked with an *.
ROOT-MEAN SQUARED ERROR ON TEST SET
Single Task Backprop (STL)
Change MTL
to Best STL
Doorknob Loc
The 1D-ALVINN domain used simulated data. Although the simulator was not built
with MTL in mind, it was modiﬁed to make extra task signals available in the training
data. The 1D-DOORS domain used real data collected from a real camera on a real robot
wandering around a real hallway. Although every attempt was made to keep this domain
challenging (e.g., the robot was not kept parallel to the hallway and the distance to the
doors and illumination was allowed to vary), it is still a domain contrived speciﬁcally to
demonstrate MTL. How well will MTL work on a real domain which was not customized
Pneumonia Prediction
Of the 3,000,000 cases of pneumonia each year in the U.S., 900,000 are admitted to the
hospital for treatment and testing. Most pneumonia patients recover given appropriate treatment, and many can be treated effectively without hospitalization. Nonetheless, pneumonia
is serious: 100,000 of those hospitalized for pneumonia die from it, and many more are at
elevated risk if not hospitalized.
R. CARUANA
A primary goal in medical decision making is to accurately, swiftly, and economically
identify patients at high risk from diseases like pneumonia so they may be hospitalized to
receive aggressive testing and treatment; patients at low risk may be more comfortably,
safely, and economically treated at home. In this problem the diagnosis of pneumonia
has already been made. The goal is not to diagnose if the patient has pneumonia, but to
determine how much risk the illness poses to the patient.
Because some of the most useful tests for predicting pneumonia risk are usually measured
after one is hospitalized, they will be available only if preliminary assessment indicates
hospitalization and further testing is warranted. But low-risk patients can often be identiﬁed
using measurements made prior to admission to the hospital. We have a database in which
all patients were hospitalized. It is the extra lab tests made once these patients are admitted
to the hospital that we will use as extra tasks for MTL; they cannot be used as inputs because
they usually will not be available for future patients when the decision to hospitalize or not
must be made.
The Medis Pneumonia Database contains 14,199 pneumonia cases
collected from 78 hospitals in 1989. Each patient in the database was diagnosed with
pneumonia and hospitalized. 65 measurements are available for most patients. These
include 30 basic measurements acquired prior to hospitalization, such as age, sex, and
pulse, and 35 lab results, such as blood counts or blood gases, usually not available until
after hospitalization. The database indicates how long each patient was hospitalized and
whether the patient lived or died. 1,542 (10.9%) of the patients died. The most useful
decision aid for this problem would predict which patients will live or die. But this is too
difﬁcult. In practice, the best that can be achieved is to estimate a probability of death
(POD) from the observed symptoms. In fact, it is sufﬁcient to learn to rank patients by their
POD so lower-risk patients can be discriminated from higher-risk patients; patients at least
risk may then be considered for outpatient care.
The performance criteria used by others working with the Medis database is the accuracy with which one can select prespeciﬁed fractions of the patient
population who will live. For example, given a population of 10,000 patients, ﬁnd the 20%
of this population at least risk. To do this we learn a risk model and a threshold for this
model that allows 20% of the population (2,000 patients) to fall below it. If 30 of the 2,000
patients below this threshold die, the error rate is 30/2000 = 0.015. We say that the error rate
for FOP 0.20 is 0.015 (FOP stands for “fraction of population”). In this paper we consider
FOPs 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Our goal is to learn models and model thresholds, such
that the error rate at each FOP is minimized.
The Medis database contains results from 35 lab tests that usually will be available only
after patients are hospitalized. These results typically will not be available when the model
is used because the patients will not yet have been admitted. We use MTL to beneﬁt from
the future lab results. The extra lab values are used as extra backprop outputs, as shown
in Figure 4. The hope is that the extra outputs will bias the shared hidden layer towards
representations that better capture important features of each patient’s condition.3
We developed a method called Rankprop that learns to rank patients without learning to
predict mortality. “Rankprop” is short for “backpropagation using sum-of-squares errors
on repeatedly re-estimated ranks”. Rankprop outperforms traditional backprop using sum-
MULTITASK LEARNING
of-squares errors (SSE) on targets 0=lives,1=dies by 10% – 40% on this domain, depending
on which FOP is used for comparison. It is the best performer we know of on this database.
See for details about rankprop and why it outperforms
SSE on this domain.
Figure 4. Using future lab results as extra outputs to bias learning for the main rankprop risk prediction task. The
lab tests would help most if they could be used as inputs, but will not yet have been measured when risk must be
predicted, so we use them as extra MTL outputs instead.
The STL net has 32 hidden units and one output for the rankprop risk prediction. The
MTL net has 64 hidden units. (Preliminary experiments suggested 32 hidden units was near
optimal for STL, and that MTL would perform somewhat better with nets as large as 512
hidden units.) Table 3 shows the mean performance of ten runs of rankprop using STL and
MTL. The bottom row shows the improvement over STL with rankprop. Although MTL
lowers the error at each FOP compared with STL, only the differences at FOP 0.3, 0.4, and
0.5 are statistically signiﬁcant with ten trials.
Table 3. Error Rates (fraction deaths) for STL with Rankprop and MTL with Rankprop on Fractions of the
Population (FOP) predicted to be at low risk between 0.0 and 0.5. MTL makes 5–10% fewer errors than STL.
STL Rankprop
MTL Rankprop
R. CARUANA
We also tried using feature nets on this problem. Feature nets is
a competing approach that trains nets to predict the missing future measurements and uses
the predictions, or the hidden layers learned for these predictions, as extra inputs. On this
pneumonia problem feature nets did not yield beneﬁts comparable to MTL.
How Does MTL Work?
Why are tasks learned better when trained on a net that learns other related tasks at the same
time? Is it because information in the extra tasks is helping the hidden layer learn a better
internal representation, or is something else less interesting happening? And, if multitask
learning is exploiting the information in the training signals of related tasks, how does it do
this? This section addresses these questions.
Ruling Out Alternate Explanations
There are many potential reasons why adding extra outputs to a backprop net might improve
generalization performance. For example, adding noise to backpropagation sometimes improves generalization . To the extent that tasks are uncorrelated, their contribution to the aggregate gradient (the gradient that sums the error fed back
from each layer’s outputs) can appear as noise to other tasks. Thus uncorrelated tasks might
improve generalization by acting as a source of noise. Another possibility is that adding
tasks might change weight updating dynamics to somehow favor nets with more tasks.
For example, adding extra tasks increases the effective learning rate on the input-to-hidden
layer weights relative to the hidden layer-to-output weights. Maybe larger learning rates
on the ﬁrst layer improves learning. A third possibility is net capacity; MTL nets share the
hidden layer between all tasks. Perhaps reduced capacity improves generalization on these
It is possible to devise experiments to disprove each of these explanations, but the number
of possible explanations that would have to be ruled out is not small. It would be better to
show the beneﬁts of MTL depend on the training signals for the extra tasks being related to
the main task, as the following experiment does: Take an MTL training set. For each case
in the training set, there is a set of input features, the main task training signal, and a set of
extra task training signals. Shufﬂe the extra task training signals among all the cases in the
training set, i.e., randomly reassign the training signals for the extra tasks among the cases.
This breaks the relationship between the main task and the extra tasks without altering other
properties of the extra tasks; the distributions of the extra tasks remains unchanged. If MTL
depends on the extra information in the training signals being meaningfully related to the
main task, shufﬂing will eliminate that relationship, and thus should eliminate the beneﬁts of
MTL. If the beneﬁts from MTL depend on some other property of having multiple outputs,
shufﬂing will not affect this and the beneﬁts should remain after shufﬂing. This shufﬂe
test is similar to the heuristic used in to discover complex
patterns in data.
MULTITASK LEARNING
We’ve run the shufﬂe test on the problems in Section 2. In each case, shufﬂing the extra
tasks reduces the performance of MTL to performance comparable to STL. We conclude
that the beneﬁts observed with MTL are due to the information in the extra training signals
serving as a domain-speciﬁc inductive bias for these problems, not to some other beneﬁt
achievable with unrelated extra outputs.
The shufﬂe test does not completely rule out the possibility that the beneﬁt of MTL is
due to restricting net capacity—extra tasks can consume net capacity even after they have
been shufﬂed. To rule out net capacity as the possible explanation for MTL, we always
compare MTL with STL run at many different net sizes, or are careful to optimize the net
size for STL before running the experiments. Usually, we do not optimize the net size for
MTL. We’ve also done experiments using MTL nets larger than the sum of all the STL nets
combined. In these experiments, the MTL nets still outperform STL. It is clear that the
extra tasks are not improving performance merely by restricting net capacity.
MTL Mechanisms
Knowing that the performance improvement from MTL is due to the extra information in
the training signals of related tasks is different from knowing how that beneﬁt occurs. This
section summarizes several mechanisms that help MTL backprop nets to generalize better.
The mechanisms all derive from the summing of error gradient terms at the hidden layer for
the different tasks. Each, however, exploits a different relationship between tasks. We have
discovered additional mechanisms (some of which are special cases of the ones presented
here) and have run tests on carefully contrived problems to verify that each mechanism
actually works. More detail can be found in .
Statistical Data Ampliﬁcation
Data ampliﬁcation is an effective increase in sample size due to extra information in the
training signals of related tasks. Ampliﬁcation occurs when there is noise in the training
signals. Consider two tasks, T and T ′, with independent noise added to their training
signals, that both beneﬁt from computing a hidden layer feature F of the inputs. A net
learning both T and T ′ can, if it recognizes that the two tasks share F, use the two training
signals to learn F better by averaging F through the different noise processes.
Attribute Selection
Consider two tasks, T and T ′, that use a common hidden layer feature F. Suppose there are
many inputs to the net. A net learning T will, if there is limited training data or signiﬁcant
noise, sometimes have difﬁculty distinguishing inputs relevant to F from those irrelevant
to it. A net learning both T and T ′, however, will better select the attributes relevant to
F because data ampliﬁcation provides better training signals for F, allowing it to better
R. CARUANA
determine which inputs to use to compute F. Attribute selection is a consequence of data
ampliﬁcation.
Eavesdropping
Consider a hidden layer feature F, useful to tasks T and T ′, that is easy to learn when
learning T, but difﬁcult to learn when learning T ′ (either because T ′ uses F in a more
complex way, or because the residual error in T ′ learned without F is noisier). A net
learning T will learn F, but a net learning just T ′ may not. If the net learning T ′ also
learns T, T ′ can eavesdrop on the hidden layer learned for T (e.g., F) and thus learn better.
Once the connection is made between T ′ and the evolving representation for F, the extra
information from T ′ about F will help the net learn F better via the other mechanisms. The
simplest case of eavesdropping is what Abu-Mostafa calls catalytic hints where T = F,
i.e., the net is being told explicitly to learn a feature F that is useful to the main task
 .
Representation Bias
Because nets are initialized with random weights, backprop is a stochastic search procedure;
multiple runs rarely yield identical nets. Suppose there are two local minima, A and B, a
net can ﬁnd for task T. Suppose a net learning task T ′ also has two minima, A and C. Both
share the minima at A (i.e., both would perform well if the net entered that region of weight
space), but do not overlap at B and C. We ran two experiments. In the ﬁrst, we selected the
minima so that nets trained on T alone are equally likely to ﬁnd A or B, and nets trained on
T ′ alone are equally likely to ﬁnd A or C. Nets trained on both T and T ′ usually fall into A
for both tasks.4 This shows that MTL tasks prefer hidden layer representations that other
tasks prefer. Search is biased towards representations in the intersection of what would be
learned for T or T ′ alone.
In the second experiment we selected the minima so that T has a strong preference for B
over A: a net trained on T always falls into B. T ′, however, still has no preference between
A or C. When both T and T ′ are trained on one net, T falls into B as expected: the bias
from T ′ is unable to pull it to A. Surprisingly, T ′ usually falls into C, the minima it does
not share with T! T creates a “tide” in the hidden layer representation towards B that ﬂows
away from A. T ′ has no preference for A or C, but is subject to the tide created by T. Thus
MULTITASK LEARNING
T ′ usually falls into C; it would have to ﬁght the tide from T to fall into A. MTL tasks
prefer NOT to use hidden layer representations that other tasks prefer NOT to use.
Backprop MTL Discovers How Tasks Are Related
Section 3.2 presents mechanisms that allow MTL to exploit different kinds of relationships
between tasks. But MTL nets are not told how tasks are related. Do MTL backprop nets
discover how tasks are related? Yes. Backprop nets, though primarily used for supervised
learning, perform a limited kind of unsupervised learning on the hidden layer features
learned for different tasks (different outputs). The details of how this unsupervised learning
occurs and how well it works are not yet fully understood. It is worthwhile, however, to
demonstrate here that backprop does discover task relatedness.
We devised a set of test problems called the Peaks Functions. Each peak function is of
IF (?1 > 1/2), THEN ?2, ELSE ?3
where ?1, ?2, and ?3 are instantiated from the alphabet {A,B,C,D,E,F} without duplication.
There are 120 such functions:
P001 = IF (A > 1/2) THEN B, ELSE C
P002 = IF (A > 1/2) THEN B, ELSE D
P014 = IF (A > 1/2) THEN E, ELSE C
P024 = IF (B > 1/2) THEN A, ELSE F
P120 = IF (F > 1/2) THEN E, ELSE D
The variables A–F are deﬁned on the real interval . A–F are provided as inputs to
a backprop net learning peaks functions. The values for A–F are given to the net via an
encoding, rather than as simple continuous inputs. A net learning peaks functions must not
only learn the functions, but must learn to properly decode the input encodings. The details
of the encoding we used are not particularly interesting; nearly any learnable encoding will
work. The encoding we used has ten inputs for each of the six inputs A–F, so there are 60
inputs altogether.
We trained one MTL net on all 120 peaks functions. This net has 60 inputs and 120
outputs, one for each of the 120 peaks functions. We “opened” the net to see how much
different outputs shared the hidden layer. We did a sensitivity analysis for each output with
each hidden unit. There are 120 outputs and 64 hidden units, so we did 15,360 separate
sensitivity analyses. By comparing the sensitivity of output P001 to each hidden unit with
that of output P002 to each hidden unit, we were able to measure how much outputs P001
and P002 shared the hidden layer. We used a non-parametric rank correlation test to measure
sharing because we were uncertain of the distributions of sensitivities.
R. CARUANA
The relatedness of two peaks functions depends on how many variables they have in
common, and whether they use those variables in the same way. For example, P001 does
not share any variables with P120, so it is not related to P120 (see above). P001 shares two
variables with P024, though neither of these are used in the same way; P001 is moderately
related to P024. P001 also shares two variables with P014, and both variables are used the
same way. Thus P001 is more related to P014 than to P024.
Figure 5 shows the rank correlation of hidden unit sensitivities between tasks as a function
of how related they are. In the graph, the data point at “0 features in common” compares
how much tasks having no features in common share the hidden layer. The two data points
at “3 features in common” show the degree of hidden unit sharing between tasks that use
the same three features (though these features are not necessarily in the same places in the
tasks). The line labelled “any feature” disregards the position of the features in the tasks.
Tasks that have one feature in common might or might not use that common feature the
same way. The line labelled “test must match”, however, requires that the feature in the
conditional test be the same. Thus if two tasks have one feature in common, this feature
must be the feature used in the conditional.
Figure 5. Sharing in the hidden layer as a function of the similarity between tasks. Tasks that are more related
share more hidden units.
The general trend of both lines is that tasks share hidden units more if they are more
related. The small negative correlation for tasks that do not share any variables suggests
that a complete lack of relatedness between functions leads to anticorrelated sharing, i.e.,
outputs for unrelated functions tend to use different hidden units. The correlations for
the “test must match” line is higher than the correlations for the “any feature” line. This
MULTITASK LEARNING
suggests that overlap in the conditional IF test is more important for hidden layer sharing
than overlap in the THEN or ELSE part of the tasks.
There are other relationships between peaks functions we could examine. For every relationship between peaks functions we examined, relatedness was positively correlated with
hidden unit sharing. This suggests that, for the peaks functions at least, backpropagation
using a shared hidden layer is able to discover how tasks are related on hidden layer features
without being given explicit training signals about task relatedness.
Is MTL Broadly Applicable?
Section 2 demonstrated the beneﬁts of MTL. Section 3 showed these beneﬁts are due to
the domain knowledge contained in the extra training signals. How often will training data
be available for extra tasks that are usefully related to the main task? This section presents
nine kinds of domains where training signals for useful extra tasks will often be available.
We believe most real-world problems fall into one or more of these kinds of domains.
This claim might sound surprising given that few of the test problems in machine learning
repositories are multitask problems. We believe that most problems traditionally used in
machine learning have been preprocessed to ﬁt STL, thus eliminating the opportunities for
MTL before learning was applied.
Using the Future to Predict the Present
Often valuable features become available after predictions must be made. These features
cannot be used as inputs because they will not be available at run time. If learning is done
ofﬂine, however, they can be collected for the training set and used as extra MTL tasks.
The predictions the learner makes for these extra tasks will probably be ignored when the
system is used; their main function is to provide extra information to the learner during
One application of learning from the future is medical risk prediction, such as the pneumonia risk problem from Section 2.3. In that problem, we used lab tests that were available in
the training set—but which would not be available when making predictions for patients—
as extra output tasks. The valuable information contained in those future measurements
helped bias the net towards a hidden layer representation that better supported risk prediction
from the features that would be available at run time.
Future measurements are available in many ofﬂine learning problems. As a very different
example, a robot or autonomous vehicle can more accurately measure the size, location,
and identity of objects in the future if it passes near them. For example, road stripes can
be detected reliably as a vehicle passes alongside them, but detecting them far ahead of a
vehicle is beyond the current state-of-the-art. Since driving brings future road closer to the
car, stripes can be measured accurately when passed and added to the training set. They can’t
be used as inputs because they will not be available in time when driving autonomously. As
MTL outputs, though, they provide extra information that helps learning without requiring
they be available at run time.
R. CARUANA
Multiple Representations and Metrics
Sometimes capturing everything that is important in one error metric or in one output representation is difﬁcult. When alternate metrics or output representations capture different,
but useful, aspects of a problem, MTL can be used to beneﬁt from them.
An example of using MTL with different metrics is again the pneumonia domain from
Section 2.3. There we used the rankprop error metric 
designed speciﬁcally for this domain. Rankprop outperforms backprop using traditional
SSE by 10% – 40% on this problem. Rankprop, however, can have trouble learning to rank
cases at such low risk that virtually all patients survive. Rankprop still outperforms SSE
on these low-risk patients, but this is where it has the most difﬁculty learning a stable rank.
Interestingly, SSE is at its best in regions of the space with high purity, as in regions where
most cases have low risk. Suppose we add an additional SSE output to a network learning
to predict risk using rankprop?
Adding an extra SSE output to the rankprop MTL net has the expected effect. It lowers
error at the rankprop output for the low-risk FOPs, while slightly increasing error at the
higher-risk FOPs. Table 4 shows the results with rankprop before and after adding the extra
SSE output. Note that the extra SSE output is completely ignored when predicting patient
risk. It has been added solely because it provides a useful bias to the net during training.
Table 4. Adding an extra SSE task to MTL with rankprop improves MTL performance where SSE performs well
(FOPs near 0.0 or 1.0) but hurts MTL performance where SSE performs poorly (FOPs near 0.5).
Similarly, it is not always apparent what output encoding will work best.
codings of the main task can be used as extra outputs the same way alternate error metrics
were used above. For example, distributed output representations often help parts of a
problem be learned better because the parts have separate error gradients. But if prediction
requires all outputs in the distributed representation to be correct at the same time, a nondistributed representation can be more accurate. MTL is one way to merge these conﬂicting
requirements and obtain both beneﬁts by using both output representations.
Time Series Prediction
Applications of this type are a subclass of using the future to predict the present where
future tasks are identical to the current task except that they occur at a later time. This is a
large enough subclass to warrant special attention.
The simplest way to use MTL for time series prediction is to use a single net with multiple
outputs, each output corresponding to the same task at a different time. Figure 2 showed
MULTITASK LEARNING
an MTL net with four outputs. If output k referred to the prediction for the time series
task at time Tk, this net makes predictions for the same task at four different times. Often,
the output used for prediction would be the middle one (temporally) so that there are tasks
earlier and later than it trained on the net. Or, as input features temporally “slide” across
the inputs, one can collect the outputs from a sequence of predictions and combine them.
We tested MTL on time sequence data in a robot domain where the goal is to predict
future sensory states from the current sensed state and the planned action. For example,
we were interested in predicting the sonar readings and camera image that would be sensed
N meters in the future given the current sonar and camera readings, for N between 1 and
8 meters. As the robot moves, it collects a stream of sense data. (Strictly speaking, this
sense data is a time series only if the robot moves at constant speed. We use dead reckoning
to determine the distance the robot travelled, so our data might be described as a spatial
We used a backprop net with four sets of outputs. Each set predicts the sonar and camera
image that will be sensed at a future distance. Output set 1 is the prediction for 1 meter,
set 2 is for 2 meters, set 3 is for 4 meters, and set 4 for 8 meters. The performance of this
net on each prediction distance is compared in Table 5 with separate STL nets learning to
predict each distance separately. Each entry is the SSE averaged over all sense predictions.
Error increases with distance, and MTL outperforms STL at all distances except 1 meter.
Table 5. STL and MTL on robot sensory prediction tasks. The tasks are to predict what the robot will sense 1, 2,
4, and 8 meters in the future. The harder 4 and 8 meter prediction tasks are helped the most by MTL, while the
easier 1 meter task may be hurt by MTL.
The loss of accuracy at 1 meter is not statistically signiﬁcant, but there is an interesting
trend in MTL improvement as a function of distance: MTL seems to help the harder, longrange prediction tasks more. We conjecture that this may not be uncommon. That is, MTL
may help harder tasks most, possibly at the expense of easier tasks, because there is more
room for improvement with harder tasks and more to loose with easy tasks. Where possible,
one should use STL for the tasks on which it works best, and use MTL for the tasks on
which it works best. But it is important to include tasks best trained with STL on the MTL
net to help the MTL tasks.
WhydoesMTLprovideabeneﬁtwithtimeseriesdata? Oneexplanationisthatpredictions
at different time scales (or different distance scales) often partially depend on different
processes. When learning a task with a short time scale, the learner may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
recognize the longer-term processes, and vice-versa. Training both scales on a single net
improves the chances that both short- and long-term processes will be learned and combined
to make predictions.
R. CARUANA
Using Non-Operational Features
Some features are impractical to use at run time because they are too expensive to compute,
or because they need human expertise that won’t be around or that will be too slow. Training
sets, however, are often small, and we usually have the luxury to spend more time preparing
them. Where it is practical to compute non-operational feature values for the training set,
these may be used as extra MTL outputs.
A good example of this is in scene analysis where human expertise is often required to
label important features. Usually the human will not be in the loop when the learned system
is used. Does this mean features labelled by humans cannot be used for learning? No. If
the labels can be acquired for the training set, they can be used as extra tasks for the learner;
as extra tasks they will not be required later when the system is used. A good example of
this is the 1D-DOORS domain, where we used a mouse to deﬁne features in the images
of doorways collected from a robot-mounted camera. A human had to process each image
to capture the training signals for the two main tasks, the doorknob location and doorway
center, so it was easy to collect the additional features at the same time. Using the extra
features as extra tasks improved performance considerably on the two main tasks.
Using Extra Tasks to Focus Attention
Learners often learn to use large, ubiquitous patterns in the inputs, while ignoring small or
less common inputs that are useful. MTL can be used to coerce the learner to attend to
patterns in the input it would otherwise ignore. This is done by forcing it to learn internal
representations to support tasks that depend critically on input patterns it might otherwise
ignore. A good example of this is the road-following domain in Section 2.1. Here, STL
nets often ignore lane markings when learning to steer because lane markings are usually
a small part of the image, are not always present, and frequently change appearance (e.g.,
single vs. double centerlines and solid vs. dashed centerlines).
If a net learning to steer is also required to learn to recognize road stripes as an extra
output task, the net will learn to attend to those parts of the image where stripes occur. To
the extent that the stripe tasks are learnable, the net will develop internal representations to
support them. Since the net is also learning to steer using the same hidden layer, the steering
task can use whatever parts of the stripe hidden representation are useful for steering.
Sequential Transfer
Sometimes we already have a domain theory for related tasks from prior learning. The
data used to train these models, however, may no longer be available. Can MTL beneﬁt
from the prior learned models without the training data? Yes. One can use the model
to generate synthetic data and use the training signals in the synthetic data as extra MTL
tasks. This approach to sequential transfer elegantly sidesteps the catastrophic interference
problem (forgetting old tasks while learning new ones), and is applicable even where the
analytic methods of evaluating domain theories used by other serial transfer methods are
MULTITASK LEARNING
not available. For example, EBNN requires that the
domain theory be differentiable, but the MTL approach to sequential transfer does not. This
approach is most effective when the prior learned models are accurate. If the prior models
are poor, they can be a poor source of inductive bias. Some serial transfer mechanisms
have explicit mechanisms for reducing transfer when prior learning does not appear to be
accurate for the task at hand .
An issue that arises when synthesizing data from prior models is what distribution to
sample from. One approach is to use the distribution of the training patterns for the current
task. Pass the current training patterns through the prior learned models and use the predictions those models make as extra MTL outputs when learning the new main task. This
sampling may not always be satisfactory. If the models are complex (suggesting a large
or carefully constructed sample would be needed to represent them with high ﬁdelity), but
the new sample of training data is small, it is beneﬁcial to sample the prior model at more
points than the current sample. See for a thorough discussion of
synthetic data sampling.
Multiple Tasks Arise Naturally
Often the world gives us sets of related tasks to learn. The traditional approach to separate
these into independent problems trained in isolation is counterproductive; related tasks can
beneﬁt each other if trained together. An early, almost accidental, use of multitask transfer
in backprop nets is NETtalk . NETtalk learns the phonemes
and stresses to give a speech synthesizer to pronounce the words given it as inputs. NETtalk
used one net with many outputs, partly because the goal was to control a synthesizer that
needed both phonemes and stresses at the same time. Although they never analyzed the
contribution of multitask transfer to NETtalk, there is evidence that NETtalk is harder to
learn using separate nets .
A more recent example of multiple tasks arising naturally is Mitchell’s Calendar Apprentice System (CAP) . In CAP, the goal is to learn to
predict the Location, Time Of Day, Day Of Week, and Duration of the meetings it
schedules. These tasks are functions of the same data and can share many common features. Early results using MTL decision trees (see Section 5.2) on this domain suggest that
training these four tasks together yields better performance than training them in isolation,
as is done in the CAP system.
Quantization Smoothing
Often the world gives us quantized information. For example, the training signal may result
from human assessment into one of several categorical variables (e.g., poor, medium, good),
or it may result from a natural process that quantizes some underlying smoother function
(e.g., physical measurements made with limited precision, or patient outcomes such as lives
or dies). Although quantization sometimes makes problems easier to learn, usually it makes
learning harder.
R. CARUANA
If there are extra training signals available that are less quantized than the main task, or
that are quantized differently, these may be useful as extra tasks. What is learned for less
quantized extra tasks is helpful because it sometimes can be learned more easily due to its
greater smoothness. Extra tasks that are not smoother, but which result from a different
quantization process, sometimes also help because, together with the main task, it may be
possible to better interpolate the coarse quantization of both tasks. In effect, each task can
serve to ﬁll in some of the gaps created by quantization in the other.
One example of quantization smoothing occurs in the pneumonia domain. In this domain,
the main task—mortality probability—is heavily and stochastically quantized: a patient
either lives or dies. But one of the extra features in the database is the length of stay in
the hospital. If length of stay is related to risk and the severity of illness, then it is clear
that the length of stay extra task can help the net better interpolate risk between the crudely
quantized values lives or dies. In this case, the relationship between length of stay and
risk may be complex. For example, patients at very high risk might have short stays in the
hospital because they do not live long. While the potential complexity of the relationship
between a quantized task and some related, less quantized task can make beneﬁtting from
the less quantized task more difﬁcult, some beneﬁt will often arise.
Some Inputs Work Better as Outputs
Many domains where MTL is useful are domains where it is impractical to use some features
as inputs. MTL provides a way of beneﬁtting from these features (instead of just ignoring
them) by using them as extra tasks. Might some features that can be used as inputs be better
used as outputs? Surprisingly, yes. It is possible to construct problems with features that
are more useful when used as outputs than as inputs.
Consider the following function:
F1(A,B) = SIGMOID(A+B),
SIGMOID(x) = 1/(1 + e(−x))
Consider the backprop net shown in Figure 6a with 20 inputs, 16 hidden units, and one
output trained to learn F1(A,B). Data for F1(A,B) is generated by randomly sampling values
A and B uniformly from the interval [-5,5]. The net input is 10-bit binary codes for A and
B. The ﬁrst 10 inputs receive the coding for A and the second 10 that for B. The target
output is the unary real (unencoded) value F1(A,B).
Table 6 shows the mean performance of 50 trials of Net 1a with backpropagation and early
stopping. For each trial, we generate new random training, halt, and test sets. Training sets
contain 50 patterns—enough for good performance, but not so much that there is not room
for improvement. The halt and test sets contain 1000 cases each to minimize the effect of
sampling error.
Now consider the related function:
F2(A,B) = SIGMOID(A-B).
Suppose, in addition to the 10-bit binary codings for A and B, the net is given the
unencoded value F2(A,B) as an extra input feature. Will this extra input help it learn
F1(A,B) better? Probably not. A+B and A-B do not correlate for random A and B. (The
MULTITASK LEARNING
Figure 6. Three net architectures for learning F1. A:STD is a standard net that does not use the extra feature.
B:STD+IN is a net that uses the extra feature as an extra input. C:STD+OUT is MTL, the extra feature is used as
an extra output, not as an input.
Table 6. Performance of STL, STL with an extra input, and MTL (STL with an extra output) on F1. Using the
extra feature as an MTL output works better than using it as an extra input.
Signiﬁcance
STD (STL w/o extra input)
STD+IN (STL with extra input)
MTL (STD with extra output)
absolute value of the correlation coefﬁcients for our training sets is typically less than 0.01.)
This hurts backprop’s ability to learn to use F2(A,B) to predict F1(A,B). The net in Figure
6b has 21 inputs – 20 for the binary codes for A and B, and an extra input for F2(A,B). The
2nd line in Table 6 shows the performance of STL with the extra input for the same training,
halting, and test sets. Performance is not signiﬁcantly different—the extra information
contained in the feature F2(A,B) does not help backpropagation learn F1(A,B) when used
as an extra input.
If using F2(A,B) as an extra input does not help backpropagation learn F1(A,B), should
we ignore F2(A,B)? No. F1(A,B) and F2(A,B) are strongly related. They both need to
compute the same subfeatures, A and B. If, instead of using F2(A,B) as an extra input, it is
used as an extra output that must be learned, it will bias the shared hidden layer to learn A
and B better, and this will help the net better learn to predict F1(A,B).
Figure 6c shows a net with 20 inputs for A and B, and 2 outputs, one for F1(A,B) and
one for F2(A,B). The performance of this net is evaluated only on the output for F1(A,B),
but backpropagation is done on both outputs. The 3rd line in Table 6 shows the mean
performance of the MTL net on F1(A,B). Using F2(A,B) as an extra output improves
performance on F1(A,B). Using the extra feature as an extra output is better than using it
as an extra input.
R. CARUANA
F1(A,B) and F2(A,B) were carefully contrived. We have devised less contrived functions
that demonstrate similar effects, and have seen evidence of this behavior in real-world
problems . One particularly interesting class of problems where
some features are more useful as outputs than as inputs is when there is noise present in the
features; noise in extra outputs is often less harmful than noise in extra inputs.
Is MTL Just for Backprop Nets?
In MTL with backprop nets, the representation used for multitask transfer is a hidden layer
shared by all tasks. Many learning methods do not have a representation naturally shared
between tasks. Can MTL be used with these methods? Yes. This section presents an
algorithm and results for MTL with case-based methods such as k-nearest neighbor and
kernel regression, and sketches an algorithm for MTL in decision tree induction.
MTL in KNN and Kernel Regression
K-nearest neighbor (KNN) and kernel regression (also called locally weighted averaging
(LCWA)) use a distance metric deﬁned on attributes to ﬁnd training cases close to the new
Distance(case) =
weighti ∗(∆attributei)2
The principle difference between KNN and LCWA is the kernel used for prediction.
Whereas KNN uses a kernel that is uniform for the K closest neighbors and drops to 0
for cases further away, LCWA uses a kernel that decreases smoothly (and usually rapidly)
with increasing distance.
TheperformanceofKNNandLCWAdependsonthequalityofthedistancemetric. Search
for good attribute weights can be cast as an optimization problem using cross validation to
judge the performance of different sets of weights. We use gradient descent and leave-oneout cross validation, which is particularly efﬁcient with case-based methods like KNN and
Finding good attribute weights is essential to good performance with KNN and LCWA.
MTL can be used to ﬁnd better weights. The basic approach is to ﬁnd attribute weights that
yield good performance not just on the main task, but also on a set of related tasks drawn
from the domain.
Eval Metric = Perf Main Task +
λi ∗Perf Extra Taski
λi = 0 causes learning to ignore the extra task, λi ≈1 causes learning to give as much
weight to performance on the extra task as on the main task, and λi ≫1 causes learning to
pay more attention to performance on the extra task than on the main task.
MULTITASK LEARNING
We applied MTL LCWA to the pneumonia domain from Section 2.3. As before, the main
task is to predict a fraction of the population at least risk, and the extra tasks are to predict
the results of lab tests available on the training set but that will not be available for future
Figure 7. Error rate at FOP 0.3 as a function of λ, the parameter that controls how sensitive learning is to extra
tasks. λ = 0 is STL; the extra tasks are ignored. λ = 1 is MTL with the same weight given to the main task and
each extra task. λ = 2 is MTL with most weight given to the extra tasks instead of the main task.
Figure 7 shows the error rates for FOP 0.3 as a function of λ (for simplicity, we present
results here where each λi takes on the same value). λ = 0 is STL; all extra tasks are
ignored. λ = 1.0 is MTL giving equal weight to each extra task and to the main task; the
feature weights attempt to perform well on all the tasks. Note that the error rate is lowest
when learning pays comparable attention to the main task and to the extra tasks.5 Similar
graphs were obtained for other FOPs. Table 7 summarizes the performance of LCWA with
STL (λ = 0) and MTL (with λ = 1.0) for the ﬁve FOPs. As with backpropagation, MTL
performs 5–10% better than STL on risk prediction.
Figure 8 shows the performance of STL (λ = 0) and MTL (with λ = 1.0) as a function
of the size of the training set. The error bars are the standard errors of the estimates. The
error rates for MTL are lower than STL for all training set sizes. For smaller training set
sizes, MTL yields performance comparable to STL given 25% to 75% more data.
R. CARUANA
Table 7. Error rates of STL LCWA and MTL LCWA (λ = 1) on the pneumonia problem using training sets with
1000 cases.
Figure 8. Performance of STL (λ = 0) and MTL (with λ = 1) as the number of training patterns varies. For
100–800 training patterns, STL needs about 50% more data to perform as well as MTL.
MTL Decision Tree Induction
Traditional decision trees are single task: leaves denote a class (or class probabilities) for
only one task. Multitask decision trees, where each leaf denotes classes for more than one
task, are possible, but why use them? Just as it was important to ﬁnd good feature weights
in KNN/LCWA, in top-down induction of decision trees (TDIDT) it is important to ﬁnd
good splits. In STL TDIDT, the only information available to judge splits is how well they
separate classes on a single task. In MTL TDIDT splits can be evaluated by how well they
perform on multiple tasks. If tasks are related, preferring splits that have utility to multiple
tasks will improve the quality of the selected splits.
The basic recursive step in TDIDT is to determine what split to add
at the current node in a growing decision tree. Typically this is done using an information
gain metric that measures how much class purity is improved by the available splits. The
MULTITASK LEARNING
basic approach in MTL TDIDT is to compute the information gain of each split for each task
individually, combine the gains, and select the split with the best aggregate performance.
As in MTL KNN/LCWA, λ parameters are introduced to control how much emphasis is
given to the extra tasks. Weighting the extra tasks this way yields better performance than
the simpler approach presented in , which combined task gains by averaging
them; recursive splitting algorithms often suffer when the data becomes sparse low in the
tree, so it is important early splits are sensitive to performance on the main task. See
 for more detail about how the λ parameters can be learned efﬁciently in
MTL TDIDT. See for the earliest discussion we
know of the potential beneﬁts of MTL in decision trees.
Related Work
It is common to train neural nets with multiple outputs. Usually these outputs encode a
single task. For example, in classiﬁcation tasks it is common to use one output for each class
 ). But using one net for a few strongly related tasks
is also not new. The classic NETtalk application uses one
net to learn both phonemes and their stresses. Using one net is natural for NETtalk because
the goal is to learn to control a synthesizer that needs both phoneme and stress commands
at the same time. NETtalk is an early example of MTL. But the builders of NETtalk viewed
the multiple outputs as codings for a single problem, not as independent tasks that beneﬁted
by being trained together. If one graphs the NETtalk learning curves for the phoneme and
stress tasks separately, one observes that the stress tasks begin to overtrain long before the
phoneme tasks reach peak performance. Better performance could easily been obtained in
NETtalk by doing early stopping on each output individually, or by balancing the learning
rates of the different outputs so they all reach peak performance at roughly the same time.
 performed a thorough comparison of NETtalk and
ID3 on the NETtalk text-to-speech domain. One explanation they considered as to why
backpropagation outperformed ID3 on this problem is that backpropagation beneﬁts from
sharing hidden units between different outputs, something ID3 does not do. They conclude
that although hidden unit sharing (i.e., MTL) does help, it is not the largest difference
between the two learning methods, and suggest that adding sharing to ID3 probably would
not be worthwhile.
Transferring learned structure between related tasks is not new.
The early work on
sequential transfer of learned structure between neural nets clearly demonstrates that what is learned for one task can be
used as a bias for other tasks. Unfortunately, this work failed to ﬁnd improvements in
generalization performance; the focus was on speeding up learning. More recently, Mitchell
and Thrun devised a serial transfer method called Explanation-Based Neural Nets (EBNN)
 based on tangent prop 
that yields improved generalization on sequences of learned tasks. devised a serial transfer mechanism for KNN that clusters previously learned tasks
into sets of related tasks. KNN attribute weights learned for previous tasks in the cluster
most similar to the new task are used for the new task when the number of training patterns
R. CARUANA
for the new task is too small to support accurate learning. Both of these approaches differ
from MTL, where the goal is to learn a better model for one task by learning all available
extra tasks in parallel. O’Sullivan is currently exploring a thesis that combines sequential
transfer and MTL.
Some approaches to inductive transfer have both parallel and sequential components.
 present a method called Curds & Whey that takes advantage
of correlations between different prediction tasks. Models for different tasks are trained
separately (i.e., via STL), but predictions from the separately learned models are combined
before making the ﬁnal predictions. This sharing of the predictions of the models instead
of the internal structure learned by the models is quite different from MTL; combining the
two methods is straightforward and might be advantageous in some domains. Omohundro
presents algorithms for “Family Discovery” where the goal is to learn a parameterized family
of stochastic models . By interleaving learning of different functions
drawn from the family of functions, the algorithms learn the structure of the function family
and can make better predictions.
 suggested that generalization in artiﬁcial neural nets would improve if
nets learned to better represent underlying regularities of the domain. Suddarth and Abu-
Mostafa were among the ﬁrst to recognize that this might be accomplished by providing
extra information at the outputs of a net. used extra outputs to inject rule hints into networks about what they should learn.
This is MTL where the extra tasks are carefully engineered to coerce the net to learn speciﬁc
internal representations. The centerline extra tasks in the 1D-ALVINN domain in Section
2.1 are examples of rule-injection hints. provides hints to
backprop nets via extra terms in the error signal backpropagated for the main task output.
The extra error terms constrain what is learned to satisfy desired properties of main task
such as monotonicity , symmetry, or transitivity with respect to
certain sets of inputs. MTL, which does not use extra error terms on the main task output,
could easily be used in concert with Abu-Mostafa’s hints.
MTL is similar in some ways to clustering and unsupervised learning. For example, small
changes to the indices in COBWEB’s probabilistic information metric yields a
metric suitable for judging splits in multitask decision trees. Whereas COBWEB considers
all features as tasks to predict, MTL decision trees allow the user to specify which signals
are inputs and which are training signals. This not only makes it easier to create additional
tasks without committing to extra training information being available at run time, but
makes learning simpler in domains where some features cannot reasonably be predicted.
 explore how concept formation systems such as
COBWEB can be extended to acquire overlapping concept descriptions. Their OLOC
system is an incremental concept learner that learns overlapping probabilistic descriptions
that improve predictive accuracy. de Sa’s Minimizing Disagreement Algorithm 
is an unsupervised learning method similar in spirit to MTL. In MDA, multiple unsupervised
learning tasks are trained in parallel and bias each other via supervisory signals from the
other unsupervised tasks.
Attempts have been made to develop theories of parallel transfer in artiﬁcial neural nets
 .6 Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to use the
MULTITASK LEARNING
theory developed so far to draw conclusions about real-world uses of MTL. Limitations of
the current theory include:
it yields worst-case bounds that are too loose to insure extra tasks will help. For example,
it is possible to create synthetic problems where increasing the number of tasks hurts
performance instead of helping it. Results with these problems are consistent with the
theory, but only because the bounds are loose enough to allow it.
it lacks a well-deﬁned notion of task relatedness and makes assumptions about sharing
in the hidden layer that often are not satisﬁed. For example, we usually ﬁnd that optimal
performance requires increasing the number of units in the shared hidden layer as the
number of tasks increases. This conﬂicts with assumptions made by the theory that the
hidden layer size remain constant as the number of tasks increases.
it is unable to account for behaviors of the search procedure that are critical in practice.
As one example, if early stopping is not done correctly, MTL often hurts performance
instead of helping it. The current theory is unable to account for important phenomena
like this.
Developing a theory of MTL that better agrees with what is observed in practice may be
difﬁcult. Perhaps the hardest obstacle standing in the way of better MTL theory is the
difﬁculty of deﬁning task relatedness. An improved theory of MTL in artiﬁcial neural nets
also would need to address open questions about the effective capacity of neural nets and
take into account important behaviors of training procedures like backprop, such as their
susceptibility to local minima, pressure towards sharing, etc.
 use extra tasks to improve the generalization performance of
a committee machine that combines the predictions of multiple learned experts. Because
committee machines work better if the errors made by different committee members are
decorrelated, they use a different extra task for each committee member to bias how it learns
the main task. Each committee member learns the main task in a slightly different way,
and the performance of the committee as a whole improves. Committee machines trained
with extra tasks can be viewed as MTL with architectures more complex than the simple,
fully connected MTL architectures presented here. One interesting feature of committee
MTL architectures is that multiple copies of the main task are used, and this improves
performance on the main task. Sometimes this same effect is observed with simpler, fully
connected MTL nets, too . examine a much
more sophisticated approach to beneﬁtting from multiple copies of the main task by using
multi-bit error-correcting codes as the output representation.
One application of MTL is to take features that will be missing at run time but that are
available for the training set, and use them as outputs instead of inputs. There are other
ways to handle missing values. One approach is to treat each missing feature as a separate
learning problem, and use predictions for missing values as inputs. (We tried this on the
pneumonia problem and did not achieve performance comparable to MTL, but in some
domains this works well.) Other approaches to missing data include marginalizing over
the missing values in learned probabilistic models , and using EM to iteratively reestimate missing values from current
R. CARUANA
estimates of the data density . Of particular interest in
this direction is work on learning Bayesian Networks . Because Bayes nets have sound
statistical semantics (which makes handling missing values easier) and usually are more
comprehensive models than those learned with STL, Bayes nets also are able to beneﬁt from
extra tasks like those used by MTL. It is not clear yet if Bayes nets represent a competitive
approach to MTL, the main issue being that the extra complexity inherent in many Bayes net
models may increase the number of training samples required to achieve good performance.
Discussion and Future Work
Predictions for Multiple Tasks
MTL trains many tasks in parallel on one learner, but this does not mean one learned model
should be used to make predictions for many tasks. The reason for training multiple tasks
on one learner is so one task can beneﬁt from the information contained in the training
signals of other tasks, not to reduce the number of models that must be learned. Where
tradeoffs can be made between mediocre performance on all tasks and optimal performance
on any one task, usually it is best to optimize performance on tasks one at a time, and allow
performance on the extra tasks to degrade. The task weights in MTL KNN/LCWA and
MTL TDIDT make this tradeoff explicit; the learner can even ignore some tasks to achieve
better performance on the main task.
Where predictions for several tasks are required (as in CAP, Section 4.7), it may be
important to train a separate MTL model for each required task. With backprop MTL,
however, using an architecture that treats all tasks equally, and that has sufﬁcient capacity
in the shared hidden layer to allow parts of the hidden layer to become dedicated to single
tasks, often allows models to be learned for all tasks during one training run. If early
stopping is used, it is important to apply it to each task individually; not all tasks train—or
overtrain—at the same rate. The easiest way to do this is to take snapshots of the network
when performance on each task is best, instead of trying to halt training on some tasks while
other tasks are still being trained. If some tasks train much faster than others, reducing the
learning rate on tasks that have already achieved their best performance is one way to prevent
them from overtraining so much that they drag the other slower tasks into overtraining.
Learning Rate in Backprop MTL
Usually better performance is obtained in backprop MTL when all tasks learn at similar
rates and reach best performance at roughly the same time. If the main task trains long
before the extra tasks, it cannot beneﬁt from what has not yet been learned for the extra
tasks. If the main task trains long after the extra tasks, it cannot shape what is learned for
the extra tasks. Moreover, if the extra tasks begin to overtrain, they may cause the main
task to overtrain too because of the overlap in hidden layer representation.
MULTITASK LEARNING
The easiest way to control the rate at which different tasks learn is to adjust the learning
rate on each output task. One way to do this is to train a net using equal learning rates
for all tasks, and then train again a second time, reducing the learning rate for tasks that
learned fastest. A few iterations of this process usually sufﬁce to bring most tasks to peak
performance at roughly the same time. Early stopping on tasks individually is then used
to pick the optimal stopping point for each task. We are currently testing an algorithm
that automates this tuning of learning rates. Instead of using a learning rate for each task
that is constant throughout training, it adaptively adjusts each task’s learning rate during
training based on how much progress that task has made. Tasks ahead of schedule have
their learning rate reduced until slower tasks catch up. This method still requires at least
one prior training run to estimate how far each task will get before it begins to overtrain.
Parallel vs. Sequential Transfer
MTL is parallel transfer. It might seem that sequential transfer would be easier.
This may not be the case. The advantages of parallel transfer are:
The full detail of what is being learned for all tasks is available to all tasks because all
tasks are being learned at the same time.
In many applications, the extra tasks are available in time to be learned in parallel with
themaintask(s). Paralleltransferdoesnotrequireonetodeﬁneatrainingsequence—the
order in which tasks are trained often makes a difference in serial transfer.
Tasks often beneﬁt each other mutually, something a linear sequence cannot capture.
For example, if task 1 is learned before task 2, task 2 can’t help task 1. This not only
reduces performance on task 1, but can also reduce task 1’s ability to help task 2.
When tasks naturally arise serially, it is straightforward to use parallel transfer for sequential transfer. If the training data can be stored, perform MTL using whatever tasks have
become available, re-learning as new tasks arise. If training data cannot be stored, synthetic
data can be generated from prior learned models (see Section 4.6). Interestingly, while it is
easy to use parallel transfer to do serial transfer, it is not so easy to use serial transfer to do
parallel transfer. Note that it is possible to combine serial and parallel transfer; O’Sullivan
is currently exploring a thesis at Carnegie Mellon to combine MTL and EBNN for life-long
learning in robots.
Computational Cost
The main goal of multitask learning is to improve generalization. But what effect does MTL
have on training time? In backprop nets, an MTL net is usually larger than an STL net and
thus requires more computation per backprop pass. If all tasks eventually need to be learned,
training the MTL net often requires less computation than training the individual STL nets.
If most of the extra tasks are being trained just to help one or a few main tasks, then the
R. CARUANA
MTL net will require more computation. However, we often ﬁnd that tasks trained with
MTL need fewer epochs than the same tasks trained alone, which partially compensates for
the extra computational cost of each MTL epoch.
In k-nearest neighbor, kernel regression, and decision trees, MTL adds little to the cost of
training the models. The only extra cost is the computation needed to evaluate performance
on multiple tasks instead of just one task. This small constant factor is easily dominated
by other more expensive steps, such as computing distances between cases, ﬁnding nearest
neighbors, ﬁnding the best threshold for splits of continuous attributes in decision trees,
etc. The main additional cost of using MTL with these algorithms is cross-validating the λ
parameters the control the relative weight of the main and extra tasks.
Architecture
The applications of MTL backprop presented in Section 2 use a single fully connected
hidden layer shared equally by all tasks. Sometimes, more complex net architectures work
better. For example, sometimes it is beneﬁcial to have a small private hidden layer for the
main task, and a larger hidden layer shared by both the main task and extra tasks. But too
many private hidden layers (e.g., a private hidden layer for each task) reduce sharing and the
beneﬁts of MTL. We do not currently have principled ways to determine what architecture
is best for each problem. Fortunately, simple architectures often work well, even if not
optimally. experiment with several different architectures for
MTL in backprop nets.
Regularization methods such as weight decay can be used with MTL. By reducing the
effective number of free parameters in the model, regularization promotes sharing. Too
strong a bias for sharing, however, can hurt performance. If tasks are more different than
they are alike (the usual case), it is important to allow tasks to learn fairly independent
models and overlap only where there is common hidden structure. This is one reason why
MTL performance often drops if the size of the shared hidden layer is much smaller than
the sum of the sizes of the STL hidden layers that would provide good performance on the
tasks when trained separately.
What Are Related Tasks?
One of the most important open problems in inductive transfer is to better characterize,
either formally or heuristically, what related tasks are. The lack of an adequate deﬁnition of
task relatedness is one of the obstacles preventing the development of more useful theories
of inductive transfer. Some of the characteristics of a theory of relatedness are already clear.
For example, if two tasks are the same function of the inputs, but with independent noise
processes added to the task signals, clearly the two tasks are related. As another example, if
two tasks are to predict different aspects of the health of the same individual, these tasks are
more related than two tasks to predict different aspects of the health of different individuals.
Finally, just because two tasks help each other when trained together does not necessarily
mean they are related: sometimes injecting noise through an extra output on a backprop net
MULTITASK LEARNING
improves generalization on other outputs by acting as a regularizer at the hidden layer, but
this does not mean the noise task is related to the other tasks.
We may never have a theory of relatedness that allows us to reliably predict which tasks
will help or hurt each other when used for inductive transfer. Because of this, we are now
focussing part of our effort on ways of efﬁciently determining which tasks are beneﬁcially
related to each other. Of particular interest is recent work on feature selection that shows
generalization performance sometimes improves if as many as half of the input features
available on some of the large problems in the UCI repository are ignored, i.e., not used as
inputs . It would be interesting to test those
problems to see if some of the “ignored” features might be well used as extra outputs (as
was done in Section 4.9).
When Inductive Transfer Hurts
MTL does not always improve performance.
In the pneumonia domain, performance
dropped for high-risk cases when an extra SSE output was added to the rankprop net (see
Section 4.2). This was consistent with our model of the relative strengths and weaknesses of
the main and extra task on this problem. MTL is a source of inductive bias. Some inductive
biases help. Some inductive biases hurt. It depends on the problem. For now, the safest
approach is to treat MTL as a tool that must be tested on each problem. Fortunately, on
most problems where we have tried MTL, it helps. Algorithms that automatically adjust the
MTL bias using cross-validation, such as those used for TDIDT and KNN, are important
steps for making MTL useful in practice.
MTL Thrives on Complexity
Perhaps the most important lesson we have learned from applying MTL to real problems
is that the MTL practitioner must get involved before the problem and data have been
sanitized.
MTL beneﬁts from extra information that often would be engineered away
because traditional STL techniques would not be able to use it. The opportunities for MTL
often decrease as one gets further removed from the raw data or from the data collection
process. MTL provides new ways of using information that may not be obvious from the
traditional STL point-of-view.
Acquiring domain-speciﬁc inductive bias is subject to the usual knowledge acquisition
bottleneck. Multitask learning allows inductive bias to be acquired via the training signals
for related additional tasks drawn from the same domain. This paper demonstrates that the
beneﬁt of using extra tasks can be substantial. Through careful experiments, we are able
to show that the beneﬁts of multitask learning are due to the extra information contained in
the training signals for the extra tasks, not due to some other property of backpropagation
R. CARUANA
nets that might be achieved in another way. We are also able to elucidate a number of
mechanisms that explain how multitask learning improves generalization.
Mostoftheworkpresentedinthispaperusesmultitasklearninginbackpropnets. Wehave,
however, developed algorithms for multitask learning in k-nearest neighbor and decision
trees. The ability to use multitask learning with inductive methods as different as artiﬁcial
neural nets, decision trees, and k-nearest neighbor speaks to the generality of the basic
idea. Perhaps more importantly, we have been able to identify a number of situations
that commonly arise in real-world domains where multitask learning should be applicable.
This is surprising—few of the standard test problems used in machine learning today are
multitask problems. We conjecture that as machine learning is applied to unsanitized,
real-world problems, the opportunities for multitask learning will increase.
Acknowledgments
We thank Greg Cooper, Michael Fine, and other members of the Pitt/CMU Cost-Effective
Health Care group for help with the Medis Pneumonia Database; Dean Pomerleau for the use
of his road simulator; Tom Mitchell, Reid Simmons, Joseph O’Sullivan, and other members
of the Xavier Robot Project for help with Xavier the robot; and Tom Mitchell, David
Zabowski, and other members of the Calendar Apprentice Project for help in collecting and
using the CAP data. The work to characterize which features are more useful as inputs
or as outputs is joint work with Virginia de Sa. Rankprop was developed with Shumeet
Baluja. This work has beneﬁtted from discussions with many people, most notably Tom
Mitchell, Herb Simon, Dean Pomerleau, Tom Dietterich, Shumeet Baluja, Jonathan Baxter,
Virginia de Sa, Scott Fahlman, Andrew Moore, Sebastian Thrun, and Dave Touretzky. We
also thank the anonymous reviewers for their thorough reviews and excellent suggestions.
1. More complex architectures than a fully connected hidden layer sometimes work better. See Section 7.5
2. A similar experiment using nets with 2 hidden layers containing 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 hidden units per layer for
STL and 32 hidden units per layer for MTL yielded similar results.
3. It is interesting to note that other researchers who tackled this problem using this database ignored the extra
lab tests because they knew the lab tests would not be available at run time and did not see ways to use them
other than as inputs.
4. In these experiments the nets have sufﬁcient capacity to ﬁnd independent minima for the tasks. They are not
forced to share the hidden layer representations.
5. If separate λi are learned for each extra task, some λ may be near 0 while others may be larger than 1.
6. Baxter’s theory does not exactly apply to the backprop MTL described in this paper because it assumes each
task has independent training patterns. In MTL, the extra training signals are usually, though not always,
available for the same training patterns as the main task.
MULTITASK LEARNING