Active Learning and Student-centered Pedagogy Improve
Student Attitudes and Performance in Introductory Biology
Peter Armbruster,* Maya Patel,*† Erika Johnson,* and Martha Weiss*
*Department of Biology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057; and †Department of Education,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Submitted March 27, 2009; Accepted May 28, 2009
Monitoring Editor: Debra Tomanek
We describe the development and implementation of an instructional design that focused on
bringing multiple forms of active learning and student-centered pedagogies to a one-semester,
undergraduate introductory biology course for both majors and nonmajors. Our course redesign
consisted of three major elements: 1) reordering the presentation of the course content in an
attempt to teach specific content within the context of broad conceptual themes, 2) incorporating
active and problem-based learning into every lecture, and 3) adopting strategies to create a more
student-centered learning environment. Assessment of our instructional design consisted of a
student survey and comparison of final exam performance across 3 years—1 year before our
course redesign was implemented and during two successive years of implementation
 . The course restructuring led to significant improvement of self-reported student
engagement and satisfaction and increased academic performance. We discuss the successes and
ongoing challenges of our course restructuring and consider issues relevant to institutional
INTRODUCTION
The traditional lecture format of most large introductory
science courses presents many challenges to both teaching
and learning. Although a traditional lecture course may be
effective for efficiently disseminating a large body of content
to a large number of students, these one-way exchanges
often promote passive and superficial learning and fail to stimulate student motivation, confidence, and enthusiasm . As a consequence,
the traditional lecture model can often lead to students
completing their undergraduate education without skills
that are important for professional success . Over the past two decades, a series of influential reports and articles have called attention to the need for
changes in approaches to undergraduate science education
in ways that promote meaningful learning, problem solving,
and critical thinking for a diversity of students . This need is particularly acute
at the introductory level, where a major “leak in the pipeline” toward science careers has been noted .
Although the proposed improvements noted above differ
in detail, a remarkably consistent theme is the call to bring
student-centered instructional strategies, such as active- and
inquiry-oriented learning, into the classroom. Allen and
Tanner define active learning as “seeking new information, organizing it in a way that is meaningful, and having the chance to explain it to others.” This form of instruction emphasizes interactions with peers and instructors and
involves a cycle of activity and feedback where students are
given consistent opportunities to apply their learning in the
classroom. By placing students at the center of instruction,
this approach shifts the focus from teaching to learning and
promotes a learning environment more amenable to the
metacognitive development necessary for students to become independent and critical thinkers . A substantial number of studies have shown that
active-learning instructional approaches can lead to improved student attitudes and increased learning
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.09–03–0025
Address correspondence to: Peter Armbruster relative
to a standard lecture format.
The establishment of several national programs that promote active-learning pedagogy (The National Academies
Summer Institutes1 and FIRST II2), the establishment of
journals such as CBE—Life Sciences Education, and the
growth of several database repositories of active-learning
exercises (MERLOT pedagogy portal3, TIEE4, FIRST II, National Digital Science Library,5 and especially BioSciEdNet6
and SENCER Digital Libary7) are all positive evidence of
concerted responses to the calls for change noted above.
These resources also provide significant support for faculty
committed to implementing active-learning strategies in
their courses both in terms of training opportunities and by
making example teaching materials readily available. Nevertheless, the proposition of restructuring a large introductory course to emphasize elements of active learning can
seem overwhelming for faculty with extensive time commitments in other realms and little or no formal training in
Here, we describe the development and implementation
of an instructional design that focused on bringing multiple
forms of active-learning and student-centered pedagogies
into a traditionally lecture-based introductory biology
course. Our course restructuring was motivated by several
perceived deficiencies common to traditional lecture-based
introductory courses. The most pronounced concern, shared
by multiple faculty involved in the course, was poor student
attitudes. Both numeric and written responses on course
evaluations indicated that students were not satisfied with
the course and did not recognize the importance of the
course content to their education as biologists. For example,
students often commented on course evaluations that the
lectures and/or course materials were “boring.” Furthermore, individual instructor–student interactions often indicated that students were more concerned with their test
scores than with gaining a thorough understanding of the
course material. Poor student attitudes also were reflected
by poor attendance, limited participation in class, and suboptimal student performance.
We hypothesized that incorporating active-learning and
student-centered pedagogy into the instructional design of
our course would both improve student attitudes and also
lead to increased student performance . We
chose to focus primarily on using problem-based learning
activities because these activities tend to be more succinct
and less open-ended than case-based activities, and thus it
was easier to integrate problem-based activities into our
previously established lecture organization. Our positive
results illustrate how changing the instructional design of a
course, without wholesale changes to course content, can
lead to improved student attitudes and performance. The
goals of this article are to 1) describe the elements of our
instructional design that contributed to improved student
attitudes and performance; and 2) discuss significant future
challenges, so that other educators can learn from our experiences.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
The course restructuring we describe pertains to the lecture portion
of Introductory Biology II, a one-semester course that typically
enrolls between 170 and 190 students (details are provided below).
The course was taught in a standard lecture format in 2006 and
redesigned to emphasize active learning and student-centered pedagogy in 2007 and 2008. The first author taught the course in all 3
years and in the 2 years before 2006. The hypotheses we
consider in this study are that student attitudes and performance
increased in 2007 and 2008 in response to the instructional design
we implemented.
Course Description
Introductory Biology II is the second semester of a 1-yr sequence
required for biology majors and premedical students. The first
semester of the sequence, Introductory Biology I, focuses on molecular and cellular biology with some treatment of development and
physiology. Introductory Biology II emphasizes principles of ecology, evolution, and a survey of the diversity of life. This basic course
content was not changed substantially as part of the revision we
describe, although we modified the order in which the material was
presented (see below). In all 3 years, the lectures consisted of three
70-min periods per week. There also was an optional weekly recitation section where the instructor was available to answer student
questions. In all 3 years , we handed out a set of questions (“the daily dozen”) for each lecture to help guide students in
their assigned textbook reading, and discussion in recitation often
centered on these questions. Before our course revision, assessment
for the lecture portion of the course consisted of three midterms and
a final examination, with each exam consisting of a mix of quantitative problem solving, short answer, and short essay questions. As
part of our course revision, we modified this assessment plan to
include 10 weekly quizzes, two midterms, and a final exam. In all 3
years, all students were required to enroll in a weekly 3-h laboratory
section that was assessed and evaluated separately from the lecture
portion of the course. The laboratory portion of the course was not
a part of this course revision.
Course Redesign
Our course redesign consisted of three major elements:
1. Reorder course content. We reordered the presentation of the
course content in an attempt to teach specific content within the
context of broad conceptual themes. For example, a new lecture
on evolutionary developmental biology (“evo-devo”) was presented before the series of lectures surveying animal diversity.
This lecture was designed to both serve as an intellectual bridge
between the sections of the course describing evolutionary mechanisms and organismal diversity and also to help students understand patterns of animal diversity by understanding some of
the mechanisms by which that diversity evolved. As another
example, two lectures on photosynthesis were presented immediately following a lecture on ecosystem ecology in order to help
students understand the details and importance of primary productivity within the context of nutrient cycling of ecosystems. We
also ended the course with a two-lecture module on the biology
of avian flu that synthesized a number of topics taught during
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 www.biosciednet.org/portal/.
7 www.sencer.net/search.cfm
P. Armbruster et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
different parts of the semester. In these lectures we emphasized
the role of mutation and reassortment in viral evolution, discussed how species interactions influenced viral reassortment,
and considered epidemiological models of viral transmission and
spread. A copy of the course syllabus is available by request from
the corresponding author.
2. Active learning and group problem solving. We incorporated
active and problem-based learning into every lecture. Students
were organized into groups of four on the first day of class, asked
to sit together throughout the semester, and in almost every
lecture groups were presented with a quantitative or conceptual problem. Examples of a quantitative problem concerning
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium and a strip sequence problem
 concerning character displacement are
presented in Table 1, A and B, respectively. Group problems
were typically displayed on a PowerPoint slide, and the groups
were given 3–5 min to work on the problem. During this period,
the instructor would move from group to group in the classroom
to monitor student progress and offer suggestions if a group
encountered difficulty. The level of student activity was clearly
indicated by the noise level of student discussions in the classroom, which was monitored to determine when to bring the
group work to a close. Haphazardly selected group representatives were then asked to report out to the class after each group
problem-solving session. In addition to the examples in Table 1,
we used a variety of active-learning exercises as described in
Handelsman et al. , including think-pair-share, 1-min papers, and concept maps.
A personal response system (a.k.a. “clickers”) also was used to
promote active learning in the classroom. Each lecture included
two to six “clicker questions” that were presented as multiplechoice questions on a PowerPoint slide. Generally, we developed
the questions to address a specific concept covered in the lecture,
but in some cases Graduate Record Exam (GRE) or Medical
College Admission Test questions were presented with a label
indicating the source of the question. Effective implementation of
clicker questions is discussed below (see Discussion), and two
representative examples are presented in Table 2. Students were
awarded participation points (20 points of a course total of 700
points) if they answered 75% of all clicker questions presented
over the entire semester (approximately 120 total questions each
year), regardless of whether their answers were correct. Clickers
were also used to administer weekly quizzes (see below).
3. Student-centered pedagogy. We adopted several additional
strategies to create a more student-centered learning environment. Every lecture included a set of learning goals made explicit
to students in the lecture PowerPoint slides (Table 3). All exam
and quiz questions were then labeled with the corresponding
learning goals to emphasize the alignment of learning goals and
assessment. We also included a set of vocabulary terms for each
lecture to help the students focus on important concepts, and
with the hope that students would use these technical terms to
formulate more precise and succinct answers to free-response
questions on exams. We also placed an increased emphasis on
formative assessment by integrating assessment and self-assessment components into activities during lecture so that students
would receive feedback designed to improve their performance
 . For example, virtually every group
problem in lecture (e.g., Table 1) included a component of formative assessment because we always discussed the answer to
each problem in class and the group work problems closely
resembled the problems on exams. Finally, we administered 11
weekly quizzes worth 8 points each, with only the top 10 scores
applied to the final grade. These weekly quizzes thus provided
regular feedback on student performance in a “low-stakes” assessment environment and encouraged students to keep up with
the material on a regular basis.
The course redesign was implemented for the first time in 2007. In
2008, the course organization closely followed that of 2007, with
minor modifications based on student feedback in 2007 (see Discussion for details). The most substantial change in 2008 involved
moving the weekly quizzes to Thursday, the day after the optional
recitation session .
Assessment of Student Attitudes and Performance
We assessed student attitudes toward the course in all 3 years by
1) administering a three-page questionnaire that used both Likert-scale
and free response questions (see Supplemental Material I), and 2)
comparing scores on university-administered course evaluations for
questions that addressed student satisfaction. We assessed student
performance by comparing class scores on two identical final exam
questions administered in 2006, 2007, and 2008 (see Supplemental
Material II). We do not hand back the approximately 20-page final
exam, so it is not possible that the specifics of these questions were
available to students in later years . We chose
final exam questions that addressed the fundamental topics of logistic population growth and life-history trade-offs and a more
conceptual question on island biogeography (see Supplemental Material II). All of these topics were emphasized heavily in lecture in all
3 years. In addition, two educational experts scored all of the
questions on the final exam in 2006, 2007, and 2008 according to
Bloom’s taxonomy of learning . Bloom’s taxonomy
identifies six hierarchical levels of understanding that range from
knowledge (level 1), to comprehension (level 2), application (level
3), analysis (level 4), synthesis (level 5), and evaluation (level 6). We
used a weighted Kappa statistic to quantify the
interrater reliability because this statistic is appropriate for ratings
that fall into discrete categories. Because the original scored exams
are no longer available, direct comparison of performance on questions that differ in Bloom’s ranking across years is not possible.
Table 1. Examples of problems administered to groups during
A. A three-allele problem on Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
Problem: You are studying a population of wildflowers with three
alleles (A, a, A) where p  freq (A), q  freq (a), r  freq (A).
AA genotypes are blue, aa genotypes are red, AA individuals
are pink, and all heterozygous genotypes are purple.
You sample 100 flowers and find four blue and 16 red flowers.
If this population is in Hardy–Weinberg-equilibrium, what is the
frequency of the AA heterozygote genotype?
Answer: The frequency of AA genotype is 0.16.
B. A modified strip-sequence problem concerning character
displacement
Problem: Consider two species of birds that occupy a similar
ecological niche. Furthermore, these birds occur both in
sympatry and in allopatry. Arrange the following terms in the
correct order to describe the processes leading to character
displacement (note: one term does not fit).
character displacement—competition—competitive exclusion—
resource partitioning—sympatric populations—natural selection—
evolutionary change
Answer: Sympatric populations 3 competition 3 natural selection
3 evolutionary change 3 resource partitioning 3 character
displacement
For both problems, students were asked to work collaboratively in
preassigned groups for 5 to 10 min to solve the problem. A single
successful group was then asked to describe their solution to the
class. The instructor then asked for explanations from any other
group that successfully solved the problem by using an alternative
approach or reasoning.
Revision of Introductory Biology
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
However, our electronic grade book does permit us to compare the
proportion of points at different Bloom’s levels and performance on
the final exam in all 3 years.
Data Analysis
We tested for differences in class composition between years
based on categories in Table 4 by using a 2 goodness-of-fit test.
We tested for differences in Likert-scale student responses concerning attitudes toward the course from both the questionnaire
and university course evaluations by using one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) followed by a posteriori comparison of means
with a sequential Bonferroni correction to control for experimentwise error (  0.05). We used a one-way ANOVA of Likert-scale
ratings of the helpfulness of different lecture components (i.e.,
weekly quizzes, clickers, etc.) with lecture component as a fixed
effect and students nested within lecture component as a random
effect. The one-way ANOVA was followed by planned (a priori)
comparisons of means of different lecture components (averaged
across years) with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
We tested for differences between years for each
individual lecture component with a Student’s t test, again with
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. To test for differences in student performance on identical final exam questions among
years , we also used one-way ANOVA and a
posteriori comparison of means with Bonferroni correction. To test for
differences in performance on the entire final exam in 2006, 2007, and
2008, we performed one-way ANOVA on square-root arcsine-transformed percentage scores in each year followed by a posteriori comparison of means with Bonferroni correction.
Students’ free responses on the questionnaire (see Supplemental
Material I) provided a source of qualitative data on attitudes. Each
student’s answers to question 5A (“What specifically did you like
about the course?”) and positive comments from question 6 (“What
else would you like to tell us?”) were combined to reflect the student’s
positive feedback. Similarly, each student’s answers to question 5B
(“What specifically did you dislike about the course?”) and negative
comments from question 6 were combined to represent the student’s
negative feedback. Negative and positive feedback for each of the 3
years was coded separately. Codes were developed in vivo . Most codes reflected specific course or lecture
elements, such as clickers, quizzes, learning goals, PowerPoint slides,
and guest lectures. Additional codes were developed to tag students’
more general or descriptive statements such as: “too early” or “connected to the real world.” The open response nature of these questions
meant that individual statements could be tagged with several codes
(examples of coded text are provided in Supplemental Material III).
Categories were developed in relation to code frequencies as
determined by the number of students whose statements were
tagged with that code in a given year. In this way, we avoided
overestimating a code’s frequency when, for example, an individual mentioned a lecture element multiple times. The most
frequently used codes (e.g., clickers and quizzes) were elevated
to category status. Text tagged with these codes were re-examined for the explanatory details (subcodes) that are presented
associated with each category in Tables 5 and 6.
Composition of Student Body
Approximately 60% of Introductory Biology II students are
in the first year of undergraduate study; 75% identified
themselves as premedical students, and only 40% were declared biology majors. The student composition of the
course (Table 4) in 2007 and 2008 did not differ significantly
from 2006 (2  11.21, df  7, p  0.10).
Table 2. Examples of clicker questions administered during lecture
A. A question administered during a lecture on adaptation. See pp. 368–369 in Freeman and Herron for further details.
Recall the experiment examining predation of the tephritid fly by jumping spiders. Now, consider the data below which differ from
the results discussed in lecture. Which of the following conclusions is BEST supported by the data below?
Experimental Treatment
Jumping Spider Kills
A. Behavior but not wing pattern reduces kills by jumping spiders.
B. Wing pattern but not behavior reduces kills by jumping spiders.
C. NEITHER wing pattern nor behavior reduce kills by jumping spiders.
D. BOTH wing pattern and behavior are required to reduce kills by jumping spiders.
E. Cutting off and regluing the wing affects the kills by jumping spiders.
B. A question administered during a lecture on photosynthesis.
C4 and CAM photosynthesis are similar in that
A. In both C4 and CAM the light reactions produce ATP and NADPH to drive the Calvin cycle during the daylight hours.
B. In both C4 and CAM, the enzyme PEP carboxylase fixes CO2 into a four-carbon organic acid.
C. In both C4 and CAM, the Calvin cycle is most active during the daylight hours.
D. B and C only.
E. All of the above.
Additional examples are discussed in Discussion.
P. Armbruster et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Student Attitudes
All measures of student satisfaction differed significantly
between years (Figure 1). These measures include change in
interest in the course material from the start to the end of the
semester (F2409  5.22, p  0.001), ranking of relevance of
course material to long-term student goals (F2407  6.65, p 
0.001), self-reported student learning (F2355  11.70, p 
0.001), ranking of classroom presentations as stimulating
(F2358  26.52, p  0.001), ranking of the course as challenging (F2355  15.87, p  0.001), and overall evaluation of
instructor (F2355  15.87, p  0.001). For all measures of
student satisfaction, a posteriori comparison of treatment
means indicated that student satisfaction was significantly
higher in 2007 and 2008 than in 2006 (sequential Bonferroni,
p  0.05) but did not differ between 2007 and 2008 (p  0.05;
Figure 1). A summary of student free responses to questions
probing student satisfaction and dissatisfaction in all 3 years
is provided in Tables 5 and 6, respectively.
Student-centered and Active-Learning Components
Student ranking of the helpfulness of different lecture
components (Figure 2) indicated significant differences
among components (F7,2245  129.64; p  0.001). Planned
(a priori) comparisons of ranking scores indicated that
across both years, learning goals were considered the
most helpful lecture element, followed by clicker questions and weekly quizzes, which did not differ significantly. The vocabulary list and “daily dozen” reading
questions were ranked least helpful and did not differ
significantly. Group work, recitation, and outside class
study groups received intermediate rankings. Planned
comparisons of specific lecture elements between years
indicated significant differences in the helpfulness ranking between 2007 and 2008 for the vocabulary list (t 
3.19, df  284, p  0.01) and recitation (t  6.06, df  284,
p  0.001). All other lecture components did not differ in
helpfulness ranking between 2007 and 2008.
Student Performance
Student performance on identical final exam questions (e.g.,
see Supplemental Material II) was greater in years when the
material was taught in an interactive format 
than in 2006 when the material was taught in a standard
lecture format (Figure 3). Student scores on questions concerning logistic population growth and life-history tradeoffs
differed significantly among years (F2506  36.97, p  0.001)
and were higher in 2007 and 2008 than in 2006 (p  0.05;
Figure 3A). Student scores differed significantly among
years on a question concerning island biogeography (F2505 
14.55, p  0.001), with scores in 2008 higher than scores in
2006 and 2007, which did not differ significantly (p  0.05;
Figure 3B).
The Bloom’s taxonomy scores assigned to final exam
questions by two independent raters yielded moderate
 interrater reliability (weighted Kappa 
0.54), with the majority of disagreements (86%) due to differences between ratings at Bloom’s levels 1 and 2. Therefore, for each final exam, we pooled the number of points
available across lower-level (1–2, knowledge-comprehension) and higher-level (3–4, application-analysis) Bloom’s
categories. In 2006 and 2007, 82–85% of the final exam points
consisted of lower-level Bloom’s categories and 15–18%
were higher-level Bloom’s categories. In 2008, 75% of the
final exam points consisted of lower-level Bloom’s categories and 25% were higher-level Bloom’s categories. Student
performance on the final exam differed significantly among
years (F2442  12.24, p  0.001). Despite the higher proportion of points associated with higher-level Bloom’s categories in 2008, performance in 2008 (average score  91%) was
significantly higher (p  0.05) than in 2006 (86%) and 2007
(85%), which did not differ (p  0.05).
Table 3. Examples of learning goals presented at the beginning of
each lecture
A. Four representative learning goals (of eight total) for a
lecture on random genetic drift:
1. Be able to explain the details of the Buri experiment
and the major results (including interpretation of graphs) and
conclusions. Also, be able to make predictions about how the
results of the experiment would have been different if certain
aspects of the experiment were modified.
2. Be able to formulate basic predictions about how allele
frequencies will change within or between populations based
on knowledge of population size(s) and/or the action genetic
3. Be able to explain the concept of inbreeding depression and
the genetic basis of inbreeding depression.
4. Be able to explain the example of inbreeding depression in
the Florida panther discussed in class. What are the
proximate and ultimate causes of inbreeding depression in
this example? What are the potential management strategies
to address the deleterious effects of inbreeding depression in
this example?
B. Four representative learning goals (of eight total) for a
lecture on chordate evolution and diversity:
1. Be able to identify and explain the distinguishing
characteristics of the phylum Chordata.
2. Be able to draw/explain the chordate phylogeny constructed
in class, including accurate placement of taxa and
evolutionary innovations along the tree.
3. Be able to explain the functional significance of evolutionary
innovations from 2 above.
4. Be able to describe the aspects of amphibian anatomy,
physiology, and life history that keep them restricted to
moist habitats.
Table 4. Class composition of Introductory Biology II in 2006,
2007, and 2008a
Freshman, %
Biology majors, %
Other science majors, %
Premedical students, %
Total student responsesb
a Based on student responses to the questionnaire in Supplemental
Material I.
b Total enrollment was 165 in 2006, 179 in 2007, and 176 in 2008.
Revision of Introductory Biology
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
DISCUSSION
A traditional lecture format in a large introductory classroom often emphasizes content rather than process and in
doing so often fails to convey to students the nature of
hypothesis-based inquiry which is at the heart of scientific
research. There is reason to believe that this deficit diminishes learning outcomes and may contribute to the loss of
some of our most talented students at the introductory level
 . The primary goal
of our course restructuring was to improve student attitudes
in the course, motivated by the hypothesis that improved
attitudes would lead to improved learning outcomes . The course reorganization we described sought to
address these challenges by 1) reorganizing the course material to emphasize context, 2) engaging students with active
learning in every lecture, and 3) creating a more studentcentered classroom environment.
Student Attitudes
The data in Figure 1 clearly indicate that the changes we
implemented in 2007 and 2008 improved student attitudes
toward the course. For every question considered, student
satisfaction scores increased significantly between 2006 and
2007 and did not differ between 2007 and 2008. It is important to note that in 2006, the first author was teaching this
course for the third consecutive year. University teaching
evaluation scores were consistent in the three years before
2007, and in fact a major reason for implementing the
changes we describe in 2007 was that the instructor (first
author) felt strongly that after 3 years, additional teaching
experience alone was unlikely to cause a significant change
in student response to the course. We therefore attribute the
clear and consistent changes in student attitudes between
2006 and 2007 (Figure 1) directly to the elements of course
redesign we describe here, and the similarity of student
responses in 2007 and 2008 (Figure 1 and Tables 5 and 6)
further supports this interpretation.
The students’ free-responses summarized in Tables 5 and
6 are consistent with the data presented in Figure 1. First, it
should be noted that the proportion of positive comments
increased from 2006 (65%) to 2007 (81%) and 2008 (89%). In
2006, the top category (56%) of positive response concerned
traditional course material (e.g., PowerPoint slides, videos),
whereas in 2007 and 2008 traditional course materials were
mentioned in only 10–11% of the positive comments, and
quality of instruction was the most common positive com-
Table 5. Top five categories of positive free response (and associated explanatory subcodes) regarding student satisfaction from
questions 5A and 6 on the questionnaire provided in Supplemental Material I
2006 (n  107)
2007 (n  114)
2008 (n  148)
Traditional course materials: Power
Point, videos, handouts, outlines
Quality of instruction: enthusiasm, clarity,
organization, comprehensive, pacing
Quality of instruction: organization,
clarity, and interesting
Quality of instruction: enthusiasm,
clarity, and organization
Clickers: clarified, engaged, immediate
Clickers: engaged, feedback
Overall well done
Additional course materials: learning
goals, groups, quizzes
Guest lectures
Interesting material
Content interesting: range of topics,
specific topics
Interaction in lecture: via group
activities, clickers, multiple
approaches to learning
Specific topics
Traditional course materials: PowerPoint,
Traditional course materials:
PowerPoint, videos, recitation
See text for details of classification of categories.
Table 6. Top five categories of negative free response (and associated explanatory subcodes) regarding student satisfaction from
questions 5B and 6 on the questionnaire provided in Supplemental Material I
2006 (n  104)
2007 (n  101)
2008 (n  118)
Lecture not stimulating
Group work
Group work
Exams: too hard, too specific, grading
Quizzes: too frequent, too hard,
Quizzes: points, stressful, too hard
Logistics: too early, too long, use board
Logistics: too early, too long, no
Logistics: lecture too long
Course materials: improve handouts/
outlines/PowerPoint
Guest lectures: irrelevant, unrelated to
course material
Difficult to know what to study,
learning goals incomplete
Subject matter not interesting
Course materials: PowerPoint, folders,
use the board, more movies and
Spent too much time on easy
topics, not enough time on hard
See text for details of classification of categories.
P. Armbruster et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
ment in both years at 24 and 27%, respectively (Table 5).
Together, these results clearly indicate that students’ perception of the quality of instruction increased in 2007 and 2008,
similar to results in Figure 1.
Student-centered and Active-Learning Components
Students’ positive free-response answers explicitly referencing specific components of the course redesign were the
second (14%) and third (13%) most frequent category of
positive response in 2007, and second (16%) and fourth
(12%) most frequent category of positive response in 2008
(Table 5). These comments in 2007 and 2008 that specifically
mention the active-learning and student-centered pedagogy
we introduced in 2007 included references to “engagement,”
“immediate feedback,” and “multiple approaches to learning.” There were almost none of these specific references in
With respect to negative free responses (Table 6), in 2006
the most frequent category of response was that lecture was
not stimulating (25%), whereas in 2007 and 2008 that category composed 1% of the negative responses. Again, these
data corroborate the results in Figure 1, where lecture was
ranked as more stimulating in 2007 and 2008 than in 2006.
It is important to note, however, that two specific elements of our course redesign were explicitly mentioned as
the first (group work, 17%) and second (weekly quizzes,
15%) most frequent category of negative response in both
2007 and 2008. Group work was also ranked relatively low
in terms of helpfulness to student learning (Figure 2). Our
interpretation of the feedback on group work is that we need
to further refine this element of the course. We adopted
strategies for effectively implementing group work as discussed by Handelsman et al. and Ebert-May and
Hodder . Students did not receive credit for these
in-class active-learning exercises, but the requirement to
report out to the class seemed to provide a strong incentive
for most students to engage seriously in these activities.
During each group-work exercise the instructor would
move throughout the classroom to monitor group progress,
and it was rare to find a group that was not seriously
engaged in the exercise. However, the attempt to include a
group exercise in almost every lecture meant that both the
quality and rigor of exercises varied considerably. The
group exercises that elicited the most animated student participation were those that were sufficiently challenging that
very few students could solve the problem individually, but
at least 50% or more of the groups could solve the problem
by working as a team. Some of our most active group
interactions occurred when we administered a challenging
quiz, and then immediately allowed the students to retake
the quiz as a group with the stipulation that the students
would receive the highest of either their group or individual
scores. This consideration suggests that a potential modification to further increase engagement in the group work
would be to assign points to these in-class exercises .
Our interpretation of the relatively high proportion of
negative comments regarding the weekly quizzes (Table 6)
differs from that regarding the group work. The weekly
quizzes were implemented in order to encourage students to
keep up with the course material and to provide them with
regular feedback on their understanding of the material in a
low-stakes assessment environment. Note that in Figure 2
students ranked the weekly quizzes third highest in terms of
helpfulness in both 2007 and 2008. We thus interpret the
data in Table 6 and Figure 2 to indicate that although some
students may dislike the weekly quizzes (administered at
8:50 am), many recognized that these quizzes were helpful
to their learning. Sixty-four percent of the respondents rated
Mean  SE student-reported attitudes
from 2006 (standard lecture format), 2007, and 2008
(revised lecture format). “Increased interest” and
“Relevance to goals” were questions on an instructor
administered questionnaire (see Supplemental Material I), all other questions were part of the university
course evaluation (see text). Increased interest represents difference in interest in the subject matter after
taking the course relative to interest before taking the
course (i.e., questions 2A and B, see Supplemental
Material I). For each question, comparison among
years was significant (p  0.001)
by one-way ANOVA. Results of a posteriori comparison of means for each question indicated by letters
where means that share the same letter are not significantly different (p  0.05) with Bonferonni correction
for experiment-wise error (  0.05).
Revision of Introductory Biology
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
quizzes at 4 or 5 in terms of their helpfulness. The following
quote is a typical comment made by students who rated
quizzes at 4 or 5:
“Quizzes seemed like a hassle at first but in the end when
our exams came up, since I had been studying all along for
the quizzes, I had learned/studied most of the material, so I
actually appreciate the weekly quiz system.” S136.2008.Q3B
We view these results as positive evidence of metacognitive awareness in that the weekly
quizzes seem to have helped these students identify strategies for enhancing their own learning. This represents a
particularly important goal for introductory classes that aim
to prepare students for more advanced course work and
independent learning.
Figure 2 indicates considerable consistency between 2007
and 2008 in the ranking of various lecture elements in terms
of the helpfulness to student learning. The explicit learning
goals (Table 3) ranked highest in both years (Figure 2). From
a student’s perspective, learning goals establish clear expectations about what skills and content students should master
from each lecture. From an instructor’s perspective, learning
goals play a critical role in shaping both instructional activities and assessment through the process of “backward design” ,
whereby learning goals explicitly articulate the desired
learning outcomes to both instructor and students. Those
desired outcomes then specify the assessment tasks that
determine whether the desired outcomes have been met,
and also shape teaching activities required to meet the desired goals. During 2007 and 2008, through the process of
backward design, the learning goals provided a clear “road
map” for both determining the content and organization of
lectures and also for writing exams, whereas in 2006 both
processes took place in a much less structured manner.
The personal response system (clickers) ranked the second
highest in terms of helpfulness with learning in both 2007
and 2008 (Figure 2). These results are consistent with those
of a large number of previous studies documenting positive
student responses to clicker systems and a large body of evidence indicating
that the use of clickers and associated peer interaction (see
below) can lead to improved student learning . In a recent and intriguing study from
physics, Reay et al. found that the use of clickers not
only led to increased learning gains in an introductory physics course but also seemed to reduce the performance difference between males and females.
Mean ( SE) ranking of helpfulness for lecture components by students in 2007 (E) and 2008 (F). Lecture components as
described in text: clicker  clicker questions; quiz  weekly quizzes;
lgoal  learning goals; vocab  vocabulary lists; group  group
work in class; daildoz  daily dozen reading questions; recit 
optional weekly recitation section; and stdygrp  optional study
group outside class. Results of one-way ANOVA testing for differences among lecture components was highly significant (p  0.001).
The legend on the top indicates results of planned comparisons (A)
among components (pooled across years) where components that
share the same letter are not significantly different (p 0.05) and (B)
between years for each individual component,
where * indicates p  0.05, ns indicates p  0.05.
Mean ( SE) points scored on identical final exam
questions administered in 2006, 2007, and 2008. (A) Logistic growth
and life-history evolution, (8 points possible). (B) Island biogeography, see Supplemental Material II (9 points possible). The legend in
the top right indicates the results of one-way ANOVA testing for
differences among years, ***p  0.001. Results of a posteriori
comparison among years indicated by letters, means associated
with the same letter are not significantly different (p  0.05).
P. Armbruster et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
The clickers were an effective pedagogical tool in our
introductory biology course in several respects. First, the
clicker system provided “real-time feedback” to the students
(Table 5). This feedback allowed the instructor to establish
clear expectations regarding the depth of student understanding required to answer quiz and exam questions correctly. Simultaneously, this information allowed students to
gauge their understanding continually relative to those expectations (i.e., formative assessment). The clickers were
also extremely helpful in identifying, and thus allowing us
to rectify, by addressing in a more direct and thorough
manner, student misconceptions. Two striking misconceptions in our class concerned the ability to interpret a phylogenetic tree and the failure to recognize that photosynthetic organisms not only fix CO2 through photosynthesis but also release CO2 through cellular respiration .
The clickers were also very useful in initiating peer instruction in the classroom . This occurred when between 35 and 75% of the class
answered a clicker question incorrectly, and students were
then instructed to consult with a neighbor for 1 to 2 min to
discuss their answers. The students were then repolled without being informed of the correct answers. Such occasions
invariably led to animated discussion among the students in
the class, and almost always resulted in an increase in the
proportion of correct answers when the students were repolled. The clicker questions that generated the most animated student discussion were those that either did not
have a single correct answer or that elicited a relatively even
number of responses between two or more answers. These
results are consistent with previous studies that demonstrate
the efficacy of peer instruction facilitated by clickers to promote student learning . However, it is critical to recognize that it is the peer interaction rather than the clickers per
se that promotes student learning , emphasizing that an appropriate underlying pedagogical design is essential for the effective use of clickers .
Student ranking of helpfulness for the vocabulary list and
recitation increased significantly from 2007 to 2008 (Figure
2). Notably, these components were ranked relatively low in
2007 and this feedback from the student questionnaire in
2007 enabled us to target these aspects of the course design
in 2008. The vocabulary list presented at the beginning of
each class (see Course Redesign) was ranked as the least
helpful element of the lecture in 2007. The goal of these lists
was to help students use technical terminology to formulate
concise and precise answers to free-response questions on
exams. In 2008 we discussed this goal in lecture and explicitly modeled the process several times. In the future, we plan
to develop active-learning exercises that explicitly focus on
clear written communication.
The increase in helpfulness ranking from 2007 to 2008 for
the optional recitation session (Figure 2) was particularly
notable. Based on student feedback in 2007, in 2008 we
moved the quizzes to Thursday so that they were given the
day immediately after the recitation sessions. Attendance at
the recitation sessions increased dramatically, consistent
with the data in Figure 2. This change from 2007 to 2008
provides an excellent example of how student feedback can
be used to make simple changes that have a large impact on
student satisfaction and performance.
Finally, we note that one of the major elements from the
course in 2006 that was carried over into 2007 and 2008 was
the daily dozen (a list of questions designed to help students
identify important concepts in the textbook reading assignments), which ranked relatively low in terms of helpfulness
compared with elements that were introduced as part of our
course restructuring in 2007. We did not receive specific
positive or negative feedback regarding the daily dozen on
our questionnaire in 2006–2008 (Tables 5 and 6), and we
attribute the relatively low ranking of this component in
2007 and 2008 (Figure 2) to greater enthusiasm for other
components of the course.
Student Performance
Our data on academic performance are consistent with previous studies indicating that student-centered pedagogy
and interactive-learning activities increase student performance . The
data in Figure 3 illustrate student performance on identical
final exam questions administered in all 3 years and show
consistent increases in performance between 2006 and 2008.
Furthermore, the proportion of points on the final exam for
questions at higher levels of Bloom’s taxonomy (levels 3–4,
application-analysis) increased from 15–18% in 2006–2007 to
25% in 2008. Furthermore, the average student performance
on the final exam also increased in 2008 (91%) relative to
2006 (86%) and 2007 (85%). Together, these results indicate
increased academic performance and imply increased proficiency with higher-order problem-solving skills associated
with the changes in instructional design implemented in our
course. These conclusions are somewhat conservative because the 2006 final exam contained a section in which
students were allowed to choose six of eight questions to
answer, but students were not given any choices on the 2007
and 2008 final exams.
The results on student performance noted above suggest
that the most pronounced increases in performance occurred
between 2007 and 2008, whereas results in Figure 1 and
Table 5 indicate that student attitudes increased significantly
from 2006 to 2007 and did not change between 2007 and
2008. We believe these results indicate that a semester of
experience with implementing the active-learning and student-centered pedagogies in 2007 made these approaches
more effective in improving student performance in 2008.
Although the initial goal of our course redesign was to target
student attitudes, we are now initiating more intensive efforts to quantify student learning by using pre- and postcourse assessment tools, assessment of higher-order skills
such as the interpretation of primary literature, and performance on the Biology GRE.
Institutional Context
The course redesign we implemented required a significant
time investment both in the approximately 6 mo leading up to
2007, and during the first semester of implementation. Attendance at a national workshop, the National Academies Sum-
Revision of Introductory Biology
Vol. 8, Fall 2009
mer Institutes on Undergraduate Education in Biology (www.
academiessummerinstitute.org/) provided significant background theory and training. Also, in fall 2006, we convened a
series of on-campus seminars featuring national leaders in
science education ( 
symposia/TFU/). These seminars were particularly useful
both in generating support from our departmental colleagues to implement changes in a course that is foundational to the department’s curriculum and also in providing
the opportunity to discuss specific details of course redesign
with individuals highly experienced in implementing active-learning and student-centered pedagogical approaches.
It is important to note, however, that once the initial course
redesign was implemented in 2007, teaching the course in
2008 did not require a significant additional time commitment relative to 2006 (before our changes were implemented) and yet the increased positive student response to
the course was sustained (Figure 1 and Table 5). Furthermore, the improved scores on the university-administered
course evaluations (see questions 2–6 in Figure 1), the primary mechanisms of assessing teaching at most institutions,
indicates that the time investment required to implement a
course restructuring can have a positive impact on instructor
evaluation criteria.
Finally, the course redesign had another unanticipated
benefit: it improved not only the students’ attitude toward
the course but also the instructor’s morale and enthusiasm.
Introductory Biology II has long been a problematic course
for our department because of deficiencies noted in the
Introduction (poor student attitudes, passive [superficial]
learning, and suboptimal student performance). As a consequence, instructors often lose enthusiasm for teaching this
course after 2 to 3 years. However, the interactive pedagogy
and positive student responses made this a much more
exciting and rewarding course to teach in 2007 and 2008.
The changes we implemented also have had an impact at
the departmental level. Based in part on the positive student
reactions to interactive and student-centered pedagogy in
Introductory Biology II, four instructors have implemented
the use of clickers in their courses and one faculty member
attended the 2007 National Academies Summer Institutes on
Undergraduate Education in Biology.
In summary, we developed and implemented an instructional design that focused on incorporating active-learning
and student-centered pedagogy into what was previously a
traditional lecture-based introductory biology course. These
changes led to sustainable improvements in student attitudes and performance. Although the changes we implemented required a significant time commitment in the first
year , this was essentially a “one time investment”
because it did not require extra effort to teach the course
using the revised model in 2008. Furthermore, several faculty in our department have begun to incorporate interactive and student-centered pedagogies into their courses. The
course reorganization we describe thus not only provides a
model for revision of an individual course but can also
provide a catalyst for institutional reform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Janet Russell and Michael Hickey for scoring our final
exam questions according to Bloom’s taxonomy; and Diane Ebert-
May, Jay Labov, Janet Russell, Debra Tomanek, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on previous versions of this
manuscript.
acknowledge
Ebert-May,
O’Dowd, and Robin Wright for valuable input on our course restructuring. Financial support was provided by the College Curriculum Renewal Project of Georgetown College and the Undergraduate Learning Initiative from the Center for New Designs in
Learning and Scholarship, Georgetown University.