Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks
Du Tran1,2, Lubomir Bourdev1, Rob Fergus1, Lorenzo Torresani2, Manohar Paluri1
1Facebook AI Research, 2Dartmouth College
{dutran,lorenzo}@cs.dartmouth.edu
{lubomir,robfergus,mano}@fb.com
We propose a simple, yet effective approach for spatiotemporal feature learning using deep 3-dimensional convolutional networks (3D ConvNets) trained on a large scale
supervised video dataset. Our ﬁndings are three-fold: 1)
3D ConvNets are more suitable for spatiotemporal feature
learning compared to 2D ConvNets; 2) A homogeneous architecture with small 3 × 3 × 3 convolution kernels in all
layers is among the best performing architectures for 3D
ConvNets; and 3) Our learned features, namely C3D (Convolutional 3D), with a simple linear classiﬁer outperform
state-of-the-art methods on 4 different benchmarks and are
comparable with current best methods on the other 2 benchmarks. In addition, the features are compact: achieving
52.8% accuracy on UCF101 dataset with only 10 dimensions and also very efﬁcient to compute due to the fast inference of ConvNets. Finally, they are conceptually very
simple and easy to train and use.
1. Introduction
Multimedia on the Internet is growing rapidly resulting in an increasing number of videos being shared every
minute. To combat the information explosion it is essential to understand and analyze these videos for various purposes like search, recommendation, ranking etc. The computer vision community has been working on video analysis
for decades and tackled different problems such as action
recognition , abnormal event detection , and activity
understanding . Considerable progress has been made
in these individual problems by employing different speciﬁc solutions. However, there is still a growing need for
a generic video descriptor that helps in solving large-scale
video tasks in a homogeneous way.
There are four properties for an effective video descriptor: (i) it needs to be generic, so that it can represent different types of videos well while being discriminative. For example, Internet videos can be of landscapes, natural scenes,
sports, TV shows, movies, pets, food and so on; (ii) the descriptor needs to be compact: as we are working with millions of videos, a compact descriptor helps processing, storing, and retrieving tasks much more scalable; (iii) it needs to
be efﬁcient to compute, as thousands of videos are expected
to be processed every minute in real world systems; and
(iv) it must be simple to implement. Instead of using complicated feature encoding methods and classiﬁers, a good
descriptor should work well even with a simple model (e.g.
linear classiﬁer).
Inspired by the deep learning breakthroughs in the image
domain where rapid progress has been made in the past
few years in feature learning, various pre-trained convolutional network (ConvNet) models are made available
for extracting image features. These features are the activations of the network’s last few fully-connected layers which
perform well on transfer learning tasks . However,
such image based deep features are not directly suitable for
videos due to lack of motion modeling (as shown in our
experiments in sections 4,5,6). In this paper we propose
to learn spatio-temporal features using deep 3D ConvNet.
We empirically show that these learned features with a simple linear classiﬁer can yield good performance on various
video analysis tasks. Although 3D ConvNets were proposed
before , to our knowledge this work exploits 3D
ConvNets in the context of large-scale supervised training
datasets and modern deep architectures to achieve the best
performance on different types of video analysis tasks. The
features from these 3D ConvNets encapsulate information
related to objects, scenes and actions in a video, making
them useful for various tasks without requiring to ﬁnetune
the model for each task. C3D has the properties that a good
descriptor should have: it is generic, compact, simple and
efﬁcient. To summarize, our contributions in this paper are:
• We experimentally show 3D convolutional deep networks are good feature learning machines that model
appearance and motion simultaneously.
• We empirically ﬁnd that 3 × 3 × 3 convolution kernel
for all layers to work best among the limited set of
explored architectures.
• The proposed features with a simple linear model outperform or approach the current best methods on 4 different tasks and 6 different benchmarks (see Table 1).
They are also compact and efﬁcient to compute.
 
action recognition
action recognition
action similarity labeling
scene classiﬁcation
scene classiﬁcation
object recognition
 ( )
75.8 (89.1)
85.2 (90.4)
Table 1. C3D compared to best published results. C3D outperforms all previous best reported methods on a range of benchmarks except
for Sports-1M and UCF101. On UCF101, we report accuracy for two groups of methods. The ﬁrst set of methods use only RGB frame
inputs while the second set of methods (in parentheses) use all possible features (e.g. optical ﬂow, improved Dense Trajectory).
2. Related Work
Videos have been studied by the computer vision community for decades. Over the years various problems like
action recognition , anomaly detection , video retrieval , event and action detection , and many
more have been proposed. Considerable portion of these
works are about video representations. Laptev and Lindeberg proposed spatio-temporal interest points (STIPs)
by extending Harris corner detectors to 3D. SIFT and HOG
are also extended into SIFT-3D and HOG3D for
action recognition. Dollar et al. proposed Cuboids features
for behavior recognition . Sadanand and Corso built ActionBank for action recognition . Recently, Wang et al.
proposed improved Dense Trajectories (iDT) which is
currently the state-of-the-art hand-crafted feature. The iDT
descriptor is an interesting example showing that temporal
signals could be handled differently from that of spatial signal. Instead of extending Harris corner detector into 3D, it
starts with densely-sampled feature points in video frames
and uses optical ﬂows to track them. For each tracker corner different hand-crafted features are extracted along the
trajectory. Despite its good performance, this method is
computationally intensive and becomes intractable on largescale datasets.
With recent availability of powerful parallel machines
(GPUs, CPU clusters), together with large amounts of training data, convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) 
have made a come back providing breakthroughs on visual
recognition . ConvNets have also been applied to
the problem of human pose estimation in both images 
and videos . More interestingly these deep networks
are used for image feature learning . Similarly, Zhou et
al. and perform well on transferred learning tasks. Deep
learning has also been applied to video feature learning in
an unsupervised setting .
In Le et al. , the authors use stacked ISA to learn spatio-temporal features for
videos. Although this method showed good results on action recognition, it is still computationally intensive at training and hard to scale up for testing on large datasets. 3D
ConvNets were proposed for human action recognition 
and for medical image segmentation . 3D convolution was also used with Restricted Boltzmann Machines
to learn spatiotemporal features . Recently, Karpathy et
al. trained deep networks on a large video dataset for
video classiﬁcation.
Simonyan and Zisserman used
two stream networks to achieve best results on action recognition.
Among these approaches, the 3D ConvNets approach
in is most closely related to us. This method used a human detector and head tracking to segment human subjects
in videos. The segmented video volumes are used as inputs
for a 3-convolution-layer 3D ConvNet to classify actions. In
contrast, our method takes full video frames as inputs and
does not rely on any preprocessing, thus easily scaling to
large datasets. We also share some similarities with Karpathy et al. and Simonyan and Zisserman in terms
of using full frames for training the ConvNet. However,
these methods are built on using only 2D convolution and
2D pooling operations (except for the Slow Fusion model
in ) whereas our model performs 3D convolutions and
3D pooling propagating temporal information across all the
layers in the network (further detailed in section 3). We also
show that gradually pooling space and time information and
building deeper networks achieves best results and we discuss more about the architecture search in section 3.2.
3. Learning Features with 3D ConvNets
In this section we explain in detail the basic operations of
3D ConvNets, analyze different architectures for 3D ConvNets empirically, and elaborate how to train them on largescale datasets for feature learning.
3.1. 3D convolution and pooling
We believe that 3D ConvNet is well-suited for spatiotemporal feature learning. Compared to 2D ConvNet, 3D ConvNet has the ability to model temporal information better
owing to 3D convolution and 3D pooling operations. In
3D ConvNets, convolution and pooling operations are performed spatio-temporally while in 2D ConvNets they are
done only spatially. Figure 1 illustrates the difference, 2D
convolution applied on an image will output an image, 2D
convolution applied on multiple images (treating them as
different channels ) also results in an image. Hence,
2D ConvNets lose temporal information of the input signal right after every convolution operation. Only 3D convolution preserves the temporal information of the input
signals resulting in an output volume. The same phenomena is applicable for 2D and 3D polling. In , although
2D convolution
3D convolution
2D convolution on multiple frames
Figure 1. 2D and 3D convolution operations. a) Applying 2D convolution on an image results in an image. b) Applying 2D convolution
on a video volume (multiple frames as multiple channels) also results in an image. c) Applying 3D convolution on a video volume results
in another volume, preserving temporal information of the input signal.
the temporal stream network takes multiple frames as input,
because of the 2D convolutions, after the ﬁrst convolution
layer, temporal information is collapsed completely. Similarly, fusion models in used 2D convolutions, most of
the networks lose their input’s temporal signal after the ﬁrst
convolution layer. Only the Slow Fusion model in uses
3D convolutions and averaging pooling in its ﬁrst 3 convolution layers. We believe this is the key reason why it performs best among all networks studied in . However, it
still loses all temporal information after the third convolution layer.
In this section, we empirically try to identify a good architecture for 3D ConvNets.
Because training deep networks on large-scale video datasets is very time-consuming,
we ﬁrst experiment with UCF101, a medium-scale dataset,
to search for the best architecture. We verify the ﬁndings on
a large scale dataset with a smaller number of network experiments. According to the ﬁndings in 2D ConvNet ,
small receptive ﬁelds of 3 × 3 convolution kernels with
deeper architectures yield best results. Hence, for our architecture search study we ﬁx the spatial receptive ﬁeld to
3 × 3 and vary only the temporal depth of the 3D convolution kernels.
Notations: For simplicity, from now on we refer video
clips with a size of c × l × h × w where c is the number of
channels, l is length in number of frames, h and w are the
height and width of the frame, respectively. We also refer
3D convolution and pooling kernel size by d×k ×k, where
d is kernel temporal depth and k is kernel spatial size.
Common network settings: In this section we describe
the network settings that are common to all the networks we
trained. The networks are set up to take video clips as inputs
and predict the class labels which belong to 101 different
actions. All video frames are resized into 128 × 171. This
is roughly half resolution of the UCF101 frames. Videos
are split into non-overlapped 16-frame clips which are then
used as input to the networks. The input dimensions are
3 × 16 × 128 × 171. We also use jittering by using random
crops with a size of 3 × 16 × 112 × 112 of the input clips
during training. The networks have 5 convolution layers
and 5 pooling layers (each convolution layer is immediately
followed by a pooling layer), 2 fully-connected layers and
a softmax loss layer to predict action labels. The number
of ﬁlters for 5 convolution layers from 1 to 5 are 64, 128,
256, 256, 256, respectively. All convolution kernels have a
size of d where d is the kernel temporal depth (we will later
vary the value d of these layers to search for a good 3D architecture). All of these convolution layers are applied with
appropriate padding (both spatial and temporal) and stride
1, thus there is no change in term of size from the input
to the output of these convolution layers. All pooling layers are max pooling with kernel size 2 × 2 × 2 (except for
the ﬁrst layer) with stride 1 which means the size of output
signal is reduced by a factor of 8 compared with the input
signal. The ﬁrst pooling layer has kernel size 1 × 2 × 2
with the intention of not to merge the temporal signal too
early and also to satisfy the clip length of 16 frames (e.g.
we can temporally pool with factor 2 at most 4 times before completely collapsing the temporal signal). The two
fully connected layers have 2048 outputs. We train the networks from scratch using mini-batches of 30 clips, with initial learning rate of 0.003. The learning rate is divided by
10 after every 4 epochs. The training is stopped after 16
Varying network architectures: For the purposes of
this study we are mainly interested in how to aggregate temporal information through the deep networks. To search
for a good 3D ConvNet architecture, we only vary kernel
temporal depth di of the convolution layers while keeping
all other common settings ﬁxed as stated above. We experiment with two types of architectures: 1) homogeneous
temporal depth: all convolution layers have the same kernel temporal depth; and 2) varying temporal depth: kernel
temporal depth is changing across the layers. For homogeneous setting, we experiment with 4 networks having kernel temporal depth of d equal to 1, 3, 5, and 7. We name
these networks as depth-d, where d is their homogeneous
temporal depth. Note that depth-1 net is equivalent to applying 2D convolutions on separate frames. For the varying
temporal depth setting, we experiment two networks with
temporal depth increasing: 3-3-5-5-7 and decreasing: 7-
5-5-3-3 from the ﬁrst to the ﬁfth convolution layer respectively. We note that all of these networks have the same size
of the output signal at the last pooling layer, thus they have
the same number of parameters for fully connected layers.
Their number of parameters is only different at convolution
layers due to different kernel temporal depth. These differences are quite minute compared to millions of parameters
in the fully connected layers. For example, any two of the
above nets with temporal depth difference of 2, only has
clip accuracy
clip accuracy
Figure 2. 3D convolution kernel temporal depth search. Action
recognition clip accuracy on UCF101 test split-1 of different kernel temporal depth settings. 2D ConvNet performs worst and 3D
ConvNet with 3 × 3 × 3 kernels performs best among the experimented nets.
17K parameters fewer or more from each other. The biggest
difference in number of parameters is between depth-1 net
and depth-7 net where depth-7 net has 51K more parameters which is less than 0.3% of the total of 17.5 millions parameters of each network. This indicates that the learning
capacity of the networks are comparable and the differences
in number of parameters should not affect the results of our
architecture search.
3.2. Exploring kernel temporal depth
We train these networks on the train split 1 of UCF101.
Figure 2 presents clip accuracy of different architectures on
UCF101 test split 1. The left plot shows results of nets with
homogeneous temporal depth and the right plot presents results of nets that changing kernel temporal depth. Depth-
3 performs best among the homogeneous nets. Note that
depth-1 is signiﬁcantly worse than the other nets which we
believe is due to lack of motion modeling. Compared to the
varying temporal depth nets, depth-3 is the best performer,
but the gap is smaller. We also experiment with bigger spatial receptive ﬁeld (e.g. 5 × 5) and/or full input resolution
(240 × 320 frame inputs) and still observe similar behavior. This suggests 3 × 3 × 3 is the best kernel choice for
3D ConvNets (according to our subset of experiments) and
3D ConvNets are consistently better than 2D ConvNets for
video classiﬁcation. We also verify that 3D ConvNet consistently performs better than 2D ConvNet on a large-scale
internal dataset, namely I380K.
3.3. Spatiotemporal feature learning
Network architecture: Our ﬁndings in the previous section indicate that homogeneous setting with convolution
kernels of 3 × 3 × 3 is the best option for 3D ConvNets.
This ﬁnding is also consistent with a similar ﬁnding in 2D
ConvNets . With a large-scale dataset, one can train a
3D ConvNet with 3×3×3 kernel as deep as possible subject
to the machine memory limit and computation affordability.
With current GPU memory, we design our 3D ConvNet to
have 8 convolution layers, 5 pooling layers, followed by two
fully connected layers, and a softmax output layer. The network architecture is presented in ﬁgure 3. For simplicity,
we call this net C3D from now on. All of 3D convolution
ﬁlters are 3 × 3 × 3 with stride 1 × 1 × 1. All 3D pooling
layers are 2 × 2 × 2 with stride 2 × 2 × 2 except for pool1
which has kernel size of 1 × 2 × 2 and stride 1 × 2 × 2
with the intention of preserving the temporal information in
the early phase. Each fully connected layer has 4096 output
To learn spatiotemproal features, we train
our C3D on Sports-1M dataset which is currently the
largest video classiﬁcation benchmark. The dataset consists
of 1.1 million sports videos. Each video belongs to one
of 487 sports categories. Compared with UCF101, Sports-
1M has 5 times the number of categories and 100 times the
number of videos.
Training: Training is done on the Sports-1M train split.
As Sports-1M has many long videos, we randomly extract
ﬁve 2-second long clips from every training video. Clips are
resized to have a frame size of 128 × 171. On training, we
randomly crop input clips into 16×112×112 crops for spatial and temporal jittering. We also horizontally ﬂip them
with 50% probability. Training is done by SGD with minibatch size of 30 examples. Initial learning rate is 0.003,
and is divided by 2 every 150K iterations. The optimization
is stopped at 1.9M iterations (about 13 epochs). Beside the
C3D net trained from scratch, we also experiment with C3D
net ﬁne-tuned from the model pre-trained on I380K.
Sports-1M classiﬁcation results:
Table 2 presents
the results of our C3D networks compared with Deep-
Video and Convolution pooling . We use only a
single center crop per clip, and pass it through the network
to make the clip prediction. For video predictions, we average clip predictions of 10 clips which are randomly extracted from the video. It is worth noting some setting differences between the comparing methods. DeepVideo and
C3D use short clips while Convolution pooling uses
much longer clips. DeepVideo uses more crops: 4 crops per
clip and 80 crops per video compared with 1 and 10 used by
C3D, respectively. The C3D network trained from scratch
yields an accuracy of 84.4% and the one ﬁne-tuned from
the I380K pre-trained model yields 85.5% at video top-
5 accuracy. Both C3D networks outperform DeepVideo’s
C3D is still 5.6% below the method of .
However, this method uses convolution pooling of deep
image features on long clips of 120 frames, thus it is not
directly comparable to C3D and DeepVideo which operate on much shorter clips. We note that the difference in
top-1 accuracy for clips and videos of this method is small
(1.6%) as it already uses 120-frame clips as inputs. In practice, convolution pooling or more sophisticated aggregation
schemes can be applied on top of C3D features to improve video hit performance.
C3D video descriptor: After training, C3D can be used
as a feature extractor for other video analysis tasks.
Figure 3. C3D architecture. C3D net has 8 convolution, 5 max-pooling, and 2 fully connected layers, followed by a softmax output layer.
All 3D convolution kernels are 3 × 3 × 3 with stride 1 in both spatial and temporal dimensions. Number of ﬁlters are denoted in each box.
The 3D pooling layers are denoted from pool1 to pool5. All pooling kernels are 2 × 2 × 2, except for pool1 is 1 × 2 × 2. Each fully
connected layer has 4096 output units.
Number of Nets
Clip hit@1
Video hit@1
Video hit@5
DeepVideo’s Single-Frame + Multires 
DeepVideo’s Slow Fusion 
Convolution pooling on 120-frame clips 
C3D (trained from scratch)
C3D (ﬁne-tuned from I380K pre-trained model)
Table 2. Sports-1M classiﬁcation result. C3D outperforms by 5% on top-5 video-level accuracy. (*)We note that the method of 
uses long clips, thus its clip-level accuracy is not directly comparable to that of C3D and DeepVideo.
extract C3D feature, a video is split into 16 frame long
clips with a 8-frame overlap between two consecutive clips.
These clips are passed to the C3D network to extract fc6
activations.
These clip fc6 activations are averaged to
form a 4096-dim video descriptor which is then followed
by an L2-normalization. We refer to this representation as
C3D video descriptor/feature in all experiments, unless we
clearly specify the difference.
What does C3D learn?
We use the deconvolution
method explained in to understand what C3D is learning internally. We observe that C3D starts by focusing on
appearance in the ﬁrst few frames and tracks the salient motion in the subsequent frames. Figure 4 visualizes deconvolution of two C3D conv5b feature maps with highest activations projected back to the image space. In the ﬁrst example, the feature focuses on the whole person and then tracks
the motion of the pole vault performance over the rest of the
frames. Similarly in the second example it ﬁrst focuses on
the eyes and then tracks the motion happening around the
eyes while applying the makeup. Thus C3D differs from
standard 2D ConvNets in that it selectively attends to both
motion and appearance. We provide more visualizations in
the supplementary material to give a better insight about the
learned feature.
4. Action recognition
We evaluate C3D features on UCF101
dataset . The dataset consists of 13, 320 videos of 101
human action categories. We use the three split setting provided with this dataset.
Classiﬁcation model: We extract C3D features and input them to a multi-class linear SVM for training models.
We experiment with C3D descriptor using 3 different nets:
C3D trained on I380K, C3D trained on Sports-1M, and C3D
trained on I380K and ﬁne-tuned on Sports-1M. In the multiple nets setting, we concatenate the L2-normalized C3D
descriptors of these nets.
Baselines: We compare C3D feature with a few baselines: the current best hand-crafted features, namely improved dense trajectories (iDT) and the popular-used
deep image features, namely Imagenet , using Caffe’s
Imagenet pre-train model. For iDT, we use the bag-of-word
representation with a codebook size of 5000 for each feature
channel of iDT which are trajectories, HOG, HOF, MBHx,
and MBHy. We normalize histogram of each channel separately using L1-norm and concatenate these normalized histograms to form a 25K feature vector for a video. For Imagenet baseline, similar to C3D, we extract Imagenet fc6
feature for each frame, average these frame features to make
video descriptor. A multi-class linear SVM is also used for
these two baselines for a fair comparison.
Results: Table 3 presents action recognition accuracy
of C3D compared with the two baselines and current best
methods. The upper part shows results of the two baselines. The middle part presents methods that use only RGB
frames as inputs. And the lower part reports all current best
methods using all possible feature combinations (e.g. optical ﬂows, iDT).
C3D ﬁne-tuned net performs best among three C3D nets
described previously. The performance gap between these
three nets, however, is small (1%). From now on, we refer
to the ﬁne-tuned net as C3D, unless otherwise stated. C3D
using one net which has only 4, 096 dimensions obtains an
accuracy of 82.3%. C3D with 3 nets boosts the accuracy
to 85.2% with the dimension is increased to 12, 288. C3D
when combined with iDT further improves the accuracy to
90.4%, while when it is combined with Imagenet, we observe only 0.6% improvement. This indicates C3D can well
capture both appearance and motion information, thus there
is no beneﬁt to combining with Imagenet which is an ap-
Figure 4. Visualization of C3D model, using the method from . Interestingly, C3D captures appearance for the ﬁrst few frames but
thereafter only attends to salient motion. Best viewed on a color screen.
Accuracy (%)
Imagenet + linear SVM
iDT w/ BoW + linear SVM
Deep networks 
Spatial stream network 
LSTM composite model 
C3D (1 net) + linear SVM
C3D (3 nets) + linear SVM
iDT w/ Fisher vector 
Temporal stream network 
Two-stream networks 
LSTM composite model 
Conv. pooling on long clips 
LSTM on long clips 
Multi-skip feature stacking 
C3D (3 nets) + iDT + linear SVM
Table 3. Action recognition results on UCF101. C3D compared
with baselines and current state-of-the-art methods. Top: simple features with linear SVM; Middle: methods taking only RGB
frames as inputs; Bottom: methods using multiple feature combinations.
pearance based deep feature. On the other hand, it is bene-
ﬁcial to combine C3D with iDT as they are highly complementary to each other. In fact, iDT are hand-crafted features
based on optical ﬂow tracking and histograms of low-level
gradients while C3D captures high level abstract/semantic
information.
C3D with 3 nets achieves 85.2% which is 9% and 16.4%
better than the iDT and Imagenet baselines, respectively.
On the only RGB input setting, compared with CNN-based
approaches, Our C3D outperforms deep networks and
spatial stream network in by 19.8% and 12.6%, respectively. Both deep networks and spatial stream network
in use AlexNet architecture. While in , the net is
ﬁne-tuned from their model pre-trained on Sports-1M, spatial stream network in is ﬁne-tuned from Imagenet pretrained model. Our C3D is different from these CNN-base
Number of dimensions
Figure 5. C3D compared with Imagenet and iDT in low dimensions. C3D, Imagenet, and iDT accuracy on UCF101 using PCA
dimensionality reduction and a linear SVM. C3D outperforms Imagenet and iDT by 10-20% in low dimensions.
Figure 6. Feature embedding. Feature embedding visualizations
of Imagenet and C3D on UCF101 dataset using t-SNE . C3D
features are semantically separable compared to Imagenet suggesting that it is a better feature for videos. Each clip is visualized as a
point and clips belonging to the same action have the same color.
Best viewed in color.
methods in term of network architecture and basic operations. In addition, C3D is trained on Sports-1M and used as
is without any ﬁnetuning. Compared with Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) based methods, C3D outperforms Longterm Recurrent Convolutional Networks (LRCN) and
LSTM composite model by 14.1% and 9.4%, respectively. C3D with only RGB input still outperforms these
two RNN-based methods when they used both optical ﬂows
and RGB as well as the temporal stream network in .
However, C3D needs to be combined with iDT to outperform two-stream networks , the other iDT-based methods , and the method that focuses on long-term modeling . Apart from the promising numbers, C3D also
has the advantage of simplicity compared to the other methods.
C3D is compact: In order to evaluate the compactness
of C3D features we use PCA to project the features into
lower dimensions and report the classiﬁcation accuracy of
the projected features on UCF101 using a linear SVM.
We apply the same process with iDT as well as Imagenet features and compare the results in Figure 5. At
the extreme setting with only 10 dimensions, C3D accuracy
is 52.8% which is more than 20% better than the accuracy
of Imagenet and iDT which are about 32%. At 50 and 100
dim, C3D obtains an accuracy of 72.6% and 75.6% which
are about 10-12% better than Imagenet and iDT. Finally,
with 500 dimensions, C3D is able to achieve 79.4% accuracy which is 6% better than iDT and 11% better than Imagenet. This indicates that our features are both compact
and discriminative. This is very helpful for large-scale retrieval applications where low storage cost and fast retrieval
are crucial.
We qualitatively evaluate our learned C3D features to
verify if it is a good generic feature for video by visualizing the learned feature embedding on another dataset. We
randomly select 100K clips from UCF101, then extract fc6
features for those clips using for features from Imagenet and
C3D. These features are then projected to 2-dimensional
space using t-SNE .
Figure 6 visualizes the feature
embedding of the features from Imagenet and our C3D on
UCF101. It is worth noting that we did not do any ﬁnetuning as we wanted to verify if the features show good
generalization capability across datasets. We quantitatively
observe that C3D is better than Imagenet.
5. Action Similarity Labeling
Dataset: The ASLAN dataset consists of 3, 631 videos
from 432 action classes. The task is to predict if a given
pair of videos belong to the same or different action. We
use the prescribed 10-fold cross validation with the splits
provided with the dataset. This problem is different from
action recognition, as the task focuses on predicting action
similarity not the actual action label. The task is quite challenging because the test set contains videos of “never-seenbefore” actions.
Features: We split videos into 16-frame clips with an
overlap of 8 frames. We extract C3D features: prob, fc7,
fc6, pool5 for each clip. The features for videos are computed by averaging the clip features separately for each type
of feature, followed by an L2 normalization.
Classiﬁcation model: We follow the same setup used
in . Given a pair of videos, we compute the 12 different
false positive rate
true positive rate
Human Performance
OSSML 
MIP+STIP+MBH 
iDT+FV 
Random Chance
Figure 7. Action similarity labeling result. ROC curve of C3D
evaluated on ASLAN. C3D achieves 86.5% on AUC and outperforms current state-of-the-art by 11.1%.
MIP+STIP+MBH
Table 4. Action similarity labeling result on ASLAN. C3D signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art method by 9.6% in accuracy and by 11.1% in area under ROC curve.
distances provided in . With 4 types of features, we obtain 48-dimensional (12 × 4 = 48) feature vector for each
video pair. As these 48 distances are not comparable to each
other, we normalize them independently such that each dimension has zero mean and unit variance. Finally, a linear
SVM is trained to classify video pairs into same or different on these 48-dim feature vectors. Beside comparing with
current methods, we also compare C3D with a strong baseline using deep image-based features. The baseline has the
same setting as our C3D and we replace C3D features with
Imagenet features.
Results: We report the result of C3D and compare with
state-of-the-art methods in table 4.
While most current
methods use multiple hand-crafted features, strong encoding methods (VLAD, Fisher Vector), and complex learning
models, our method uses a simple averaging of C3D features over the video and a linear SVM. C3D signiﬁcantly
outperforms state-of-the-art method by 9.6% on accuracy and 11.1% on area under ROC curve (AUC). Imagenet
baseline performs reasonably well which is just 1.2% below
state-of-the-art method , but 10.8% worse than C3D due
to lack of motion modeling. Figure 7 plots the ROC curves
of C3D compared with current methods and human performance. C3D has clearly made a signiﬁcant improvement
which is a halfway from current state-of-the-art method to
Table 5. Scene recognition accuracy. C3D using a simple linear
SVM outperforms current methods on Maryland and YUPENN.
human performance (98.9%).
6. Scene and Object Recognition
Datasets: For dynamic scene recognition, we evaluate
C3D on two benchmarks: YUPENN and Maryland .
YUPENN consists of 420 videos of 14 scene categories and
Maryland has 130 videos of 13 scene categories. For object
recognition, we test C3D on egocentric dataset which
consists 42 types of everyday objects. A point to note, this
dataset is egocentric and all videos are recorded in a ﬁrst
person view which have quite different appearance and motion characteristics than any of the videos we have in the
training dataset.
Classiﬁcation model: For both datasets, we use the
same setup of feature extraction and linear SVM for classiﬁcation and follow the same leave-one-out evaluation protocol as described by the authors of these datasets. For object
dataset, the standard evaluation is based on frames. However, C3D takes a video clip of length 16 frames to extract
the feature. We slide a window of 16 frames over all videos
to extract C3D features. We choose the ground truth label
for each clip to be the most frequently occurring label of the
clip. If the most frequent label in a clip occurs fewer than
8 frames, we consider it as negative clip with no object and
discard it in both training and testing. We train and test C3D
features using linear SVM and report the object recognition
accuracy. We follow the same split provided in . We
also compare C3D with a baseline using Imagenet feature
on these 3 benchmarks.
Results: Table 5 reports our C3D results and compares it
with the current best methods. On scene classiﬁcation, C3D
outperforms state-of-the-art method by 10% and 1.9%
on Maryland and YUPENN respectively. It is worth nothing that C3D uses only a linear SVM with simple averaging
of clip features while the second best method uses different complex feature encodings (FV, LLC, and dynamic
pooling). The Imagenet baseline achieves similar performance with C3D on Maryland and 1.4% lower than C3D
on YUPENN. On object recognition, C3D obtains 22.3%
accuracy and outperforms by 10.3% with only linear
SVM where the comparing method used RBF-kernel on
strong SIFT-RANSAC feature matching. Compared with
Imagenet baseline, C3D is still 3.4% worse. This can be
explained by the fact that C3D uses smaller input resolution
(128 × 128) compared to full-size resolution (256 × 256)
using by Imagenet. Since C3D is trained only on Sports-
1M videos without any ﬁne-tuning while Imagenet is fully
trained on 1000 object categories, we did not expect C3D
RT (hours)
Table 6. Runtime analysis on UCF101. C3D is 91x faster than
improved dense trajectories and 274x faster than Brox’s GPU
implementation in OpenCV.
to work that well on this task. The result is very surprising
and shows how generic C3D is on capturing appearance and
motion information in videos.
7. Runtime Analysis
We compare the runtime of C3D and with iDT and
the Temporal stream network . For iDT, we use the code
kindly provided by the authors . For , there is no
public model available to evaluate. However, this method
uses Brox’s optical ﬂows as inputs. We manage to evaluate runtime of Brox’s method using two different versions:
CPU implementation provided by the authors and the
GPU implementation provided in OpenCV.
We report runtime of the three above-mentioned methods
to extract features (including I/O) for the whole UCF101
dataset in table 6 using using a single CPU or a single K40
Tesla GPU. reported a computation time (without I/O)
of 0.06s for a pair of images. In our experiment, Brox’s
GPU implementation takes 0.85-0.9s per image pair including I/O. Note that this is not a fair comparison for iDT as it
uses only CPU. We cannot ﬁnd any GPU implementation
of this method and it is not trivial to implement a parallel
version of this algorithm on GPU. Note that C3D is much
faster than real-time, processing at 313 fps while the other
two methods have a processing speed of less than 4 fps.
8. Conclusions
In this work we try to address the problem of learning spatiotemporal features for videos using 3D ConvNets
trained on large-scale video datasets. We conducted a systematic study to ﬁnd the best temporal kernel length for
3D ConvNets. We showed that C3D can model appearance and motion information simultaneously and outperforms the 2D ConvNet features on various video analysis
We demonstrated that C3D features with a linear
classiﬁer can outperform or approach current best methods
on different video analysis benchmarks. Last but not least,
the proposed C3D features are efﬁcient, compact, and extremely simple to use.
C3D source code and pre-trained model are available
at 
Acknowledgment: we would like to thank Yann Lecun
for his valuable feedback, Nikhil Johri and Engineering at
Facebook AI Research for data and infrastructure support.
clip accuracy
Figure 8. 3D ConvNets with different input resolutions. Action
recognition clip accuracy on UCF101 test split-1 of 3D ConvNets
with different input resolutions.
Appendix A: Effects of Input Resolution
As part of the architecture study, we examine the effects of input resolution on 3D ConvNets. We use the same
common network setting described in section 3. We ﬁx all
convolution kernels to 3 × 3 × 3 and vary the input resolutions to study the effects. We experiment with 3 different nets with input resolutions of 64 × 64, 128 × 128, and
256 × 256, namely net-64, net-128, and net-256, respectively. Note that net-128 is equivalent to the depth-3 net in
section 3.2. Because of the difference in input resolutions,
these nets have different output size at the last pooling layer,
thus leading to a signiﬁcant difference in terms of number
of parameters. Table 7 reports the numbers of parameters
and the training time of these nets. Figure 8 presents the
clip accuracy of these nets on UCF101 test split-1. Net-128
outperforms net-64 by 3.1% and attains a comparable accuracy with net-256. This indicates that net-128 provides a
good trade-off between training time, accuracy, and memory consumption. We note that with the current GPU memory limit, one has to use model parallelism to train C3D
with 256 × 256 input resolution.
# of params (M)
Train time (mins/epoch)
Table 7. Number of parameters and training time comparison of
3D ConvNets with different input resolutions. Note that net-128 is
equivalent to the depth-3 net in the paper.
Appendix B: Visualization of C3D Learned Features
For a better understanding of what C3D learned internally, we provide additional visualizations using deconvolution.
Decovolutions of C3D: We randomly select 20K clips
from UCF101. We group clips that ﬁre strongly for the
same feature map at a pre-selected convolution layer. We
use deconvolution to project the top activations of
these clips back into image space. We visualize the gradients causing the activiation together with the corresponding cropped image sequences. Note that we did not do any
ﬁne-tuning of C3D model on UCF101.
Figure 9 and 10 visualize deconvolutions of C3D learned
feature maps at the layers conv2a and conv3b. Visualizations of the same feature map are grouped together. For
ﬁgures 11, 12, 13, and 14, each ﬁgure presents the deconvolutions of one learned feature map of the conv5b layer. Finally, ﬁgure 15 compares the deconvolutions of several C3D
conv5b feature maps with optical ﬂows. As showed in
the visualizations, at early convolution layer conv2a, C3D
learns low-level motion patterns such as moving edges,
blobs, short changes, edge orientation changes, or color
changes. At a higher layer of conv3b, C3D learns bigger
moving patterns of corners, textures, body parts, and trajectories. Finally, at the deepest convolution layer, conv5b,
C3D learns more complicated motion patterns such as moving circular objects, biking-like motions.