Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education-TOJDE July 2015 ISSN 1302-6488 Volume: 16 Number: 3 Article 6
THE USE OF OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
IN ONLINE LEARNING:
A Study of Students’ Perception
Meirani HARSASI
Universitas Terbuka, INDONESIA
Universitas Terbuka (UT) is Indonesia’s higher education institution which implements
distance education system. The term distance implies that learning is not performed faceto-face but there is geographically separation between students and teacher. Therefore,
UT must provide many kinds of learning modes and learning support. To facilitate
students in their learning process, UT provides an e-learning system named online
tutorial. This tutorial is provided for all courses which are designed in 8 sessions of virtual
class. Students can learn, discuss, and ask to the teacher via this mode of learning. As the
development of methods in e-learning, the use of open educational resources (OER) has
increasing these days. Learning materials can be taken easily and freely from internet. UT
also utilize OER in it’s learning process, especially in e-learning. The aim of this study was
to collect data from students about their acceptance of integrating OER into e-learning.
The use of OER is perceived by students as something interesting because it’s new for
them and can help them to have a better understanding about a topic. The results also
showed that video has found as the most interesting OER for students. Other results,
limitation and suggestion from students about integrating OER into e-learning also will be
discussed in this paper.
Keywords: distance education, e-learning, OER.
INTRODUCTION
Universitas Terbuka (UT) is the only higher education institution in Indonesia that implements
a distance and open learning system. The term distance implies that learning is not performed
face-to-face, but makes use of media, whether printed media or non-printed (audio/video,
computer/Internet, radio and television broadcasts). Open means there is no limitation as to
age, year of graduation, period of study, registration time, and frequency of examinations. The
only limitation applied is that UT students must have graduated from High School.
The essence of distance learning is the separation between students and teachers which mean
students have to be able to study independently. To support the system, UT provides a variety
of learning materials, basically in the form of printed and non-printed materials. During the
learning process in one semester, students have to read the printed materials and utilize
learning support based on multimedia and internet. Learning support materials provided for
students including computer assisted instruction (CAI), video, audio, TV and radio broadcast.
UT also provides learning support services based on internet, namely online tutorial, self
exercise, and online-based enrichment materials. Online tutorial is a kind of e-learning
implemented in UT to teach students about a certain subject. Online tutorial as one of learning
support service for students as virtual class that is designed in 8 weeks. Students also have to
do 3 tasks during the semester. By participating online tutorial, students can have opportunity
to interact with the tutor, ask about the topic, and also know and discuss each other, if they
can’t attend a face to face class.
Open Educational Resources (OER) is widely used these days, including in education. OER
have gained increased attention for their potential and promise to obviate demographic,
economic, and geographic educational boundaries and to promote life-long learning and
personalized learning. The rapid growth of OER provides new opportunities for teaching
and learning, at the same time, they challenge established views about teaching and
learning practices in higher education . UT also utilizes OER in learning
process, including in online tutorial. Online tutorial is designed in 8 weeks. Every week,
tutor provides learning material and discussion forum. In week 3, 5, and 7, students have
to do task given by the tutor. To enrich the material, tutor can adopt material that is
freely taken from internet, named OER. The utilization of OER is expected to be useful for
students since it can increase student’s insight beyond what they can get from printed
materials.
This study was conducted in Universitas Terbuka. The aim of this study are (1) to analyze
the use of internet by students, (2) to analyze student’s activity on e-learning, (3) to
analyze utilization of OER in e-learning based on student’s perception. The results of the
study are expected to provide information to determine the policy relating to utilization of
OER in learning process.
OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES (OER)
Open Educational Resources are defined as "technology-enabled, open provision of
educational resources for consultation, use and adaptation by a community of users for
non-commercial purposes". They are typically made freely available over the Web or the
Internet. Their principal use is by teachers and educational institutions support course
development, but they can also be used directly by students. Open Educational Resources
include learning objects such as lecture material, references and readings, simulations,
experiments and demonstrations, as well as syllabi, curricula and teachers' guides
 .
Open Educational Resources (OER) represents the combined international efforts to help
equalize access to knowledge and educational opportunities throughout the world
 . Another definition of OER was given by Bissel: OER is teaching, learning,
and research resources that are in the public domain or have been released under an
intellectual-property license that permits their free use or customization by others.
Bissell also stated that OER is digitized materials offered freely and openly for
educators, students, and self-learners to use and reuse for teaching, learning and
research. They include learning content, software tools to develop, use and distribute
content, and implementation resources (such as the open licenses themselves). There are
also several benefits of OER. Initially, they can extend access of learning for everyone,
including nontraditional groups of students and those from disadvantaged backgrounds,
resulting in the widening of participation in higher education. OER can be an efficient way
of promoting lifelong learning, bridging the differences between informal and formal
Additionally, they can be an asset for expanding education in developing countries. In
short, they offer a dramatically new approach to the sharing of knowledge which can lead
to economic success of individuals, communities, companies, and, ultimately, entire
countries .
One of the barriers to significant expansion of OER is the possible loss of intelligence
property rights and copyrights. To ease the concern of maintaining copyrights to the
material posted on the web, institutions and individuals have turned to Creative
Commons and the Open Courseware Consortium . OER can be a valuable
resource to students and instructors for many reasons. From the student’s perspective,
OER had the following advantages:
Ø free materials;
Ø continuous access to resources;
Ø the ability to pursue a topic thoroughly;
Ø the ability to learn for personal knowledge or enjoyment; and
Ø easy access to materials .
According to D’Antoni , there are also several barriers in using OER:
Ø technical, such as lack of broadband access;
Ø economic, such as inadequate resources to invest in the necessary software
and hardware;
Ø social, such as a lack of the skills needed to use technology;
Ø 4) policy-oriented, such as the lack of academic recognition of the
development of OER by teaching staff; and
Ø legal, such as the time and expense associated with gaining permission to
use third part owned copyrighted materials or its removal from material.
Many higher education institutions around the world have been using the Internet and
other digital technologies to develop and distribute teaching and learning for decades. As
with any other technology-related initiatives in education, OER is driven by technical,
economic, social, policy and legal factors. Some of these factors provide either a favorable
environment or a particular handle for bringing about changes and others may hinder a
broader uptake of OER initiatives. Recently, OER have gained increased attention for their
potential and promise to obviate demographic, economic, and geographic educational
boundaries and to promote life-long learning and personalized learning. The rapid growth
of OER provides new opportunities for teaching and learning; at the same time, they
challenge established views about teaching and learning practices in higher education. At
a minimum, OER possess at least three elements, (1) learning content, (2) the tools
required to support the development and sharing of learning content, and (3)
implementation resources such as intellectual property licenses that support the sharing
and re-use of learning content.
E-LEARNING
Distance education has become an area of opportunity and concern for many colleges and
universities. It refers to technology-based instructions in which the students are at a
location physically separated from their instructors during the entire course of study
 . Initially, distance education was created for the students who were
unable to attend school. Prior to all technological advancements, distance education, in
the form of “pure” correspondence study, was created to give those students a chance to
study and could not attend ordinary schools or universities due to social, medical,
financial, or geographical reasons. Although it offers tremendous opportunities to expand
services to the students, it also poses challenges because students are often off campus
and are connected to teachers, resources, and peer learners through technologies and
teaching techniques. In a learning environment where students and instructors are
separated from one another by physical distance, and in which written communication is
the key to all interactions, feedback becomes an important issue in helping the students
maintain interest and be successful with the course contents .
Higher education systems all over the world are challenged nowadays by the new
information and communication technologies (ICT). These technologies have had a huge
impact on the world economy, corporate management and globalization trends, and they
bear a tremendous potential to reshape the nature of study environments everywhere, of
both conventional and distance teaching institutions . E-learning
has been used very effectively in university teaching for enhancing the traditional forms
of teaching and administration.
Students on many courses in many universities now find they have web access to the
lecture notes and selected digital resources in support of their study, they have
personalized web environments in which they can join discussion forums with their class
or group, and this new kind of access gives them much greater flexibility of study.
E-learning refers to the use of Internet technologies to deliver a broad array of solutions
that enhance knowledge and performance . E-learning can be used in
almost every level of education, especially higher education. It can be an effective way
for students to explore knowledge more than what they can get from a class room. Elearning is also called Web-based learning, online learning, distributed learning,
computer-assisted instruction, or Internet-based learning. Historically, there have been
two common e-learning modes: distance learning and computer assisted instruction.
Distance learning uses information technologies to deliver instruction or materials to
learners who are at remote locations from a central site. Computer assisted instruction
(also called computer-based learning and computer based training) uses computers to aid
in the delivery of stand-alone multimedia packages for learning and teaching. These two
modes are subsumed under e-learning as the Internet becomes the integrating
technology .
RESEARCH METHOD
This research is a descriptive qualitative research with the main aim was to get
information about the use of internet and OER in e-learning. Population of the research
was all students in Magister Management Program of UT who take course in the semester
and take certain course that was chosen as a course sample. Purposive sampling was
used as the sampling method, which means we only chose sample/students who eligible
for this research, e.g. they have practiced e-learning more than one semester. Data to be
analyzed is gathered from students by sending questionnaire via email.
A questionnaire was being divided into 2 sections, first is questionnaire about the use of
internet and e-learning, and second is the use of OER in e-learning. All samples were sent
the questionnaire, and they were given maximum 1 month to filled out the questionnaire.
Only completed questionnaire will be used for analysis.
To analyze the data, they were two steps in this research. First was to calculate the
percentage of student’s answers, and the second was to conduct qualitative analysis of
the student’s answers. The results of these steps would be used as a tool to give
description of student’s answer. After getting description of student’s perception, an
analysis could be done to show the conditions in Universitas Terbuka and the results are
expected to be input for decision making to enhance learning process by optimizing the
use of OER.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Data collection was conducted for 1 month in May 2013. The population of this research is all
students in Magister Management Program of UT. A purposive sampling technique was
implemented in this research with criteria of students who take Operations Management
course. Operations Management is a course that explains about how a product can be
produced at a factory, from beginning until the end, and also all techniques implemented in
producing a product. The e-learning of this course is completed with open educational
resources (OER) in the form of video, text/article, power point, and picture. All these OER
were taken freely from internet as free sources. The questionnaires were distributed to
students who take this course via e-mail.
As many as 186 questionnaires were sent to students, but only 39 questionnaires were sent
back (20, 96%). Of those 39 questionnaires, the results are as follows.
Section: 1
The use of internet and e-learning
Question no. 1. How many times do you access internet or e-learning
Question no. 2. Where do you access internet or e-learning
*Warnet is a place that belongs to private that is equipped
with computer and internet access.
People who don’t have a personal connection to internet can come to this place and pay to rent the
computer and internet.
Question no. 3. How much money do you spend for accessing internet
*USD 1 = Rp11.900
Question no. 4. How is the internet speed
Question no. 5. How is the internet speed when you’re downloading OER
Section: 2
The use of OER
Question no. 1. OER applied in my e-learning is interesting
Question no. 2. Video in OER is clear
Question no. 3. Text in OER is clear
Question no. 4. Picture in OER is clear
Question no. 5. Color in OER is interesting
Question no. 6. The use of text and font in OER is appropriate
Question no. 7. Audio in OER is clear
Question no. 8. Pronunciation by the speaker in OER is clear
Question no. 9. OER in English is very easy to understand
Question no. 10. OER is useful for me to understand the topic
Question no. 11. I’ve got difficulty while downloading the OER
From the students’ answers there are some important points that can be used as a basis
for decision making policy related to the field of e-learning. For the first question, how
many times students access internet or e-learning, most of students answered 2-3 times
a week (46%).
This number showed that students learn the e-learning every two days average. This
indicates a good condition for the students to learn independently. This condition can be
retained and improved by providing e-learning with some interesting materials and also
increase students’ participation in discussion.
The next question, it’s found that home was the preferred place for students to access
internet (57%).
This indicates that students learn during their spare time at home. This means that
students have enough time to study, so tutor can enrich the e-learning with variety
media, for example video as a means for students to learn the material. Because students
have enough time to study, they also have enough time to watch the video. Other
important results are OER is interesting and the quality of OER (video, text, picture, color,
and audio) is good.
Most of students also answered that OER is useful for them to understand the topic.
Therefore, tutor should enrich the e-learning materials with OER because the OER can
help students to learn and understand the topic.
Besides all of the advantages of OER in e-learning, there was also a weakness of OER in elearning. For the OER in the form of video, students found it’s very difficult for them to
understand video in English.
This difficulty was also experienced by the tutor, because it’s very difficult too to find OER
in the form of video in Indonesian. To overcome this problem, tutor should provide the
translation of the video, so students can understand what the video is about.
In addition to quantitative analysis, qualitative analysis was also conducted to find out
more about the utilization of OER for students. There were 3 questions of this qualitative
analysis to find out:
Ø why video was selected as the most preferred OER by students;
Ø the advantage of OER; and
Ø the disadvantage of OER
Question no. 1. Why video was selected as the most preferred OER by students
Some students answered that by watching the video, they can see the examples of a topic
they are studying in a real case. Operations management is a course that is mostly talks
about techniques in producing a product.
By providing students with video of how to produce a product, they could understand the
topic easily.
Some students also answered that by watching video while learning a topic, it is more
attractive, avoid boredom, rather than only reading text.
Question no. 2. The advantage of OER
Some students answered that the advantage of OER is can enhance their abilities in using
internet, especially the facilities in online tutorials (e-learning).
The students also answered that one of the advantage of OER was to help them to learn
faster than reading a textbook.
Question no. 3. The disadvantage of OER
Some students answered that one of the disadvantages of OER is if the OER is a video,
sometimes the quality of video and audio is not good. They also answered that they have
difficulty when watching video in English.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
The aim of this study was to gathered student’s perceptions of utilization OER in elearning. From the discussions, there were some important points related to utilization of
OER in e-learning. Video is the type of e-learning materials that is the most preferred by
According to UT’s students, by watching video, they can see the examples of a topic they
are studying in a real case. Some students also answered that by watching video while
learning a topic, it is more attractive, avoid boredom, rather than only reading text.
Another result was the fact that most of students preferred to study by e-learning from
For open and distance education students, home probably is the nicest place to learn,
especially while they learn via e-learning.
From these results, we can draw the conclusion that for open and distance education students,
of course, there are some differences from convenience students. Students of distance
education system must be able to learn independently, that’s why they need a lot of learning
supports and also places where they feel pleasant to study.
To support students on learning, the suggestions below might be needed. Video has founded
as the most preferred material by students.
As the institutions of open and distance learning, UT must provide this kind of material to
enhance student’s desire to study independently.
The number of video materials should be adjusted by the number of subjects or course so can
make it easier for students to learn. Home was founded as the most pleasant palace for
students to study independently.
To support that, distance education institution should provide a range of learning support
services, probably will be better if most of them are videos.
Examples of the use of OER in e-learning at Universitas Terbuka as follows.
introduction
Translation
BIODATA and CONTACT ADRESS of the AUTHOR
Meirani HARSASI works at Department of Management, Universitas
Terbuka, Indonesia as a lecturer. She got her Master Degree on
Management from Universitas Gadjah Mada, Indonesia at 2008. She
teaches operations management, operations research, and supply chain
management.
e-learning,
education, and management as part of her job as a lecturer in a distance
education institution.
Meirani HARSASI
Universitas Terbuka, Jl. Cabe Raya, Ciputat,
Tangerang Selatan 15418, INDONESIA
Phone: 62818417713
Fax: (621) 7434491
Email: