Attend and Diagnose: Clinical Time
Series Analysis Using Attention Models
Huan Song,† Deepta Rajan,‡∗Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan,†† Andreas Spanias†
† SenSIP Center, School of ECEE, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
‡ IBM Almaden Research Center, 650 Harry Road, San Jose, CA
†† Lawrence Livermore National Labs, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore, CA
With widespread adoption of electronic health records, there
is an increased emphasis for predictive models that can effectively deal with clinical time-series data. Powered by Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architectures with Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) units, deep neural networks have
achieved state-of-the-art results in several clinical prediction tasks. Despite the success of RNNs, its sequential nature prohibits parallelized computing, thus making it inefﬁcient particularly when processing long sequences. Recently,
architectures which are based solely on attention mechanisms have shown remarkable success in transduction tasks
in NLP, while being computationally superior. In this paper, for the ﬁrst time, we utilize attention models for clinical time-series modeling, thereby dispensing recurrence entirely. We develop the SAnD (Simply Attend and Diagnose)
architecture, which employs a masked, self-attention mechanism, and uses positional encoding and dense interpolation
strategies for incorporating temporal order. Furthermore, we
develop a multi-task variant of SAnD to jointly infer models
with multiple diagnosis tasks. Using the recent MIMIC-III
benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in all tasks, outperforming LSTM models and classical baselines with handengineered features.
Introduction
Healthcare is one of the prominent applications of data mining and machine learning, and it has witnessed tremendous
growth in research interest recently. This can be directly attributed to both the abundance of digital clinical data, primarily due to the widespread adoption of electronic health
records (EHR), and advances in data-driven inferencing
methodologies. Clinical data, for example intensive care unit
(ICU) measurements, is often comprised of multi-variate,
time-series observations corresponding to sensor measurements, test results and subjective assessments. Potential inferencing tasks using such data include classifying diagnoses accurately, estimating length of stay, and predicting
future illness, or mortality.
The classical approach for healthcare data analysis has
been centered around extracting hand-engineered features
∗The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
and building task-speciﬁc predictive models. Machine learning models are often challenged by factors such as need for
long-term dependencies, irregular sampling and missing values. In the recent years, recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) have become the de facto solution
to deal with clinical time-series data. RNNs are designed
to model varying-length data and have achieved state-ofthe-art results in sequence-to-sequence modeling , image captioning 
and recently in clinical diagnosis . Furthermore, LSTMs are effective in exploiting long-range dependencies and handling nonlinear dynamics.
Attention in Clinical Data Analysis:
RNNs perform
computations at each position of the time-series by generating a sequence of hidden states as a function of the previous hidden state and the input for current position. This
inherent sequential nature makes parallelization challenging. Though efforts to improve the computational efﬁciency
of sequential modeling have recently surfaced, some of the
limitations still persist. The recent work of Vaswani et. al.
argues that attention mechanisms, without any recurrence,
can be effective in sequence-to-sequence modeling tasks.
Attention mechanisms are used to model dependencies in
sequences without regard for their actual distances in the sequence .
In this paper, we develop SAnD (Simply Attend and Diagnose), a new approach for clinical time-series analysis,
which is solely based on attention mechanisms. In contrast
to sequence-to-sequence modeling in NLP, we propose to
use self-attention that models dependencies within a single
sequence. In particular, we adopt the multi-head attention
mechanism similar to , with an additional masking to enable causality. In order to incorporate
temporal order into the representation learning, we propose
to utilize both positional encoding and a dense interpolation
embedding technique.
Evaluation on MIMIC-III Benchmark Dataset:
Another important factor that has challenged machine learning research towards clinical diagnosis is the lack of universally accepted benchmarks to rigorously evaluate the modeling techniques. Consequently, in an effort to standardize
research in this ﬁeld, in , the au-
The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)
thors proposed public benchmarks for four different clinical
tasks: mortality prediction, detection of physiologic decompensation, forecasting length of stay, and phenotyping. Interestingly, these benchmarks are supported by the Medical
Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC-III) database
 , the largest publicly available repository of rich clinical data currently available. These datasets
exhibit characteristics that are typical of any large-scale
clinical data, including varying-length sequences, skewed
distributions and missing values. In , the authors established that RNNs
with LSTM cells outperformed all existing baselines including methods with engineered features.
In this paper, we evaluate SAnD on all MIMIC-III benchmark tasks and show that it is highly competitive, and in
most cases outperforms the state-of-the-art LSTM based
RNNs. Both superior performance and computational ef-
ﬁciency clearly demonstrate the importance of attention
mechanisms in clinical data.
Contributions:
Here is a summary of our contributions:
• We develop the ﬁrst attention-model based architecture
for processing multi-variate clinical time-series data.
• Based on the multi-head attention mechanism in , we design a masked self-attention modeling
unit for sequential data.
• We propose to include temporal order into the sequence
representation using both positional encoding and a dense
interpolation technique.
• We rigorously evaluate our approach on all MIMIC-III
benchmark tasks and achieve state-of-the-art prediction
performance.
• Using a multi-task learning study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the SAnD architecture over RNNs in joint
inferencing.
Related Work
Clinical data modeling is inherently challenging due to a
number of factors : a) irregular sampling. b) missing values
and measurement errors. c) heterogeneous measurements
obtained at often misaligned time steps and presence of
long-range dependencies. A large body of work currently
exists designed to tackle these challenges – the most commonly utilized ideas being Linear Dynamical System (LDS)
and Gaussian Process (GP). As a classic tool in time-series
analysis, LDS models the linear transition between consecutive states . LDS can be
augmented by GP to provide more general non-linear modeling on local sequences, thereby dealing with the irregular sampling issue . In order to
handle the multi-variate nature of measurements, proposed a multi-talk GP method which jointly
transforms the measurements into a uniﬁed latent space.
More recently, RNNs have become the sought-after solution for clinical sequence modeling. The earliest effort
was by Lipton et. al. , which propose to
use LSTMs with additional training strategies for diagnosis
tasks. In , RNNs are demonstrated to automatically deal with missing values when they
are simply marked by an indicator. In order to learn representations that preserve spatial, spectral and temporal patterns, recurrent convolutional networks have been used to
model EEG data in . After the introduction of the MIMIC-III datasets, have rigorously benchmarked RNNs on all four clinical prediction tasks and further improved the RNN modeling
through joint training on all tasks.
Among many RNN realizations in NLP, attention mechanism is an integral part, often placed between LSTM
encoder and decoder .
Recent research in language sequence generation indicates
that by stacking the blocks of solely attention computations,
one can achieve similar performance as RNN . In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst attention based
sequence modeling architecture for multivariate time-series
data, and study their effectiveness in clinical diagnosis.
Proposed Approach
In this section, we describe SAnD, a fully attention mechanism based approach for multivariate time-series modeling. The effectiveness of LSTMs have been established in
a wide-range of clinical prediction tasks. In this paper, we
are interested in studying the efﬁcacy of attention models
in similar problems, dispensing recurrence entirely. While
core components from the Transformer model can be adopted, key architectural modiﬁcations are
needed to solve multivariate time-series inference problems.
The motivation for using attention models in clinical modeling is three-fold: (i) Memory: While LSTMs are effective
in sequence modeling, lengths of clinical sequences are often very long and in many cases they rely solely on shortterm memory to make predictions. Attention mechanisms
will enable us to understand the amount of memory modeling needed in benchmark tasks for medical data; (ii) Optimization: The mathematical simplicity of attention models will enable the use of additional constraints, e.g. explicit
modeling of correlations between different measurements in
data, through inter-attention; (iii) Computation: Parallelization of sequence model training is challenging, while attention models are fully parallelizable.
Architecture
Our architecture is inspired by the recent Transformer model
for sequence transduction , where the
encoder and decoder modules were comprised solely of an
attention mechanism. The Transformer architecture achieves
superior performance on machine translation benchmarks,
while being signiﬁcantly faster in training when compared
to LSTM-based recurrent networks . Given a sequence of symbol representations (e.g. words) (x1, . . . , xT ), the encoder transforms
them into a continuous representation z and then the decoder
produces the output sequence (y1, . . . , yT ) of symbols.
Given a sequence of clinical measurements (x1, . . . , xT ),
Multi-Head
Multivariate
Time Series
Interpolation
Positional
Probabilities
Attention Module
 
Figure 1: An overview of the proposed approach for clinical time-series analysis. In contrast to state-of-the-art approaches, this
does not utilize any recurrence or convolutions for sequence modeling. Instead, it employs a simple self-attention mechanism
coupled with a dense interpolation strategy to enable sequence modeling. The attention module is comprised of N identical
layers, which in turn contain the attention mechanism and a feed-forward sub-layer, along with residue connections.
xt ∈RR where R denotes the number of variables, our objective is to generate a sequence-level prediction. The type
of prediction depends on the speciﬁc task and can be denoted as a discrete scalar y for multi-class classiﬁcation, a
discrete vector y for multi-label classiﬁcation and a continuous value y for regression problems. The proposed architecture is shown in Figure 1. In the rest of this section, we
describe each of the components in detail.
Input Embedding:
Given the R measurements at every
time step t, the ﬁrst step in our architecture is to generate
an embedding that captures the dependencies across different variables without considering the temporal information.
This is conceptually similar to the input embedding step in
most NLP architectures, where the words in a sentence are
mapped into a high-dimensional vector space to facilitate the
actual sequence modeling . To this end, we employ a 1D convolutional layer to obtain the d-dimensional
(d > R) embeddings for each t. Denoting the convolution
ﬁlter coefﬁcients as w ∈RT ×h, where h is the kernel size,
we obtain the input embedding: w · xi:i+h−1 for the measurement position i.
Positional Encoding:
Since our architecture contains no
recurrence, in order to incorporate information about the order of the sequence, we include information about the relative or absolute position of the time-steps in the sequence. In
particular, we add positional encodings to the input embeddings of the sequence. The encoding is performed by mapping time step t to the same randomized lookup table during
both training and prediction. The d-dimensional positional
embedding is then added to the input embedding with the
same dimension. Note that, there are alternative approaches
to positional encoding, including the sinusoidal functions
in . However, the proposed strategy is
highly effective in all our tasks.
Attention Module:
Unlike transduction tasks in NLP, our
inferencing tasks often require classiﬁcation or regression
architectures. Consequently, SAnD relies almost entirely on
self-attention mechanisms. Self-attention, also referred as
intra-attention, is designed to capture dependencies of a single sequence. Self-attention has been used successfully in a
variety of NLP tasks including reading comprehension and abstractive summarization . As we will describe later, we utilize a
restricted self-attention that imposes causality, i.e., considers information only from positions earlier than the current
position being analyzed. In addition, depending on the task
we also determine the range of dependency to consider. For
example, we will show in our experiments that phenotyping
tasks require a longer range dependency compared to mortality prediction.
In general, an attention function can be deﬁned as mapping a query q and a set of key-value pairs {k, v} to an
output o. For each position t, we compute the attention
weighting as the inner product between qt and keys at every other position in the sequence (within the restricted set)
t′=t−r, where r is the mask size. Using these attention weights, we compute o as weighted combination of the
value vectors {vt′}t−1
t′=t−r and pass o through a feed-forward
network to obtain the vector representation for t. Mathematically, the attention computation can be expressed as follows:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
where Q, K, V are the matrices formed by query, key
and value vectors respectively, and d is the dimension of
the key vectors. This mechanism is often referred to as
the scalar dot-product attention. Since we use only selfattention, Q, K, V all correspond to input embeddings of
the sequence (with position encoding). Additionally, we
mask the sequence to specify how far the attention models can look into the past for obtaining the representation
for each position. Hence, to be precise, we refer to this as
masked self-attention.
Implicitly, self-attention creates a graph structure for the
sequence, where edges indicate the temporal dependencies.
Instead of computing a single attention graph, we can actually create multiple attention graphs each of which is de-
ﬁned by different parameters. Each of these attention graphs
can be interpreted to encode different types of edges and
hence can provide complementary information about different types of dependencies. Hence, we use “multi-head attention” similar to , where 8 heads are
used to create multiple attention graphs and the resulting
weighted representations are concatenated and linearly projected to obtain the ﬁnal representation. The second component in the attention module is 1D convolutional sub-layers
with kernel size 1, similar to the input embedding. Internally,
we use two of these 1D convolutional sub-layers with ReLU
(rectiﬁed linear unit) activation in between. Note that, we
include residue connections in both the sub-layers.
Since we stack the attention module N times, we perform
the actual prediction task using representations obtained at
the ﬁnal attention module. Unlike transduction tasks, we do
not make predictions at each time step in all cases. Hence,
there is a need to create a concise representation for the entire sequence using the learned representations, for which
we employ a dense interpolated embedding scheme, that encodes partial temporal ordering.
Dense Interpolation for Encoding Order:
The simplest
approach to obtain a uniﬁed representation for a sequence,
while preserving order, is to simply concatenate embeddings
at every time step. However, in our case, this can lead to
a very high-dimensional, “cursed” representation which is
not suitable for learning and inference. Consequently, we
propose to utilize a dense interpolation algorithm from language modeling. Besides providing a concise representation,
 demonstrated that the
dense interpolated embeddings better encode word structures which are useful in detecting syntactic features. In our
architecture, dense interpolation embeddings, along with the
positional encoding module, are highly effective in capturing enough temporal structure required for even challenging
clinical prediction tasks.
Dense Interpolation Embedding
Input : Steps t of the time series and length of the
sequence T, embeddings at step t as st,
Output: Dense interpolated vector representation u.
for t = 1 to T do
s = M ∗t/T
for m = 1 to M do
w = pow(1 −abs(s −m)/M, 2)
um = um + w ∗st
Algorithm 1: Dense interpolation embedding with partial order for a given sequence.
The pseudocode to perform dense interpolation for a
given sequence is shown in Algorithm 1. Denoting the hidden representation at time t, from the attention model, as
st ∈Rd, the interpolated embedding vector will have dimension d × M, where M is the dense interpolation factor. Note that when M = T, it reduces to the concatenation
case. The main idea of this scheme is to determine weights
w, denoting the contribution of st to the position m of the
ﬁnal vector representation u. As we iterate through the timesteps of a sequence, we obtain s, the relative position of time
step t in the ﬁnal representation u and w is computed as
w = (1−|s−m|
)2. We visualize the dense interpolation process in Figure 2 for the toy case of T = 5, M = 3. The
larger weights in w are indicated by darker edges while the
lighter edges indicates lesser inﬂuence. In practice, dense interpolation is implemented efﬁciently by caching w’s into a
Figure 2: Visualizing the dense interpolation module, for the
case when T = 5 and M = 3.
matrix W ∈RT ×M and then performing the following matrix multiplication: U = S × W, where S = [s1, . . . , sT ].
Finally we can obtain u by stacking columns of U.
Linear and Softmax layers:
After obtaining a single vector representation from dense interpolation, we utilize a linear layer to obtain the logits. The ﬁnal layer depends on the
speciﬁc task. We can use a softmax layer for the binary classiﬁcation problems, a sigmoid layer for multi-label classi-
ﬁcation since the classes are not mutually exclusive and a
ReLU layer for regression problems. The corresponding loss
functions are:
• Binary classiﬁcation: −(y·log(ˆy))+(1−y)·log(1−ˆy),
where y and ˆy are the true and predicted labels.
• Multi-label classiﬁcation: 1
k=1 −(yk·log(ˆyk)+(1−
yk) · log(1 −ˆyk)), where K denotes the total number of
labels in the dataset.
• Regression: T
t=1(lt −ˆlt)2, where lt and ˆlt denote the
true and predicted response variables at time-step t.
Regularization:
In the proposed approach, we apply the
following regularization strategies during training: (i) We
apply dropout to the output of each sub-layer in the attention module prior to residual connections and normalize the
outputs. We include an additional dropout layer after adding
the positional encoding to the input embeddings, (ii) We also
perform attention dropout, similar to ,
after computing the self-attention weights.
Complexity:
Learning long-range dependencies is a key
challenge in many sequence modeling tasks. Another notion of complexity is the amount of computation that can be
parallelized, measured as the minimum number of sequential operations required. Recurrent models require O(T) sequential operations with a total O(T · d2) computations in
each layer. In comparison, the proposed approach requires a
constant O(1) sequential operations (entirely parallelizable)
with a total O(T · r · d) computations per layer, where r
denotes the size of the mask for self-attention. In all our implementations, d is ﬁxed at 256 and r ≪d, and as a result
our approach is signiﬁcantly faster than RNN training.
MIMIC-III Benchmarks & Formulation
In this section, we describe the MIMIC-III benchmark tasks
and the application of the SAnD framework to these tasks,
along with a joint multi-task formulation.
The MIMIC-III database consists of de-identiﬁed information about patients admitted to critical care units between
2001 and 2012 . It encompasses an array of data types such as diagnostic codes, survival rates,
and more. Following , we used the
cohort of 33, 798 unique patients with a total of 42, 276 hospital admissions and ICU stays. Using raw data from Physionet, each patient’s data has been divided into separate
episodes containing both time-series of events, and episodelevel outcomes . The time-series
measurements were then transformed into a 76-dimensional
vector at each time-step. The size of the benchmark dataset
for each task is highlighted in Table 1.
In Hospital Mortality:
Mortality prediction is vital during rapid triage and risk/severity assessment. In Hospital
Mortality is deﬁned as the outcome of whether a patient dies
during the period of hospital admission or lives to be discharged. This problem is posed as a binary classiﬁcation one
where each data sample spans a 24-hour time window. True
mortality labels were curated by comparing date of death
(DOD) with hospital admission and discharge times. The
mortality rate within the benchmark cohort is only 13%.
Decompensation:
Another aspect that affects treatment
planning is deterioration of organ functionality during hospitalization. Physiologic decompensation is formulated as
a problem of predicting if a patient would die within the
next 24 hours by continuously monitoring the patient within
ﬁxed time-windows. Therefore, the benchmark dataset for
this task requires prediction at each time-step. True decompensation labels were curated based on occurrence of patient’s DOD within the next 24 hours, and only about 4.2%
of samples are positive in the benchmark.
Length of Stay:
Forecasting length of a patient’s stay is
important in healthcare management. Such an estimation
is carried out by analyzing events occurring within a ﬁxed
time-window, once every hour from the time of admission.
As part of the benchmark, hourly remaining length of stay
values are provided for every patient. These true range of
values were then transformed into ten buckets to repose this
into a classiﬁcation task, namely: a bucket for less than a day,
seven one day long buckets for each day of the 1st week, and
two outlier buckets-one for stays more than a week but less
than two weeks, and one for stays greater than two weeks
 .
Phenotyping:
Given information about a patient’s ICU
stay, one can retrospectively predict the likely disease conditions. This process is referred to as acute care phenotyping.
The benchmark dataset deals with 25 disease conditions of
which 12 are critical such as respiratory/renal failure, 8 conditions are chronic such as diabetes, atherosclerosis, and 5
are ’mixed’ conditions such as liver infections. Typically, a
patient is diagnosed with multiple conditions and hence this
can be posed as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem.
Table 1: Task-speciﬁc sample sizes of MIMIC-III dataset.
Validation
Decompensation
Length of Stay
Phenotyping
Applying SAnD to MIMIC-III Tasks
In order to solve the afore-mentioned benchmark tasks with
SAnD, we need to make a few key parameter choices for
effective modeling. These include: size of the self-attention
mask (r), dense interpolation factor (M) and the number of
attention blocks (N). While attention models are computationally more efﬁcient than RNNs, their memory requirements can be quite high when N is signiﬁcantly large. However, in practice, we are able to produce state-of-the-art results with small values of N. As described in the previous
section, the total number of computations directly relies on
the size of the mask, r and interestingly our experiments
show that smaller mask sizes are sufﬁcient to capture all
required dependencies in 3 out of 4 tasks, except phenotyping, which needed modeling of much longer-range dependencies. The dependency of performance on the dense
interpolation factor, M is more challenging to understand,
since it relies directly on the amount of variability in the
measurements across the sequence. The other hyperparameters of network such as the learning rate, batch size and
embedding sizes were determined using the validation data.
Note, in all cases, we used the Adam optimizer with parameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98 and
ϵ = 10−8. The training was particularly challenging for the
decompensation and length of stay tasks because of the large
training sizes. Consequently, training was done by dividing
the data into chunks of 20000 samples and convergence was
observed with just 20-30 randomly chosen chunks. Furthermore, due to the imbalance in the label distribution, using a
larger batch size (256) helped in some of the cases.
Multi-task Learning:
In several recent results from the
deep learning community, it has been observed that joint inferencing with multiple related tasks can lead to superior
performance in each of the individual tasks, while drastically improving the training behavior. Hence, similar to the
approach in , we implemented a
multi-task version of our approach, SAnD-Multi, that uses
a loss function that jointly evaluates the performance of all
tasks, which can be expressed as follows:
ℓmt = λpℓph + λiℓihm + λdℓdc + λlℓlos,
where ℓph, ℓihm, ℓdc, ℓlos correspond to the losses for the
four tasks. The input embedding and attention modules are
shared across the tasks, while the ﬁnal representations and
the prediction layers are unique to each task. Our approach
allows the use of different mask sizes and interpolation factors for each task, but requires the use of the same N.
(a) Phenotyping - Convergence Behavior
(b) Phenotyping - Choice of r
(c) Phenotyping - Choice of (N, M)
(d) In Hospital Mortality - Choice of (N, M)
(e) Decompensation - Choice of (N, M)
(f) Length of Stay - Choice of (N, M)
Figure 3: Applying SAnD to MIMIC-III benchmark tasks - We illustrate the training behavior and impact of the choice of the
attention mask size, number of attention layers and dense interpolation factor on test performance.
Performance Evaluation
In this section we evaluate the proposed SAnD framework on
the benchmark tasks and present comparisons to the stateof-the-art RNNs based on LSTM ,
and baseline logistic regression (LR) with hand-engineered
features. To this end, we discuss the evaluation metrics and
the choice of algorithm parameters. In particular, we analyze
the impact of the choice of number of attention layers N,
the dense interpolation factor M, and the mask size of the
self-attention mechanism r on the test performance. Finally,
we report the performance of the mutli-task variants of both
RNN and proposed approaches on all tasks.
Single-Task Case
Phenotyping:
This multi-label classiﬁcation problem involves retrospectively predicting acute disease conditions.
Following and , we use the following metrics to evaluate the different
approaches on this task: (i) macro-averaged Area Under the
ROC Curve (AUROC), which averages per-label AUROC,
(ii) micro-averaged AUROC, which computes single AU-
ROC score for all classes together, (iii) weighted AUROC,
which takes disease prevalence into account. The learning
rate was set to 0.0005, batch size was ﬁxed at 128 and a
residue dropout probability of 0.4 was used. First, we observe that the proposed attention model based architecture
demonstrates good convergence characteristics as shown in
Figure 3(a). Given the uneven distribution of the class labels,
it tends to overﬁt to the training data. However, with both
attention and residue dropout regularizations, it generalizes
well to the validation and test sets. Since, the complexity of
the proposed approach relies directly on the attention mask
size (r), we studied the impact of r on test performance. As
shown in Figure 3(b), this task requires long-term dependencies in order to make accurate predictions. Though all
performance metrics improve upon the increase of r, there
is no signiﬁcant improvement beyond r = 96 which is still
lower than the feature dimensionality 256. As shown in Figure 3(c), using a grid search on the parameters N (number
of attention layers) and M (dense interpolation factor), we
identiﬁed the optimal values. As described earlier, lowering
the value of N reduces the memory requirements of SAnD.
In this task, we observe that the values N = 2 and M = 120
produced the best performance, and as shown in Table 2, it
is highly competitive to the state-of-the-art results.
In Hospital Mortality:
In this binary classiﬁcation task,
we used the following metrics for evaluation: (i) Area under Receiver Operator Curve (AUROC), (ii) Area under
Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC), and (iii) minimum of precision and sensitivity (Min(Se,P+)). In this case, we set the
batch size to 256, residue dropout to 0.3 and the learning rate
at 0.0005. Since the prediction is carried out using measure-
Table 2: Performance Comparison for the MIMIC-III benchmark tasks, using both single-task and multi-task strategies.
LSTM-Multi
SAnD-Multi
Task 1: Phenotyping
Weighted AUC
Task 2: In Hospital Mortality
min(Se, P+)
Task 3: Decompensation
min(Se, P+)
Task 4: Length of Stay
ments from the last 24 hours, we did not apply any additional
masking in the attention module, except for ensuring causality. From Figure 3(d), we observe that the best performance
was obtained at N = 4 and M = 12. In addition, even for
the optimal N the performance drops with further increase
in M, indicating signs of overﬁtting. From Table 2, it is apparent that SAnD outperforms both the baseline methods.
Decompensation:
Evaluation metrics for this task are the
same as the previous case of binary classiﬁcation. Though
we are interested in making predictions at every time step
of the sequence, we obtained highly effective models with
r = 24 and as a result our architecture is signiﬁcantly more
efﬁcient for training on this large-scale data when compared
to an LSTM model. Our best results were obtained from
training merely on about 25 chunks (batch size = 128, learning rate = 0.001) , when N = 1 and M = 10 (see Figure
3(e)), indicating that increasing the capacity of the model
easily leads to overﬁtting. This can be attributed to the heavy
bias in the training set towards the negative class. Results for
this task (Table 2) are signiﬁcantly better than the state-ofthe-art, thus evidencing the effectiveness of SAnD.
Length of Stay:
Since this problem is solved as a multiclass classiﬁcation task, we measure the inter-agreement between true and predicted labels using the Cohen’s linear
weighted kappa metric. Further, we assign the mean length
of stay from each bin to the samples assigned to that class,
and use conventional metrics such as mean squared error
(MSE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). The
grid search on the parameters revealed that the best results
were obtained at N = 3 and M = 12, with no further
improvements with larger N (Figure 3(f)). Similar to the
decompensation case, superior results were obtained using
r = 24 when compared with the LSTM performance, in
terms of all the evaluation metrics.
Multi-Task Case
We ﬁnally evaluate the performance of SAnD-Multi by
jointly inferring the model parameters with the multi-task
loss function in Eq (2). We used the weights λp = 0.8, λi =
0.5, λd = 1.1, λl = 0.8. Interestingly, in the multi-task case,
the best results for phenotyping were obtained with a much
lower mask size (72), thereby making the training more ef-
ﬁcient. The set of hyperparameters were set at batch size =
128, learning rate = 0.0001, N = 2, M = 36 for phenotyping and M = 12 for the other three cases. As shown in Table
2, this approach produces the best performance in almost all
cases, with respect to all the evaluation metrics.
Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a novel approach to model clinical time-series data, which is solely based on masked selfattention, thus dispensing recurrence completely. Our selfattention module captures dependencies restricted within a
neighborhood in the sequence and is designed using multihead attention. Further, temporal order is incorporated into
the sequence representation using both positional encoding
and dense interpolation embedding techniques. The training process is efﬁcient and the representations are highly
effective for a wide-range of clinical diagnosis tasks. This
is evidenced by the superior performance on the challenging
MIMIC-III benchmark datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that emphasizes the importance of
attention in clinical modeling and can potentially create new
avenues for pushing the boundaries of healthcare analytics.
Acknowledgments
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S.
Dept. of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. LLNL-CONF-