ISSN 1440-771X
Department of Econometrics
and Business Statistics
 
Another Look at Measures of Forecast Accuracy
Rob J. Hyndman and Anne B. Koehler
Working Paper 13/05
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Rob J Hyndman
Department of Econometrics and Business Statistics,
Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia.
Telephone: +61–3–9905–2358
Email: 
Anne B Koehler
Department of Decision Sciences & Management Information Systems
Miami University
Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA.
Telephone: +1–513–529–4826
E-Mail: 
20 May 2005
JEL CLASSIFICATION: C53, C52, C22
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Abstract: We discuss and compare measures of accuracy of univariate time series forecasts. The
methods used in the M-competition and the M3-competition, and many of the measures recommended by previous authors on this topic, are found to be inadequate, and many of them are degenerate
in commonly occurring situations. Instead, we propose that the mean absolute scaled error become
the standard measure for comparing forecast accuracy across multiple time series.
Keywords: forecast accuracy, forecast evaluation, forecast error measures, M-competition, mean
absolute scaled error.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
1 Introduction
Many measures of forecast accuracy have been proposed in the past, and several authors have
made recommendations about what should be used when comparing the accuracy of forecast
methods applied to univariate time series data. It is our contention that many of these proposed
measures of forecast accuracy are not generally applicable, can be inﬁnite or undeﬁned, and can
produce misleading results. We provide our own recommendations of what should be used in
empirical comparisons. In particular, we do not recommend the use of any of the measures
that were used in the M-competition and the M3-competition.
To demonstrate the inadequacy of many measures of forecast accuracy, we provide three examples of real data in Figure 1. These show series N0472 from the M3-competition1, monthly
log stock returns for the Walt Disney Corporation, and monthly sales of a lubricant product
sold in large containers. Note that the Disney return series and the lubricant sales series both include exact zero observations, and the Disney series contains negative values. Suppose we are
interested in comparing the forecast accuracy of four simple methods: (1) the historical mean
using data up to the most recent observation; (2) the “na¨ıve” method or random-walk method
based on the most recent observation; (3) simple exponential smoothing and (4) Holt’s method.
We do not suggest these are the best methods for these data, but they are all simple methods
that are widely applied. We compare the in-sample performance of the methods (based on
one-step-ahead forecasts) and the out-of-sample performance (based on forecasting the data in
the hold-out period using only information from the ﬁtting period).
Tables 1–3 show some forecast error measures for these methods applied to the example data.
The acronyms are deﬁned below and we explicitly deﬁne the measures in Sections 2 and 3.
Mean Absolute Percentage Error
Median Absolute Percentage Error
Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error
Symmetric Median Absolute Percentage Error
Median Relative Absolute Error
Geometric Mean Relative Absolute Error
Mean Absolute Scaled Error
1Data downloaded from 
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
(a) M3 series 472
(b) Disney monthly log return
Percentage return
(c) Sales of lubricant
Units sold
Figure 1: Example (a): Series 472 from the M3-competition. Example (b): ten years of monthly log stock
returns for the Walt Disney Corporation, 1990–1999. Data source: Tsay , chapter 1. Example (c):
three years of monthly sales of a lubricant product sold in large containers. Data source: ‘Product C’ in
Makridakis, Wheelwright and Hyndman , chapter 1. The vertical dashed lines indicate the end of
the data used for ﬁtting and the start of the “hold-out” set used for out-of-sample forecast.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Example (a)
Random walk
Table 1: Forecast error measures for M3 series N0472.
Example (b)
Random walk
Table 2: Forecast error measures for Disney stocks.
Example (c)
Random walk
Table 3: Forecast error measures for lubricant sales.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
In these tables, we have included measures that have been previously recommended for use
in comparing forecast accuracy across many series. Most textbooks recommend the use of
the MAPE and it was the primary measure in the M-competition . In contrast, Makridakis, Wheelwright & Hyndman warns against the use of the MAPE in
some circumstances, including those encountered in these examples. Armstrong and Collopy
 recommended the use of GMRAE, MdRAE and MdAPE. Fildes also recommended the use of MdAPE and GMRAE (although he described the latter as the relative geometric
root mean square error or GRMSE). The MdRAE, sMAPE and sMdAPE were used in the M3competition .
The M-competition and M3-competition also used rankings amongst competing methods. We
do not include those here as they are dependent on the number of methods being considered.
They also give no indication of the size of the forecast errors. Similarly, both competitions
included measures based on the percentage of times one method was better than a benchmark
method. Again, such measures are not included here as they do not indicate the size of the
To our knowledge, the MASE has not been proposed before. We consider it the best available
measure of forecast accuracy and we argue for it in Section 3.
Note that there are many inﬁnite values occurring in Tables 1–3 due to division by zero. Division by numbers close to zero also results in very large numbers. The undeﬁned values arise
due to the division of zero by zero. Also note that the sMAPE can take negative values although
it is meant to be an “absolute percentage error”.
Of the measures in Tables 1–3, only the MASE can be used for these series due to the occurrence of inﬁnite and undeﬁned values. These three series are not degenerate or unusual—
intermittent demand data often contain zeros and many time series of interest to forecasters
take negative observations. The cause of the problems with M3 series N0472 is the occurrence
of consecutive observations taking the same value, something that occurs very often with real
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
2 A critical survey of accuracy measures
Let Yt denote the observation at time t and Ft denote the forecast of Yt. Then deﬁne the forecast
error et = Yt −Ft. The forecasts may be computed from a common base time, and be of varying
forecast horizons. Thus, we may compute out-of-sample forecasts Fn+1, . . . , Fn+m based on data
from times t = 1, . . . , n. Alternatively, the forecasts may be from varying base times, and be of a
consistent forecast horizon. That is, we may compute forecasts F1+h, . . . , Fm+h where each Fj+h
is based on data from times t = 1, . . . , j. The in-sample forecasts in the examples above were
based on the second scenario with h = 1. A third scenario arises when we wish to compare the
accuracy of methods across many series at a single forecast horizon. Then we compute a single
Fn+h based on data from times t = 1, . . . , n for each of m different series.
We do not distinguish these scenarios in this paper. Rather, we simply look at ways of summarizing forecast accuracy assuming that we have m forecasts and that we observe the data at
each forecast period.
We use the notation mean(xt) to denote the sample mean of {xt} over the period of interest
(or over the series of interest). Analogously, we use median(xt) for the sample median and
gmean(xt) for the geometric mean.
2.1 Scale-dependent measures
There are some commonly used accuracy measures whose scale depends on the scale of the
data. These are useful when comparing different methods on the same set of data, but should
not be used, for example, when comparing across data sets that have different scales. Nevertheless, the MSE was used by Makridakis et al., 1985, in the M-competition. This inappropriate
use of the MSE was widely criticized .
The most commonly used scale-dependent measures are based on the absolute error or squared
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Mean Square Error (MSE) = mean(e2
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) =
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) = mean(|et|)
Median Absolute Error (MdAE) = median(|et|)
Often, the RMSE is preferred to the MSE as it is on the same scale as the data. Historically,
the RMSE and MSE have been popular, largely because of their theoretical relevance in statistical modelling. However, they are more sensitive to outliers than MAE or MdAE which has
led some authors to recommend against their use in forecast accuracy
evaluation.
2.2 Measures based on percentage errors
The percentage error is given by pt = 100et/Yt. Percentage errors have the advantage of being
scale-independent, and so are frequently used to compare forecast performance across different
data sets. The most commonly used measures are:
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) = mean(|pt|)
Median Absolute Percentage Error (MdAPE) = median(|pt|)
Root Mean Square Percentage Error (RMSPE) =
Root Median Square Percentage Error (RMdSPE) =
These measures have the disadvantage of being inﬁnite or undeﬁned if Yt = 0 for any t in
the period of interest, and having an extremely skewed distribution when any Yt is close to
zero. This means, for example, that the MAPE is often substantially larger than the MdAPE.
Where the data involves small counts it is impossible to use these measures as occurrences of zero values of Yt occur
frequently. Excessively large (or inﬁnite) MAPEs were avoided in the M3-competition by only
including data that were positive . However, this is an
artiﬁcial solution that is impossible to apply in practical situations.
A further disadvantage of methods based on percentage errors is that they assume a meaning-
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
ful zero. For example, they make no sense in measuring forecast error for temperatures on the
Fahrenheit or Celsius scales.
The MAPE and MdAPE also have the disadvantage that they put a heavier penalty on positive
errors than on negative errors. This observation led to the use of the so-called “symmetric”
measures deﬁned by
Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (sMAPE) = mean(200|Yt −Ft|/(Yt + Ft))
Symmetric Median Absolute Percentage Error (sMdAPE) = median(200|Yt −Ft|/(Yt + Ft))
The problems arising from small values of Yt may be less severe for sMAPE and sMdAPE;
however, even there if Yt is close to zero than Ft is also likely to be close to zero, so the measure
still involves division by a number close to zero.
As was seen in the examples in Section 1, sMAPE and sMdAPE can take negative values. It
would seem more natural to deﬁne them with absolute values in the denominator, and so avoid
this problem, but this is not what is usually done. Further, these measures are not as “symmetric” as their name suggests. For the same value of Yt, the value of 2|Yt −Ft|/(Yt + Ft) has a
heavier penalty when forecasts are high compared to when forecasts are low. See Goodwin
and Lawton and Koehler for further discussion on this point.
Some authors have noted that measures based on percentage errors
are often highly skewed, and therefore transformations (such as logarithms) can make them
more stable. See Coleman and Swanson for further discussion.
2.3 Measures based on relative errors
An alternative way of scaling is to divide each error by the error obtained using another standard method of forecasting. Let rt = et/e∗
t denote the relative error where e∗
t is the forecast error
obtained from the benchmark model. Usually, the benchmark model is the random walk where
Ft is equal to the last observation; this is what was used in the examples in Section 1.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Then we can deﬁne:
Mean Relative Absolute Error (MRAE) = mean(|rt|)
Median Relative Absolute Error (MdRAE) = median(|rt|)
Geometric Mean Relative Absoluate Error (GMRAE) = gmean(|rt|)
and so on. Armstrong and Collopy recommended the use of relative absolute errors,
especially the GMRAE and MdRAE. Fildes also prefers the GMRAE although he expresses it in an equivalent (but more complex) form as the square root of the geometric mean
of squared relative errors. This equivalence does not seem to have been noticed by any of the
discussants in the commentary by Ahlburg et al. .
A serious deﬁciency in relative error measures is that e∗
t can be small. In fact, rt has inﬁnite
variance because e∗
t has positive probability density at 0. One common special case is when et
t are normally distributed, in which case rt has a Cauchy distribution.
Armstrong and Collopy recommend the use of “winsorizing” to trim extreme values.
This will avoid the difﬁculties associated with small values of e∗
t , but adds some complexity to
the calculation and a level of arbitrariness as the amount of trimming must be speciﬁed.
2.4 Relative measures
Rather than use relative errors, one can use relative measures. For example, let MAEb denote
the MAE from the benchmark model. Then, a relative MAE is given by
RelMAE = MAE/MAEb .
Similar measures can be deﬁned using RMSEs, MdAEs, MAPEs, etc. Note that Armstrong and
Collopy refer to the relative MAE as CumRAE.
When the benchmark model is a random walk, and the forecasts are all one-step forecasts, the
relative RMSE is Theil’s U statistic , sometimes called U2. In fact, Theil’s
deﬁnition is ambiguous and the relative RMSPE with the random walk as a benchmark model
is also sometimes called Theil’s U statistic LMR measure is simply log(RelMSE). While this has some nice statistical
properties, it is not so easily interpreted which is possibly why it has not been widely used.
The random walk or “na¨ıve” method (where Ft is equal to the last observation) is the most
common benchmark method for such calculations, although another frequently used possibility is the mean method (where Ft is equal to the mean of all observations). For seasonal data,
the “na¨ıve2” method is sometimes used for comparison; this gives forecasts based on the last
observation adjusted for seasonality using classical decomposition .
An advantage of these methods is their interpretability. For example relative MAE measures
the improvement possible from the proposed forecast method relative to the benchmark forecast method. When RelMAE < 1, the proposed method is better than the benchmark method
and when RelMAE > 1, the proposed method is worse than the benchmark method.
However, they require several forecasts on the same series to enable a MAE (or MSE) to be
computed. One common situation where it is not possible to use such measures is where one
is measuring the out-of-sample forecast accuracy at a single forecast horizon across multiple
series. It makes no sense to compute the MAE across series (due to their different scales).
A related approach is to use the percentage of forecasts for which a given method is more
accurate than the random walk. This is often known as “Percent Better” and can be expressed
PB(MAE) = 100 mean(I{MAE < MAEb})
PB(MSE) = 100 mean(I{MSE < MSEb})
However, these give no indication about the amount of improvement possible. Thus, it is
possible to have one method that performs very slightly better than the benchmark method for
99 series but much worse on 1 series, thus giving it a PB score of 99 even though the benchmark
method is preferable.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
3 Scaled errors
Relative measures and measures based on relative errors both try to remove the scale of the
data by comparing the forecasts with those obtained from some benchmark forecast method,
usually the na¨ıve method. However, they both have problems. Relative errors have a statistical
distribution with undeﬁned mean and inﬁnite variance. Relative measures can only be computed when there are several forecasts on the same series, and so cannot be used to measure
out-of-sample forecast accuracy at a single forecast horizon.
We propose a new but related idea that is suitable for all situations, by scaling the absolute error
based on the in-sample MAE from a benchmark forecast method. Assuming the benchmark
method is the na¨ıve method, then a scaled error is deﬁned as
|Yi −Yi−1|
which is clearly independent of the scale of the data. A scaled error is less than one if it arises
from a better forecast than the average one-step benchmark forecast computed in-sample. Conversely, it is greater than one if the forecast is worse than the average one-step benchmark
forecast computed in-sample.
The Mean Absolute Scaled Error is simply
MASE = mean(|qt|).
Related measures such as Root Mean Squared Scaled Error (RMSSE) and Median Absolute
Scaled Error (MdASE) can be deﬁned analogously. Billah et al. used a similar error
measure when they computed the absolute value of the forecast error as a percentage of the insample standard deviation. However, this approach has the disadvantage that the denominator
grows with the sample size for non-stationary series containing a unit root. Scaling by the insample MAE only assumes that the ﬁrst differenced series is stationary, which is almost always
true for real data.
When MASE < 1, the proposed method gives, on average, smaller errors than the one-step
errors from the benchmark method. If multi-step forecasts are being computed, it is possible to
scale by the in-sample MAE computed from multi-step benchmark forecasts.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
We propose that measures based on scaled errors should become the standard approach in
comparing forecast accuracy across series on different scales. They have a meaningful scale,
are widely applicable, and are not subject to the degeneracy problems seen in the examples in
Section 1. The only circumstance under which these measures would be inﬁnite or undeﬁned
is when all historical observations are equal.
Of these measures, we prefer MASE as it is less sensitive to outliers and more easily interpreted
than RMSSE, and less variable on small samples than MdASE.
4 Application to M3-competition data
We demonstrate the use of MASE using the M3-competition data .
Figure 2 shows the MASE at each forecast horizon for ﬁve forecasting methods applied to the
M3-competition data. The errors have been scaled by the one-step in-sample forecast errors
from the na¨ıve method, and then averaged across all series. So a value of 2 indicates that
the out-of-sample forecast errors are, on average, about twice as large as the in-sample onestep forecast errors from the na¨ıve method. Because the scaling is based on one-step forecasts,
the scaled errors for multi-step forecasts are typically larger than one. The methods Theta,
Robust-Trend and ForecastPro were part of the M3-competition, and are described in Makridakis & Hibon . The HKSG method uses the state space modelling approach of Hyndman,
Koehler, Snyder and Grose , but only including the additive models.
Table 4 gives the MASE for each of the M3 methods along with the HKSG method. Here, the
absolute scaled errors have been averaged across all out-of-sample forecast horizons, and then
averaged across all series. The best performing method in each category is highlighted with its
MASE in bold.
Comparing Table 4 with the results of the original M3 analysis 
shows that MASE does not substantially affect the main conclusions about the best-performing
methods. In particular, as with the original M3 analysis, the Theta method does very well. Hyndman & Billah pointed out that this method is
equivalent to simple exponential smoothing (SES) with drift where the drift is half the value of
the slope of a linear regression ﬁtted to the data. Thus, it provides a form of shrinkage which
limits the ability of the model to produce anything wildly inaccurate.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Annual data
Forecast horizon
Robust−Trend
ForecastPro
Quarterly data
Forecast horizon
Robust−Trend
ForecastPro
Monthly data
Forecast horizon
Robust−Trend
ForecastPro
Other data
Forecast horizon
Robust−Trend
ForecastPro
Figure 2: Mean Absolute Scaled Errors at different forecast horizons for ﬁve forecasting methods applied
to the M3-competition data.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
645 series
756 series
1428 series
174 series
3003 series
Robust-Trend
ForecastPro
BJ automatic
Flores/Pearce1
PP-autocast
Flores/Pearce2
Automatic ANN
Table 4: Mean Absolute Scaled Errors for the M3-competition data. All methods were participants in
the M3-competition except for HKSG which is based on the method of Hyndman, Koehler, Snyder and
Grose .
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy
Recently, Koning et al. have evaluated the M3 results by conducting statistical tests of
the rankings of the various methods. This provides an interesting insight into the performance
of the accuracy measures—good measures should produce more powerful tests, and therefore
more signiﬁcant differences between forecast methods.
There were 22 methods in the M3-competition that were applied to all 3003 series, and so
there are (22
2 ) = 231 pairs of methods. We used a Wilcoxon test to determine if the MASE
values (averaged across all forecast horizons) were signiﬁcantly different for each of these 231
pairs of methods. At the 5% level, 49.4% of the pairs were signiﬁcantly different, while 35.5%
were signiﬁcantly different at the 1% level. In contrast, the same test applied to sMAPE values
yielded only 30.7% of signiﬁcant pairs at the 5% level and 21.1% of signiﬁcant pairs at the 1%
level. Clearly, on this analysis, the MASE is much better at distinguishing between forecast
5 Conclusion
Despite two decades of papers on measures of forecast error, we believe that some fundamental
problems have been overlooked. In particular, the measures used in the M-competition and the
M3-competition, and the measures recommended by other authors, all have problems—they
can give inﬁnite or undeﬁned values in commonly occurring situations.
We propose that scaled errors become the standard measure for forecast accuracy, where the
forecast error is scaled by the in-sample mean absolute error obtained using the na¨ıve forecasting method. This is widely applicable, and is always deﬁned and ﬁnite except in the irrelevant
case where all historical data are equal. This new measure is also easily interpretable: values of
MASE greater than one indicate the forecasts are worse, on average, than in-sample one-step
forecasts from the naive method.
The mean absolute scaled error (MASE) was applied to the M3 data and it was shown that
it gave results that were consistent with the main conclusions of the M3-competition. It also
allows more powerful tests of the difference between methods than the sMAPE.
6 Acknowledgments
We thank Michelle Hibon for kindly providing the forecasts submitted to the M3-competition.
Another look at measures of forecast accuracy