Preattentive texture discrimination with early vision
mechanisms
Jitendra Malik and Pietro Perona
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California 94720
Received July 7, 1989, accepted December 28, 1989
We present a model of human preattentive texture perception. This model consists of three stages: (1) convolu-
tion of the image with a bank of even-symmetric linear filters followed by half-wave rectification to give a set of
responses modeling outputs of V1 simple cells, (2) inhibition, localized in space, within and among the neural-
response profiles that results in the suppression of weak responses when there are strong responses at the same or
nearby locations, and (3) texture-boundary detection by using wide odd-symmetric mechanisms. Our model can
predict the salience of texture boundaries in any arbitrary gray-scale image. A computer implementation of this
model has been tested on many of the classic stimuli from psychophysical literature. Quantitative predictions of
the degree of discriminability of different texture pairs match well with experimental measurements of discrimina-
bility in human observers.
1. INTRODUCTION
Classical theories of texture perception by J u l e s ~ l - ~
B e ~ k ~ - ~
attribute preattentive texture discrimination to dif-
ferences in first-order statistics of stimulus features such as
orientation, size, and brightness of constituent elements.
These theories have typically been constructed for black-
and-white dot or line patterns and are not directly applica-
ble to gray-scale images (though Voorhees and Poggio7 pro-
vide a definition of textons for gray-scale images). Experi-
mental results describing phenomena that are not well
explained by these theories have been reported.a10 An al-
ternative a p p r ~ a c h ~ ~ ' l - ~ ~ ~ ' ~ - ' ~
to texture perception is based
on the responses of the linear mechanisms (psychophysically
observed spatial-frequency channels and neurophysiologi-
cally observed blob-, bar-, and edge-sensitive neurons) that
have been used to explain a range of phenomena in early
spatial vision. While these efforts have demonstrated that a
filtering approach can explain some phenomena that are not
consistent with the texton theory, a complete model has not
Yet been presented. Such a model should satisfy the follow-
ing criteria:
1. Biological plausibility:
The stages of the model
8hould be motivated by, and be consistent with, known
Physiological mechanisms of early vision.
2. Generality: The model should be general enough that
it can be tested on any arbitrary gray-scale image.
3. Quantitative match with psychophysical data: The
model should make a quantitative prediction about the sa-
lience of the boundary between any two textured regions.
Rank ordering of the discriminability of different texture
Pairs should agree with that measured psychophysically.
We outline our model in Section 2. In Section 3 we moti-
W e the necessity of each stage of the model with physiologi-
cal, Psychophysical, and computational arguments. In Sec-
tion 4, quantitative predictions from our model are com-
n- .n nnnn ,,,^
, - - A n - .
Vol. 7, No. 5/May 1990/J. Opt. SOC. Am. A
Fared with psychophysical data on the discriminability of
several texture pairs collected by Gurnsey and Browselo and
KrOse.17 We also show in Section 5 that our model performs
satisfactorily on the texture pairs invented by Julesz and
KrOsels and by Williams and Juleszlg in order to pose diffi-
culties for other quasi-linear-filtering models. We conclude
with a critical discussion in Section 6.
2. MODEL FOR TEXTURE PERCEPTION
In the first stage we model the output of V1 simple cells (or
subunits of V1 complex cells as described by Spitzer and
Hochstein20). The image I ( x , y) is convolved with a bank of
linear filters Fk followed by half-wave rectification. We will
indicate the positive part with R+(x,y) = max[R(x, y ) , 01 and
the negative part with R-(x, y) = max[-R(x, y), 01, which
give a set of neural responses Ri(x, y), where the index i
identifies the orientation-frequency channel:
R,fi = (I * Fk)+(x, Y),
R,k+i = (1 * Fk)-(x, Y).
Radially symmetric filters model nonoriented simple cells.
Directionally tuned filters with even-symmetric cross sec-
tions perpendicular to their axes model bar-sensitive simple
cells. In Subsection 3.A we give the details of the choice of
the filters.
The second stage of our model is nonlinear inhibition,
localized in space, within and among the neural-response
profiles, which results in the suppression of weak responses
when there are stronger responses at the same or nearby
locations. Details are in Subsection 3.F. Let PZR;(r, y ) be
the postinhibition response in the ith channel.
The third stage of our model is the computation of the
texture gradientz1 (Subsection 3.G). We define the texture
gradient to be maxillv(PIR, * G,,)(x, y)ll, where G,,
is a radi-
ally symmetric Gaussian function with standard deviation CT'
and the index i ranges over all channels.
A schematic view of the model is presented in Fig. 1.
,J. Opt. SOC. Am. ANol. 7, No. 5/May 1990
Fig. 1. Simplified schematics of our model for texture perception.
The image (bottom) is filtered using the kernels 8'1.. . F,,, and is
half-wave rectified to give the set of simple-cell responses RI . . . R,.
The postinhibition responses PIRl . . . PIR, are computed by
thresholding the R, and taking the maximum of the result over small
neighborhoods. The thresholds depend on the activity of all chan-
nels. The texture gradient is computed by taking the maximum of
the responses of wide odd-symmetric filters acting on the postinhi-
bition responses PIRi.
3. MOTIVATION FOR THE STAGES OF THE
The general structure of our model follows the findings of
Julesz,l-3 B e ~ k , ~ - ~
and TreismanZ2 that state that in preat-
tentive vision, precise positional relationships between tex-
tons are not important; only densities matter. These find-
ings suggest that when two textures TI and T2 are discrimi-
nable, they are distinguished by different spatial averages J
J T ~ R(x, y) and J JT, R(x, y) of some locally computed
neural response R. A discussion of how earlier models fit
into this framework may be found in Ref. 23.
Within this framework, a set of appropriate neural mecha-
nisms that produce responses Ri and a pooling mechanism
utilizing these responses to compute the texture gradient
have to be chosen. Our guiding principles for these two
choices are biological plausibility and parsimony. The final
test for the model is, of course, whether it reproduces human
performance.
A. Choice of the Filters
Several models have been proposed for the point-spread
function of simple cells and subunits of complex cells.
These include Gabor functions,24 differences of offset Gaus-
s i a n ~ ~ ~
(DOOG), and differences of offset differences of
Gaussians.26 We have chosen to use DOOG (Fig. 2) for our
simulations, given their good fit with the physiological mea-
surements and their computational simplicity. We believe
that this is not a critical choice. Any of the families of
functions mentioned above could have been used instead.
The radially symmetric filter classes DOGl(u) and
J. Malik and P. Perona
DOGZ(u) (Figs. 2a and 2b) model nonoriented simple cells.
Directionally tuned filters DOOG2 ((T, r, 8 ) with even-sym.
metric cross sections perpendicular to their axes (Fig. 2c)
model bar-sensitive simple cells. In our simulations we used
six equally spaced orientations 8 and a constant aspect ratio
Implicit in the DOOG model is the assumption that recep-
tive field profiles in the direction that is perpendicular to the
axes are either odd-symmetric or even-symmetric and not of
an intermediate phase. This model is suggested by psycho-
physical studies on phase d i s c r i m i n a t i ~ n . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
One has to be
aware that electrophysiological mapping of the impulse-re-
sponse function of single-cortical simple cells does not sup-
port this view.26 At the cell level there seems to be not a
sharp dichotomy but rather a continuum between even and
odd symmetry. One explanation of this discrepancy could
be that the responses of different cells are pooled together in
such a way that one effectively gets strictly odd- or even-
symmetric mechanisms. We hypothesize (Subsection 3.H)
that information from odd-symmetric mechanisms is not
used for texture perception and therefore exclude from our
model odd-symmetric mechanisms, which respond optimal-
ly to appropriately oriented edges.
The (T parameter of the three filter classes that were used
corresponds to a nominal spatial frequency in cycles per
degree (c/deg) (given the viewing distance and size of image).
Fig. 2. Point-spread functions of some of the filters used in our
simulation. The filters were designed after Youngz5 by summing
Gaussian functions G(ro, yo, ux, u,,) = 1/2ru u exp(-(n - ro/uJ2 +
(r - yo/^,)^]] and have zero-mean value. a, Linear combination of
three circular concentric Gaussian functions, DOG2(u) = a G(0, 0,
u,, a,) + b . G(0, 0, u, u) + c . G(0, 0, uo, u,,) with variance u,:u:uo in a
ratio of 0.62:1:1.6 and a:b:c in a ratio of 1:-2:l. b, Linear combina-
tion of two circular concentric Gaussian functions, DOGl(u) =
a. G(O,O, ut, u,) + b . G(0, 0, uo, u,J, with variance uz:u:uo in a ratio of
0.71:1:1.14 and coefficients a:b in a ratio of 1:-I.
c, Linear combina-
tion of three offset identical Gaussian functions DOOG2(u, r, B ) =
a . G(O,y,, uz,
uy) 4- b . G(O,Yb, ux, u,) + c . G(O,y,, ux, u)), Variances
are u, = u, ux = r u, offsets are yo = -yc = u, Yb = 0, and coefficients
are a:b:c in a ratio of -1:2:-I for the filter with an axis of symmetry
along the x direction (0 = 0). The other DOOG2() filters are
obtained by rotation about the center of the middle Gaussian. The
scaling coefficients aDOGI:aDOG2:aDOOG2 were in a ratio of 3:4.15:2,
which was designed to equalize the dynamic range of the respective
responses.
... ..,-. --,
,.,. \,,, ...
L J \ , L .
iple cells.
oect ratio
\at recep-
lar to the
Fig. 3. Some textures (top row) and half-wave-rectified responses of one of the filters to each (bottom row). The point-spread function of
each filter is shown at the bottom-right corner of the response image. The filter shapes are as in Fig. 2; the frequency parameters correspond to
a 4 deg X 4 deg image. The response images are composed of two square regions, an upper one depicting R+, the positive part of the response,
and a lower one showing R-. a, Texture from Ref. 10, Fig. 6, pair 2.2 (top) and the response of an 8-c/deg DOGl filter (bottom); u = 0.5 X
(length of texel line segments). b, Texture from Ref. 10, Fig. 6, pair 2.1 (top) and the response of a 5-c/deg DOGl filter (bottom); u = 2 X (width
of texel line segments). c, Arrow-triangle texture (top), for which the arrow texel is obtained from the triangle by shifting one of its legs, and
the response to a 5-c/deg DOG2 filter (bottom); u = 0.3 X (length of triangle's hypotenuse). d, Texture from Ref. 30, Fig. 4.2b (top) and the re-
sponse to a 13-c/deg DOOG2 filter (bottom); uy = (width of bars), uI:uy = 3, and orientation 120 deg.
To sample adequately the spatial-frequency range around
the peak of the luminance-contrast-sensitivity function, we
used all integer values of the frequency between 3 and 14 c/
deg.29 This gives 96 filters F h , which result in 192 neural
responses Ri. It should be noted that all the filters are zero
mean. Consequently, they have zero response to any image
region in which the luminance I(x, y ) is constant.
Representative examples of these responses for some tex-
tures may be found in Fig. 3.
B. Inadequacy of Purely Linear Mechanisms
The mechanisms considered so far-convolutions
of the im-
age withVl cell impulse responses-are
linear. To see that a
model based purely on linear mechanisms cannot reproduce
human performance, we consider two textures TI, Tz that
have identical mean brightnesses, i.e., identical spatial aver-
ages. Convolving them with a linear filter F results in re-
sponses R T ~ ( X ,
y ) and RQ(x, y ) with identical spatial aver-
ages. (The values of the power spectra at 0 are identical.)
Now, we know that humans can preattentively discriminate
some textures with identical spatial averages. An example
is the even-odd pair from Ref. 31 or indeed any discrimina-
ble texture pair with identical first-order global statistics. A
generalization of this observation to nth-order statistics and
nth-order polynomial operators may be found in Ref. 23.
Some nonlinearity in the system is therefore necessary for
texture perception.
The most obvious choice of nonlinearity is half-wave recti-
fication. V1 cortical cells have low-maintained discharge
rates and are unable to respond with a decrease in firing rate
as required by a negative response. Two different cells are
needed (and used) to represent the positive and negative
parts of the response belonging respectively to the on and off
C. Loss of Essential Information from Full-Wave
Rectification
Two nonlinearities that are similar to half-wave rectification
have been used in other models of texture discrimination.
1. Full-wave rectification, where the response in the lzth
channel is RR(x, y ) = l(I* F k ) ( x , y)l, is equivalent to sum-
ming the outputs in the two corresponding half-wave rectifi-
cation channels. This approach has been used by Bergen
and Ade1s0n.l~
Energy computation, where &(x, y ) = I(I * Sk)(x, y)I2
I(I * c h ) ( X , y ) l 2 and where s h , c h constitute a pair of filters
in quadrature phase (e.g., Gabor sine and cosine filters), has
been used by Sutter et ~ 1 . ' ~
and by Fogel and Sagi.'G
We have two reasons for preferring half-wave rectification.
The first is that it is the most natural choice in the context of
current biological evidence; we know that linear filtering
J. Opt. Soc. Am. A/Vol. 7, No. 5/May 1990
J . Malik and P. Perona
Fig. 4. a, Texture pair that was constructed by adding to a uniform
gray field the zero-mean micropatterns M (right) and -M (left).
The two textures are easily discriminable, though it may be shown
that spatially averaged responses for any linear filter followed by
either half- or full-wave rectification are identical for both and thus
insufficient for the discrimination. b, Cross section of Malong the x
axis. c, d, Cross sections of the responses to M and -M in one
channel (corresponding to convolution with Fj = M followed by
positive half-wave rectification). The areas under c and d are equal.
For any zero-mean filter F (1 J F = 0) we have J j ( M t F) = 0;
hence J J(M * F)'
= J J ( M * F)- = J J(-M * F)+.
that is followed by half-wave rectification is a good first-
order approximation for modeling responses of simple cells
and subunits of complex cells. Cells computing energies
have not yet been documented. Second, in both full-wave
rectification and energy computation, the sign of the filter
response is lost. Consequently, the response in a full-wave
rectification channel or in an energy channel is identical for
micropatterns M and -M and would remain so after any
subsequent processing. This response results in the predic-
tion that a texture pair composed of micropatterns M on one
side and -M on the other (bright bars and dark bars, say)
cannot be discriminated. Since we can discriminate easily
many such texture pairs (for example, Fig. 4a) it is obvious
that these nonlinearities cannot be part of all the channels of
the visual pathway that performs texture perception.
D. Need for a Second Nonlinearity
A model of texture discrimination that uses half-wave recti-
fication as the only nonlinearity before the pooling stage (at
which the texture gradient is computed) successfully ex-
plains human performance on a number of examples. How-
ever, we can prove that such a model cannot discriminate
texture pairs composed of micropatterns M and -M.
such texture pair can be seen in Fig. 4a; human observers
have no difficulty in discriminating the bright-bar region
from the dark-bar region.
Of course, th'e responses of a channel (linear filtering fol-
lowed by half-wave rectification) to micropatterns M and
-Mare in general going to be different. However when they
are pooled, i.e., spatially averaged over a region greater than
the area of a micropattern, then they result in identical
values. For any zero-d.c. filter F(J J F = 0), the average
response is J J(M * F) = 0, which implies that the positive
and negative parts of the response on each texture have the
same average, i.e., that J J ( M * F)+ = J J(M * F)-. Now
the response to M in the off channel ( M * F)- is the same
as that to -M in the on channel (-M * F)+. It follows that
J J(M * F)+ = J J(-M * F)+ and consequently, pooled
responses in any on channel cannot be used to discriminate
the two textures. The situation is similar for any off chan-
nel. Segmentation is therefore impossible for any channel
corresponding to zero-mean filters.
For a graphical
representation of this argument see Fig. 4.
E. Choices of Second Nonlinearity
The argument in Subsection 3.D provides a motivation for
including additional nonlinearities in the channels. Howev-
er the form and site of the nonlinearity are left largely un-
specified.
The first decision to be made is whether to have the non-
linearity precede or follow the simple-cell response stage
(linear filtering and half-wave rectification). A well-known
early nonlinearity in the visual system-that of retinal adap-
t a t i ~ n ~ ~ - h a s
been postulated to play a significant role in
texture discrimination according to Sutter et ~ 1 . ~ 5
ham et ~ 2 1 . ~ ~
This nonlinearity clearly plays an important
role in vision because it enables the system to respond to
local contrast over ten log units of illumination changes.
The crucial question is whether it is sufficient to account for
texture discriminability data, with no later nonlinearity re-
quired. Relevant evidence comes from data on binary tex-
tures with only two distinct gray levels (Section 4), so that
local contrasts are equal. For these stimuli, adaptation can-
not account for the deviation of rank ordering of psycho-
physically measured texture discriminability with that pre-
dicted in the absence of a late nonlinearity. See the discus-
sion in Section 6. This suggests that a late nonlinearity is
essential.
There are at least two physiologically plausible choices for
a late nonlinearity:
1. A nonlinear contrast response function g could be
picked. Typicallyg has a sigmoidal shape with neurons that
exhibit a threshold effect for low contrast and a saturation
id P. Perona
nate easily
is obvious
hannels of
vave recti.
g stage (at
7sfully ex-
)criminate
iar region
tering fol-
Sater than
2 positive
J. Malik and P. Perona
effect for high contrast (e.g., as discussed by Albrecht and
) j m i l t ~ n ~ ~ ) .
2. Intracortical inhibition could occur within and among
the responses in the different channels.
In our model, we have chosen to use intracortical inhibi-
tion. We studied a few variations on this theme, which are
explored in Subsection 3.F.
F. Nonlinear Inhibition
Inhibitory connections and interactions (some nonlinear)
among the neurons in the primary visual cortex have been
well documented by physiological and anatomical tech-
n i q u e ~ ~ ~ - ~ ~
and are presumably the substrate for psycho-
physically observed inhibition among channels.38 A num-
ber of functional roles, including the generation or sharpen-
ing of orientation and length selectivity and contrast gain
control, have been attributed to these connections. We pro-
pose that another consequence of intracortical inhibition is
the suppression or reduction of spurious responses in nonop-
timally tuned channels.
What do we mean by spurious responses? First, we dis-
cuss some observations about neurons with linear receptive
field functions. Such a neuron typically gives a nonzero
response to a stimulus to which it is not optimally tuned.
For example, consider the texture in Fig. 4a. The bright-bar
channel is tuned to the stimulus M (Fig. 4b), and its response
(Fig. 4c) has a strong peak at the position of the stimulus.
The dark-bar channel is not tuned to the stimulus and gives
a response (Fig. 4d) consisting of two smaller peaks. We call
this response spurious. The concept is general; the response
in an orientationally tuned DOOG2 channel (as in Fig. 2) to a
DOG1 stimulus may similarly be regarded as spurious.
In Subsection 3.E we showed an example for which the
spatial averaging of the response in the optimal channel
gives the same value as the spatial average of a spurious
response. The peak value is of course greater for the opti-
mal channel. If intracortical inhibition acted in a way so as
to favor responses in optimal channels and reduce the spuri-
ous responses, texture discrimination would then be possible
by using pooled responses.
Physiological experiments on inhibition in V1 have not yet
converged on a definitive model; indeed it is likely that there
are several inhibitory circuits with different roles.
present we can only hypothesize a model and argue for (a) its
functional adequacy and (b) its biological plausibility. For
biological plausibility, we imposed three design constraints
on the inhibition model: a neural implementation should
(1) require only local connections (in the same or nearby V1
hypercolumns), (2) require only a few neural time steps, and
(3) not demand unduly specific interconnection strengths
between arbitrary pairs of neurons.
One way to model this inhibition is as follows. Thresh-
olds T,(Xo, yo) for neurons belonging to channel i with retino-
topic coordinates xo, yo are computed:
Here 1,i is the neighborhood of (20, yo) in which neurons in
channelj are able to inhibit neurons in channel i, and a,i is a
measure of the effectiveness of this inhibition. The postin-
hibition response PIR,(xo, yo) is given by
Vol. 7, No. .i/Mny 1990/J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
This results in a suppression of responses below the thresh-
old. S,(xo, yo) is a sampling neighborhood from which the
strong responses in channel i are selected for subsequent
processing.
One way to think about this mechanism is as a so-called
leaders-take-most feedforward network; it is a variant of the
winner-take-all type mechanisms quite popular in the neu-
ral-network literature.
We were guided in our choice of I,, and all by the design
criterion of eliminating spurious responses. As an example,
consider channels i and j that correspond to the positive and
negative responses of the filter DOOG2((r). Figures 4c and
4d show the responses in the two channels to a bright bar.
The peaks in the negative (spurious) response are approxi-
mately 0.65 times the positive central peak and are displaced
from it by 1.25~. This prompts a choice of a,, = 0.65 and Ill
to be a disk of radius 1.250 in order to ensure a suppression of
the negative response. This procedure can be repeated for
all the 192 X 192 pairs of channels. However this violates
our third criterion for biological plausibility because specific
interconnection strengths are required between arbitrary
pairs of neurons. We can however exploit the known clus-
tering; nonorientationally tuned neurons tend to occur in
the V1 blobs, and neurons sharing similar orientation prefer-
ences occur together. This clustering leads us to form eight
groups of channels in our framework (two radially symmet-
ric + six oriented). Ill and a], are identical for all channels i
in one of these groups; these values have been computed
from the spurious responses in the channel i with the same u
parameter as channel j. The actual values used in our simu-
lations are shown in Tables 1 and 2. S, was chosen to be a
disk of constant radius. We will refer to this model of
inhibition as model A.
Model A seems rather elaborate, and it is natural to seek
simpler models that might be adequate. In model B, we set
all = 0.5. This corresponds to having a nonspecific local
inhibitory pool of neurons and would be more consistent
with the physiological evidence of Bonds.39 In model C, alr
Table 1. Inhibitory Coefficients
for Model A"
DOOG2(u,, r,, 0,)
0.65 6(8,, 0,)
6(8,, 8,) = 1 if 0, = 8,; 0 otherwise. The inhibitory coefficients for models B,
C, and D were constant: u , ~ ~
= 0.5, a,,c = 0, and u , , ~
Table 2. Radii of the Inhibition Neighborhoods Iji for
Models A and Ba
DOG~(U,) DOOG2(g1, r,, 0,)
1 . 2 5 ~ ~
In Models C and D the neighborhoods I,, are irrelevant.
= 0, which eliminates the threshold hut keeps the stage ot?
computing local, strong responses in a neighhorhood S,.
One could relate this model to outputs of complex cells th:tt
do not show a significant modulation in their response when
a stimulus is moved across the receptive field. Finally, mod-
el D served as a control with PIR, = R,.
Nothdurft? has shown two characteristics of texture per-
ception that any model must explain. Texture discrimina-
bility depends on (a) the density of micropatterns in the
image, with higher densities leading to easier discrimination,
and (b) local differences rather than global differences.
This naturally suggests the idea of computing the gradient of
the smoothed postinhibition responses in each channel.
The texture gradient that we use is defined as max,v
(PIR, * G,,?)(x,
y). Biologically, the computation of the gra-
dient of the smoothed postinhibition response in each chan-
nel can be done by using odd-symmetric oriented mecha-
nisms similar to the edge-sensitive cells in V1. Of course,
the mechanisms responsible for computing the texture gra-
dient have large receptive fields ((T? is a measure of the size)
and presumably occur in some extrastriate area. The maxi-
mum operation seems a natural way of combining the out-
puts of the different channels. Texture boundaries may be
defined as corresponding to local peaks of the texture gradi-
ent magnitude (Fig. 5 ) .
Computation of the Texture Gradient
H. Nonuse of Odd-Symmetric Mechanisms
Our model used only channels corresponding to even-sym-
metric filters. This choice was based on an interpretation of
some experimental results of Rentschler et ~ 1 . , 4 ~
that textures composed of mirror-image, compound Gabor
signals were indistinguishable even when the individual mi-
cropatterns were easily discriminated. There was no diffi-
culty in discriminating textures composed of nonmirror-
image, compound Gabor signals. A simplified version of the
phenomenon can be seen by comparing Fig. 4a (easily seg-
mentable) and Fig. 6 (not preattentively segmentable). We
will show that this phenomenon implies that odd-symmetric
and even-symmetric filters are not treated identically in
texture discrimination. Specifically, the signs of responses
of odd-symmetric filters are ignored, while the signs of the
responses of even-symmetric filters are used (for example, to
distinguish dark-bar and bright-bar textures as in Fig. 4).
First we supply some definitions: micropatterns MI and
M:! are said to be y mirror symmetric (y-ms) if M l ( x ) =
M,(-x) and xy mirror symmetric (xy-ms) if M 1 ( z ) =
Fig. 5. Detail of the portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer by Gustav
Klimt (left) and the texture boundaries that were found (right).
The essential boundaries of the five perceived groups have been
.i. blalik ;ind 1?. I?erona
terns. Segmentation is not preattentive. Compare with Fig. 4.
Texture pair composed of y mirror-symmetric micropat-
Examples of y-ms pairs are found in Ref. 40
(Figs. 2a and 2c) and in the two micropatterns in Fig. 6; Fig. 4
contains an xy-ms pair. Consider any two y-ms patterns
M I , Mr. Now, the following operations (or any composition
thereof) preserve y-ms: (a) half-wave rectification, (b) con-
volution with any even-symmetric filter, and (c) nonlinear
scaling I -
g(I). Consequently, responses R,(MJ, R,(M2) in
any channel L corresponding to an even-symmetric filter are
also y-ms. In fact, so also are postinhibition responses
PlR,(M,), PIR,(Mz) if only inhibition from channels j corre-
sponding to even-symmetric filters is considered [for any
such j , R,(Ml), R,(M2) are y-ms, resulting in T,(MI), T,(M:!),
the respective thresholds being a y-ms pair]. Now any two
patterns that are a y-ms pair have identical spatial averages,
and from the preceding argument so must postinhibition
responses in even-symmetric channels. In other words, to
segment a texture composed of M I from one composed of Mz
by using spatially averaged responses, we must rely on the
channels corresponding to odd-symmetric filters. Interest-
ingly, for an xy-ms pair, the situation is reversed; only even-
symmetric filters are useful. To establish this, note that
convolving an xy-ms pair with an odd filter makes it a y-ms
To find the texture boundary in Fig. 6, the visual system
must rely on the differential activation of channels corre-
sponding to odd-symmetric filters; the detection of texture
boundary in Fig. 4a relies on even-symmetric channels. The
latter is easily discriminable; the one in Fig. 6 is not. One
could conclude from this result that odd-symhetric mecha-
nisms are not utilized in texture perception but that even-
symmetric are. This could be because (a) oddlsymmetric
mechanisms are not part of the texture processink pathwaY
or (b) inhibitory interactions between odd-symmdtric cells
are such that their activity is greatly reduced when?they are
stimulated by repetitive texture patterns.
An alternative hypothesis is that the outputs of odd-sym-
metric cells of opposite polarities are pooled together in the
texture-processing pathway, and therefore the information
necessary for segmenting y-ms textures is lost.
We are not in a position to discriminate precisely among
these hypotheses. Since we have not found any textures for
and P. Perona
,hi& odd-symmetric mechanisms are necessary, we have
hosen to exclude odd-symmetric mechanisms from our
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
ye have compared the degree of texture discriminability
hat was predicted by our algorithm with psychophysical
ata from KroseI7 and Gurnsey and Browse.lo Figure 7
bows seven bipartite textures with elements constructed
fterKrOse17 (Section 3.2, pp. 34-39), two after Williams and
U ~ ~ S Z , ~ '
and one composed of R's and mirror-image R's
R-mirror-R). For two of these textures, the texture
radient (a' = 12 pixels, s, = constant) obtained by our
jgorithm, using model A for inhibition, is plotted as a func-
ion of column number (Fig. 8). The texture boundary
column 64) is associated with the central peak in the gradi-
nt. The value of the gradient associated with this peak is
&en to be a measure of the discriminability predicted by
,ur algorithm. In Table 3, these data are presented in a
nore easily readable form and compared with data from
(rijse (Table 3.1, p. 39; stimulus onset asychrony, 320) and
;urnsey and Browse (pairs 1.1,1.2,1.3,3.1) for mean overall
liscriminability. Note that the rank order of discriminabil-
ty predicted by our model matches the rankings found ex-
,erimentally.
The Williams-Julesz textures were constructed to demon-
trate essential nonlinearities in texture preception. Their
Fig. 7. Nine textures that were used in our experiments.
Vol. 7, No. 5/May 199O/J. Opt. SOC.
R - ~ K K o K - R
Fig. 8. Texture gradient as a function of column number. For the
128 X 128 textures in Fig. 7 the texture gradient is averaged along
the vertical direction on the central middle portion of each column
and plotted with respect to the horizontal coordinate. Such plots
are shown for the most (L +) and least (R-mirror-R) discriminable
textures. The value of the texture gradient at its central peak is
taken to be the prediction of our model and is reported in Table 3,
Comparison of Predictions from Texture
Segmentation Algorithm with Two Sets of
Psychophysical Dataa
Texture Pair
R-mirror-R
Discriminability
Data Refs.
100(saturated )
a The symbol * indicates that a side peak of the texture gradient was higher
than the reported central peak. Because of differences in the scales used, the
three columns should be compared only by the rank ordering of discriminabil-
ity. The rank order of discriminability for the predicted data matches both
other data rankings exactly. The L M and LL LL textures have been invented
by Williams and Julesz as a counterexample to purely linear theorie~.'~ Our
algorithm correctly ranks the L M pair within the most discriminable textures
and the LL ML pair within the least discriminable ones. The discriminability
of the + o texture given by Krose saturates his psychophysical scale (top
value, zero standard deviation), so it cannot be compared quantitatively with
the other discriminability figures (standard deviation ranging between 6.7
and 11.7); ma., not available. Also compare Fig. 8.
reasoning is as follows. The LM texture is easily discrimina-
ble; not so the LLML texture (call it C), which is obtained by
adding to the LM texture (call it A) a uniform texture of
little L's (call it B) placed at the endpoints of the L and M
micropatterns. If the discriminability between the left and
right regions were a linear function of the image, then the
discriminability of C = A + B would be the sum of the
discriminabilities of A and B. As B is a single-texture region
its discriminability is of course zero, so the discriminability
of C should be equal to that of A. Clearly it is not.
The match with the experimental data that we have ob-
tained is surprisingly good; we are not aware of any other
J. Opt. SOC. Am, ANol. 7, No. 5/May 1990
J. Malik and P. Perona
Comparison of the Predictions from Models A-D with Segmentability Measurements for Two Sets of
Experimental Data"
Discriminability
Predicted Data
Data Refs.
No Inhibition,
Texture Pair
Inhibition
Inhibition
Inhibition
S, = 1 pixel -
a The symbol * indicates that a side peak of the texture gradient was higher than the central peak reported.
Table 5. Comparison of the Discriminability Ranking Given by Models A-D with That for Experimental Data
Predicted Data
Data Refs.
A', T L, + X
model that fits these data. Of course, the usual notes of
caution for any model with parameters that are not directly
measured from physiology or psychophysics apply. The
particular equations and parameters that we have proposed
are surely wrong in detail. To have any relevance to biologi-
cal texture perception, the model should degrade gracefully,
i.e., roughly similar ideas should work as well, and choices of
parameters should not be too critical.
One can gain additional insight into these issues by study-
ing simplified variants of the inhibition model A. We did
that by replacing it with the models B, C, and D described in
Subsection 3.F. The results of these simulations are shown
in Tables 4 and 5. Additional simulation results with a
slightly different choice of parameters of model A may be
found in Ref. 44.
Some qualitative features of the results are noted below.
Appropriate caution should be exercized as we do not have
any error bars for the simulation data for the four models.
1. Model A matches the experimental data best.
Model B does almost as well. The order of discrimi-
nability of the textures (+ 0)
and (L +) is reversed. Most
significant is the decrease in the discriminability of the tex-
ture (A/); it is now in the same group as the three significant-
ly less discriminable textures (+ T), (T L), and (+ X).
3. For model C, we note that, in addition to the errors
mentioned for model B, we have the unwanted increase in
the discriminability of the texture (+ X).
4. Model D serves as a control, with PIRi = Ri. The
rs here can not be explained by the adaptation nonlin-
5. LAPLACIAN PYRAMID TEXTURES
Julesz and KroselB studied a texture, which was composed of
L's and +'s, that Bergen and Adelson14 say is segmentable by
using the output of a simple center-surround Laplacian-of-
Gaussian filter. Julesz and Krose decomposed this image
into a series of bandpass-filtered images by using the Lapla-
cian pyramid technique. Levels 2, 3, and 4 of the pyramid
appeared to be the ones showing a difference between the
texture of L's and the texture of T's and hence responsible
for texture discrimination. Julesz and Krose constructed 8
new image for which these levels had been replaced by uni-
form gray. The textures however remained highly discrimi-
nable, which casts doubt on the validity of Bergen and Adel-
son's explanation.
We re-created this phenomenon (Fig. 9). The three tex-
tures appear equally discriminable, and a correct model of
texture perception should be able to predict this fact. We
tested our model on these textures, and the results may be
found in Fig. 10. It is seen that our model finds the textures
approximately equally discriminable, as indeed it should.
On examining various bandpass-filtered versions of the tex-
tures, we observed that at most frequency bands there is
some difference between the L's texture and the +'s texture;
this difference can be amplified and used by the subsequent
nonlinear stages of the model. In our simulation we found
the most significant differences in the postinhibition re-
sponses PIR; correspond to the positive part of DOG1 filters
between 3 and 9 cldeg for the original +-L texture, corre-
sponding indeed to the levels 2, 3, and 4 of the Laplacian
pyramid. For the +-L texture deprived of the levels 2 ~ 3 ,
and 4 of the Laplacian pyramid, the DOG2 filters with fie-
:1 filters
J. Malik and P. Perona
quencies above 10 c/deg were the most important for seg-
mentation. The shapes of the filters are specified in Fig. 2.
Julesz"5 has suggested that the technique of removing
frequency bands that was used by Julesz and Krose can be
used to generate counterexamples for theories that do not
have any nonlinearity before the linear filtering stage. We
have tried this on the +-L and A1 textures by deleting the
frequencies that appeared to be used by our algorithm for
segmentation. A segmentable texture obtained this way
would falsify our theory or, at least, show that we need to add
more filters to our implementation. As observed above, for
the +-L texture every frequency band appears to contrib-
ute to segmentation and so produces the trivial result that
only a blank image is not segmentable. In the A1 texture, by
filtering away the relevant frequency bands we considerably
Fig. 9. Textures from left to right: the +L texture, the same after
removal of Laplacian pyramid level 3 (+L -3), the same after
removal of Laplacian pyramid levels 2, 3, and 4 (+L -234).
Laplacian pyramid was generated by taking differences of contigu-
ous levels of a Gaussian pyramid. Level 0 of the Gaussian pyramid
was the image itself; level i was the image convolved with a rotation-
ally symmetric Gaussian of unitary norm, and u is equal to 2' pixels.
The original image is 128 X 128 pixels in size. In our experiment the
(+ L) image and the (+ L -3) image were scaled by 2/3 and %,
respectively, to reach roughly the same perceptual segmentability as
the (+L - 234) image.
- +-~--234 -
average gradient over the central middle portion of each column of
the picture is plotted. The values of the maxima are 134 for the (+
L) image, 114 for the (+ L -3) image, and 126 for the (+ L -234)
image. These values have to be scaled by3/2 to be compared with the
values in Fig. 8.
Texture gradient for the three textures in Fig. 9.
Vol. 7, No. 5/May 199O/J. Opt. SOC. Am. A
Fig. 11. Texture (Ai) (center) and two textures obtained by its
bandpass filtering (left and right). Our simulations suggested that
segmentation of Texture (Ai) does not rely on outputs of filters of 3-
4,lO-11, and 15 c/deg. The two bandpassed images were obtained
by filtering the original texture with radially symmetric window
(brick wall) filters passing the corresponding bands (left) and a
comparable number of complementary bands (right). Our model
predicts that the left image should be much less segmentable than
the one to the right. The bands used were (3-9 30-42 48-57) for the
left image and (9-30 42-48) for the right image (frequency units here
are in pixels and refer to 128 X 128 pixel-square images, which is not
to be confused with the c/deg units that are used in the rest of this
reduce discriminability (see Fig. ll), as expected from our
6. DISCUSSION
The results in Section 4 illustrate the explanatory power of
our model and suggest that many of the essential aspects of
texture perception have been captured in our theory. We
list here the principal contributions:
1. Theoretical arguments pointing out the need for es-
sential nonlinearities in texture perception and critiquing
full-wave rectification, energy computation, and adaptation
as choices of these nonlinearities.
Arguments pointing out that the polarities of respons-
es of odd-symmetric mechanisms are not utilized in texture
discrimination.
A demonstration that a model using half-wave rectifi-
cation and nonlinear inhibition can explain psychophysical
data on degree of texture discriminability. (This model
works equally well on the tricky examples of Julesz and
Krose as well as Williams and Julesz.)
Weaknesses of our model, which suggest further research,
include the following list:
1. Our model of nonlinear inhibition is somewhat ad hoc,
as it was constructed in the absence of detailed quantitative
experimental data. We hope that further research in physi-
ology and psychophysics will provide these data. The pre-
cise form of this stage (subthreshold suppression) in our
model should be viewed as a stopgap approximation.
2. Julesz,' Treisman,22 and Gurnsey and Browselo have
all mentioned the asymmetries in various tasks in preatten-
tive vision. It is most clearly seen in the data from Gurnsey
and Browse, e.g., when a field of L's is embedded in a field of
+'s, its discriminability (0.93) is much greater than for a
field of +'s embedded in L's (0.53). We suspect that this
phenomenon is related to noise in the texture gradient.
Similar ideas in the context of a different model of texture
discrimination have been expressed by Rubenstein and
J. Opt. SOC. Am. A/Vol. 7, No. 5/May 1990
3. In our simulations, the choice of u’ was made by hand
(8, 12, or 16 pixels) in the computation of the texture gradi-
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Martin Banks, Bela Julesz, and Paul Kube for
their useful comments. In particular, we would like to
thank Bela Julesz for suggesting the comparison of our mod-
el with Krose’s psychophysical data. This research was
funded by an IBM Faculty Development award, Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency contract N00039-88-C-
0292, Northrop, and the California Micro Program. Some
of the results were summarized previou~ly.~~
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. B. Julesz, “Textons, the elements of texture perception and
their interactions,” Nature (London) 290,91-97 .
2. J. Bergen and B. Julesz, “Rapid discrimination of visual pat-
terns,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 13,857-863 .
3. B. Julesz, “Texton gradients: the texton theory revisited,”
Biol. Cybern. 54,245-251 .
4. J. Beck, “Similarity grouping and peripheral discriminability
under uncertainty,” Am. J. Psychol. 85,l-19 .
5. J. Beck, “Textural segmentation,” in Organization and
Representation in Perception, J. Beck, ed. .
6. J. Beck, K. Prazdny, and A. Rosenfeld, Human and Machine
Vision , pp. 1-38.
7. H. Voorhees and T. Poggio, “Computing texture boundaries
from images,” Nature (London) 333,364-367 .
8. J. Enns, “Seeing textons in context,” Percept. Psychophys. 39,
143-147 .
9. J. Beck, A. Sutter, and R. Ivry, “Spatial frequency channels and
perceptual grouping in texture segmentation,” Comput. Vision
Graphics Image Process. 37,299-325 .
10. R. Gurnsey and R. Browse, “Micropattern properties and pre-
sentation conditions influencing visual texture discrimination,”
Percept. Psychophys. 41,239-252 .
11. T. Caelli, “Three processing characteristics of visual texture
segmentation,” Spatial Vision 1,19-30 .
12. J. Coggins and A. K. Jain, “A spatial filtering approach to
texture analysis,” Pattern Recogn. Lett. 3,195-203 .
13. M. Turner, “Texture discrimination by gabor functions,” Biol.
Cybern. 55,71-82 .
14. J. Bergen and E. Adelson, “Early vision and texture percep-
tion,” Nature (London) 333,363-364 .
15. A. Sutter, J. Beck, and N. Graham, “Contrast and spatial vari-
ables in texture segregation: testing a simple spatial-frequency
channels model,” Percept. Psychophys. 46,312-332 .
16. I. Fogel and D. Sagi, “Gabor filters as texture discriminators,”
Biol. Cybern. 61,103-113 .
17. B. J. Krose, A Description of Visual Structure, Ph.D. disserta-
tion (Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands,
18. B. Julesz and B. Krose, “Features and spatial filters,” Nature
(London) 333,302-303 .
19. B. Julesz, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey
07974 (personal communication).
20. H. Spitzer and S. Hochstein, “Simple- and complex-cell re-
sponse dependences on stimulation parameters, and A complex
cell receptive-field model,” J. Neurophysiol. 53, 1244-1286
21. H. C. Nothdurft, “Sensitivity for structure gradient for texture
discrimination tasks,” Vision Res. 25,1957-1968 .
,J, Malik and P. Perona
22. A. Treisman, “Preattentive processing in vision,” Comput. Vi-
sion Graphics Image Process. 31, 156-177 .
23. P. R. Kube, On Image Texture, Ph.D. dissertation .
24. J. D. Daugman, “Two dimensional spectral analysis of cortical
receptive field profiles,” Vision Res. 20,847-856 .
25. R. Young, “The Gaussian derivative theory of spatial vision:
analysis of cortical cell receptive field line-weighting profiles,”
Tech. Rep. GMR-4920 .
26. A. Parker and M. J. Hawken, “Two-dimensional spatial struc.
ture of receptive fields in monkey striate cortex,” J. Opt. Soc.
Am. A 5,598-605 .
27. D. Field and J. Nachmias, “Phase reversal discrimination,” J.
Vis. Res. 24,333-340 .
28. D. Burr, C. Morrone, and D. Spinelli, “Evidence of edge and bar
detectors in human vision,” Vision Res. 29,419-431 .
29. We have used a linear sampling of the frequency space instead
of the more common logarithmic sampling. The way we com-
bine the output of the different channels makes this choice
immaterial, provided that the sampling is dense enough.
30. H. Voorhees, “Finding texture boundaries in images,” Tech.
Rep. 968 .
31. B. Julesz, E. N. Gilbert, and J. D. Victor, “Visual discrimination
of textures with identical third order statistics,” Biol. Cybern.
32. R. Sbapley and C. Enroth-Cugell, “Visual adaptation and reti-
nal gain controls,” Prog. Retinal Res. 4,263-347 .
33. N. Graham, J. Beck, and A. Sutter, “TWO nonlinearities in
texture segregation,” Invest. Ophtalmol. Vis. Sci. 30,161 .
34. D. Albrecht and D. Hamilton, “Striate cortex of monkey and
cat: contrast response function,” J. Neurophysiol. 48,217-237
35. K. Toyama, M. Kimura, and K. Tanaka, “Organization of cat
visual cortex as investigated by cross-correlation techniques,” J.
Neurophysiol. 46,202-214 .
36. K. De Valois and R. Tootell, “Spatial-frequency-specific inhibi-
tion in car striate cortex cells,” J. Physiol. 336,359-376 .
37. A. M. Sillito and P. C. Murphy, Neurotransmitters and Cortical
From Molecules to Mind , Chap. 11.
38. D. Tolhurst, “Adaptation to square wave gratings: inhibition
between spatial frequency channels in the human visual sys-
tem,”J. Physiol. 226,231-248 .
39. A. B. Bonds, “Role of inhibition in the specification of orienta-
tion selectivity of cells in the car striate cortex,” Visual Neu-
rosci. 2,41-55 .
40. I. Rentschler, M. Hubner, and T. Caelli, “On the discrimination
of compound Gabor signals and textures,” Vision Res. 28,279-
291 .
41. Data are from Ref. 17. The tabulated data correspond to Arb
(Table 3.1, p. 39; stimulus onset asynchrony, 320).
42. B. Krose, “Local structure analyzers as determinants of preat-
tentive pattern discrimination,” Biol. Cybern. 55, 289-298
43. Data are from Ref. 10. The tabulated data correspond to mean
overall discriminability (pairs 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 3.1) averaged over
foreground/background and different stimulus durations.
44. J. Malik and P. Perona, “A computational model of texture
perception,” Tech. Rep. UCB/CSD 89/491 (Computer Science
Division, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif.,
45. B. Julesz, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey
07974 (personal communication).
46. B. Rubenstein and D. Sagi, “Texture variability across the ori-
entation spectrum can yield asymmetry in texture discrimina-
tion,’’ Perception 18,517 .
47. J. Malik and P. Perona, “A computational model of human
texture perception,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 30, 16l
31,137-140 .