Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 1–46,
Lisboa, Portugal, 17-18 September 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.
Findings of the 2015 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
Ondˇrej Bojar
Charles Univ. in Prague
Rajen Chatterjee
Christian Federmann
Microsoft Research
Barry Haddow
Univ. of Edinburgh
Matthias Huck
Univ. of Edinburgh
Chris Hokamp
Dublin City Univ.
Philipp Koehn
JHU / Edinburgh
Varvara Logacheva
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Christof Monz
Univ. of Amsterdam
Matteo Negri
Johns Hopkins Univ.
Carolina Scarton
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Lucia Specia
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Marco Turchi
This paper presents the results of the
WMT15 shared tasks, which included a
standard news translation task, a metrics
task, a tuning task, a task for run-time
estimation of machine translation quality,
and an automatic post-editing task. This
year, 68 machine translation systems from
24 institutions were submitted to the ten
translation directions in the standard translation task. An additional 7 anonymized
systems were included, and were then
evaluated both automatically and manually. The quality estimation task had three
subtasks, with a total of 10 teams, submitting 34 entries. The pilot automatic postediting task had a total of 4 teams, submitting 7 entries.
Introduction
We present the results of the shared tasks of
the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT) held at EMNLP 2015.
This workshop
builds on eight previous WMT workshops . This year we conducted ﬁve ofﬁcial tasks:
a translation task, a quality estimation task, a metrics task, a tuning task1, and a automatic postediting task.
In the translation task (§2), participants were
asked to translate a shared test set, optionally restricting themselves to the provided training data.
We held ten translation tasks this year, between
English and each of Czech, French, German,
Finnish, and Russian.
The Finnish translation
1The metrics and tuning tasks are reported in separate papers .
tasks were new this year, providing a lesser resourced data condition on a challenging language
pair. The system outputs for each task were evaluated both automatically and manually.
The human evaluation (§3) involves asking
human judges to rank sentences output by
anonymized systems.
We obtained large numbers of rankings from researchers who contributed
evaluations proportional to the number of tasks
they entered. We made data collection more ef-
ﬁcient and used TrueSkill as ranking method.
The quality estimation task (§4) this year included three subtasks: sentence-level prediction
of post-editing effort scores, word-level prediction
of good/bad labels, and document-level prediction
of Meteor scores.
Datasets were released with
English→Spanish news translations for sentence
and word level, English↔German news translations for document level.
The ﬁrst round of the automatic post-editing
task (§5) examined automatic methods for correcting errors produced by an unknown machine
translation system.
Participants were provided
with training triples containing source, target and
human post-editions, and were asked to return
automatic post-editions for unseen (source, target) pairs.
This year we focused on correcting
English→Spanish news translations.
The primary objectives of WMT are to evaluate
the state of the art in machine translation, to disseminate common test sets and public training data
with published performance numbers, and to re-
ﬁne evaluation and estimation methodologies for
machine translation. As before, all of the data,
translations, and collected human judgments are
publicly available.2 We hope these datasets serve
as a valuable resource for research into statistical
2 
machine translation and automatic evaluation or
prediction of translation quality.
Overview of the Translation Task
The recurring task of the workshop examines
translation between English and other languages.
As in the previous years, the other languages include German, French, Czech and Russian.
Finnish replaced Hindi as the special language
this year. Finnish is a lesser resourced language
compared to the other languages and has challenging morphological properties. Finnish represents
also a different language family that we had not
tackled since we included Hungarian in 2008 and
2009 .
We created a test set for each language pair by
translating newspaper articles and provided training data, except for French, where the test set was
drawn from user-generated comments on the news
The test data for this year’s task was selected from
online sources, as before. We took about 1500 English sentences and translated them into the other
5 languages, and then additional 1500 sentences
from each of the other languages and translated
them into English. This gave us test sets of about
3000 sentences for our English-X language pairs,
which have been either written originally written
in English and translated into X, or vice versa.
For the French-English discussion forum test
set, we collected 38 discussion threads each from
the Guardian for English and from Le Monde for
French. See Figure 1 for an example.
The composition of the test documents is shown
in Table 1.
The stories were translated by the professional
translation agency Capita, funded by the EU
Framework Programme 7 project MosesCore, and
by Yandex, a Russian search engine company.3
All of the translations were done directly, and not
via an intermediate language.
Training data
As in past years we provided parallel corpora
to train translation models, monolingual corpora to train language models, and development
sets to tune system parameters.
Some training corpora were identical from last year (Eu-
3 
roparl4, United Nations, French-English 109 corpus, CzEng, Common Crawl, Russian-English
parallel data provided by Yandex, Russian-English
Wikipedia Headlines provided by CMU), some
were updated (News Commentary, monolingual
data), and new corpora was added (Finnish Europarl), Finnish-English Wikipedia Headline corpus).
Some statistics about the training materials are
given in Figure 2.
Submitted systems
We received 68 submissions from 24 institutions. The participating institutions and their entry names are listed in Table 2; each system did
not necessarily appear in all translation tasks. We
also included 1 commercial off-the-shelf MT system and 6 online statistical MT systems, which we
anonymized.
For presentation of the results, systems are
treated as either constrained or unconstrained, depending on whether their models were trained only
on the provided data. Since we do not know how
they were built, these online and commercial systems are treated as unconstrained during the automatic and human evaluations.
Human Evaluation
Following what we had done for previous workshops, we again conduct a human evaluation
campaign to assess translation quality and determine the ﬁnal ranking of candidate systems. This
section describes how we prepared the evaluation
data, collected human assessments, and computed
the ﬁnal results.
This year’s evaluation campaign differed from
last year in several ways:
• In previous years each ranking task compared
ﬁve different candidate systems which were
selected without any pruning or redundancy
This had resulted in a noticeable
amount of near-identical ranking candidates
in WMT14, making the evaluation process
unnecessarily tedious as annotators ran into
a fair amount of ranking tasks containing
very similar segments which are hard to inspect. For WMT15, we perform redundancy
cleanup as an initial preprocessing step and
4As of Fall 2011, the proceedings of the European Parliament are no longer translated into all ofﬁcial languages.
This is perfectly illustrated by the UKIP numbties banning people with HIV.
You mean Nigel Farage saying the NHS should not be used to pay for people coming to the UK as
health tourists, and saying yes when the interviewer speciﬁcally asked if, with the aforementioned
in mind, people with HIV were included in not being welcome.
You raise a straw man and then knock it down with thinly veiled homophobia.
Every time I or my family need to use the NHS we have to queue up behind bigots with a sense of
entitlement and chronic hypochondria.
I think the straw man is yours.
Health tourism as deﬁned by the right wing loonies is virtually none existent.
I think it’s called democracy.
So no one would be affected by UKIP’s policies against health tourism so no problem.
Only in UKIP La La Land could Carswell be described as revolutionary.
Quoting the bollox The Daily Muck spew out is not evidence.
Ah, shoot the messenger.
The Mail didn’t write the report, it merely commented on it.
Whoever controls most of the media in this country should undead be shot for spouting populist
propaganda as fact.
I don’t think you know what a straw man is.
You also don’t know anything about my personal circumstances or identity so I would be very
careful about trying to eradicate a debate with accusations of homophobia.
Farage’s comment came as quite a shock, but only because it is so rarely addressed.
He did not express any homophobic beliefs whatsoever.
You will just have to ﬁnd a way of getting over it.
I’m not entirely sure what you’re trying to say, but my guess is that you dislike the media reporting
things you disagree with.
It is so rarely addressed because unlike Fararge and his Thatcherite loony disciples who think aids
and ﬂoods are a signal from the divine and not a reﬂection on their own ignorance in understanding
the complexities of humanity as something to celebrate,then no.
Figure 1: Example news discussion thread used in the French–English translation task.
Sources (Number of Documents)
aktu´alnˇe.cz (4), blesk.cz (1), blisty.cz (1), ctk.cz (1), den´ık.cz (1), e15.cz (1), iDNES.cz (19), ihned.cz (3), lidovky.cz (6), Novinky.cz (2), tyden.cz (1).
ABC News (4), BBC (6), CBS News (1), Daily Mail (1), Euronews (1), Financial Times (1), Fox News (2), Globe and
Mail (1), Independent (1), Los Angeles Times (1), News.com Australia (9), Novinite (2), Reuters (2), Sydney Morning
Herald (1), stv.tv (1), Telegraph (8), The Local (1), The Nation (1), UPI (1), Washington Post (3).
Abendzeitung N¨urnberg (1), Aachener Nachrichten (1), Der Standard (2), Deutsche Welle (1), Frankfurter Neue
Presse (1), Frankfurter Rundschau (1), Generalanzeiger Bonn (2), G¨ottinger Tageblatt (1), Haller Kreisblatt (1), Hellweger Anzeiger (1), Junge Welt (1), Kreisanzeiger (1), Mainpost (1), Merkur (3), Mittelbayerische Nachrichten (2),
Morgenpost (1), Mitteldeutsche Zeitung (1), Neue Presse Coburg (1), N¨urtinger Zeitung (1), OE24 (1), K¨olnische
Rundschau (1), Tagesspiegel (1), Volksfreund (1), Volksstimme (1), Wiener Zeitung (1), Westf¨alische Nachrichten (2).
Aamulehti (2), Etel¨a-Saimaa (1), Etel¨a-Suomen Sanomat (3), Helsingin Sanomat (13), Ilkka (7), Ilta-Sanomat (18),
Kaleva (4), Karjalainen (2), Kouvolan Sanomat (1), Lapin Kansa (3), Maaseudun Tulevaisuus (1).
168.ru (1), aif (6), altapress.ru (1), argumenti.ru (8), BBC Russian (1), dp.ru (2), gazeta.ru (4), interfax (2), Kommersant (12), lenta.ru (8), lgng (3), mk (5), novinite.ru (1), rbc.ru (1), rg.ru (2), rusplit.ru (1), Sport Express (6), vesti.ru (10).
Table 1: Composition of the test set. For more details see the XML test ﬁles. The docid tag gives the source and the date for
each document in the test set, and the origlang tag indicates the original source language.
Europarl Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Finnish ↔English
60,125,563
55,642,101
50,486,398
53,008,851
14,946,399
17,376,433
37,814,266
52,723,296
Distinct words
News Commentary Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Russian ↔English
6,270,748 5,161,906 5,513,985 5,499,625 3,435,458 3,759,874 4,394,974 4,625,898
Distinct words
Common Crawl Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Russian ↔English
91,328,790 81,096,306 54,575,405 58,870,638 3,529,783 3,927,378 21,018,793 21,535,122
Distinct words
United Nations Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
12,886,831
411,916,781
360,341,450
Distinct words
109 Word Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
22,520,400
811,203,407
668,412,817
Distinct words
Yandex 1M Parallel Corpus
Russian ↔English
24,121,459
26,107,293
Distinct words
CzEng Parallel Corpus
Czech ↔English
14,833,358
200,658,857
228,040,794
Distinct words
Wiki Headlines Parallel Corpus
Russian ↔English
Finnish ↔English
Distinct words
Europarl Language Model Data
59,848,044
63,439,791
53,534,167
14,946,399
39,511,068
Distinct words
News Language Model Data
118,337,431
42,110,011
135,693,607
45,149,206
45,835,812
2,744,428,620
1,025,132,098
2,427,581,519
745,645,366
823,284,188
16,501,511
Distinct words
13,727,336
French ↔English
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Russian ↔English
Finnish ↔English
Distinct words
Figure 2: Statistics for the training and test sets used in the translation task. The number of words and the number of distinct
words (case-insensitive) is based on the provided tokenizer.
Institution
Aalto University 
Abu-MaTran 
AFRL-MIT-*
Air Force Research Laboratory / MIT Lincoln Lab 
Chalmers University of Technology 
University of Stuttgart and Munich 
Carnegie Mellon University
CU-CHIMERA
Charles University 
Charles University 
Deutsches Forschungszentrum f¨ur K¨unstliche Intelligenz 
University of Illinois 
University of Stuttgart 
Karsruhe Institut of Technology 
Karsruhe Institut of Technology / LIMSI 
LIMSI 
University of Macau
University of Montreal 
RWTH Aachen 
University of Shefﬁeld 
University of Saarland 
University of Edinburgh / Johns Hopkins University 
UEDIN-SYNTAX
University of Edinburgh 
USAAR-GACHA
University of Saarland, Liling Tan
Uppsala University 
COMMERCIAL-1
Commercial machine translation system
[A,B,C,E,F,G]
Six online statistical machine translation systems
Table 2: Participants in the shared translation task. Not all teams participated in all language pairs. The translations from the
commercial and online systems were not submitted by their respective companies but were obtained by us, and are therefore
anonymized in a fashion consistent with previous years of the workshop.
create multi-system translations. As a consequence, we get ranking tasks with varying numbers of candidate systems. To avoid
overloading the annotators we still allow a
maximum of ﬁve candidates per ranking task.
If we have more multi-system translations,
we choose randomly.
A brief example should illustrate this more
clearly: say we have the following two candidate systems:
sysA="This, is ’Magic’"
sysX="this is
After lowercasing, removal of punctuation
and whitespace normalization, which are our
criteria for identifying near-identical outputs,
both would be collapsed into a single multisystem:
sysA+sysX="This, is ’Magic’"
The ﬁrst representative of a group of nearidentical outputs is used as a proxy representing all candidates in the group throughout the
evaluation.
While there is a good chance that users would
have used some of the stripped information,
e.g., case to differentiate between the two
systems relative to each other, the collapsed
system’s comparison result against the other
candidates should be a good approximation
of how human annotators would have ranked
them individually. We get a near 2x increase
in the number of pairwise comparisons, so
the general approach seems helpful.
crowd-sourced
translation assessment in WMT14 we ended
up with approximately seventy-ﬁve percent
less raw comparison data. Still, we were able
to compute good conﬁdence intervals on
the clusters based on our improved ranking
This year, due to the aforementioned cleanup,
annotators spent their time more efﬁciently,
resulting in an increased number of ﬁnal
ranking results.
We collected a total of
542,732 individual “A > B” judgments this
year, nearly double the amount of data compared to WMT14.
• Last year we compared three different models of producing the ﬁnal system rankings:
Expected Wins (used in WMT13), Hopkins
and May (HM) and TrueSkill (TS). Overall,
we found the TrueSkill method to work best
which is why we decided to use it as our only
approach in WMT15.
We keep using clusters in our ﬁnal system rankings, providing a partial ordering (clustering) of
all evaluated candidate systems. Semantics remain
unchanged to previous years: systems in the same
cluster could not be meaningfully distinguished
and hence are considered to be of equal quality.
Evaluation campaign overview
WMT15 featured the largest evaluation campaign
to date. Similar to last year, we decided to collect
researcher-based judgments only. A total of 137
individual annotator accounts have been actively
involved. Users came from 24 different research
groups and contributed judgments on 9,669 HITs.
Overall, these correspond to 29,007 individual
ranking tasks (plus some more from incomplete
HITs), each of which would have spawned exactly
10 individual “A > B” judgments last year, so
we expected at least >290,070 binary data points.
Due to our redundancy cleanup, we are able to
get a lot more, namely 542,732. We report our
inter/intra-annotator agreement scores based on
the actual work done (otherwise, we’d artiﬁcially
boost scores based on inferred rankings) and use
the full set of data to compute clusters (where the
inferred rankings contribute meaningful data).
Human annotation effort was exceptional and
we are grateful to all participating individuals and
teams. We believe that human rankings provide
the best decision basis for machine translation
evaluation and it is great to see contributions on
this large a scale. In total, our human annotators
spent 32 days and 20 hours working in Appraise.
The average annotation time per HIT amounts
to 4 minutes 53 seconds.
Several annotators
passed the mark of 100 HITs annotated, some
worked for more than 24 hours. We don’t take this
enormous amount of effort for granted and will
make sure to improve the evaluation platform and
overall process for upcoming workshops.
Data collection
The system ranking is produced from a large set
of pairwise judgments on the translation quality of
candidate systems. Annotations are collected in
an evaluation campaign that enlists participants in
the shared task to help. Each team is asked to contribute one hundred “Human Intelligence Tasks”
(HITs) per primary system submitted.
Each HIT consists of three so-called ranking
tasks. In a ranking task, an annotator is presented
with a source segment, a human reference translation, and the outputs of up to ﬁve anonymized
candidate systems, randomly selected from the set
of participating systems, and displayed in random
order. This year, we perform redundancy cleanup
as an initial preprocessing step and create multisystem translations.
As a consequence, we get
ranking tasks with varying numbers of candidate
There are two main beneﬁts to this approach:
• Annotators are more efﬁcient as they don’t
have to deal with near-identical translations
which are notoriously hard to differentiate;
• Potentially, we get higher quality annotations
as near-identical systems will be assigned the
same “A > B” ranks, improving consistency.
As in previous years, the evaluation campaign
is conducted using Appraise5 ,
an open-source tool built using Python’s Django
framework. At the top of each HIT, the following
instructions are provided:
You are shown a source sentence followed by several candidate translations.
Your task is to rank the translations from
best to worst (ties are allowed).
Annotators can decide to skip a ranking task but
are instructed to do this only as a last resort, e.g.,
if the translation candidates shown on screen are
clearly misformatted or contain data issues (wrong
language or similar problems). Only a small number of ranking tasks has been skipped in WMT15.
A screenshot of the Appraise ranking interface is
shown in Figure 3.
Annotators are asked to rank the outputs from 1
(best) to 5 (worst), with ties permitted. Note that
a lower rank is better. The joint rankings provided
by a ranking task are then reduced to the fully expanded set of pairwise rankings produced by considering all
≤10 combinations of all n ≤5
outputs in the respective ranking task.
5 
For example, consider the following annotation
provided among outputs A, B, F, H, and J:
As the number of outputs n depends on the number of corresponding multi-system translations in
the original data, we get varying numbers of resulting binary judgments. Assuming that outputs
A and F from above are actually near-identical,
the annotator this year would see a shorter ranking
Note that AF is a multi-system translation covering two candidate systems.
Both examples would be reduced to the following set of pairwise judgments:
A > B, A = F, A > H, A < J
B < F, B < H, B < J
F > H, F < J
Here, A > B should be read is “A is ranked higher
than (worse than) B”. Note that by this procedure,
the absolute value of ranks and the magnitude of
their differences are discarded. Our WMT15 approach including redundancy cleanup allows to
obtain these judgments at a lower cognitive cost
for the annotators. This partially explains why we
were able to collect more results this year.
For WMT13, nearly a million pairwise annotations were collected from both researchers and
paid workers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, in
a roughly 1:2 ratio. Last year, we collected data
from researchers only, an ability that was enabled by the use of TrueSkill for producing the
partial ranking for each task (§3.4).
This year,
based on our redundancy cleanup we were able to
nearly double the amount of annotations, collecting 542,732. See Table 3 for more details.
Annotator agreement
Each year we calculate annotator agreement
scores for the human evaluation as a measure of
Figure 3: Screenshot of the Appraise interface used in the human evaluation campaign. The annotator is presented with a
source segment, a reference translation, and up to ﬁve outputs from competing systems (anonymized and displayed in random
order), and is asked to rank these according to their translation quality, with ties allowed.
the reliability of the rankings. We measured pairwise agreement among annotators using Cohen’s
kappa coefﬁcient (κ) . If P(A) be
the proportion of times that the annotators agree,
and P(E) is the proportion of time that they would
agree by chance, then Cohen’s kappa is:
κ = P(A) −P(E)
Note that κ is basically a normalized version of
P(A), one which takes into account how meaningful it is for annotators to agree with each other
by incorporating P(E). The values for κ range
from 0 to 1, with zero indicating no agreement and
1 perfect agreement.
We calculate P(A) by examining all pairs of
outputs6 which had been judged by two or more
judges, and calculating the proportion of time that
they agreed that A < B, A = B, or A > B. In
6regardless if they correspond to an individual system or
to a set of systems (“multi-system”) producing nearly identical translations
other words, P(A) is the empirical, observed rate
at which annotators agree, in the context of pairwise comparisons.
As for P(E), it captures the probability that two
annotators would agree randomly. Therefore:
P(E) = P(A<B)2 + P(A=B)2 + P(A>B)2
Note that each of the three probabilities in P(E)’s
deﬁnition are squared to reﬂect the fact that we are
considering the chance that two annotators would
agree by chance. Each of these probabilities is
computed empirically, by observing how often annotators actually rank two systems as being tied.
Table 4 shows ﬁnal κ values for inter-annotator
agreement for WMT11–WMT15 while Table 5
details intra-annotator agreement scores, including the division of researchers (WMT13r) and
MTurk (WMT13m) data. The exact interpretation
of the kappa coefﬁcient is difﬁcult, but according
to Landis and Koch , 0–0.2 is slight, 0.2–0.4
is fair, 0.4–0.6 is moderate, 0.6–0.8 is substantial,
and 0.8–1.0 is almost perfect.
Language Pair
Czech→English
English→Czech
German→English
English→German
French→English
English→French
Russian→English
English→Russian
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
Totals WMT15
Table 3: Amount of data collected in the WMT15 manual evaluation campagin. The ﬁnal four rows report summary information
from previous editions of the workshop. Note how many rankings we get for Czech language pairs. These include systems from
the tuning shared task. Finnish, as a new language, sees a shortage of rankings for Finnnish→English Interest in French seems
to have lowered this year with only seven systems. Overall, we see a nice increase in pairwise rankings, especially considering
that we have dropped crowd-source annotation and are instead relying on researchers’ judgments exclusively.
The inter-annotator agreement rates improve
for most language pairs. On average, these are
the best scores we have ever observed in one of
our evaluation campaigns, including in WMT11,
where results were inﬂated due to inclusion of the
reference in the agreement rates. The results for
intra-annotator agreement are more mixed: some
improve greatly (Czech and German) while others
degrade (French, Russian). Our special language,
Finnish, also achieves very respectable scores. On
average, again, we see the best intra-annotator
agreement scores since WMT11.
It should be noted that the improvement is not
caused by the “ties forced by our redundancy
cleanup”. If two systems A and F produced nearidentical outputs, they are collapsed to one multisystem output AF and treated jointly in our agreement calculations, i.e. only in comparison with
other outputs. It is only the ﬁnal TrueSkill scores
that include the tie A = F.
Producing the human ranking
The collected pairwise rankings are used to produce the ofﬁcial human ranking of the systems.
For WMT14, we introduced a competition among
multiple methods of producing this human ranking, selecting the method based on which could
best predict the annotations in a portion of the
collected pairwise judgments. The results of this
competition were that (a) the competing metrics
produced almost identical rankings across all tasks
but that (b) one method, TrueSkill, had less variance across randomized runs, allowing us to make
more conﬁdent cluster predictions.
In light of
these ﬁndings, this year, we produced the human
ranking for each task using TrueSkill in the following fashion, following procedures adopted for
WMT12: We produce 1,000 bootstrap-resampled
runs over all of the available data. We then compute a rank range for each system by collecting the
absolute rank of each system in each fold, throwing out the top and bottom 2.5%, and then clustering systems into equivalence classes containing
systems with overlapping ranges, yielding a partial ordering over systems at the 95% conﬁdence
The full list of the ofﬁcial human rankings for
each task can be found in Table 6, which also reports all system scores, rank ranges, and clusters
for all language pairs and all systems. The ofﬁcial
interpretation of these results is that systems in the
same cluster are considered tied. Given the large
number of judgments that we collected, it was possible to group on average about two systems in a
cluster, even though the systems in the middle are
typically in larger clusters.
In Figure 4 and 5, we plotted the human evaluation result against everybody’s favorite metric
BLEU (some of the outlier online systems are
Language Pair
Czech→English
English→Czech
German→English
English→German
French→English
English→French
Russian→English
English→Russian
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
Table 4: κ scores measuring inter-annotator agreement for WMT15. See Table 5 for corresponding intra-annotator agreement
scores. WMT13r and WMTm refer to researchers’ judgments and crowd-sourced judgments obtained using Mechanical Turk,
respectively. WMT14 and WMT15 results are based on researchers’ judgments only (hence, comparable to WMT13r).
Language Pair
Czech→English
English→Czech
German→English
English→German
French→English
English→French
Russian→English
English→Russian
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
Table 5: κ scores measuring intra-annotator agreement, i.e., self-consistency of judges, across for the past few years of the
human evaluation campaign. Scores are much higher for WMT15 which makes sense as we enforce annotation consistency
through our initial preprocessing which joins near-identical translation candidates into multi-system entries. It seems that the
focus on actual differences in our annotation tasks as well as the possibility of having “easier” ranking scenarios for n < 5
candidate systems results in a higher annotator agreement, both for inter- and intra-annotator agreement scores.
not included to make the graphs viewable). The
plots cleary suggest that a fair comparison of
systems of different kinds cannot rely on automatic scores. Rule-based systems receive a much
lower BLEU score than statistical systems (see for
instance English–German, e.g.,
PROMT-RULE).
The same is true to a lesser degree for statistical syntax-based systems (see English–German,
UEDIN-SYNTAX) and online systems that were not
tuned to the shared task (see Czech–English, CU-
TECTO vs. the cluster of tuning task systems TT-
Quality Estimation Task
The fourth edition of the WMT shared task on
quality estimation (QE) of machine translation
(MT) builds on the previous editions of the task
 , with tasks including both sentence and
word-level estimation, using new training and test
datasets, and an additional task: document-level
prediction.
The goals of this year’s shared task were:
• Advance work on sentence- and wordlevel quality estimation by providing larger
• Investigate the effectiveness of quality labels,
features and learning methods for documentlevel prediction.
• Explore differences between sentence-level
and document-level prediction.
• Analyse the effect of training data sizes and
quality for sentence and word-level predic-
Czech–English
UEDIN-SYNTAX
TT-BLEU-MIRA-D
TT-ILLC-UVA
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-USAAR-TUNA
TT-METEOR-CMU
TT-BLEU-MIRA-SP
TT-HKUST-MEANT
English–Czech
CU-CHIMERA
UEDIN-SYNTAX
COMMERCIAL1
TT-BLEU-MIRA-D
TT-USAAR-TUNA
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-METEOR-CMU
TT-BLEU-MIRA-SP
Russian–English
PROMT-RULE
AFRL-MIT-PB
AFRL-MIT-FAC
AFRL-MIT-H
LIMSI-NCODE
UEDIN-SYNTAX
USAAR-GACHA
USAAR-GACHA
German–English
UEDIN-SYNTAX
French–English
LIMSI-CNRS
English–French
LIMSI-CNRS
English–Russian
PROMT-RULE
LIMSI-NCODE
UEDIN-SYNTAX
USAAR-GACHA
USAAR-GACHA
English–German
UEDIN-SYNTAX
PROMT-RULE
Finnish–English
ABUMATRAN-COMB
UEDIN-SYNTAX
ABUMATRAN-HFS
SHEFF-STEM
English–Finnish
ABUMATRAN-COMB
ABUMATRAN-COMB
UEDIN-SYNTAX
Table 6: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT15 translation task. Systems are ordered by their inferred system means, though systems
within a cluster are considered tied. Lines between systems indicate clusters according to bootstrap resampling at p-level
p ≤.05. Systems with grey background indicate use of resources that fall outside the constraints provided for the shared task.
English–German
UEDIN-SYNTAX
PROMT-RULE
German–English
UEDIN-SYNTAX
English–Czech
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-BLEU-MIRA-D
UEDIN-SYNTAX
TT-BLEU-MIRA-SP
TT-METEOR-CMU
CU-CHIMERA
TT-USAAR-TUNA-SAARLAND
COMMERCIAL1
Czech–English
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-ILLC-UVA
UEDIN-SYNTAX
TT-BLEU-MIRA-SP
TT-USAAR-TUNA-SAARLAND
TT-BLEU-MIRA-D
TT-METEOR-CMU
TT-HKUST-MEANT
Figure 4: Human evaluation scores versus BLEU scores for the German–English and Czech–English language pairs illustrate
the need for human evaluation when comparing systems of different kind. Conﬁdence intervals are indicated by the shaded
ellipses. Rule-based systems and to a lesser degree syntax-based statistical systems receive a lower BLEU score than their
human score would indicate. The big cluster in the Czech-English plot are tuning task submissions.
English–French
LIMSI-CNRS
French–English
LIMSI-CNRS
Russian–English
PROMT-RULE
AFRL-MIT-PB
LIMSI-NCODE
USAAR-GACHA
AFRL-MIT-FAC
AFRL-MIT-H
USAAR-GACHA2
UEDIN-SYNTAX
English–Russian
LIMSI-NCODE
PROMT-RULE
USAAR-GACHA
UEDIN-SYNTAX
USAAR-GACHA2
Finnish–English
ABUMATRAN-HFS
ABUMATRAN-COMB
SHEFF-STEM
UEDIN-SYNTAX
English–Finnish
UEDIN-SYNTAX
ABUMATRAN-UNC-COMB
ABUMATRAN-UNC
ABUMATRAN-COMB
Figure 5: Human evaluation versus BLEU scores for the French–English, Russian–English, and Finnish-English language pairs.
tion, particularly the use of annotations obtained from crowdsourced post-editing.
Three tasks were proposed: Task 1 at sentence
level (Section 4.3), Task 2 at word level (Section 4.4), and Task 3 at document level (Section
4.5). Tasks 1 and 2 provide the same dataset with
English-Spanish translations generated by the statistical machine translation (SMT) system, while
Task 3 provides two different datasets, for two
language pairs:
English-German (EN-DE) and
German-English (DE-EN) translations taken from
all participating systems in WMT13 . These datasets were annotated with different labels for quality: for Tasks 1 and 2, the labels
were automatically derived from the post-editing
of the machine translation output, while for Task
3, scores were computed based on reference translations using Meteor .
Any external resource, including additional quality estimation training data, could be used by participants (no distinction between open and close
tracks was made). As presented in Section 4.1,
participants were also provided with a baseline set
of features for each task, and a software package
to extract these and other quality estimation features and perform model learning, with suggested
methods for all levels of prediction. Participants,
described in Section 4.2, could submit up to two
systems for each task.
Data used to build MT systems or internal system information (such as model scores or n-best
lists) were not made available this year as multiple MT systems were used to produce the datasets,
especially for Task 3, including online and rulebased systems. Therefore, as a general rule, participants could only use black-box features.
Baseline systems
Sentence-level baseline system:
For Task 1,
QUEST7 was used to extract 17 MT system-independent features from the
source and translation (target) ﬁles and parallel
• Number of tokens in the source and target
sentences.
• Average source token length.
• Average number of occurrences of the target
word within the target sentence.
7 
• Number of punctuation marks in source and
target sentences.
• Language model (LM) probability of source
and target sentences based on models for the
WMT News Commentary corpus.
• Average number of translations per source
word in the sentence as given by IBM Model
1 extracted from the WMT News Commentary parallel corpus, and thresholded such
that P(t|s) > 0.2/P(t|s) > 0.01.
• Percentage of unigrams, bigrams and trigrams in frequency quartiles 1 (lower frequency words) and 4 (higher frequency
words) in the source language extracted from
the WMT News Commentary corpus.
• Percentage of unigrams in the source sentence seen in the source side of the WMT
News Commentary corpus.
These features were used to train a Support Vector Regression (SVR) algorithm using a Radial
Basis Function (RBF) kernel within the SCIKIT-
LEARN toolkit.8 The γ, ϵ and C parameters were
optimised via grid search with 5-fold cross validation on the training set. We note that although the
system is referred to as “baseline”, it is in fact a
strong system. It has proved robust across a range
of language pairs, MT systems, and text domains
for predicting various forms of post-editing effort
 . It contains the following 25 features:
• Word count in the source and target sentences, source and target token count ratio.
Although these features are sentence-level
their values will be the same for all
words in a sentence), but the length of a
sentence might inﬂuence the probability of a
word being incorrect.
8 
9 
• Target token, its left and right contexts of one
• Source token aligned to the target token,
its left and right contexts of one word.
The alignments were produced with the
force align.py script, which is part of
cdec .
It allows to
align new parallel data with a pre-trained
alignment model built with the cdec word
aligner (fast align).
The alignment model
was trained on the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
• Boolean dictionary features: whether target
token is a stopword, a punctuation mark, a
proper noun, a number.
• Target language model features:
– The order of the highest order n-gram
which starts or ends with the target token.
(ti−2, ti−1, ti),
(ti−1, ti, ti+1),
(ti, ti+1, ti+2),
where ti is the target token ).
• The order of the highest order n-gram which
starts or ends with the source token.
• Boolean pseudo-reference feature: 1 if the
token is contained in a pseudo-reference, 0
otherwise.
The pseudo-reference used for
this feature is the automatic translation generated by an English-Spanish phrase-based
SMT system trained on the Europarl corpus
with standard settings.10
• The part-of-speech tags of the target and
source tokens.
• The number of senses of the target and source
tokens in WordNet.
We model the task as a sequence prediction
problem and train our baseline system using the
Linear-Chain Conditional Random Fields (CRF)
algorithm with the CRF++ tool.11
10 
11 
Document-level baseline system:
For Task 3,
the baseline features for sentence-level prediction
were used.
These are aggregated by summing
or averaging their values for the entire document.
Features that were summed: number of tokens
in the source and target sentences and number of
punctuation marks in source and target sentences.
All other features were averaged.
The implementation for document-level feature extraction is
available in QUEST++ .12
These features were then used to train a SVR algorithm with RBF kernel using the SCIKIT-LEARN
toolkit. The γ, ϵ and C parameters were optimised
via grid search with 5-fold cross validation on the
training set.
Participants
Table 7 lists all participating teams submitting systems to any of the tasks. Each team was allowed
up to two submissions for each task and language
In the descriptions below, participation in
speciﬁc tasks is denoted by a task identiﬁer.
DCU-SHEFF (Task 2): The system uses the
baseline set of features provided for the task.
Two pre-processing data manipulation techniques were used: data selection and data
bootstrapping. Data selection ﬁlters out sentences which have the smallest proportion of
erroneous tokens and are assumed to be the
least useful for the task. Data bootstrapping
enhances the training data with incomplete
training sentences (e.g.
the ﬁrst k words
of a sentence of the length N, where k <
N). This technique creates additional data
instances and boosts the importance of errors occurring in the training data. The combination of these techniques doubled the F1
score for the “BAD” class, as compared to a
models trained on the entire dataset given for
the task. The labelling was performed with a
CRF model trained using the CRF++ tool, as
in the baseline system.
HDCL (Task 2): HDCL’s submissions are based
on a deep neural network that learns continuous feature representations from scratch, i.e.
from bilingual contexts.
The network was
pre-trained by initialising the word lookuptable with distributed word representations,
12 
questplusplus
Participating team
Dublin City University, Ireland and University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
Heidelberg University, Germany 
Lorraine Laboratory of Research in Computer Science and its Applications,
France 
Dublin City University, Ireland 
Shenyang Aerospace University, China 
University of Shefﬁeld Team 1, UK 
Alicant University, Spain 
Ghent University, Belgium 
USAAR-USHEF
University of Shefﬁeld, UK and Saarland University, Germany 
Undisclosed
Table 7: Participants in the WMT15 quality estimation shared task.
and ﬁne-tuned for the quality estimation classiﬁcation task by back-propagating wordlevel prediction errors using stochastic gradient descent. In addition to the continuous
space deep model, a shallow linear classiﬁer
was trained on the provided baseline features
and their quadratic expansion.
One of the
submitted systems (QUETCH) relies on the
deep model only, the other (QUETCHPLUS)
is a linear combination of the QUETCH system score, the linear classiﬁer score, and binary and binned baseline features. The system combination yielded signiﬁcant improvements, showing that the deep and shallow
models each contributes complementary information to the combination.
LORIA (Task 1): The LORIA system for Task
1 is based on a standard machine learning
approach where source-target sentences are
described by numerical vectors and SVR is
used to learn a regression model between
these vectors and quality scores. Feature vectors used the 17 baseline features, two Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) features and 31
features based on pseudo-references.
LSI approach considers source-target pairs as
documents, and projects the TF-IDF wordsdocuments matrix into a reduced numerical
This leads to a measure of similarity between a source and a target sentence, which was used as a feature.
of these features were used based on two
matrices, one from the Europarl corpus and
one from the ofﬁcial training data. Pseudoreferences were produced by three online
systems. These features measure the intersection between n-gram sets of the target sentence and of the pseudo-references.
sets of features were extracted from each online system, and a fourth feature was extracted measuring the inter-agreement among
the three online systems and the target system.
RTM-DCU (Tasks 1, 2, 3): RTM-DCU systems
are based on referential translation machines
(RTM) .
RTMs propose a language independent approach and avoid the need to access any taskor domain-speciﬁc information or resource.
The submissions used features that indicate
the closeness between instances to the available training data, the difﬁculty of translating them, and the presence of acts of translation for data transformation. SVR was used
for document and sentence-level prediction
tasks, also in combination with feature selection or partial least squares, and global linear
models with dynamic learning were used for
the word-level prediction task.
SAU (Task 2): The SAU submissions used a CRF
model to predict the binary labels for Task
They rely on 12 basic features and 85
combination features. The ratio between OK
and BAD labels was found to be 4:1 in the
training set. Two strategies were proposed to
solve this problem of label ratio imbalance.
The ﬁrst strategy is to replace “OK” labels
with sub-labels to balance label distribution,
where the sub-labels are OK B, OK I, OK E,
OK (depending on the position of the token
in the sentence). The second strategy is to
reconstruct the training set to include more
“BAD” words.
SHEFF-NN (Tasks 1, 2):
SHEFF-NN submissions were based on (i) a Continuous
Space Language Model (CSLM) to extract
additional features for Task 1 (SHEF-GP
and SHEF-SVM), (ii) a Continuous Bagof-Words (CBOW) model to produce word
embeddings as features for Task 2 (SHEF-
W2V), and (iii) a combination of features
produced by QUEST++ and a feature produced with word embedding models (SHEF-
SVR and Gaussian Processes
were used to learn prediction models for Task
1, and a CRF algorithm for binary tagging
models in Task 2 (Pystruct Linear-chain CRF
trained with a structured SVM for system
SHEF-W2V, and CRFSuite Adaptive Regularisation of Weight Vector (AROW) and
Passive Aggressive (PA) algorithms for system SHEF-QuEst++).
Interesting ﬁndings
for Task 1 were that (i) CSLM features always bring improvements whenever added to
either baseline or complete feature sets and
(ii) CSLM features alone perform better than
the baseline features. For Task 2, the results
obtained by SHEF-W2V are promising: although it uses only features learned in unsupervised fashion (CBOW word embeddings),
it was able to outperform the baseline as well
as many other systems. Further, combining
the source-to-target cosine similarity feature
with the ones produced by QUEST++ led to
improvements in the F1 of “BAD” labels.
UAlacant (Task 2): The submissions of the Universitat d’Alacant team were obtained by applying the approach in , which uses any source of bilingual
information available as a black-box in order to spot sub-segment correspondences between a sentence S in the source language
and a given translation hypothesis T in the
target language.
These sub-segment correspondences are used to extract a collection of
features that is then used by a multilayer perceptron to determine the word-level predicted
score. Three sources of bilingual information available online were used: two online
machine translation systems, Apertium13 and
Google Translate; and the bilingual concordancer Reverso Context.14 Two submissions
were made for Task 2: one using only the
70 features described in , and one combining them with the
baseline features provided by the task organisers.
UGENT (Tasks 1, 2):
The submissions for
the word-level task used 55 new features
in combination with the baseline feature set
to train binary classiﬁers.
The new features try to capture either accuracy (meaning transfer from source to target sentence)
using word and phrase alignments, or ﬂuency (well-formedness of target sentence) using language models trained on word surface forms and on part-of-speech tags. Based
on the combined feature set, SCATE-MBL
uses a memory-based learning (MBL) algorithm for binary classiﬁcation.
HYBRID uses the same feature set and forms
a classiﬁer ensemble using CRFs in combination with the MBL system for predicting
word-level quality.
For the sentence-level
task, SCATE-SVM-single uses a single feature to train SVR models, which is based
on the percentage of words that are labelled
as “BAD” by the word-level quality estimation system SCATE-HYBRID. SCATE-SVM
adds 16 new features to this single feature and
the baseline feature set to train SVR models
using an RBF kernel. Additional language resources are used to extract the new features
for both tasks.
USAAR-USHEF (Task 3): The systems submitted for both EN-DE and DE-EN (called
BFF) were built by using a exhaustive search
for feature selection over the ofﬁcial baseline
features. In order to select the best features,
a Bayesian Ridge classiﬁer was trained for
each feature combination and the classiﬁers
were evaluated in terms of Mean Average Error (MAE): the classiﬁer with the smallest
13 
14 
MAE was considered the best. For EN-DE,
the selected features were: average source token length, percentage of unigrams and of trigrams in fourth quartile of frequency in a corpus of the source language. For DE-EN, the
best features were: number of occurrences
of the target word within the target hypothesis, percentage of unigrams and of trigrams
in ﬁrst quartile of frequency in a corpus of
the source language. This provide an indication of which features of the baseline set contribute for document-level quality estimation.
USHEF (Task 3):
The system submitted for
the EN-DE document-level task was built by
using the 17 ofﬁcial baseline features, plus
discourse features (repetition of words, lemmas and nouns and ratio of repetitions – as
implemented in QUEST++. For DE-EN, a
combination of the 17 baseline features, the
discourse repetition features and discourseaware features extracted from syntactic and
discourse parsers was used.
The new discourse features are:
number of pronouns,
number of connectives, number of satellite
and nucleus relations in the RST (Rhetorical Structure Theory) tree for the document
and number of EDU (Elementary Discourse
Units) breaks in the text. A backward feature selection approach, based on the feature rank of SCIKIT-LEARN’s Random Forest implementation, was also applied.
both languages pairs, the same algorithm as
that of the baseline system was used: the
SCIKIT-LEARN implementation of SVR with
RBF kernel and hyper-parameters optimised
via grid-search.
HIDDEN (Task 3): This submission, whose creators preferred to remain anonymous, estimates the quality of a given document by
explicitly identifying potential translation errors in it. Translation error detection is implemented as a combination of human expert
knowledge and different language processing tools, including named entity recognition,
part-of-speech tagging and word alignments.
In particular, the system looks for patterns
of errors deﬁned by human experts, taking
into account the actual words and the additional linguistic information. With this approach, a wide variety of errors can be detected: from simple misspellings and typos to
complex lack of agreement (in genre, number
and tense), or lexical inconsistencies. Each
error category is assigned an “importance”,
again according to human knowledge, and
the amount of error in the document is computed as the weighted sum of the identiﬁed
errors. Finally, the documents are sorted according to this ﬁgure to generate the ﬁnal
submission to the ranking variant of Task 3.
Task 1: Predicting sentence-level quality
This task consists in scoring (and ranking) translation sentences according to the percentage of their
words that need to be ﬁxed. It is similar to Task 1.2
in WMT14. HTER is used
as quality score, i.e. the minimum edit distance
between the machine translation and its manually
post-edited version in .
As in previous years, two variants of the results
could be submitted:
• Scoring: An absolute HTER score for each
sentence translation, to be interpreted as an
error metric: lower scores mean better translations.
• Ranking: A ranking of sentence translations
for all source sentences from best to worst.
For this variant, it does not matter how the
ranking is produced (from HTER predictions
or by other means). The reference ranking is
deﬁned based on the true HTER scores.
The data is the same as that used for the
WMT15 Automatic Post-editing task,15 as kindly
provided by Unbabel.16 Source segments are tokenized English sentences from the news domain
with at least four tokens. Target segments are tokenized Spanish translations produced by an online SMT system. The human post-editions are a
manual revision of the target, collected using Unbabel’s crowd post-editing platform. HTER labels
were computed using the TERCOM tool17 with
default settings (tokenised, case insensitive, exact
matching only), but with scores capped to 1.
As training and development data, we provided English-Spanish datasets with 11, 271 and
1, 000 source sentences, their machine translations, post-editions and HTER scores, respectively.
As test data, we provided an additional
15 
16 
17 
set of 1, 817 English-Spanish source-translations
pairs produced by the same MT system used for
the training data.
Evaluation
Evaluation was performed against
the true HTER label and/or ranking, using the
same metrics as in previous years:
• Scoring: Mean Average Error (MAE) (primary metric,
ofﬁcial score for ranking
submissions),
Root Mean Squared Error
• Ranking:
DeltaAvg (primary metric) and
Spearman’s ρ rank correlation.
Additionally, we included Pearson’s r correlation against the true HTER label, as suggested by
Graham .
Statistical signiﬁcance on MAE and DeltaAvg
was computed using a pairwise bootstrap resampling (1K times) approach with 95% conﬁdence
intervals. 18 For Pearson’s r correlation, we measured signiﬁcance using the Williams test, as also
suggested in .
Table 8 summarises the results for the
ranking variant of Task 1. They are sorted from
best to worst using the DeltaAvg metric scores as
primary key and the Spearman’s ρ rank correlation
scores as secondary key.
The results for the scoring variant are presented
in Table 9, sorted from best to worst by using the
MAE metric scores as primary key and the RMSE
metric scores as secondary key.
Pearson’s r coefﬁcients for all systems against
HTER is given in Table 10.
As discussed in
 , the results according to this metric can rank participating systems differently. In
particular, we note the SHEF/GP submission, are
which is deemed signiﬁcantly worse than the baseline system according to MAE, but substantially
better than the baseline according to Pearson’s
correlation.
Graham argues that the use
of MAE as evaluation score for quality estimation tasks is inadequate, as MAE is very sensitive
to variance. This means that a system that outputs predictions with high variance is more likely
to have high MAE score, even if the distribution
follows that of the true labels. Interestingly, according to Pearson’s correlation, the systems are
18 
files/bootstrap-significance.pl
ranked exactly in the same way as according to
our DeltaAvg metric. The only difference is that
the 4th place is now considered signiﬁcantly different from the three winning submissions. She
also argues that the signiﬁcance tests used with
MAE, based on randomised resampling, assume
that the data is independent, which is not the case.
Therefore, we apply the suggested Williams signiﬁcance test for this metric.
Task 2: Predicting word-level quality
The goal of this task is to evaluate the extent to
which we can detect word-level errors in MT output. Often, the overall quality of a translated segment is signiﬁcantly harmed by speciﬁc errors in
a small proportion of words. Various classes of
errors can be found in translations, but for this
task we consider all error types together, aiming
at making a binary distinction between ’GOOD’
and ’BAD’ tokens. The decision to bucket all error types together was made because of the lack of
sufﬁcient training data that could allow consideration of more ﬁne-grained error tags.
This year’s word-level task uses the same
dataset as Task 1, for a single language pair:
English-Spanish.
Each instance of the training,
development and test sets consists of the following elements:
• Source sentence (English).
• Automatic translation (Spanish).
• Manual post-edition of the automatic translation.
• Word-level binary (“OK”/“BAD”) labelling
of the automatic translation.
The binary labels for the datasets were acquired
automatically with the TERCOM tool .19 This tool computes the edit distance between machine-translated sentence and its
reference (in this case, its post-edited version).
It identiﬁes four types of errors: substitution of
a word with another word, deletion of a word
(word was omitted by the translation system), insertion of a word (a redundant word was added by
the translation system), and word or sequence of
words shift (word order error). Every word in the
machine-translated sentence is tagged with one of
these error types or not tagged if it matches a word
from the reference.
19 
DeltaAvg ↑
Spearman’s ρ ↑
English-Spanish
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT+FILTRE
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM-single
Baseline SVM
Ofﬁcial results for the ranking variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 1. The winning submissions are
indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to pairwise bootstrap
resampling (1K times) with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system
at a statistically signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
English-Spanish
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT+FILTRE
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT
• UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM-single
Baseline SVM
Table 9: Ofﬁcial results for the scoring variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 1. The winning submissions are indicated
by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to bootstrap resampling (1K
times) with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system at a statistically
signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
Pearson’s r ↑
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT+FILTRE
• LORIA/17+LSI+MT
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM-single
Baseline SVM
Table 10: Alternative results for the scoring variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 1. The winning submissions are
indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to Williams test with
95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system at a statistically signiﬁcant
level according to the same test.
All the untagged (correct) words were tagged
with “OK”, while the words tagged with substitution and insertion errors were assigned the tag
“BAD”. The deletion errors are not associated
with any word in the automatic translation, so we
could not consider them.
We also disabled the
shift errors by running TERCOM with the option
‘-d 0’. The reason for that is the fact that searching for shifts introduces signiﬁcant noise in the
annotation. The system cannot discriminate be-
tween cases where a word was really shifted and
where a word (especially common words such as
prepositions, articles and pronouns) was deleted in
one part of the sentence and then independently
inserted in another part of this sentence, i.e. to
correct an unrelated error.
The statistics of the
datasets are outlined in Table 11.
% of “BAD”
Table 11: Datasets for Task 2.
Evaluation
Submissions
terms of classiﬁcation performance against the
original labels. The main evaluation metric is the
average F1 for the “BAD” class. Statistical significance on F1 for the “BAD” class was computed
using approximate randomization tests.20
The results for Task 2 are summarised
in Table 12. The results are ordered by F1 score
for the error (BAD) class.
Using the F1 score for the word-level estimation
task has a number of drawbacks. First of all, we
cannot use it as the single metric to evaluate the
system’s quality. The F1 score of the class “BAD”
becomes an inadequate metric when one is also
interested in the tagging of correct words. In fact,
a naive baseline which tags all words with the class
“BAD” would yield 31.75 F1 score for the “BAD”
class in the test set of this task, which is close to
some of the submissions and by far exceeds the
baseline, although this tagging is uninformative.
We could instead use the weighted F1 score,
which would lead to a single F1 ﬁgure where every class is given a weight according to its frequency in the test set. However, we believe the
weighted F1 score does not reﬂect the real quality of the systems either. Since there are many
more instances of the “GOOD” class than there
are of the “BAD” class, the performance on the
“BAD” class does not contribute much weight to
the overall score, and changes in accuracy of error
prediction on this less frequent class can go unnoticed. The weighted F1 score for the strategy
which tags all words as “GOOD” would be 72.66,
20 
sigf.shtml
which is higher than the score of many submissions. However, similar to the case of tagging all
words as “BAD”, this strategy is uninformative. In
an attempt to ﬁnd more intuitive ways of evaluating word-level tasks, we introduce a new metric
called sequence correlation. It gives higher importance to the instances of the “BAD” class and
is robust against uninformative tagging.
The basis of the sequence correlation metric is
the number of matching labels in the reference and
the hypothesis, analogously to a precision metric.
However, it has some additional features that are
aimed at making it more reliable.
We consider
the tagging of each sentence separately as a sequence of tags.
We divide each sequence into
sub-sequences tagged by the same tag, for example, the sequence “OK BAD OK OK OK” will be
represented as a list of 3 sub-sequences: [ “OK”,
“BAD”, “OK OK OK” ]. Each subsequence has
also the information on its position in the original sentence. The sub-sequences of the reference
and the hypothesis are then intersected, and the
number of matching tags in the corresponding subsequences is computed so that every sub-sequence
can be used only once. Let us consider the following example:
Reference:
Hypothesis:
Here, the reference has three sub-sequences, as
in the previous example, and the hypothesis consists of only one sub-sequence which coincides
with the hypothesis itself, because all the words
were tagged with the “OK” label. The precision
score for this sentence will be 0.8, as 4 of 5 labels
match in this example. However, we notice that
the hypothesis sub-sequence covers two matching sub-sequences of the reference: word 1 and
words 3–5. According to our metric, the hypothesis sub-sequence can be used for the intersection
only once, giving either 1 of 5 or 3 of 5 matching words. We choose the highest value and get
the score of 0.6. Thus, the intersection procedure
downweighs the uninformative hypotheses where
all words are tagged with one tag.
In order to compute the sequence correlation we
need to get the set of spans for each label in both
the prediction and the reference, and then intersect
them. A set of spans of each tag t in the string w
is computed as follows:
weighted F1
English-Spanish
• UAlacant/OnLine-SBI-Baseline
• HDCL/QUETCHPLUS
UAlacant/OnLine-SBI
SAU/KERC-CRF
SAU/KERC-SLG-CRF
SHEF2/W2V-BI-2000
SHEF2/W2V-BI-2000-SIM
SHEF1/QuEst++-AROW
UGENT/SCATE-HYBRID
DCU-SHEFF/BASE-NGRAM-2000
HDCL/QUETCH
DCU-SHEFF/BASE-NGRAM-5000
SHEF1/QuEst++-PA
UGENT/SCATE-MBL
RTM-DCU/s5-RTM-GLMd
RTM-DCU/s4-RTM-GLMd
Table 12: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT15 quality estimation Task 2. The winning submissions are indicated by a •. These are
the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to approximate randomization tests with 95%
conﬁdence intervals. Submissions whose results are statistically different from others according to the same test are grouped
by a horizontal line.
St(w) = {w[b:e]}, ∀i s.t. b ⩽i ⩽e : wi = t
where w[b:e] is a substring wb, wb+1, ..., we−1, we.
Then the intersection of spans for all labels is:
Int(y, ˆy) =
sˆy∈St(ˆy)
Here λt is the weight of a tag t in the overall
result. It is inversely proportional the number of
instances of this tag in the reference:
where ct(ˆy) is the number of words labelled with
the label t in the prediction.
Thus we give the
equal importance to all tags.
The sum of matching spans is also weighted by
the ratio of the number of spans in the hypothesis and the reference. This is done to downweigh
the system tagging if the number of its spans differs from the number of spans provided in the gold
standard. This ratio is computed as follows:
r(y, ˆy) = min(|y|
|ˆy|; |ˆy|
This ratio is 1 if the number of spans is equal
for the hypothesis and the reference, and less than
1 otherwise.
The ﬁnal score for a sentence is produced as follows:
SeqCor(y, ˆy) = r(y, ˆy) · Int(y, ˆy)
Then the overall sequence correlation for the
whole dataset is the average of sentence scores.
Table 13 shows the results of the evaluation according to the sequence correlation metric. The results for the two metrics are quite different: one of
the highest scoring submissions according to the
F1-BAD score is only the third under the sequence
correlation metric, and vice versa: the submissions
with the highest sequence correlation feature in
3rd place according to F1-BAD score. However,
the system rankings produced by two metrics are
correlated — their Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient between them is 0.65.
Correlation
English-Spanish
• SAU/KERC-CRF
• SAU/KERC-SLG-CRF
• UAlacant/OnLine-SBI-Baseline
UAlacant/OnLine-SBI
HDCL/QUETCH
HDCL/QUETCHPLUS
DCU-SHEFF/BASE-NGRAM-5000
UGENT/SCATE-HYBRID
DCU-SHEFF/BASE-NGRAM-2000
UGENT/SCATE-MBL
SHEF2/W2V-BI-2000
SHEF2/W2V-BI-2000-SIM
SHEF1/QuEst++-AROW
RTM-DCU/s5-RTM-GLMd
SHEF1/QuEst++-PA
RTM-DCU/s4-RTM-GLMd
Table 13: Alternative results for the WMT15 quality estimation Task 2 according to the sequence correlation metric. The winning submissions are indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according
to approximate randomization tests with 95% conﬁdence intervals. Submissions whose results are statistically different from
others according to the same test are grouped by a horizontal line.
The sequence correlation metric gives preference to systems that use sequence labelling (modelling dependencies between the assigned tags).
We consider this a desirable feature, as we are generally not interested in maximising the prediction
accuracy for individual words, but in maximising
the accuracy for word-level labelling in the context
of the whole sentence. However, using the TER
alignment to tag errors cannot capture “phraselevel errors”, and each token is considered independently when the dataset is built. This is a fundamental issue with the current deﬁnition of the
word-level quality estimation that we intend to address in future work.
Our intuition is that the sequence correlation
metric should be closer to human perception of
word-level QE than F1 scores. The goal of wordlevel QE is to identify incorrect segments of a sentence — and the sequence correlation metric evaluates how good the segmentation of the sentence
is into correct and incorrect phrases. A system can
get very high F1 score by (almost) randomly assigning a correct tag to a word, and giving very
little information on correct and incorrect areas in
the text. That was illustrated by the WMT14 wordlevel QE task results, where the baseline strategy
that assigned tag “BAD” to all words had significantly higher F1 score than any of the submissions. fundamental problem with the current task.
I added a sentence about it at the end of the paragraph before this one.
Task 3: Predicting document-level quality
Predicting the quality of units larger than sentences can be useful in many scenarios. For example, consider a user searching for information
about a product on the web. The user can only ﬁnd
reviews in German but he/she does not speak the
language, so he/she uses an MT system to translate
the reviews into English. In this case, predictions
on the quality of individual sentences in a translated review are not as informative as predictions
on the quality of the entire review.
With the goal of exploring quality estimation
beyond sentence level, this year we proposed a
document-level task for the ﬁrst time.
the lack of large datasets with machine translated
documents (by various MT systems), we consider
short paragraphs as documents. The task consisted
in scoring and ranking paragraphs according to
their predicted quality.
The paragraphs were extracted from the
WMT13 translation task test data , using submissions from all participating
MT systems. Source paragraphs were randomly
chosen using the paragraph markup in the SGML
ﬁles. For each source paragraph, a translation was
taken from a different MT system such as to select
approximately the same number of instances from
each MT system. We considered EN-DE and DE-
EN as language pairs, extracting 1, 215 paragraphs
for each language pair. 800 paragraphs were used
for training and 415 for test.
Since no human annotation exists for the quality of entire paragraphs (or documents), Meteor
against reference translations was used as quality
label for this task. Meteor was calculated using
its implementation within the Asyia toolkit, with
the following settings: exact match, tokenised and
case insensitive .
Evaluation
The evaluation of the paragraphlevel task was the same as that for the sentencelevel task. MAE and RMSE are reported as evaluation metrics for the scoring task, with MAE as
ofﬁcial metric for systems ranking. For the ranking task, DeltaAvg and Spearman’s ρ correlation
are reported, with DeltaAvg as ofﬁcial metric for
systems ranking. To evaluate the signiﬁcance of
the results, bootstrap resampling (1K times) with
95% conﬁdence intervals was used. Pearson’s r
correlation scores with the Williams signiﬁcance
test are also reported.
Table 14 summarises the results of the
ranking variant of Task 3.21 They are sorted from
best to worst using the DeltaAvg metric scores as
primary key and the Spearman’s ρ rank correlation scores as secondary key.
RTM-DCU submissions achieved the best scores:
was the winner for EN-DE, and RTM-FS-SVR
for DE-EN. For EN-DE, the HIDDEN system
did not show signiﬁcant difference against the
baseline. For DE-EN, USHEF/QUEST-DISC-BO,
USAAR-USHEF/BFF and HIDDEN were not signiﬁcantly different from the baseline.
The results of the scoring variant are given in
Table 15, sorted from best to worst by using the
MAE metric scores as primary key and the RMSE
metric scores as secondary key. Again the RTM-
DCU submissions scored the best for both lan-
21Results for MAE, RMSE and DeltaAvg are multiplied by
100 to improve readability.
guage pairs. All systems were signiﬁcantly better than the baseline. However, the difference between the baseline system and all submissions was
much lower in the scoring evaluation than in the
ranking evaluation.
Following the suggestion in ,
Table 16 shows an alternative ranking of systems considering Pearson’s r correlation results.
The alternative ranking differs from the ofﬁcial
ranking in terms of MAE: for EN-DE, RTM-
DCU/RTM-FS-SVR is no longer in the winning
group, while for DE-EN, USHEF/QUEST-DISC-
BO and USAAR-USHEF/BFF did not show statistically signiﬁcant difference against the baseline.
However, as with Task 1 these results are the same
as the ofﬁcial ones in terms of DeltaAvg.
Discussion
In what follows, we discuss the main ﬁndings of
this year’s shared task based on the goals we had
previously identiﬁed for it.
Advances in sentence- and word-level QE
For sentence-level prediction, we used similar
data and quality labels as in previous editions of
the task: English-Spanish, news text domain and
HTER labels to indicate post-editing effort. The
main differences this year were:
(i) the much
larger size of the dataset, (ii) the way post-editing
was performed – by a large number of crowdsourced translators, and (iii) the MT systems used
– an online statistical system.
We will discuss
items (i) and (ii) later in this section. Regarding
(iii), the main implication of using an online system was that one could not have access to many of
the resources commonly used to extract features,
such as the SMT training data and lexical tables.
As a consequence, surrogate resources were used
for certain features, including many of the baseline
ones, which made them less effective. To avoid
relying on such resources, novel features were explored, for example those based on deep neural
network architectures (word embeddings and continuous space language models by SHEFF-NN)
and those based on pseudo-references (n-gram
overlap and agreement features by LORIA).
While it is not possible to compare results directly with those published in previous years, for
sentence level we can observe the following with
respect to the corresponding task in WMT14 (Task
DeltaAvg ↑
Spearman’s ρ ↑
English-German
• RTM-DCU/RTM-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-REP
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
Baseline SVM
German-English
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-BO
Baseline SVM
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
Ofﬁcial results for the ranking variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 3. The winning submissions are
indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to bootstrap
resampling (1K times) with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system
at a statistically signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
English-German
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
• RTM-DCU/RTM-SVR
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-REP
Baseline SVM
German-English
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-BO
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
Baseline SVM
Ofﬁcial results for the scoring variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 3. The winning submissions are
indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to bootstrap
resampling (1K times) with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system
at a statistically signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
• In terms of scoring, according to the primary
metric – MAE, in WMT15 all systems except
one were signiﬁcantly better than the baseline. In both WMT14 and WMT15 only one
system was signiﬁcantly worse than the baseline. However, in WMT14 four others (out of
nine) performed no different than the baseline. This year, no system tied with the baseline: the remaining seven systems were signiﬁcantly better than the baseline. One could
say systems are consistently better this year.
It is worth mentioning that the baseline remains the same, but as previously noted, the
resources used to extract baseline features are
likely to be less useful this year given the mismatch between the data used to produce them
and the data used to build the online SMT
• In terms of ranking, in WMT14 one system
was signiﬁcantly worse than the baseline, and
the four remaining systems were signiﬁcantly
better. This year, all eight submissions are
signiﬁcantly better than the baseline.
can once more be seen as progress from last
year’s results. These results as well as the
general ranking of systems were also found
following Pearson’s correlation as metric, as
Pearson’s r ↑
English-German
• RTM-DCU/RTM-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-REP
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
Baseline SVM
German-English
• RTM-DCU/RTM-FS-SVR
RTM-DCU/RTM-FS+PLS-SVR
USHEF/QUEST-DISC-BO
USAAR-USHEF/BFF
Baseline SVM
Table 16: Alternative results for the scoring variant of the WMT15 quality estimation Task 3. The winning submissions are
indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to the Williams
test with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the gray area are not different from the baseline system at a statistically
signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
suggested by Graham .
For the word level task, a comparison with the
WMT14 corresponding task is difﬁcult to perform,
as in WMT14 we did not have a meaningful baseline. The baseline used then for binary classiﬁcation was to tag all words with the label “BAD”.
This baseline outperformed all the submissions in
terms of F1 for the “BAD” class, but it cannot be
considered an appropriate baseline strategy (see
Section 4.4). This year the submissions were compared against the output of a real baseline system
and the set of baseline features was made available to participants. Although the baseline system
itself performed worse than all the submitted systems, some other systems beneﬁted from adding
baseline features to their feature sets (UAlacant,
UGENT, HDCL).
Considering the feature sets and methods used,
the number of participants in the WMT14 wordlevel task was too small to draw reliable conclusion: four systems for English–Spanish and one
system for all other three language pairs.
larger number of submissions this year is already a
positive result: 16 submissions from eight teams.
Inspecting the systems submitted this and last
year, we can speculate about the most promising
techniques.
Last year’s winning system used a
neural network trained on pseudo-reference features (namely, features extracted from n-best lists)
 . This year’s winning systems are also based on pseudo-reference
features (UAlacant) and deep neural network architectures (HDCL). Luong et al. had previously reported that pseudo-reference features
improve the accuracy of word-level predictions.
The two most recent editions of this shared task
seem to indicate that the state of the art in wordlevel quality estimation relies upon such features,
as well as the ability to model the relationship between the source and target languages using large
Effectiveness of quality labels, features and
learning methods for document-level QE
The task of paragraph-level prediction received
fewer submissions than the other two tasks: four
submissions for the scoring variant and ﬁve for
the ranking variant, for both language pairs. This
is understandable as it was the ﬁrst time the task
was run. Additionally, paragraph-level QE is still
fairly new as a task. However, we were able to
draw some conclusions and learn valuable lessons
for future research in the area.
By and large, most features are similar to those
used for sentence-level prediction.
Discourseaware features showed only marginal improvements relative to the baseline system (USHEF systems for EN-DE and DE-EN). One possible reason for that is the way the training and test data
sets were created, including paragraphs with only
one sentence. Therefore, discourse features could
not be fully explored as they aim to model relationships and dependencies across sentences, as
well as within sentences. In future, data will be
selected more carefully in order to consider only
paragraphs or documents with more sentences.
Systems applying feature selection techniques,
such as USAAR-USHEF/BFF, did not obtain major improvements over the baseline.
they provided interesting insights by ﬁnding a
minimum set of baseline features that can be used
to build models with the same performance as the
entire baseline feature set. These are models with
only three features selected as the best combination by exhaustive search.
The winning submissions for both language
pairs and variants – RTM-DCU – explored features based on the source and target side information. These include distributional similarity, closeness of test instances to the training data, and indicators for translation quality. External data was
used to select “interpretants”, which contain data
close to both training and test sets to provide context for similarity judgements.
In terms of quality labels, one problem observed in previous work on document-level QE
 is the low variation of
scores (in this case, Meteor) across instances of
the dataset. Since the data collected for this task
included translations from many different MT systems, this was not the case. Table 17 shows the average and standard deviation (STDEV) values for
the datasets (both training and test set together).
Although the variation is substantial, the average
value of the training set is a good predictor. In
other words, if we consider the average of the
training set scores as the prediction value for all
data points in the test set, we obtain results as good
as the baseline system. For our datasets, the MAE
ﬁgure for EN-DE is 10, and for DE-EN 7 – the
same as the baseline system. We can only speculate that automatically assigned quality labels
based on reference translations such as Meteor are
not adequate for this task. Other automatic metrics
tend to behave similarly to Meteor for documentlevel . Therefore, ﬁnding
an adequate quality label for document-level QE
remains an open issue. Having humans directly
assign quality labels is much more complex than
in the sentence and word level cases. Annotation
of entire documents, or even paragraphs, becomes
a harder, more subjective and much more costly
task. For future editions of this task, we intend
to collect datasets with human-targeted documentlevel labels obtained indirectly, e.g. through postediting.
No submission focused on exploring learning
Meteor (↑)
Table 17: Average metric scores for automatic metrics in the
corpus for Task 3.
algorithms speciﬁcally targeted at document-level
prediction.
Differences between sentence-level and
document-level QE
The differences between sentence and documentlevel prediction have not been explored to a great
extent. Apart from the discourse-aware features by
USHEF, the baseline and other features explored
by participating teams for document level prediction were simple aggregations of sentence level
feature values.
none of the submitted systems use
sentence-level
predictions
paragraph-level QE. Although this technique
is possible in principle, its effectiveness has
not yet been proved.
 report promising results when using word-level
prediction for sentence-level QE, but inclusive
results when using sentence-level prediction for
document-level QE. They considered BLEU, TER
and Meteor as quality labels, all leading to similar
ﬁndings. Once more the use of inadequate quality
labels for document-level prediction could have
been the reason.
No submission evaluated different machine
learning algorithms for this task. The same algorithms as those used for sentence-level prediction
were applied by all participating teams.
Effect of training data sizes and quality for
sentence and word-level QE
As it was previously mentioned, the post-editions
used for this year’s sentence and word-level tasks
were obtained through a crowdsourcing platform
where translators volunteered to post-edit machine
translations. As such, one can expect that not all
post-editions will reach the highest standards of
professional translation. Manual inspection of a
small sample of the data, however, showed that the
post-editions were high quality, although stylistic differences are evident in some cases. This is
likely due to the fact that different editors, with
different styles and levels of expertise, worked on
different segments. Another factor that may have
inﬂuenced the quality of the post-editions is the
fact that segments were ﬁxed out of context. For
word level, in particular, a potential issue is the
fact that the labelling of the words was done completely automatically, using a tool for alignment
based on minimum edit distance (TER).
On the positive side, this dataset is much larger
dataset than any we have used before for prediction at any level: nearly 12K segments for training/development, as opposed to maximum 2K in
previous years. For sentence-level prediction we
did not expect massive gains from larger datasets,
as it has been shown that small amounts of data
can be as effective or even more effective than the
entire collection, if selected in a clever way . However, it is well known that
data sparsity is an issue for word-level prediction,
so we expected a large dataset to improve results
considerably for this task.
Unfortunately, having access to a large number
of samples did not seem to bring much improvement for word-level predictions accuracy.
main reason for that was the fact that the number of erroneous words in the training data was
too small, as compared to the number of correct
words: 50% of the sentences had zero incorrect
words (15% of the sentences) or fewer than 15%
incorrect words (35% of the sentences). Participants used various data manipulation strategies to
improve results: ﬁltering of the training data, as
in DCU-SHEFF systems, alternative labelling of
the data which discriminates between “OK” label
in the beginning, middle, and end of a good segment, and insertion of additional incorrect words,
as in SAU-KERC submissions. Additionally, most
participants in the word-level task leveraged additional data in some way, which points to the
need for even larger but more varied post-edited
datasets in order to make signiﬁcant progress in
this task.
Automatic Post-editing Task
This year WMT hosted for the ﬁrst time a shared
task on automatic post-editing (APE) for machine
translation. The task requires to automatically correct the errors present in a machine translated text.
As pointed out in Parton et al. and Chatterjee et al. , from the application point of
view, APE components would make it possible to:
• Improve MT output by exploiting information unavailable to the decoder, or by performing deeper text analysis that is too expensive at the decoding stage;
• Cope with systematic errors of an MT system
whose decoding process is not accessible;
• Provide professional translators with improved MT output quality to reduce (human)
post-editing effort;
• Adapt the output of a general-purpose MT
system to the lexicon/style requested in a speciﬁc application domain.
The ﬁrst pilot round of the APE task focused on
the challenges posed by the “black-box” scenario
in which the MT system is unknown and cannot
be modiﬁed. In this scenario, APE methods have
to operate at the downstream level (that is after
MT decoding), by applying either rule-based techniques or statistical approaches that exploit knowledge acquired from human post-editions provided
as training material. The objectives of this pilot
were to: i) deﬁne a sound evaluation framework
for the task, ii) identify and understand the most
critical aspects in terms of data acquisition and
system evaluation, iii) make an inventory of current approaches and evaluate the state of the art
and iv) provide a milestone for future studies on
the problem.
Task description
Participants were provided with training and development data consisting of (source, target, human post-edition) triplets, and were asked to return automatic post-editions for a test set of unseen
(source, target) pairs.
Training, development and test data were created by randomly sampling from a collection
of English-Spanish (source, target, human postedition) triplets drawn from the news domain.22
Instances were sampled after applying a series of
data cleaning steps aimed at removing duplicates
and those triplets in which any of the elements
(source, target, post-edition) was either too long
or too short compared to the others, or included
tags or special problematic symbols.
reason for random sampling was to induce some
homogeneity across the three datasets and, in turn,
22The original triplets were provided by Unbabel (https:
//unbabel.com/).
to increase the chances that correction patterns
learned from the training set can be applied also
to the test set. The downside of losing information yielded by text coherence (an aspect that some
APE systems might take into consideration) has
hence been accepted in exchange for a higher error
repetitiveness across the three datasets. Table 18
provides some basic statistics about the data.
The training and development sets respectively
consist of 11, 272 and 1, 000 instances. In each
• The source (SRC) is a tokenized English
sentence having a length of at least 4 tokens.
This constraint on the source length
was posed in order to increase the chances
to work with grammatically correct full sentences instead of phrases or short keyword
• The target (TGT) is a tokenized Spanish
translation of the source, produced by an unknown MT system;
• The human post-edition (PE) is a manuallyrevised version of the target. PEs were collected by means of a crowdsourcing platform
developed by the data provider.
Test data (1, 817 instances) consists of (source,
target) pairs having similar characteristics of those
in the training set. Human post-editions of the test
target instances were left apart to measure system
performance.
The data creation procedure adopted, as well as
the origin and the domain of the texts pose speciﬁc
challenges to the participating systems. As discussed in Section 5.4, the results of this pilot task
can be partially explained in light of such challenges. This dataset, however, has three major advantages that made it suitable for the ﬁrst APE pilot: i) it is relatively large (hence suitable to apply
statistical methods), ii) it was not previously published (hence usable for a fair evaluation), iii) it is
freely available (hence easy to distribute and use
for evaluation purposes).
Evaluation metric
System performance is evaluated by computing the distance between automatic and human
post-editions of the machine-translated sentences
present in the test set (i.e. for each of the 1,817
target test sentences). This distance is measured
in terms of Translation Error Rate (TER) , an evaluation metric commonly
used in MT-related tasks (e.g. in quality estimation) to measure the minimum edit distance between an automatic translation and a reference
translation.23 Systems are ranked based on the average TER calculated on the test set by using the
TERcom24 software: lower average TER scores
correspond to higher ranks.
Each run is evaluated in two modes, namely: i) case insensitive and
ii) case sensitive. Evaluation scripts to compute
TER scores in both modalities have been made
available to participants through the APE task web
The ofﬁcial baseline is calculated by averaging the
distances computed between the raw MT output
and the human post-edits. In practice, the baseline APE system is a system that leaves all the
test targets unmodiﬁed.26 Baseline results computed for both evaluation modalities (case sensitive/insensitive) are reported in Tables 20 and 21.
Monolingual translation as another term of
comparison.
To get further insights about the
progress with respect to previous APE methods, participants’ results are also analysed with
respect to another term of comparison:
a reimplementation of the state-of-the-art approach
ﬁrstly proposed by Simard et al. .27
this purpose, a phrase-based SMT system based
on Moses is used.
Translation and reordering models were estimated following the Moses protocol with default setup using MGIZA++ for word
alignment. For language modeling we used the
23Edit distance is calculated as the number of edits (word
insertions, deletions, substitutions, and shifts) divided by the
number of words in the reference. Lower TER values indicate
better MT quality.
24 
25 
26In this case, since edit distance is computed between
each machine-translated sentence and its human-revised version, the actual evaluation metric is the human-targeted TER
(HTER). For the sake of clarity, since TER and HTER compute edit distance in the same way (the only difference is in
the origin of correct sentence used for comparison), henceforth we will use TER to refer to both metrics.
27This is done based on the description provided in Simard
et al. . Our re-implementation, however, is not meant
to ofﬁcially represent such approach. Discrepancies with the
actual method are indeed possible due to our misinterpretation or to wrong guesses about details that are missing in the
Train (11,272)
Dev (1,000)
Test (1,817)
Table 18: Data statistics.
KenLM toolkit for standard ngram modeling with an n-gram length of 5. Finally, the APE system was tuned on the development set, optimizing TER with Minimum Error Rate Training . The results of this
additional term of comparison, computed for both
evaluation modalities (case sensitive/insensitive),
are also reported in Tables 20 and 21.
For each submitted run, the statistical signiﬁcance of performance differences with respect to
the baseline and the re-implementation of Simard
et al. is calculated with the bootstrap
test .
Participants
Four teams participated in the APE pilot task by
submitting a total of seven runs. Participants are
listed in Table 19; a short description of their systems is provided in the following.
Abu-MaTran.
The Abu-MaTran team submitted the output of two statistical post-editing
(SPE) systems,
both relying on the MOSES
phrase-based statistical machine translation toolkit
 and on sentence level classiﬁers.
The ﬁrst element of the pipeline, the
SPE system, is trained on the automatic translation of the News Commentary v8 corpus from
English to Spanish aligned with its reference.
This translation is obtained with an out-of-thebox phrase-based SMT system trained on Europarl
v7. Both translation and post-editing systems use
a 5-gram Spanish LM with modiﬁed Kneser-Ney
smoothed trained on News Crawl 2011 and 2012
with KenLM . For the second element of the pipeline, a binary classiﬁer to select
the best translation between the given MT output
or its automatic post-edition is used. Two different
approaches are investigated: a 180-hand-craftedbased regression model trained with a Support
Vector Machine (SVM) with a radial basis function kernel to estimate the sentence-level HTER
score, and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
classiﬁer using context word embeddings as input
and classifying each word of a sentence as good
or bad. An automatic translation to be post-edited
is ﬁrst decoded by our SPE system, then fed into
one of the classiﬁers identiﬁed as SVM180feat and
RNN. The HTER estimator selects the translation
with the lower score while the binary word-level
classiﬁer selects the translation with the fewer
amount of bad tags. The ofﬁcial evaluation of the
shared task show an advantage of the RNN approach compared to SVM.
The two runs submitted by FBK are based on combining the
statistical phrase-based post-editing approach proposed by Simard et al. and its most signiﬁcant variant proposed by B´echara et al. .
The APE systems are built-in an incremental manner. At each stage of the APE pipeline, the best
conﬁguration of a component is decided and then
used in the next stage. The APE pipeline begins
with the selection of the best language model from
several language models trained on different types
and quantities of data. The next stage addresses
the possible data sparsity issues raised by the relatively small size of the training data. Indeed, an
analysis of the original phrase table obtained from
the training set revealed that a large part of its entries is composed of instances that occur only once
in the training. This has the obvious effect of collecting potentially unreliable “translation” (or, in
the case of APE, correction) rules. The problem is
exacerbated by the “context-aware” approach proposed by B´echara et al. , which builds the
phrase table by joining source and target tokens
thus breaking down the co-occurrence counts into
smaller numbers. To cope with this problem, a
novel feature (neg-impact) is designed to prune the
phrase table by measuring the usefulness of each
translation. The higher is the value of the negimpact feature, the less useful is the translation
option. After pruning, the ﬁnal stage of the APE
pipeline tries to raise the capability of the decoder
to select the correct translation rule by the introduction of new task speciﬁc features integrated in
Participating team
Abu-MaTran
Abu-MaTran Project (Prompsit)
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy 
Laboratoire d’Informatique pour la M´ecanique et les Sciences de
l’Ing´enieur, France 
USAAR-SAPE
Saarland University, Germany & Jadavpur University, India 
Table 19: Participants in the WMT15 Automatic Post-editing pilot task.
the model. These features measure the similarity
and the reliability of the translation options and
help to improve the precision of the resulting APE
For the ﬁrst edition of the APE shared
task LIMSI submitted two systems . The ﬁrst one is based on the approach
of Simard et al. and considers the APE task
as a monolingual translation between a translation hypothesis and its post-edition. This straightforward approach does not succeed in improving
translation quality. The second submitted system
implements a series of sieves, each applying a simple post-editing rule. The deﬁnition of these rules
is based on an analysis of the most frequent error corrections and aims at: i) predicting word
case; ii) predicting exclamation and interrogation
marks; and iii) predicting verbal endings. Experiments with this approach show that this system
also hurts translation quality. An in-depth analysis revealed that this negative result is mainly explained by two reasons: i) most of the post-edition
operations are nearly unique, which makes very
difﬁcult to generalize from a small amount of data;
and ii) even when they are not, the high variability
of post-editing, already pointed out by Wisniewski
et al. , results in predicting legitimate corrections that have not been made by the annotators, therefore preventing from improving over the
USAAR-SAPE.
USAAR-SAPE
system is designed with three basic
components: corpus preprocessing, hybrid word
alignment and a state-of-the-art phrase-based
SMT system integrated with the hybrid word
alignment.
The preprocessing of the training
corpus is carried out by stemming the Spanish
MT output and the PE data using Freeling . The hybrid word alignment method combines different kinds of word
alignment:
GIZA++ word alignment with the
grow-diag-ﬁnal-and (GDFA) heuristic , SymGiza++ , the Berkeley aligner ,
and the edit distance-based aligners . These different
word alignment tables are
combined by a mathematical union method. For
the phrase-based SMT system various maximum
phrase lengths for the translation model and
n–gram settings for the language model are used.
The best results in terms of BLEU score are achieved by a maximum phrase
length of 7 for the translation model and a 5-gram
language model.
The ofﬁcial results achieved by the participating
systems are reported in Tables 20 and 21. The
seven runs submitted are sorted based on the average TER they achieve on test data. Table 20 shows
the results computed in case sensitive mode, while
Table 21 provides scores computed in the case insensitive mode.
Both rankings reveal an unexpected outcome:
none of the submitted runs was able to beat the
baselines (i.e. average TER scores of 22.91 and
22.22 respectively for case sensitive and case insensitive modes). All differences with respect to
such baselines, moreover, are statistically significant. In practice, this means that what the systems learned from the available data was not reliable enough to yield valid corrections of the test
instances. A deeper discussion about the possible
causes of this unexpected outcome is provided in
Section 5.4.
Unsurprisingly, for all participants the case insensitive evaluation results are slightly better than
the case sensitive ones. Although the two rankings are not identical, none of the systems was
particularly penalized by the case sensitive evaluation. Indeed, individual differences in the two
modes are always close to the same value (∼0.7
TER difference) measured for the two baselines.
FBK Primary
LIMSI Primary
USAAR-SAPE
LIMSI Contrastive
Abu-MaTran Primary
FBK Contrastive
 
Abu-MaTran Contrastive
Ofﬁcial results for the WMT15 Automatic
Post-editing task – average TER (↓) case sensitive.
LIMSI Primary
FBK Primary
USAAR-SAPE
Abu-MaTran Primary
LIMSI Contrastive
FBK Contrastive
 
Abu-MaTran Contrastive
Ofﬁcial results for the WMT15 Automatic
Post-editing task – average TER (↓) case insensitive.
In light of this, and considering the importance of
case sensitive evaluation in some language settings
(e.g. having German as target), future rounds of
the task will likely prioritize this more strict evaluation mode.
Overall, the close results achieved by participants reﬂect the fact that, despite some small variations, all systems share the same underlying statistical approach of Simard et al. . As anticipated in Section 5.1, in order to get a rough
idea about the extent of the improvements over
such state-of-the-art method, we replicated it and
considered its results as another term of comparison in addition to the baselines. As shown in Tables 20 and 21, the performance results achieved
by our implementation of Simard et al. are
23.839 and 23.130 in terms of TER for the respective case sensitive and insensitive evaluations.
Compared to these scores, most of the submitted
runs achieve better performance, with positive average TER differences that are always statistically
signiﬁcant. We interpret this as a good sign: despite the difﬁculty of the task, the novelties introduced by each system allowed to make signiﬁcant steps forward with respect to a prior reference
technique.
Discussion
To better understand the results and gain useful insights about this pilot evaluation round, we perform two types of analysis. The ﬁrst one is focused
on the data, and aims to understand the possible
reasons of the difﬁculty of the task. In particular,
by analysing the challenges posed by the origin
and the domain of the text material used, we try
to ﬁnd indications for future rounds of the APE
task. The second type of analysis focuses on the
systems and their behaviour. Although they share
the same underlying approach and achieve similar
results, we aim to check if interesting differences
can be captured by a more ﬁne grained analysis
that goes beyond rough TER measurements.
Data analysis
In this section we investigate the possible relation between participants’ results and the nature
of the data used in this pilot task (e.g.
quantity, sparsity, domain and origin) . For this purpose, we take advantage of a new dataset – the
Autodesk Post-Editing Data corpus28 – which has
been publicly released after the organisation of the
APE pilot task. Although it was not usable for
this ﬁrst round, its characteristics make it particularly suitable for our analysis purposes. In particular: i) Autodesk data predominantly covers the
domain of software user manuals (that is, a
restricted domain compared to a general one like
news), and ii) post-edits come from professional
translators (that is, at least in principle, a more reliable source of corrections compared to crowdsourced workforce). To guarantee a fair comparison, English-Spanish (source, target, human postedition) triplets drawn from the Autodesk corpus
are split in training, development and test sets under the constraint that the total number of target
words and the TER in each set should be similar
to the APE task splits. In this setting, performance
differences between systems trained on the two
datasets will only depend on the different nature
of the data (e.g. domain). Statistics of the training
sets are reported in Table 22 (those concerning the
( 
Autodesk-PostEditing)
source-MT/TM target segments post-edited into several
languages (Chinese, Czech, French, German, Hungarian,
Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Brazilian Portuguese,
Russian, Spanish) with between 30K to 410K segments per
Table 22: WMT APe Task and Autodesk training data statistics.
APE task data are the same of Table 18).
The impact of data sparsity.
A key issue in
most evaluation settings is the representativeness
of the training data with respect to the test set used.
In the case of the statistical approach at the core of
all the APE task submissions, this issue is even
more relevant given the limited amount of training data available. In the APE scenario, data representativeness relates to the fact that the correction patterns learned from the training set can be
applied also to the test set (as mentioned in Section 5.1, in the data creation phase random sampling from an original data collection was applied
for this purpose). From this point of view, dealing
with restricted domains such as software user
manuals should be easier than working with news
data. Indeed, restricted domains are more likely
to feature smaller vocabularies, be more repetitive
(or, in other terms, less sparse) and, in turn, determine a higher applicability of the learned error
correction patterns.
To check the relation between task difﬁculty and
data repetitiveness, we compared different monolingual indicators (i.e. number of types and lemmas, and repetition rate29 – RR) computed on the
APE and the Autodesk source, target and postedited sentences. Although both the datasets have
the same amount of target tokens, Table 22 shows
that the APE training set has nearly double of
types and lemmas compared to the Autodesk data,
29Repetition rate measures the repetitiveness inside a text
by looking at the rate of non-singleton n-gram types (n=1. .
.4) and combining them using the geometric mean. Larger
value means more repetitions in the text. For more details
see Cettolo et al. 
which indicates the presence of less repeated information. A similar conclusion can be drawn by
observing that the Autodesk dataset has a repetition rate that is more than twice the value computed for the APE task data.
This monolingual analysis does not provide any
information about the level of repetitiveness of the
correction patterns made by the post-editors, because it does not link the target and the post-edited
sentences. To investigate this aspect, two instances
of the re-implemented approach of Simard et al.
 introduced in Section 5.1 are respectively
trained on the APE and the Autodesk training sets.
We consider the distribution of the frequency of
the translation options in the phrase table as a good
indicator of the level of repetitiveness of the corrections in the data. For instance, a large number
of translation options that appear just one or only
few times in the data indicates a higher level of
sparseness. As expected due to the limited size
of the training set, the vast majority of the translation options in both phrase tables are singletons
as shown in Table 23. Nevertheless, the Autodesk
phrase table is more compact (731k versus 1,066k)
and contains 10% fewer singletons than the APE
task phrase table. This conﬁrms that the APE task
data is more sparse and suggests that it might be
easier to learn more applicable correction patterns
from the Autodesk domain-speciﬁc data.
To verify this last statement, the two APE systems are evaluated on their own test sets. As previously shown, the system trained on the APE task
data is not able to improve over the performance
achieved by a system that leaves all the test targets
unmodiﬁed (see Table 20). On the contrary, starting from a baseline of 23.57, the system trained
on the Autodesk data is able to reduce the TER by
3.55 points (20.02). Interestingly, the Autodesk
APE system is able to correctly ﬁx the target sentences and improve the TER by 1.43 points even
with only 25% of the training data.
These results conﬁrm our intuitions about the usefulness of
repetitive data and show that, at least in restricteddomain scenarios, automatic post-editing can be
successfully used as an aid to improve the output
of an MT system.
Professional vs.
Crowdsourced post-editions
Differently from the Autodesk data, for which the
post-editions are created by professional translators, the APE task data contains crowdsourced MT
corrections collected from unknown translators. One risk, given the high variability of valid MT corrections, is that the crowdsourced workforce follows post-editing attitudes
and criteria that differ from those of professional
translators.
Professionals tend to: i) maximize
productivity by doing only the necessary and suf-
ﬁcient corrections to improve translation quality,
and ii) follow consistent translation criteria, especially for domain terminology.
Such a tendency will likely result in coherent and minimally
post-edited data from which learning and drawing statistics is easier. This is not guaranteed by
crowdsourced workers which do not have speciﬁc
time or consistency constraints. This suggests that
non-professional post-editions and the correction
patterns learned from them will feature less coherence, higher noise and higher sparsity.
To assess the potential impact of these issues on
data representativeness (and, in turn, on the task
difﬁculty), we analyse a subset of the APE test instances (221 triples randomly sampled) in which
target sentences were post-edited by professional
translators. The analysis focuses on TER scores
computed between:
1. The target sentences and their crowdsourced
post-editions (avg. TER = 26.02);
2. The target sentences and their professional
post-editions (avg. TER = 23.85);
3. The crowdsourced post-editions and the professional ones, using the latter as references
(avg. TER = 29.18).
The measured values indicate an attitude of nonprofessionals to correct more often and differently from the professional translators. Interestingly, and similar to the ﬁndings of Potet et al.
 , crowdsourced post-editions feature a distance from the professional ones that is even
higher than the distance between the original target sentences and the experts’ corrections (29.18
vs. 23.85). If we consider the output of professional translators as a gold standard (made of coherent and minimally post-edited data), these ﬁgures suggest a higher difﬁculty in handling crowdsourced corrections.
Further insights can be drawn from the analysis of the word level corrections produced by
the two translator proﬁles. To this aim, word insertions, deletions, substitutions and phrase shifts
are extracted using the TERcom software similar
to Blain et al. and Wisniewski et al. .
For each error type, the ratio between the number of edit operations and the total number of occurred errors operations performed is computed.
This quantity provides us with a measure of the
level of repetitiveness of the errors, with 100%
indicating that all the error patterns are unique,
and small values indicating that most of the errors
are repeated. Our results show that non-experts
have generally larger ratio values than the professional translators (insertion +6%, substitution
+4%, deletion +4%). This seems to support our
hypothesis that, independently from their quality,
post-editions collected from non-experts are less
coherent than those derived from professionals.
It is unlikely that different crowdsourced workers will apply the same corrections in the same
contexts. If this hypothesis holds, the difﬁculty
of this APE pilot task could be partially ascribed
to this unavoidable intrinsic property of crowdsourced data. This aspect, however, should be further investigated to draw deﬁnite conclusions.
System/performance analysis
The TER results presented in Tables 20 and 21 evidence small differences between participants, but
they do not shed light on the real behaviour of the
systems. To this aim, in this section the submitted
runs are analysed by taking into consideration the
changes made by each system to the test instances
(case sensitive evaluation mode). In particular, Table 24 provides the number of modiﬁed, improved
and deteriorated sentences, together with the percentage of edit operations performed 
Table 24: Number of test sentences modiﬁed, improved and deteriorated by each submitted run, together with the corresponding percentage of insertions, deletions, substitutions and shifts (case sensitive).
deletions, substitutions, shifts). Looking at these
numbers, the following conclusions can be drawn.
Although it varies considerably between the submitted runs, the number of modiﬁed sentences is
quite small. Moreover, a general trend can be observed: the best systems are the most conservative
ones. This situation likely reﬂects the aforementioned data sparsity and coherence issues. A small
fraction of the correction patterns found in the
training set seems to be applicable also to the test
set, and the risk of performing corrections that are
either wrong, redundant, or different from those in
the reference post-editions is rather high.
From the system point of view, the context in
which a learned correction pattern will be applied
is crucial. For instance, the same word substitution (e.g. “house” →“home”) is not applicable in
all contexts. While sometimes it will be necessary
(Example 1: “The house team won the match”), in
some contexts it is optional (Example 2: “I was in
my house”) or wrong (Example 3: “He worked for
a brokerage house”). Unfortunately, the unnecessary word replacement in Example 2 (human posteditors would likely leave it untouched) would increase the TER of the sentence exactly as in the
clearly wrong replacement in Example 3.
From the evaluation point of view, not penalising such correct but unnecessary corrections is
also crucial. Similar to MT, where a source sentence can have many valid translations, in the APE
task a target sentence can have many valid posteditions. Indeed, nothing prevents that in our evaluation some correct post-editions are considered
as “deteriorated” sentences simply because they
differ from the human post-editions used as references. As in MT, this well known variability
problem might penalise good systems, thus calling for alternative evaluation criteria (e.g. based
on multiple references or sensitive to paraphrase
Interestingly, for all the systems the
number of modiﬁed sentences is higher than the
sum of the improved and the deteriorated ones.
Such difference is represented by modiﬁed sentences for which the corrections do not yield TER
variations. This grey area makes the evaluation
problem related to variability even more evident.
The analysis of the edit operations performed by
each system is not particularly informative. Similar to the overall performance results, also the
proportion of correction types they perform re-
ﬂects the adoption of the same underlying statistical approach. The distribution of the four types of
edit operations is almost identical, with a predominance lexical substitutions (55.7%-57.7%) and
rather few phrasal shifts (8.0%-8.6%).
Lessons learned and outlook
The objectives of this pilot APE task were to: i)
deﬁne a sound evaluation framework for future
rounds, ii) identify and understand the most critical aspects in terms of data acquisition and system
evaluation, iii) make an inventory of current approaches, evaluate the state of the art and iv) provide a milestone for future studies on the problem.
With respect to the ﬁrst point, improving the evaluation is possible, but no major issues emerged
or requested radical changes in future evaluation
rounds. For instance, using multiple references or
a metric sensitive to paraphrase matches to cope
with variability in the post-editing would certainly
Concerning the most critical aspects of the evaluation, our analysis highlighted the strong dependence of system results on data repetitiveness/representativeness.
This calls into question the actual usability of text material coming
from general domains like news and, probably, of
post-editions collected from crowdsourced workers (this aspect, however, should be further investigated to draw deﬁnite conclusions). Nevertheless,
it’s worth noting that collecting a large, unpublished, public, domain-speciﬁc and professionalquality dataset is a hardly achievable goal that will
always require compromise solutions.
Regarding the approaches proposed, this ﬁrst
experience was a conservative but, at the same
time, promising ﬁrst step. Although participants
performed the task sharing the same statistical approach to APE, the slight variants they explored allowed them to outperform the widely used monolingual translation technique. Moreover, results’
analysis also suggests a possible limitation of this
state-of-the-art approach: by always performing
all the applicable correction patterns, it runs the
risk of deteriorating the input translations that it
was supposed to improve. This limitation, common to all the participating systems, is a clue of
a major difference between the APE task and the
MT framework. In MT the system must always
process the entire source sentence by translating
all of its words into the target language. In the
APE scenario, instead, the system has another option for each word: keeping it untouched. A reasonable (and this year unbeaten) baseline is in
fact a system that applies this conservative strategy for all the words. By raising this and other
issues as promising research directions, attracting
researchers’ attention to a challenging applicationoriented task, and establishing a sound evaluation
framework to measure future advancements, this
pilot has substantially achieved its goals, paving
the way for future rounds of the APE evaluation
Acknowledgments
MosesCore, QT21, EXPERT and CRACKER
projects funded by the European Commission (7th
Framework Programme and H2020).
We would also like to thank Unbabel for providing the data used in the QE Tasks 1 and 2, and
in the APE task.