Material Recognition in the Wild with the Materials in Context Database
Sean Bell∗
Paul Upchurch∗
Noah Snavely
Kavita Bala
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
{sbell,paulu,snavely,kb}@cs.cornell.edu
Recognizing materials in real-world images is a challenging task. Real-world materials have rich surface texture,
geometry, lighting conditions, and clutter, which combine
to make the problem particularly difﬁcult. In this paper, we
introduce a new, large-scale, open dataset of materials in
the wild, the Materials in Context Database (MINC), and
combine this dataset with deep learning to achieve material
recognition and segmentation of images in the wild.
MINC is an order of magnitude larger than previous material databases, while being more diverse and well-sampled
across its 23 categories. Using MINC, we train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for two tasks: classifying
materials from patches, and simultaneous material recognition and segmentation in full images. For patch-based classiﬁcation on MINC we found that the best performing CNN
architectures can achieve 85.2% mean class accuracy. We
convert these trained CNN classiﬁers into an efﬁcient fully
convolutional framework combined with a fully connected
conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) to predict the material at
every pixel in an image, achieving 73.1% mean class accuracy. Our experiments demonstrate that having a large,
well-sampled dataset such as MINC is crucial for real-world
material recognition and segmentation.
1. Introduction
Material recognition plays a critical role in our understanding of and interactions with the world. To tell whether
a surface is easy to walk on, or what kind of grip to use
to pick up an object, we must recognize the materials that
make up our surroundings. Automatic material recognition
can be useful in a variety of applications, including robotics,
product search, and image editing for interior design. But recognizing materials in real-world images is very challenging.
Many categories of materials, such as fabric or wood, are
visually very rich and span a diverse range of appearances.
Materials can further vary in appearance due to lighting and
shape. Some categories, such as plastic and ceramic, are of-
∗Authors contributed equally
Transfer weights
(discretely
optimized)
OpenSurfaces
(a) Constructing MINC
(b) Patch material classification
(c) Full scene material classification
P(material)
Figure 1. Overview. (a) We construct a new dataset by combining
OpenSurfaces with a novel three-stage Amazon Mechanical
Turk (AMT) pipeline. (b) We train various CNNs on patches from
MINC to predict material labels. (c) We transfer the weights to a
fully convolutional CNN to efﬁciently generate a probability map
across the image; we then use a fully connected CRF to predict the
material at every pixel.
ten smooth and featureless, requiring reasoning about subtle
cues or context to differentiate between them.
Large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet , SUN 
and Places ) combined with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been key to recent breakthroughs in
object recognition and scene classiﬁcation. Material recognition is similarly poised for advancement through large-scale
data and learning. To date, progress in material recognition
has been facilitated by moderate-sized datasets like the Flickr
Material Database (FMD) . FMD contains ten material
categories, each with 100 samples drawn from Flickr photos.
These images were carefully selected to illustrate a wide
range of appearances for these categories. FMD has been
used in research on new features and learning methods for
material perception and recognition . While
FMD was an important step towards material recognition, it
is not sufﬁcient for classifying materials in real-world im-
 
agery. This is due to the relatively small set of categories,
the relatively small number of images per category, and also
because the dataset has been designed around hand-picked
iconic images of materials. The OpenSurfaces dataset 
addresses some of these problems by introducing 105,000
material segmentations from real-world images, and is signiﬁcantly larger than FMD. However, in OpenSurfaces many
material categories are under-sampled, with only tens of
A major contribution of our paper is a new, well-sampled
material dataset, called the Materials in Context Database
(MINC), with 3 million material samples. MINC is more
diverse, has more examples in less common categories, and
is much larger than existing datasets. MINC draws data from
both Flickr images, which include many “regular” scenes,
as well as Houzz images from professional photographers of
staged interiors. These sources of images each have different
characteristics that together increase the range of materials
that can be recognized. See Figure 2 for examples of our
data. We make our full dataset available online at http:
//minc.cs.cornell.edu/.
We use this data for material recognition by training different CNN architectures on this new dataset. We perform
experiments that illustrate the effect of network architecture, image context, and training data size on subregions
(i.e., patches) of a full scene image. Further, we build on
our patch classiﬁcation results and demonstrate simultaneous material recognition and segmentation of an image by
performing dense classiﬁcation over the image with a fully
connected conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) model . By
replacing the fully connected layers of the CNN with convolutional layers , the computational burden is signiﬁcantly
lower than a naive sliding window approach.
In summary, we make two new contributions:
• We introduce a new material dataset, MINC, and 3stage crowdsourcing pipeline for efﬁciently collecting
millions of click labels (Section 3.2).
• Our new semantic segmentation method combines a
fully-connected CRF with unary predictions based on
CNN learned features (Section 4.2) for simultaneous
material recognition and segmentation.
2. Prior Work
Material Databases. Much of the early work on material
recognition focused on classifying speciﬁc instances of textures or material samples. For instance, the CUReT 
database contains 61 material samples, each captured under
205 different lighting and viewing conditions. This led to
research on the task of instance-level texture or material classiﬁcation , and an appreciation of the challenges of
building features that are invariant to pose and illumination.
Later, databases with more diverse examples from each material category began to appear, such as KTH-TIPS ,
and led explorations of how to generalize from one example
of a material to another—from one sample of wood to a completely different sample, for instance. Real-world texture
attributes have also recently been explored .
In the domain of categorical material databases, Sharan et
al. released FMD (described above). Subsequently,
Bell et al. released OpenSurfaces which contains over
20,000 real-world scenes labeled with both materials and objects, using a multi-stage crowdsourcing pipeline. Because
OpenSurfaces images are drawn from consumer photos on
Flickr, material samples have real-world context, in contrast
to prior databases (CUReT, KTH-TIPS, FMD) which feature cropped stand-alone samples. While OpenSurfaces is a
good starting point for a material database, we substantially
expand it with millions of new labels.
Material recognition. Much prior work on material recognition has focused on the classiﬁcation problem (categorizing
an image patch into a set of material categories), often using
hand-designed image features. For FMD, Liu et al. introduced reﬂectance-based edge features in conjunction with
other general image features. Hu et al. proposed features based on variances of oriented gradients. Qi et al. 
introduced a pairwise local binary pattern (LBP) feature.
Li et al. synthesized a dataset based on KTH-TIPS2
and built a classiﬁer from LBP and dense SIFT. Timofte et
al. proposed a classiﬁcation framework with minimal
parameter optimization. Schwartz and Nishino introduced material traits that incorporate learned convolutional
auto-encoder features. Recently, Cimpoi et al. developed a CNN and improved Fisher vector (IFV) classiﬁer that
achieves state-of-the-art results on FMD and KTH-TIPS2.
Finally, it has been shown that jointly predicting objects and
materials can improve performance .
Convolutional neural networks. While CNNs have been
around for a few decades, with early successes such as
LeNet , they have only recently led to state-of-theart results in object classiﬁcation and detection, leading
to enormous progress.
Driven by the ILSVRC challenge , we have seen many successful CNN architectures , led by the work of Krizhevsky et al.
on their SuperVision (a.k.a. AlexNet) network , with
more recent architectures including GoogLeNet . In addition to image classiﬁcation, CNNs are the state-of-the-art
for detection and localization of objects, with recent work
including R-CNNs , Overfeat , and VGG . Finally, relevant to our goal of per-pixel material segmentation,
Farabet et al. use a multi-scale CNN to predict the class
at every pixel in a segmentation. Oquab et al. employ a
sliding window approach to localize patch classiﬁcation of
objects. We build on this body of work in deep learning to
solve our problem of material recognition and segmentation.
Pol. stone
Figure 2. Example patches from all 23 categories of the Materials in Context Database (MINC). Note that we sample patches so that the
patch center is the material in question (and not necessarily the entire patch). See Table 1 for the size of each category.
3. The Materials in Context Database (MINC)
We now describe the methodology that went into building
our new material database. Why a new database? We needed
a dataset with the following properties:
• Size: It should be sufﬁciently large that learning methods can generalize beyond the training set.
• Well-sampled: Rare categories should be represented
with a large number of examples.
• Diversity: Images should span a wide range of appearances of each material in real-world settings.
• Number of categories: It should contain many different materials found in the real world.
3.1. Sources of data
We decided to start with the public, crowdsourced
OpenSurfaces dataset as the seed for MINC since it is
drawn from Flickr imagery of everyday, real-world scenes
with reasonable diversity. Furthermore, it has a large number
of categories and the most samples of all prior databases.
While OpenSurfaces data is a good start, it has a few limitations. Many categories in OpenSurfaces are not well sampled. While the largest category, wood, has nearly 20K samples, smaller categories, such as water, have only tens of examples. This imbalance is due to the way the OpenSurfaces
dataset was annotated; workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) were free to choose any material subregion to segment. Workers often gravitated towards certain common
types of materials or salient objects, rather than being encouraged to label a diverse set of materials. Further, the
images come from a single source (Flickr).
We decided to augment OpenSurfaces with substantially
more data, especially for underrepresented material categories, with the initial goal of gathering at least 10K samples
per material category. We decided to gather this data from
another source of imagery, professional photos on the interior design website Houzz (houzz.com). Our motivation for
using this different source of data was that, despite Houzz
photos being more “staged” (relative to Flickr photos), they
actually represent a larger variety of materials. For instance,
Houzz photos contain a wide range of types of polished
stone. With these sources of image data, we now describe
how we gather material annotations.
3.2. Segments, Clicks, and Patches
What speciﬁc kinds of material annotations make for a
good database? How should we collect these annotations?
The type of annotations to collect is guided in large part by
the tasks we wish to generate training data for. For some
tasks such as scene recognition, whole-image labels can
sufﬁce . For object detection, labeled bounding
boxes as in PASCAL are often used . For segmentation or
scene parsing tasks, per-pixel segmentations are required . Each style of annotation comes with a cost proportional
to its complexity. For materials, we decided to focus on two
problems, guided by prior work:
• Patch material classiﬁcation. Given an image patch,
what kind of material is it at the center?
• Full scene material classiﬁcation. Given a full image, produce a full per-pixel segmentation and labeling.
Also known as semantic segmentation or scene parsing
(but in our case, focused on materials). Note that classi-
ﬁcation can be a component of segmentation, e.g., with
sliding window approaches.
(a) Which images
contain wood?
(b) Click on 3
points of wood
(c) What is this
Figure 3. AMT pipeline schematic for collecting clicks.
Workers ﬁlter by images that contain a certain material, (b) workers click on materials, and (c) workers validate click locations by
re-labeling each point. Example responses are shown in orange.
Segments. OpenSurfaces contains material segmentations—
carefully drawn polygons that enclose same-material regions.
To form the basis of MINC, we selected OpenSurfaces segments with high conﬁdence (inter-worker agreement) and
manually curated segments with low conﬁdence, giving a
total of 72K shapes. To better balance the categories, we
manually segmented a few hundred extra samples for sky,
foliage and water.
Since some of the OpenSurfaces categories are difﬁcult
for humans, we consolidated these categories. We found
that many AMT workers could not disambiguate stone from
concrete, clear plastic from opaque plastic, and granite
from marble. Therefore, we merged these into stone, plastic,
and polished stone respectively. Without this merging, many
ground truth examples in these categories would be incorrect.
The ﬁnal list of 23 categories is shown in Table 1. The
category other is different in that it was created by combining
various smaller categories.
Clicks. Since we want to expand our dataset to millions
of samples, we decided to augment OpenSurfaces segments
by collecting clicks: single points in an image along with a
material label, which are much cheaper and faster to collect.
Figure 3 shows our pipeline for collecting clicks.
Initially, we tried asking workers to click on examples
of a given material in a photo. However, we found that
workers would get frustrated if the material was absent in
too many of the photos. Thus, we added an initial ﬁrst
stage where workers ﬁlter out such photos. To increase
the accuracy of our labels, we verify the click labels by
asking different workers to specify the material for each
click without providing them with the label from the previous
To ensure that we obtain high quality annotations and
avoid collecting labels from workers who are not making an
effort, we include secret known answers (sentinels) in the
ﬁrst and third stages, and block workers with an accuracy
below 50% and 85% respectively. We do not use sentinels
in the second stage since it would require per-pixel ground
truth labels, and it turned out not to be necessary. Workers
generally performed all three tasks so we could identify bad
workers in the ﬁrst or third task.
Polished stone
Table 1. MINC patch counts by category. Patches were created
from both OpenSurfaces segments and our newly collected clicks.
See Section 3.2 for details.
Material clicks were collected for both OpenSurfaces
images and the new Houzz images. This allowed us to use
labels from OpenSurfaces to generate the sentinel data; we
included 4 sentinels per task. With this streamlined pipeline
we collected 2,341,473 annotations at an average cost of
$0.00306 per annotation (stage 1: $0.02 / 40 images, stage
2: $0.10 / 50 images, 2, stage 3: $0.10 / 50 points).
Patches. Labeled segments and clicks form the core of
MINC. For training CNNs and other types of classiﬁers,
it is useful to have data in the form of ﬁxed-sized patches.
We convert both forms of data into a uniﬁed dataset format:
square image patches. We use a patch center and patch scale
(a multiplier of the smaller image dimension) to deﬁne the
image subregion that makes a patch. For our patch classi-
ﬁcation experiments, we use 23.3% of the smaller image
dimension. Increasing the patch scale provides more context
but reduces the spatial resolution. Later in Section 5 we
justify our choice with experiments that vary the patch scale
for AlexNet.
We place a patch centered around each click label. For
each segment, if we were to place a patch at every interior
pixel then we would have a very large and redundant dataset.
Therefore, we Poisson-disk subsample each segment, separating patch centers by at least 9.1% of the smaller image
dimension. These segments generated 655,201 patches (an
average of 9.05 patches per segment). In total, we generated 2,996,674 labeled patches from 436,749 images. Patch
counts are shown in Table 1, and example patches from
various categories are illustrated in Figure 2.
4. Material recognition in real-world images
Our goal is to train a system that recognizes the material
at every pixel in an image. We split our training procedure
into multiple stages and analyze the performance of the
network at each stage. First, we train a CNN that produces a
single prediction for a given input patch. Then, we convert
the CNN into a sliding window and predict materials on a
dense grid across the image. We do this at multiple scales
and average to obtain a unary term. Finally, a dense CRF
 combines the unary term with fully connected pairwise
reasoning to output per-pixel material predictions. The entire
system is depicted in Figure 1, and described more below.
(a) Multiscale input
(b) Probability map (12 of 23 shown)
(c) Predicted labels
Figure 4. Pipeline for full scene material classiﬁcation. An image (a) is resized to multiple scales [1/
2]. The same sliding CNN
predicts a probability map (b) across the image for each scale; the results are upsampled and averaged. A fully connected CRF predicts a
ﬁnal label for each pixel (c). This example shows predictions from a single GoogLeNet converted into a sliding CNN (no average pooling).
4.1. Training procedure
MINC contains 3 million patches that we split into training, validation and test sets. Randomly splitting would result
in nearly identical patches (e.g., from the same OpenSurfaces segment) being put in training and test, thus inﬂating
the test score. To prevent correlation, we group photos into
clusters of near-duplicates, then assign each cluster to one
of train, validate or test. We make sure that there are at least
75 segments of each category in the test set to ensure there
are enough segments to evaluate segmentation accuracy. To
detect near-duplicates, we compare AlexNet CNN features
computed from each photo (see the supplemental for details).
For exact duplicates, we discard all but one of the copies.
We train all of our CNNs by ﬁne-tuning the network
starting from the weights obtained by training on 1.2 million images from ImageNet (ILSVRC2012). When training
AlexNet, we use stochastic gradient descent with batchsize
128, dropout rate 0.5, momentum 0.9, and a base learning
rate of 10−3 that decreases by a factor of 0.25 every 50,000
iterations. For GoogLeNet, we use batchsize 69, dropout 0.4,
and learning rate αt = 10−4p
1 −t/250000 for iteration t.
Our training set has a different number of examples per
class, so we cycle through the classes and randomly sample
an example from each class. Failing to properly balance the
examples results in a 5.7% drop in mean class accuracy (on
the validation set). Further, since it has been shown to reduce
overﬁtting, we randomly augment samples by taking crops
(227 × 227 out of 256 × 256), horizontal mirror ﬂips, spatial
scales in the range [1/
2], aspect ratios from 3:4 to 4:3,
and amplitude shifts in [0.95, 1.05]. Since we are looking at
local regions, we subtract a per-channel mean (R: 124, G:
117, B: 104) rather than a mean image .
4.2. Full scene material classiﬁcation
Figure 4 shows an overview of our method for simultaneously segmenting and recognizing materials. Given a
CNN that can classify individual points in the image, we
convert it to a sliding window detector and densely classify
a grid across the image. Speciﬁcally, we replace the last
fully connected layers with convolutional layers, so that the
network is fully convolutional and can classify images of
any shape. After conversion, the weights are ﬁxed and not
ﬁne-tuned. With our converted network, the strides of each
layer cause the network to output a prediction every 32 pixels. We obtain predictions every 16 pixels by shifting the
input image by half-strides (16 pixels). While this appears to
require 4x the computation, Sermanet et al. showed that
the convolutions can be reused and only the pool5 through
fc8 layers need to be recomputed for the half-stride shifts.
Adding half-strides resulted in a minor 0.2% improvement
in mean class accuracy across segments (after applying the
dense CRF, described below), and about the same mean class
accuracy at click locations.
The input image is resized so that a patch maps to a
256x256 square. Thus, for a network trained at patch scale
s, the resized input has smaller dimension d = 256/s. Note
that d is inversely proportional to scale, so increased context
leads to lower spatial resolution. We then add padding so
that the output probability map is aligned with the input
when upsampled. We repeat this at 3 different scales (smaller
dimension d/
2), upsample each output probability
map with bilinear interpolation, and average the predictions.
To make the next step more efﬁcient, we upsample the output
to a ﬁxed smaller dimension of 550.
We then use the dense CRF of Kr¨ahenb¨uhl et al. to
predict a label at every pixel, using the following energy:
E(x | I) =
ψij(xi, xj)
ψi(xi) = −log pi(xi)
ψij(xi, xj) = wp δ(xi ̸= xj) k(fi −fj)
where ψi is the unary energy (negative log of the aggregated softmax probabilities) and ψij is the pairwise term
that connects every pair of pixels in the image. We use a
single pairwise term with a Potts label compatibility term
δ weighted by wp and unit Gaussian kernel k. For the features fi, we convert the RGB image to L*a*b* and use color
i ) and position (px, py) as pairwise features for
each pixel: fi =
, where d is the
smaller image dimension. Figure 4 shows an example unary
term pi and the resulting segmentation x.
Figure 5. Varying patch scale. We train/test patches of different
scales (the patch locations do not vary). The optimum is a trade-off
between context and spatial resolution. CNN: AlexNet.
Architecture
Validation
AlexNet 
GoogLeNet 
VGG-16 
Table 2. Patch material classiﬁcation results. Mean class accuracy for different CNNs trained on MINC. See Section 5.1.
Food 90.4%
Wallpaper 83.4%
Glass 78.5%
Hair 95.3%
Leather 88.2%
Tile 82.7%
Fabric 77.8%
Foliage 95.1%
Other 87.9%
Ceramic 82.7%
Metal 77.7%
Skin 93.9%
Pol. stone 85.8%
Stone 82.7%
Mirror 72.0%
Water 93.6%
Brick 85.1%
Paper 81.8%
Plastic 70.9%
Carpet 91.6%
Painted 84.2%
Wood 81.3%
Table 3. Patch test accuracy by category. CNN: GoogLeNet. See
the supplemental material for a full confusion matrix.
5. Experiments and Results
5.1. Patch material classiﬁcation
In this section, we evaluate the effect of many different
design decisions for training methods for material classiﬁcation and segmentation, including various CNN architectures,
patch sizes, and amounts of data.
CNN Architectures. Our ultimate goal is full material segmentation, but we are also interested in exploring which
CNN architectures give the best results for classifying single patches.
Among the networks and parameter variations we tried we found the best performing networks were
AlexNet , VGG-16 and GoogLeNet . AlexNet
and GoogLeNet are re-implementations by BVLC , and
VGG-16 is conﬁguration D (a 16 layer network) of .
All models were obtained from the Caffe Model Zoo .
Our experiments use AlexNet for evaluating material classi-
ﬁcation design decisions and combinations of AlexNet and
GoogLeNet for evaluating material segmentation. Tables 2
and 3 summarize patch material classiﬁcation results on our
dataset. Figure 10 shows correct and incorrect predictions
made with high conﬁdence.
Input patch scale. To classify a point in an image we must
decide how much context to include around it. The context,
expressed as a fraction of image size, is the patch scale. A
priori, it is not clear which scale is best since small patches
have better spatial resolution, but large patches have more
Number of training patches
Mean class accuracy (test set)
Equal size
Figure 6. Varying database size. Patch accuracy when trained on
random subsets of MINC. Equal size is using equal samples per
category (size determined by smallest category). CNN: AlexNet.
Peak accuracy
per category
Figure 7. Accuracy vs patch scale by category. Dots: peak accuracy for each category; colored lines: sky, wallpaper, mirror; gray
lines: other categories. CNN: AlexNet. While most materials are
optimally recognized at 23.3% or 32% patch scale, recognition of
sky, wallpaper and mirror improve with increasing context.
contextual information. Holding patch centers ﬁxed we varied scale and evaluated classiﬁcation accuracy with AlexNet.
Results and a visualization of patch scales are shown in Figure 5. Scale 32% performs the best. Individual categories
had peaks at middle scale with some exceptions; we ﬁnd
that mirror, wallpaper and sky improve with increasing context (Figure 7). We used 23.3% (which has nearly the same
accuracy but higher spatial resolution) for our experiments.
Dataset size. To measure the effect of size on patch classiﬁcation accuracy we trained AlexNet with patches from
randomly sampled subsets of all 369,104 training images
and tested on our full test set (Figure 6). As expected, using
more data improved performance. In addition, we still have
not saturated performance with 2.5 million training patches;
even higher accuracies may be possible with more training
data (though with diminishing returns).
Dataset balance. Although we’ve shown that more data is
better we also ﬁnd that a balanced dataset is more effective.
We trained AlexNet with all patches of our smallest category
(wallpaper) and randomly sampled the larger categories
(the largest, wood, being 40x larger) to be equal size. We
then measured mean class accuracy on the same full test
set. As shown in Figure 6, “Equal size” is more accurate
than a dataset of the same size and just 1.7% lower than
the full training set (which is 9x larger). This result further
demonstrates the value of building up datasets in a balanced
manner, focusing on expanding the smallest, least common
categories.
Polished stone
Figure 8. Full-scene material classiﬁcation examples: high-accuracy test set predictions by our method. CNN: GoogLeNet (with the
average pooling layer removed). Right: legend for material colors. See Table 4 for quantitative evaluation.
Input image
(a) Labels from CRF
(b) Labels from CRF
(test set)
trained on segments
trained on clicks
Figure 9. Optimizing for click accuracy leads to sloppy boundaries. In (a), we optimize for mean class accuracy across segments,
resulting in high quality boundaries. In (b), we optimize for mean
class accuracy at click locations. Since the clicks are not necessarily close to object boundaries, there is no penalty for sloppy
boundaries. CNN: GoogLeNet (without average pooling).
5.2. Full scene material segmentation
The full test set for our patch dataset contains 41,801
photos, but most of them contain only a few labels. Since
we want to evaluate the per-pixel classiﬁcation performance,
we select a subset of 5,000 test photos such that each photo
contains a large number of segments and clicks, and small
categories are well sampled. We greedily solve for the best
such set of photos. We similarly select 2,500 of 25,844
validation photos. Our splits for all experiments are included
online with the dataset. To train the CRF for our model, we
try various parameter settings (θp, θab, θL, wp) and select the
model that performs best on the validation set. In total, we
evaluate 1799 combinations of CNNs and CRF parameters.
See the supplemental material for a detailed breakdown.
We evaluate multiple versions of GoogLeNet: both the
original architecture and a version with the average pooling
layer (at the end) changed to 5x5, 3x3, and 1x1 (i.e. no
average pooling). We evaluate AlexNet trained at multiple
patch scales (Figure 5). When using an AlexNet trained
at a different scale, we keep the same scale for testing. We
also experiment with ensembles of GoogLeNet and AlexNet,
Architecture
(a) Segments only
(b) Clicks only
Scale: 11.6%
Scale: 23.3%
Scale: 32.0%
Scale: 46.5%
Scale: 66.2%
7x7 avg. pool
5x5 avg. pool
3x3 avg. pool
No avg. pool
Table 4. Full scene material classiﬁcation results. Mean class
and total accuracy on the test set. When training, we optimize the
CRF parameters for mean class accuracy, but report both mean class
and total accuracy (mean accuracy across all examples). In one
experiment (a), we train and test only on segments; in a separate
experiment (b), we train and test only on clicks. Accuracies for
segments are averaged across all pixels that fall in that segment.
combined with either arithmetic or geometric mean.
Since we have two types of data, clicks and segments, we
run two sets of experiments: (a) we train and test only on
segments, and in a separate experiment (b) we train and test
only on clicks. These two training objectives result in very
different behavior, as illustrated in Figure 9. In experiment
(a), the accuracy across segments are optimized, producing
clean boundaries. In experiment (b), the CRF maximizes
accuracy only at click locations, thus resulting in sloppy
boundaries. As shown in Table 4, the numerical scores for
the two experiments are also very different: segments are
more challenging than clicks. While clicks are sufﬁcient to
train a CNN, they are not sufﬁcient to train a CRF.
Focusing on segmentation accuracy, we see from Table 4(a) that our best single model is GoogLeNet without
average pooling (6% better than with pooling). The best
ensemble is 2 CNNs: GoogLeNet (no average pooling) and
AlexNet (patch scale: 46.5%), combined with arithmetic
mean. Larger ensembles perform worse since we are aver-
Fabric (99%)
Foliage (99%)
Food (99%)
Leather (99%)
Metal (99%)
Mirror (99%)
Painted (99%)
Plastic (99%)
T: Polished stone
P: Stone (90%)
P: Water (35%) P: Carpet (27%) P: Foliage (67%)
Figure 10. High conﬁdence predictions. Top two rows: correct
predictions. Bottom row: incorrect predictions (T: true, P: predicted). Percentages indicate conﬁdence (the predictions shown are
at least this conﬁdent). CNN: GoogLeNet.
aging worse CNNs. In Figure 8, we show example labeling
results on test images.
5.3. Comparing MINC to FMD
Compared to FMD, the size and diversity of MINC is
valuable for classifying real-world imagery. Table 5 shows
the effect of training on all of FMD and testing on MINC
(and vice versa). The results suggests that training on FMD
alone is not sufﬁcient for real-world classiﬁcation. Though it
may seem that our dataset is “easy,” since the best classiﬁcations scores are lower for FMD than for MINC, we ﬁnd that
difﬁculty is in fact closely tied to dataset size (Section 5.1).
Taking 100 random samples per category, AlexNet achieves
54.2 ± 0.7% on MINC (64.6 ± 1.3% when considering only
the 10 FMD categories) and 66.5% on FMD.
5.4. Comparing CNNs with prior methods
Cimpoi is the best prior material classiﬁcation method
on FMD. We ﬁnd that by replacing DeCAF with oversampled AlexNet features we can improve on their FMD results.
We then show that on MINC, a ﬁnetuned CNN is even better.
To improve on , we take their SIFT IFV, combine it
with AlexNet fc7 features, and add oversampling (see
supplemental for details). With a linear SVM we achieve
69.6 ± 0.3% on FMD. Previous results are listed in Table 6.
Having found that SIFT IFV+fc7 is the new best on
FMD, we compare it to a ﬁnetuned CNN on a subset of MINC (2500 patches per category, one patch per
photo). Fine-tuning AlexNet achieves 76.0 ± 0.2% whereas
(10 categories
in common)
Table 5. Cross-dataset experiments. We train on one dataset and
test on another dataset. Since MINC contains 23 categories, we
limit MINC to the 10 categories in common. CNN: AlexNet.
Sharan et al. 
57.1 ± 0.6%
Cimpoi et al. 
67.1 ± 0.4%
Fine-tuned AlexNet
66.5 ± 1.5%
SIFT IFV+fc7
69.6 ± 0.3%
Table 6. FMD experiments. By replacing DeCAF features with
oversampled AlexNet features we improve on the best FMD result.
SIFT IFV+fc7 achieves 67.4 ± 0.5% with a linear SVM
(oversampling, 5 splits).
This experiment shows that
a ﬁnetuned CNN is a better method for MINC than
SIFT IFV+fc7.
6. Conclusion
Material recognition is a long-standing, challenging problem. We introduce a new large, open, material database,
MINC, that includes a diverse range of materials of everyday scenes and staged designed interiors, and is at least an
order of magnitude larger than prior databases. Using this
large database we conduct an evaluation of recent deep learning algorithms for simultaneous material classiﬁcation and
segmentation, and achieve results that surpass prior attempts
at material recognition.
Some lessons we have learned are:
• Training on a dataset which includes the surrounding
context is crucial for real-world material classiﬁcation.
• Labeled clicks are cheap and sufﬁcient to train a CNN
alone. However, to obtain high quality segmentation
results, training a CRF on polygons results in much
better boundaries than training on clicks.
Many future avenues of work remain. Expanding the
dataset to a broader range of categories will require new
ways to mine images that have more variety, and new annotation tasks that are cost-effective. Inspired by attributes
for textures , in the future we would like to identify material attributes and expand our database to include them. We
also believe that further exploration of joint material and object classiﬁcation and segmentation will be fruitful and
lead to improvements in both tasks. Our database, trained
models, and all experimental results are available online at
 
Acknowledgements. This work was supported in part by
Google, Amazon AWS for Education, a NSERC PGS-D
scholarship, the National Science Foundation (grants IIS-
1149393, IIS-1011919, IIS-1161645), and the Intel Science
and Technology Center for Visual Computing.