Vol.:(0123456789)
Minds and Machines 29:495–514
 
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI
Scott Robbins1
Received: 6 June 2019 / Accepted: 5 October 2019 / Published online: 15 October 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
There is widespread agreement that there should be a principle requiring that artificial intelligence (AI) be ‘explicable’. Microsoft, Google, the World Economic
Forum, the draft AI ethics guidelines for the EU commission, etc. all include a principle for AI that falls under the umbrella of ‘explicability’. Roughly, the principle
states that “for AI to promote and not constrain human autonomy, our ‘decision
about who should decide’ must be informed by knowledge of how AI would act
instead of us” (Floridi et al. in Minds Mach 28(4):689–707, 2018). There is a strong
intuition that if an algorithm decides, for example, whether to give someone a loan,
then that algorithm should be explicable. I argue here, however, that such a principle
is misdirected. The property of requiring explicability should attach to a particular
action or decision rather than the entity making that decision. It is the context and
the potential harm resulting from decisions that drive the moral need for explicability—not the process by which decisions are reached. Related to this is the fact that
AI is used for many low-risk purposes for which it would be unnecessary to require
that it be explicable. A principle requiring explicability would prevent us from reaping the benefits of AI used in these situations. Finally, the explanations given by
explicable AI are only fruitful if we already know which considerations are acceptable for the decision at hand. If we already have these considerations, then there is
no need to use contemporary AI algorithms because standard automation would be
available. In other words, a principle of explicability for AI makes the use of AI
redundant.
Keywords  Ethics of AI · Explicability · Explainable AI · Meaningful human
control · Artificial intelligence
* Scott Robbins
 
Delft University of Technology, Jaffalaan 5, 2628 BX Delft, The Netherlands
S. Robbins
1  Introduction
It is rare to see large numbers of ethicists, practitioners, journalists, and policy-makers agree on something that should guide the development of a technology. Yet, with
the principle requiring that artificial intelligence (AI) be explicable, we have exactly
that. Microsoft, Google, the World Economic Forum, the draft AI ethics guidelines for the EU commission, etc. all include a principle for AI that falls under the
umbrella of ‘explicability’. The exact wording varies. Some talk of ‘transparency’,
others of ‘explainability’, and still others of ‘understandability’. Finally, Floridi et al.
call for a principle of ‘explicability’ for AI which claims that when systems are powered by AI, humans should be able to obtain “a factual, direct, and clear explanation
of the decision-making process” .
The intuition that an algorithm should be capable of explaining itself is strong—
especially algorithms operating in morally significant contexts. Frank Pasquale’s
Black Box Society provides examples of decisions made about us by algorithms for which we are not offered an explanation. It is unfair that we can receive a
low credit score, end up on a police watch list, get higher prison sentences, etc. without explanation about the considerations that led to those decisions. If algorithms
are used to make decisions in these contexts, there should be explanations about
how they arrived at a specific decision.1 Floridi et al. argue that AI will constrain
rather than promote human autonomy unless we have the “knowledge of how AI
would act instead of us” .
Getting algorithms to provide us with explanations about how a particular decision was made allows us to keep ‘meaningful human control’ over the decision.
That is, knowing why a particular decision was reached by an algorithm allows us to
accept, disregard, challenge, or overrule that decision.2 ‘Meaningful human control’
was originally used as a principle for lethal autonomous weapons systems: “humans
not computers and their algorithms should ultimately remain in control of, and thus
morally responsible for relevant decisions about (lethal) military operations” . ‘Meaningful human control’ is now being used to describe an ideal
that all AI should achieve if it is going to operate in morally sensitive contexts . A principle of explicability, then, is a moral principle that should help bring us closer to acceptable uses
of algorithms. The question then is: does a principle of explicability overcome ethical issues associated with the use of algorithms?
In what follows, I will argue that principles requiring that AI be explicable are
misguided. Not only would such a requirement trade off the power of AI in terms of
performance, but such a requirement assumes that we have a list of considerations
that are acceptable for a given decision. I argue that such a list would preclude the
1  Robbins and Henschke make the important point that this argument can be turned on its head: “The
solution, therefore, is to use such algorithms for specific situations in which it is acceptable to not have
an explanation” .
2  This is not the only conception of meaningful human control in the literature. More will be said about
this in what follows.
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
use of machine learning algorithms. Of more philosophical importance is that the
property of ‘requiring explicability’ is incorrectly applied to AI. The real object in
need of the property of ‘requiring explicability’ is the result of the process—not the
process itself. We do not require everyone capable of making a decision to be able to
explain every decision they make. Rather, we require them to provide explanations
when the decisions they have made require explanations. For AI we should take a
similar approach.
Instead of trying to have our cake and eat it too (having powerful AI that can
explain its decisions), we should be deciding which decisions require explanations.
Knowing that a specific decision requires an explanation (e.g. declining a loan application) gives us good reason not to use opaque AI (e.g. machine learning) for that
decision. Any decision requiring an explanation should not be made by machine
learning (ML) algorithms. Automation is still an option; however, this should be
restricted to the old-fashioned kind of automation whereby the considerations are
hard-coded into the algorithm. Luckily for the ML community, there are many decisions that benefit society without requiring explanations.
2  Calls for a Principle of Explicability for AI
It would be shadowboxing to argue that a principle of explicability for AI is unnecessary if there were no proposals for such a principle. In this section, I highlight
some examples of the many calls for such a principle by academics, NGOs, corporations, etc. It should be clear that explicability is considered to be an important part
of achieving so-called ‘ethical’, ‘responsible’, ‘trustworthy’, etc. AI.
Before highlighting the many examples of calls for a principle of explicability
for AI, it is important to distinguish between the usefulness of explicable AI and a
requirement that AI be explicable. I do not argue against the idea that explicable AI
could be useful in certain contexts; rather, I will argue against a principle requiring
that AI be explicable. For example, if someone were to have an ML algorithm that
was highly accurate with regard to making predictions about the weather, there may
be some desire to have that algorithm explain itself. This desire would not be based
on the idea that it is wrong to use the decisions made by the ML without explanation; rather, knowing what considerations were used by the ML for its decision
may increase our knowledge about the weather. This example is in contrast with the
examples used by those proposing a principle of explicability for AI. ML used for
medical diagnosis , judicial sentencing , and predictive
policing are just a few of many realworld examples. Using the decisions of ML algorithms in these contexts without
explanation is wrong, so the argument goes, unless that ML algorithm is explicable.
One reason that using inexplicable decisions in morally sensitive contexts like the
ones listed above is wrong is that we must ensure that the decisions are not based
S. Robbins
on inappropriate3 considerations. If a predictive policing algorithm labels people as
criminals and uses their skin color as an important consideration then we should not
be using that algorithm. If the algorithm is not explicable, then this consideration
may be used without our knowledge. The opacity of the algorithm prevents us from
knowing whether it is unethically biased.
One of the main reasons that AI, and ML specifically, is the target in calls for a
principle of explicability is that these algorithms are opaque. The inputs used for
ML algorithms4 are translated into a machine-readable format (1 s and 0 s) and then
based on the patterns those 1 s and 0 s have a path is taken through a series of hidden
layers. The data used to train this algorithm will have given each of the many paths
that an input could take a probability corresponding to the resulting classification.
Although many researchers are working to make this process explicable, little progress has been made .
Those who have had some success can only give us educated guesses based on many
results. In a nutshell, they are using algorithms to analyze the results for patterns
that may tell us something about the reasons used by the target ML algorithm.
In short, we do not know the reasons for a specific ML algorithm decision. Combine this fact with using ML algorithms for decisions that the as having moral significance (i.e. decisions which could result in harm-broadly construed to include
rights violations) and we have an ethically problematic situation. An algorithm used,
for example, to accept or reject your loan request will significantly affect you. A
rejection could cause you and your partner significant distress and change the course
of your life. It is exactly this type of situation that motivated the European Union to
include in the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) what many have interpreted as a ‘right to explanation’ when fully automated decisions significantly affect
the right not to be subject to a decision, which may include a measure, evaluating personal aspects relating to him or her which is based solely on automated processing and which produces legal effects concerning him or her or
similarly significantly affects him or her5
It is intuitive that, when an ML algorithm makes a decision about us that has a morally ‘significant’ effect, it should be able to ‘explain’ itself. This intuition has led
many to propose that a principle of AI is that it should be explicable. Below is a
sample of the academics, non-governmental organizations, and large technology
companies who have an AI principle that can be interpreted to be an explicability
principle.
5  GDPR Recital 71. The full text can be found at https​://gdpr-info.eu/recit​als/no-71/. Some have argued
that no such right can be derived .
3  Inappropriate captures both considerations that are unethical (e.g. race) and clearly irrelevant (e.g. your
astrological sign). Both are inappropriate and could lead to unethical outcomes.
4  I specifically discuss deep learning algorithms here. Note that other ML algorithms using different
methods exist (e.g. evolutionary algorithms).
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
Luciano Floridi, for example, outlined a framework for a ‘Good AI Society’.
In that framework he and his colleagues explicitly call for AI systems that make
‘socially significant decisions’ to be explicable:
Develop a framework to enhance the explicability of AI systems that make
socially significant decisions. Central to this framework is the ability for individuals to obtain a factual, direct, and clear explanation of the decision-making process, especially in the event of unwanted consequences. 
NGOs including the Public Voice (established by the Electronic Privacy Information
Center) and the Future of Life Institute have also called for principles of explainability for AI.6 The Public Voice, in their list of AI Universal Guidelines, has a right to
transparency which states:
All individuals have the right to know the basis of an AI decision that concerns
them. This includes access to the factors, the logic, and techniques that produced the outcome. 
And the Future of Life Institute includes two transparency principles in their AI
Principles:
Failure transparency: If an AI system causes harm, it should be possible to ascertain why.
Judicial transparency: Any involvement by an autonomous system in judicial
decision-making should provide a satisfactory explanation auditable by a competent human authority. 7
Microsoft’s current CEO Satya Nadella called for a transparency requirement in an
op-ed to the online magazine Slate:
A.I. must be transparent: We should be aware of how the technology works
and what its rules are. We want not just intelligent machines but intelligible
machines. Not artificial intelligence but symbiotic intelligence. The tech will
know things about humans, but the humans must know about the machines.
People should have an understanding of how the technology sees and analyzes
the world. Ethics and design and in hand. 
And Google claims that they will “design AI systems that provide appropriate
opportunities for feedback, relevant explanations, and appeal” .
Last but not least, James Bridle in his book The New Dark Age: Technology and
the end of the Future calls for a fourth principle of robotics , the Partnership on AI . There are sure to be more.
7  It is unclear why the judicial context gets special attention here. While the judicial context is an especially morally salient one, it is none more so than medical or policing contexts.
S. Robbins
three): “a robot—or any other intelligent machine—must be able to explain itself to
humans” .8
While it is not possible to claim that this sample of principles, and the many others I did not mention, all amount to the same thing, they do all call for AI to be
explicable. To be sure, I do not think it is the intent of the authors of these principles
to require all AI to be explicable; however, the way that the principles are written
this requirement would either apply to all AI or it would be unclear when it would
have to be applied or not. In some of the examples above the principles call for
transparency of AI. Although transparency and explicability are not synonymous,
when transparency is used with respect to the transparency of the reasons for the
AI-generated decision, this amounts to explicability. Others have called for transparency principles which are not the same as explicability. Instead, what they mean by
transparency is transparency of the sourcing and usage of training data or transparency of other parts of the development and implementation of AI.9 One can support
this kind of transparency without supporting a principle of explicability. One may,
for example, be transparent with regard to the training data used for the algorithm
without being able to provide an explanation regarding a particular decision made
by that algorithm. This kind of transparency would go some way toward ensuring
that algorithms will work for a diverse set of people (e.g. ensuring that the training
data was not solely made up of the data regarding white males).
The many examples highlighted above are there to make it clear that there are
many calls for AI to be explicable. Indeed, not just calls, but demands for a principle
that would require AI to be explicable. It is the purpose of this paper to argue that
such a principle is misguided.
3  The Why, Who, and What of an Explicability Principle for AI
3.1  What is Explicability For?
Before getting to what explicability is and who it is for, we must understand what
the purpose is for a principle of explicability for AI. This will go some way towards
understanding what explicability is and who it is for. I argue that a principle of
explicability is primarily for the maintaining of meaningful human control over
algorithms. The idea is that an explanation of an algorithm’s output will allow a
human being to have meaningful control over the algorithm—enabling the ascription of moral responsibility to that human being (or set of human beings). With an
explanation of the algorithm’s decision, it is possible for human beings to accept,
disregard, challenge, or overrule that decision. The Center for a New American
Security (CNAS), for example, writes that it is necessary that “human operators are
8  It must be noted that Asimov originally had four total laws-meaning that Bridle’s would be a fifth, not
a fourth. He added a ‘zeroeth law’ to precede the others which stated: “a robot may not harm humanity,
or, by inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.”.
9  See e.g. Whittaker et al. .
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
making informed, conscious decisions about the use of weapons” and that “human
operators have sufficient information to ensure the lawfulness of the action they are
taking…”.10
There are, however, other features of meaningful human control that would not
be captured by explicability. Meaningful human control over autonomous driving systems may not require human beings to have any say over a particular decision because of the psychological limitations of the human driver to gain cognitive
awareness in time to act . Santoni de Sio and van den Hoven
 argue that meaningful human control occurs when algorithms meet ‘track’
and ‘trace’ conditions. We must be able to trace responsibility for the outcomes
of algorithms back to human beings. The decisions of algorithms must also track
human values. While I use a specific conception of meaningful human control (i.e.
giving humans the ability to accept, disregard, challenge, or overrule an AI algorithm’s decision), I am not arguing that this conception is the best one. Rather, this
is the conception that I argue is implicit when one requires that AI be explicable.
We must keep in mind that an explicability principle for AI is ethical in nature.
The starting point for these lists is that there are ethical problems associated with
algorithms. If the design and development of algorithms follow a particular set of
principles, then, it is believed that the resulting algorithm will be ‘good’, ‘trustworthy’, or ‘responsible’. So, a principle of explicability is an attempt to overcome some
ethical issues unique to algorithms.
Ethical value is to be contrasted to the epistemic value explicable AI might provide. Explicable AI may be extremely valuable to researchers and others who would
be able to use explanations to better understand their domain. Garry Kasparov, for
example, may find an explanation of a particular chess move made by an algorithm
beneficial for his own ability to play chess.11 A doctor may find an explanation useful to better understand how to diagnosis a particular disease. This epistemic value
of explicability for AI is not under dispute. In these cases, we are not harmed by the
opacity of the algorithm’s decision-making process. A principle of explicability, in
contrast, is ethical in that it is about preventing harm (broadly construed) that could
occur due to the opacity of the algorithm.
What is the ethical issue that is giving rise to this principle? One candidate is the
issue of understanding what went wrong if something harmful happens as a consequence of the algorithm. For example, if a self-driving car swerves into a barrier killing its passenger(s) then it would be helpful to have an explanation of what
caused this to happen in order to prevent it happening in the future. While a principle of explainability would help with this, it does not capture the full range of ethical
issues that explicability aims to overcome. For example, if someone is incorrectly
10  For other documents with similar features for meaningful human control see e.g. United States
Department of Defense and Horowitz and Scharre . For a helpful overview of the common
themes involved in discussions about meaningful human control see Ekelhof .
11  A good, recent, example of this is the growing discussion about Move 37 by AlphaGo during its game
with Lee Sedol .
S. Robbins
denied a loan by an algorithm how will we know that something harmful has happened so that we can demand an explanation?
This points to the ethical issue of ensuring that the outputs of algorithms are not
made based upon ethically problematic or irrelevant considerations. We expect, for
example, a rejection for a loan not to be based on the color of the applicant’s skin (or
a proxy thereof). An explanation of the algorithm’s decision can allow for someone
to accept, disregard, challenge, or overrule the rejection. This gives meaningful control of the decision to human beings. This goes above and beyond the stipulation that
some particular human is responsible for the algorithm’s decisions. This provides a
human with the information they need in order to exercise that control.
Explicability, therefore, is an attempt to maintain meaningful human control over
algorithms. Only human beings can be held morally accountable so it should be
human beings that are in control over these decisions . If a
human being has an explanation of the algorithm’s decision, then it is possible for
that human being to accept, disregard, challenge, or overrule that decision.
3.2  Who is Explicability for?
How the requirement that AI be explicable is understood depends upon who will
receive the explanation. A medical diagnosis algorithm that classifies someone as
having a brain tumor might, for example, provide a heat map of which parts of the
brain scan most contributed to the diagnosis. This ‘explanation’ would probably be
useless to a patient—or to anyone else without very specific medical training. However, if the goal is that the algorithm is under ‘meaningful human control’ then we
are not concerned with the patient’s understanding of the explanation.
Just as with any diagnosis, we trust that our physician is making a justified
decision in line with current medical practice. The physician should be ultimately
responsible for the brain tumor diagnosis and therefore it is the physician who
should be able to evaluate the explanation. Remember that the purpose of the explanation is to overcome an ethical problem; namely, to establish meaningful human
control over that decision by allowing one to confirm that the reasons for a decision
are in line with domain-specific norms and best practices.
To illustrate, let us say that an algorithm rejects a loan application. This algorithm
is able to provide an explanation in the form of considerations that played a factor in
its rejection. One of those considerations was the fact that the application included a
high debt-to-income ratio. To the applicant, this is interesting to know but it would
be quite unclear whether their debt-to-income ratio was at a level that justified its
factoring in on a decision to reject their loan application. Only those with relevant
domain-specific knowledge would be able to evaluate whether this particular debtto-income ratio should factor into a decision to reject the loan. This only gets more
complicated as more considerations factor into algorithmic decisions.
To achieve the ethical goal of a principle of explicability the explanation provided by an algorithm should enable a human being to have meaningful control over
the decisions the algorithm makes. This means that the person using the algorithm is
the person that the explanation should be directed towards—not the person subject
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
to the decision of the algorithm (although those two roles may be filled by the same
person). While the person subject to the algorithm’s outputs may be interested to
know the explanation (and in some cases should be provided with it in order to
achieve other ethical goals),12 this does not establish meaningful human control over
the algorithm’s output.
3.3  Artificial Intelligence
‘Artificial Intelligence’ is an overused phrase that signifies many things. Explanation
also has many uses depending on the context. We have had artificially intelligent
systems for decades that did not result in any calls for explanation. This is mainly
because what is known as good old-fashioned AI (GOFAI) is simply a set of explicitly coded rules in the form of a decision tree that allows for the automation of processes. For example, if you wanted to automate the decision on which move to make
in chess it may look like this:
This is clearly a terrible algorithm for deciding your next chess move—a much more
sophisticated algorithm designed using GOFAI could be achieved. However, this
kind of automation is inherently explicable because the code makes the reasons for
a resulting decision explicit. Opacity with regard to this type of automation would
only occur if the institutions doing the automating did not want people to know how
the decisions are being made .
GOFAI is in contrast to AI that falls under the umbrella of machine learning
(ML). The GOFAI approach is limited by what the designers of the algorithm could
think of. Novel situations may result in terrible decisions by the AI. ML is one
approach to overcome such limitations. In a nutshell, ML attempts to use statistical
methods to allow an algorithm to ‘learn’ every time it ‘tries’ to achieve its specified
goal. Each attempt, whether it fails or succeed, will result in the algorithm updating
its statistical probabilities that correlate to features of the input.13
An ML algorithm could be trained to play chess by playing many times without explicit rules given by humans. The ML algorithm may play at random the first
12  Most notably the goal of actionable recourse: the ability to contest incorrect decisions or to understand what could be changed in order for the data subject to achieve a more desirable result .
13  For a nice overview of machine learning methods and trends see Jordan and Mitchell .
S. Robbins
time—losing very easily. At the end of the game, we would tell the AI that it lost.
The next game the AI would play slightly differently. Over hundreds, thousands, or
even millions of games the AI would be very well trained to play the game of chess.
The resulting trained ML algorithm would be opaque with regard to its reasoning for
any given move.
Is it acceptable that the algorithm makes decisions that are not explicable? If you
share my intuition that there is no problem here, it may stem from the fact that the
outcomes of these ‘chess move’ decisions cannot result in harm. A terrible chess
move may result in the loss of the chess game, but life, limb, reputation, and property are not at stake. An AI making decisions in other contexts, such as medical
diagnosis and judicial sentencing, could cause real harm.
The point here is to show that the principle of explicability is important due to the
rise of algorithms using ML or other methods that are opaque with regard to how
the algorithm reaches a particular decision. If we are simply using automated processes (e.g. GOFAI) then explicability is only a problem if the developer intentionally obfuscates the explanation. In these cases an explanation is readily available to
developers and companies; however, they do not see it in their interest to reveal that
explanation to the public. While not addressed here, this problem is very important
 .
3.4  Explicability
So if one is using an ML algorithm for decisions that could result in harm and
responsibly wants to adhere to a set of principles that includes a principle of explicability, what is one to do? First, one would need to know what is being demanded
by a principle of explicability. That is, what is an explanation that would satisfy the
principle?
First, we could be demanding a causal explanation for a particular outcome/
action/decision. For example, when Google’s image classification algorithm classified two young black people as gorillas there was an outcry and much embarrassment for Google . If Google were to explain the algorithm’s
classification by saying that “features of the image input correlated highly with
training images classified as gorillas” I doubt that anyone would be satisfied. We are
not concerned with how the algorithm classifies images in general. Rather, we want
to know why the label ‘gorillas’ was applied to a specific image by the algorithm. In
other words, we demand to know the specific features of the image that contributed
to the labeling.
Scientific explanations also give us answers to how things happened. However,
we do not want to know the how; rather, we want to know the why. I do not want to
know how my daughter hit her brother: “I raised my right arm and moved it forward
at high velocity”, but the why: “he took my favorite stuffed animal from me.” The
latter why explanation is an explanation that provides the reason(s) that a particular
action was taken. This reason or reasons may or may not morally justify the action.
These reasons are precisely what we want to evaluate. In the case of ML we could
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
get an explanation like the following excerpt used to describe how DeepMind’s
AlphaGo chooses its next move:
At the end of the simulation, the action values and visit counts of all traversed
edges are updated. Each edge accumulates the visit count and mean evaluation of all simulations passing through that edge is the leaf node from the ith
simulation, and 1(s, a, i) indicates whether an edge (s, a) was traversed during
the ith simulation. Once the search is complete, the algorithm chooses the most
visited move from the root position 
This, if you are a person with the requisite knowledge to understand it, is an explanation of the how for a particular move in the game of Go made by the algorithmdriven process. It says nothing about the particular features of that move which
contributed to the decision to make the move. One could attempt to provide a justification for a particular move made by the algorithm by referencing the effectiveness
of the algorithm itself: “the move chosen by the algorithm is a good move because
the algorithm has proven to be very good at the game of Go”. We can see that this is
an unsatisfying explanation when we apply it to a different context. If the best heart
surgeon in the world were to leave a sponge in the patient and a nurse were to ask:
“why did she leave the sponge in the patient?” and someone were to respond “it was
good to leave the sponge there because the decision was made by the best surgeon
in the world.” What we really want with an explanation are all (and only) the considerations important for their contribution to a particular decision—considerations
that a human could use to determine whether a particular algorithmic decision was
justified.
We could give a general explanation of sorts for opaque algorithms in any context. Why did the ML algorithm decide to label a convicted criminal as high-risk?
Because data used as an input to the algorithm correlated with features of data used
to train the algorithm that were tagged as having a high risk. While this is an explanation, it clearly falls short of what is desired by the principles highlighted above.
What is really desired is an explanation that would provide a human with information that could be used to determine whether the result of the algorithm was justified.
An explanation may justify a particular decision or it may not, and, a decision
may be justified by reasons that do not feature in an explanation of that decision
 . If, for example, I were to make a move
in chess because I thought that it would make the board more balanced (in terms
of aesthetics) we would have an explanation for the move that I made that failed to
justify the move. However, that move may also have been the best move I could have
made—making the move justified. While it was a great chess move, I doubt anyone
would take my advice on a future move—nor should we if we knew that an algorithm was using board balance as a consideration in favor of a particular move. This
shows that we cannot simply look to the decision itself and ask whether that decision was justified or not. An algorithm may flag someone as a dangerous criminal
who in fact happens to be a dangerous criminal—justifying the algorithm’s classification. However, if the consideration leading to that classification was the person’s
race then we have an explanation that fails to justify the decision whether the decision was correct.
S. Robbins
In short, what is desired is an explanation providing the considerations that contributed to the result in question. This gives a human being the information needed
in order to accept, disregard, challenge, or overrule the decision. In the same way
that a police officer might claim in court that a particular criminal is high-risk, and
the judge asks for the considerations used to justify such a label, we want the algorithm to justify itself in reference to the considerations used.
A justification for this ‘high risk’ label given by the police officer might be that
while in custody the criminal threatened to do much more harm once she was free.
The judge may accept this as a good justification and sentence the criminal to the
maximum allowable prison sentence. If, on the other hand, the police officer justified this label by saying that the criminal was really dark-skinned and menacing
looking, then the judge (hopefully) would reject the police officer’s label of ‘highrisk’. If an algorithm was delegated the task of labeling criminals as ‘high-risk’ and
did so as a result of race, then we would want the judge to know that so that she
could reject the algorithm’s decision. A technical, causal, or scientific explanation
does not allow the judge to have meaningful human control over the algorithm.
4  Current Approaches to Explicable AI
Having a principle requiring that AI be able to explicable means that there must be
methods for which an algorithm can give an explanation for its decision. Here I do
not focus on intrinsically explainable algorithms (like the GOFAI approach above).
Instead, I focus on the ML algorithms that are the reason for introducing a principle
of explicability for AI in the first place.
There has been much work in achieving explainable AI. They can be classified into two broad approaches. The first is offers ‘model-centric explanations’ and
the second offers ‘subject-centric explanations’ .
Model-centric explanations aim to provide the information that is known about
the algorithm in order to better understand the algorithm—enabling users to better understand how to use the algorithm. The information that provided relates to
the data the algorithm was trained on, how the algorithm was tested for bias, the
intentions of the designers, performance metrics, etc. The idea is that knowing all
of this other information about the algorithm may allow society to “make informed
choices regarding usage, implementation, and regulation of these machines” .
While this approach to explainable AI is interesting, it does not really capture
what is meant by ‘explicability’. We do not have the considerations that played a factor in the resulting decision. At best we have guestimates or maybe a justified belief
that the algorithm will work in the given context because it has performed well in
similar contexts and the input is relevantly similar to data used during the training
phase of the algorithm. This does not overcome the ethical problem resulting in
important decisions made by algorithms. However, it may significantly help society
decide on the acceptability of using a specific algorithm for a specific purpose.
The ‘subject-centric’ explanations are an attempt to zoom in on the input (the
subject) and understand what it is about it that caused the specified decision. For
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
example, an explanation of a loan rejection may be that the person who requested
the loan has a debt-to-income ratio that is always classified as a rejection by the
algorithm. While there may be other considerations that would also contribute to a
rejection, the debt-to-income ratio could be seen as a sufficient condition for rejection. In this clear cut case, the explanation would help humans decide whether the
decision was justified—and therefore satisfy the type of explanation discussed in
the previous section. Unfortunately ML decisions are rarely going to be this simple.
The more data fed into the algorithm as input makes the output that much harder
to explain. Many variables may need to be modified in order to change the resulting classification—making it increasingly unlikely that a satisfactory explanation is
5  Three Misgivings about Explicable AI
There are three major misgivings I have regarding the principle of explicability
for AI. The first is with regard to where the property of ‘requiring explicability’ is
placed. I argue that we do not normally place such a property on the process which
results in a decision; rather, we place that property onto the decision itself. Second,
there seem to be many implementations of AI in situations of low to no risk (in
terms of harm). It is unreasonable that the decisions resulting from AI in these situations should be required to provide explanations. Finally, in situations of high risk
there is a catch-22 for those who wish to use ML: If ML is being used for a decision
requiring an explanation then it must be explicable AI and a human must be able
to check that the considerations used are acceptable, but if we already know which
considerations should be used for a decision, then we don’t need ML.
5.1  Explicability of the Decision versus Decision‑Maker
The mistake with requiring that AI be explicable is that it places the requirement of
explicability onto the decision-maker rather than the decision itself. Some calls for a
principle of explicability allude to this when they add the qualifier resembling ‘when
the decision made by the AI significantly affects a person’. This is an acknowledgment that the property of ‘requiring an explanation’ really applies to the decision
itself—not the entity making that decision.
When my daughter hits her brother, I would reasonably demand that she explain
her decision to act in that way. She has significantly impacted her brother because
she has directly caused him pain. In contrast, when my daughter suddenly starts to
dance and I ask her why, she would (and has done many times) shrug her shoulders
and say, “I don’t know”. I, of course, am not mad at her for her lack of explanation. The reason is that one action requires an explanation, and the other does not.
The first action resulted in harm, thereby ‘significantly affecting’ a person. The second action is benign. No one is harmed by my daughter’s spontaneous dancing. It
S. Robbins
would therefore be unreasonable if I were to tell my daughter that everything she did
requires a morally justifying explanation14 or that all children should be ‘explicable’.
In short, adding the property ‘requiring explicability’ to children would be a mistake. It is the action or decision which can/should have the property of requiring
explicability. Decisions capable of causing harm (broadly construed) are decisions
which require this property. Anyone unable to give an explanation for such a decision is doing wrong.
When discussions about AI and explanation come up, there are some common
examples given. Algorithms making decisions about loan applications, criminal sentencing, policing, medical diagnoses, weapons targeting, etc. all get mentioned when
discussing the need for algorithms to be able to explain themselves. However, the
common element in all of these contexts is that the decisions made in these contexts
require explanations that justify those decisions. Whatever the process used to make
these decisions there must be an explanation for any given decision.
This is important because using explicability as a principle for AI could force
those designing algorithms for decisions or roles that do not require explanation to
use less powerful AI like GOFAI. This would significantly constrain many of the
great uses of ML algorithms that are not able to explain themselves. For example,
ML is often used for credit card fraud detection . When the
algorithm classifies a transaction as fraudulent, this causes the bank to lock the
credit card until the customer can confirm that they indeed made the transaction.
False positives can, to be sure, be annoying; however, the only thing we really care
about is whether the algorithm performs well compared to other methods. Because
the role of the algorithm is simply to flag a transaction as fraudulent, the ultimate
decision-maker will be the customer herself. I can see no good reason why the ML
algorithm should be forced to provide an explanation here.
This is why many of the principles highlighted above include a qualification;
namely, that AI must be explicable if the decision will significantly affect someone.
This, of course, needs to be specified very clearly in order to separate out the decisions that will trigger the principle and those that do not. Of course, once we do this
with any level of specification we are simply deciding what roles, tasks, and decisions require explanations and which ones do not. The principle will no longer have
anything to do with artificial intelligence.
5.2  Inexplicable AI for Low‑Risk Purposes
In May 2015 Google’s AlphaGo algorithm defeated the world champion Go player
Ke Jie . The AlphaGo algorithm provided Ke Jie no explanation for any of the moves it made. However, an algorithm deciding which moves
to make in the game of Go does not seem problematic because the possible consequences stemming from these decisions are at no risk of causing harm. Many AI
14  This does not preclude my interest in an explanation in terms of, for example, her desires and preferences. If she simply told me that she “loved dancing” when asked “why” then this may provide me with a
reason for entering her into dance class.
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
and ML applications fall into this category. This is more often than not a result of
the algorithm’s implementation within a larger process. For example, Cortis is an
algorithm that detects voice patterns associated with cardiac arrest .
The algorithm exists explicitly for the purposes of aiding emergency call operators.
The algorithm takes as its input live sound from the calling line. Its output is true if
the voice pattern is associated with cardiac arrest and false if it is not. The context of
emergency calls is high risk. The operator has legal, as well as moral, responsibility
and can make decisions that will save (or end) lives. The addition of the algorithm in
this context aids the operator with one specific problem: someone on the other end
of the line may be having a heart attack.
This algorithm cannot, however, cause harm. The worst-case scenario is that the
algorithm does not identify someone as having a cardiac arrest who is indeed experiencing cardiac arrest. This is regrettable; however, the algorithm not being there
would not have changed this outcome.15 It is an example of an algorithm that should
be judged on its accuracy—not its reasons. A principle of explicability would mean
this algorithm would not be allowed to operate. This would be unfortunate as it has
been shown to detect heart attacks on average 30 s faster than human operators with
an accuracy of 93% (human operators have a 73% accuracy rate).
It should be noted that establishing that a particular algorithm has no risk of causing harm would be incredibly difficult to establish. It will often be the case that it is
unknown what the possible consequences of algorithmic decisions will be. There
would have to be some standard of risk for automated decisions before we allow
anyone to claim that their algorithm’s decisions cannot cause harm. The point here
is to show that there are definitely cases where algorithm’s decisions have a low risk
of causing harm and a lack of explanation should not preclude its use.16
5.3  Catch 22 of Requiring Explicability for AI
In Joseph Heller’s Catch 22 Doc Daneeka explains to Yossarian the catch regarding the policy allowing insane people to cease flying bombing missions: “Catch 22.
Anyone who wants to get out of combat duty isn’t really crazy” .
So in order to get out of combat duty, one would have to be insane and to tell their
superior that they wished to cease combat duty. Unfortunately, only a sane person
would make such a request. There is a similar catch to explainable AI. If ML is
being used for a decision requiring an explanation, then it must be explicable AI and
a human must be able to check that the considerations used are acceptable. But if we
already know which considerations should be used for a decision, then we do not
An example may help to illustrate: say there is a ML algorithm that is developed
to decide whether someone should get a loan (there have been real-world examples
15  There is a concern that operators may come to think that there is no heart attack unless the algorithm
identifies one—resulting in situations where were there not an algorithm they would have identified a
heart attack on their own (thanks to Seumas Miller for this concern).
16  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for making this point.
S. Robbins
of this). This algorithm is opaque and there are justifiably calls for explainable AI
in this context. So we pour millions in funding to come up with explainable AI that
somehow is just as powerful as the original algorithm.17 Now when a loan application is processed, there is an explanation spit out by the algorithm along with its
decision. A human can check this explanation to ensure that it is an ‘acceptable’
explanation. We can imagine an explanation for a rejected application being “the
applicant’s address is in a neighborhood inhabited primarily by people of dark complexion and the applicant is short”. This is a terrible explanation that does not justify
the rejection of a loan application. The algorithm was clearly trained on data that
had high correlation rates between loan rejection and short people with dark complexions. These are clearly irrelevant considerations and the result of the ML algorithm should be rejected.
On the other hand, we can imagine a decision and explanation by the ML for an
accepted loan application that is ‘acceptable’. The explanation might be something
like “the applicant has a low debt to savings ratio and a high income to rent ratio”.
These both seem to be relevant considerations when deciding whether to accept a
loan application. The problem with all of this is that in order for the explanation
given by explainable AI to be useful we must have a human capable of knowing
which considerations are acceptable and which are not. If we already know which
considerations are acceptable, then there is no reason to use ML in the first place.
We could simply hard-code the considerations into an algorithm—giving us an
automated decision using pre-approved, transparent, reasoning. In this example, we
would definitely not include considerations like height and race. We would instead
have considerations like debt to saving ration and income to rent ratio.
For an explanation of a decision made by an ML algorithm to be useful we
already need to know what counts as an acceptable consideration for that decision.
For example, we can imagine an ML algorithm that could make a modern painting
and could give us an explanation for each brushstroke. Since there is no agreed-upon
list of considerations that ‘justify’ a brush stroke in the context of modern painting,
it would be a useless explanation. We could do nothing with that explanation with
regard to the decision it made (e.g. reject its decision). Here, the reader may think
that the explanation would still be useful. We may just be curious to know why the
algorithm did what it did. Furthermore, if one was a modernist painter, then this
information could be used to help them become a better painter.
There is no doubt some truth to this. Explainable AI could be used to find correlations that should serve as considerations regarding the class of decisions at hand.
However, explicability in these scenarios is very different. Now the explanations
proffered by explainable AI are not justifying explanations—they cannot be used
to justify a specific decision. For example, if a medical diagnosis algorithm used
as a consideration that the patient’s eyes were a very specific color, we would not
immediately be able to tell if this was an acceptable reason or not. This may cause
us to test the hypothesis that this specific eye color was strongly correlated with the
17  This is unlikely as there is widespread acknowledgement that explainability and power conflict and
must be traded off in the context of AI.
A Misdirected Principle with a Catch: Explicability for AI﻿
diagnosis. If this eye color is indeed indicative (to a medically significant level) then
the algorithm’s explanation would have contributed to the scientific and medical
community by coming up with a consideration we had not thought of before. This
consideration can now be used by GOFAI and/or doctors to make future diagnoses. In cases like these, we would no longer be checking an algorithm’s explanation
to ensure that it conforms to our view of what’s acceptable; rather, the explanation
would hopefully point us towards acceptable considerations we hadn’t thought of
before. Once we have these new considerations, then we could just hard code them
into traditional automation algorithms rather than let the ML algorithm take the role
of decision-maker.
6  Conclusion
If my arguments in this paper are on the right track, then we will find the solution
for the opacity of ML by using ML for roles, decisions or actions which do not have
the property of ‘requiring an explanation’. This solution may seem, at first glance,
to restrict ML to playing games. If games are the only things without the property
of ‘requiring an explanation’ that ML can do well then this would be true. However, ML has had much success to date in contexts-like healthcare—that have ethical
and societal import. Much of this success has been making decisions that do not
require explanations. Detecting cancerous moles is one such example. An algorithm
can take a picture of a mole and classify it as malignant or not. The consequences of
this decision are simply a biopsy if the mole is labeled as malignant. This algorithm
also outperforms dermatologists at such classification . The initial classification by a doctor is done by simply looking at the mole—
and although there are certain ‘rules of thumb’ regarding size, color, and shape, it
is difficult to articulate what malignant moles look like. A doctor is not required
to explain their decision. An algorithm should not be required to either—especially
when it outperforms human beings at the task.
One difficulty that arises with algorithms that perform tasks like the one above
is that they may still be biased and indirectly harm a group of people. Although
it seems that the algorithm has a net benefit to society in that it outperforms doctors at labeling moles malignant—this benefit may not be the same for all groups of
people. In this case, the algorithm performs poorly on those with a dark complexion
 . Note that this does not have anything to do with explicability as
used in principles for AI. The algorithm is not using skin color as a consideration
for determining whether a mole is malignant; rather, the algorithm is not very good
at labeling moles on patients with dark complexions. To take a simpler example,
when an individual practices a presentation before a conference they may be able to
pace the presentation well, speak clearly, and not lose their place. When it comes to
the actual presentation in front of a group of people, they could still perform much
worse. They speak too fast—causing them to end too early—and lose their place
which causes them to skip over slides because they cannot remember what they
were supposed to say for them. They did not decide to perform badly because they
were in front of a group of people. Quite the contrary—they made a conscious effort
S. Robbins
to perform their best. They are just not very good at presenting in front of people.
The source of their problem—and the problem with many ML algorithms—is not in
the explanation of the decision but in the efficacy of its decisions/actions given different contexts and inputs.
In this article, I have argued that the property of ‘requiring an explanation’
belongs to the decisions and actions themselves—not the entity performing the
action or decision. When we direct our attention to those decisions and actions, we
can better decide in which contexts and roles we should be using ML algorithms.
Furthermore, in showing that there is a catch 22 for explicable ML algorithms, it is
argued that the reason for making explicable AI is an epistemic one—not a moral
obligation. The only way to use explicable ML to solve the moral issue of algorithmic opacity is if we have already figured out the acceptable considerations for making the decision or performing the action at hand. If we already have those acceptable considerations, there is no need to use ML in the first place.
Acknowledgements  I would like to thank Aimee van Wynsberghe, Seumas Miller, Mark Alfano, Jonas
Feltes, Madelaine Ley, Tom Coggins, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback on earlier
Funding  The research benefited from the activities undertaken in the European Research Council
advanced grant project “Collective Responsibility and Counterterrorism” awarded to Professor Seumas
Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.