Surveillance & Society
CCTV Special (eds. Norris, McCahill and Wood)
2(2/3): 177-198
 
© 2004 Surveillance & Society and the author(s). All rights reserved. ISSN: 1477-7487
Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance: The Politics of
Facial Recognition Systems
Lucas D. Introna1 and David Wood2
This paper opens up for scrutiny the politics of algorithmic surveillance through an examination of Facial
Recognition Systems (FRS’s) in video surveillance, showing that seemingly mundane design decisions may
have important political consequences that ought to be subject to scrutiny. It first focuses on the politics of
technology and algorithmic surveillance systems in particular: considering t he broad politics of technology;
the nature of algorithmic surveillance and biometrics, claiming that software algorithms are a particularly
important domain of techno-politics; and finally considering both the growth of algorithmic biometric
surveillance and the potential problems with such systems. Secondly, it gives an account of FRS’s, the
algorithms upon which they are based, and the biases embedded therein. In the third part, the ways in which
these biases may manifest itself in real world implementation of FRS’s are outlined. Finally, some policy
suggestions for the future development of FRS’s are made; it is noted that the most common critiques of
such systems are based on notions of privacy which seem increasingly at odds with the world of automated
Introduction: the circulation of faces
In a post 9/11 world security has become a big question for those feeling vulnerable. As in so
many instances in social history the answer to this vulnerability is sought in a sort of certainty
rooted in surveillance . It is argued that through
surveillance and early detection the problem can be solved. Security can be secured.
Surveillance is a powerful technology for social control, however, when surveillance becomes
digitised then a there is a “step change in power, intensity and scope” . Digitisation permits the use of software algorithms (mathematical instructions –see
Section 2) for automated identification of human biometrics (a bodily trace - see Section 2)
With a biometric it is very difficult, if not impossible, for any individual to disassociate oneself (or
1 Centre for the Study of Technology and Organisation, Lancaster University Management School,
mailto: 
2 Global Urban Research Unit (GURU), School of Architecture Planning and Landscape, University of
Newcastle. mailto: 
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
be alienated) from one’s biometric – in a sense you are your biometric .
Thus, if there is a match between your body and your biometric certainty over identity can be
established. However effective surveillance also needs to be subtle, to be insinuated into the
context of everyday life. Indeed in the security world the perfect unobtrusive biometric is
considered the ‘holy grail’. It is therefore not surprising that facial recognition system (FRS)
have become a prime focus for the security establishment . Not only
are they relatively inexpensive, and supposedly effective, they require no involvement from their
targets. Unlike other biometrics facial recognition can operate anonymously in the background.
The targets do not need to surrender their face image, as they would their fingerprint, or their iris
scan. A face can be captured and (de)coded without the consent or participation from those
being targeted.
However, this ‘captured’ face image is only of use if it can be matched with an identifier. It
requires a database of face images with associated identities. Unlike fingerprints or DNA
samples, which are only collected when there is a reasonable level of suspicion of a crime, face
images are routinely collected in society by a variety of institutions, such as when we apply for a
driving licence, or a passport, or a library card, etc. It is the most common biometric in use by
humans to identify other humans. Indeed, in any western society, if one would somehow cover,
or be seen to attempt to disguise one’s face, then there is almost an immediate assumption of
guilt. One could almost say that there is an implicit common agreement to reveal our faces to
others as a condition for ongoing social order. Thus, we tend to reveal our face to others and
they to us. However, it seems that such an agreement only operates in a local and situated
manner, as part of the social relationships we control. We would find it unacceptable if a
stranger would photograph our face for no apparent reason. On the other hand we don’t find it
unacceptable to surrender our faces for the regulation of privileges—as long as we are in control
of its use and circulation. In most cases it is used in the moment of authentication (by means of
visual comparison) and then forgotten. However, what happens if our faces are collected
anonymously, encoded, and start to circulate in an invisible network, even if it is for seemingly
mundane reasons? When our face “becomes a bar code”, in the words of Agre . This
seems not what we have in mind when we reveal our faces? It seems to us that the presence of
FRS’s may indeed be changing the implied relationships we assume when facing others. This
concern becomes even more acute if we start to ‘unpack’ these algorithms to discover that to
the algorithms ‘all faces are not equal’. It is our contention that FRS’s is a very powerful and
ambiguous technology for social control. As such it requires much more scrutiny than it has had
up to now.
The purpose of this paper is to open up for scrutiny the politics of facial recognition technology
and its use in ‘smart’ CCTV. We aim to show that seemingly mundane design decisions may
have important political consequences that ought to be subject to scrutiny.
This paper is one step in that direction. It is structured as follows: the first section will focus on
the politics of technology and algorithmic surveillance systems in particular, considering first the
broad politics of technology, then explaining the nature of algorithmic surveillance and
biometrics, claiming that software algorithms are a particularly important domain of technopolitics; and finally considering both the growth of algorithmic biometric surveillance and the
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
potential problems with such systems. In the second section, we will give an account of FRS’s,
the algorithms they are based upon, and the biases embedded therein. In the third part, we will
discuss the ways in which these biases may manifest itself in real world implementation of
FRS’s. Finally, we will make some policy suggestion for the future development of FRS’s; it
should be noted that the most common critiques of such systems are based on notions of
privacy which seem increasingly at odds with the world of automated systems.
1. The Politics of Technology
The Micro-Politics of the Artefact
Technology is political . By this we mean that technology, by its very design,
includes certain interests and excludes others. It is mostly an implicit politics, part of a mundane
process of trying to solve practical problems. For example the ATM bank machine assumes a
particular person in front of it. It assumes a person that is able to see the screen, read it,
remember and enter a PIN code, etc. It is not difficult to imagine a whole section of society that
does not conform with this assumption. If you are blind, in a wheelchair, have problem
remembering, or unable to enter a PIN, because of disability, then your interest in accessing
your account can be excluded by the ATM design. This exclusion of interests may not be
obvious to the designers of ATMs as they may see their task as trying simply to solve a basic
problem of making banking transactions more efficient for the ‘average’ customer doing average
transactions. And they are mostly right — but if they are not, then their biases can become
profoundly stubborn. These systems often seem like devices for surveillance and social control
(in the sense of Foucault’s dispositif panoptique), but as Lianos has recently
pointed out, they are not designed with the monitoring and control of the human subject directly
in mind, rather this is a potential (or secondary) function of systems for ensuring flow.
Nevertheless the binary effects are in some senses quite irreversible. Where does the excluded
go to appeal when they are faced with a stubborn and mute object such as an ATM? Maybe
they can work around it, by going into the branch for example. This may be possible. However,
this exclusion becomes all the more significant because of the political economic context in which
these dispositifs exists and which they help to transform, for example if banks start to close
branches or charge for an over-the-counter transaction (as is happening). Thus, as the micropolitics of the ATM becomes tied to, and multiplied through other exclusionary practices, what
seems to be a rather trivial injustice soon may multiply into what may seem to be as an coherent
and intentional strategy of exclusion . Yet there is often nobody
there that ‘authored’ it as such . This paper will show how such
an ‘unauthored’ strategy may be emerging in facial recognition technology.
Thus, the politics of technology is more than the politics of this or that artefact. Rather these
artefacts function as nodes, or links, in a dynamic socio-technical network, or collective, kept in
place by a multiplicity of artefacts, agreements, alliances, conventions, translations, procedures,
threats, and so forth: in short by relationships of power and discipline .
Some are stable, even irreversible; some are dynamic and fragile. Analytically we can isolate
and describe these networks . However, as we survey the
landscape of networks we cannot locate, in any obvious manner, where they begin nor where
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
they end. Indeed we cannot with any degree of certainty separate the purely social from the
purely technical, cause from effect, designer from user, winners from losers, and so on.
In these complex and dynamic socio-technical networks ATMs, doors, locks, keys, cameras,
algorithms, etc. — function as political ‘locations’ where values and interests are negotiated and
ultimately ‘inscribed’ into the very materiality of the things themselves—thereby rendering these
values and interests more or less permanent . Through these
inscriptions, which may be more or less successful, those that encounter and use these inscribed
artefacts become, wittingly or unwittingly, enrolled into particular programmes, or scripts for
action. Neither the artefacts nor those that draw upon them simply except these inscriptions and
enrolments as inevitable or unavoidable. In the flow of everyday life artefacts often get lost,
break down, and need to be maintained. Furthermore, those that draw upon them use them in
unintended ways, ignoring or deliberately ‘misreading’ the script the objects may endeavour to
impose. Nevertheless, to the degree that these enrolments are successful, the consequences of
such enrolments can result in more or less profound political ‘ideologies’ that ought to be
scrutinised. We would claim that the politics of artefacts is much more mundane and much more
powerful than most other politics, yet it often evades our scrutiny. It is with this in mind that we
can introduce the politics of algorithmic surveillance
2. Algorithmic surveillance
What is an Algorithm?
The word ‘algorithm’ derives from the hugely influential 9th Century Muslim mathematician,
Muhammed ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, who produced the first extant text on algebra - a term
which also originates with him. 12th Century Christian scholars used al-Khwarizmi’s name,
latinized as ‘algorismus’ to differentiate his method of calculation from commonly used methods
like the abacus or counting tables3.
An algorithm is simply a mathematical, or logical, term for a set of instructions. Algorithms can
be divided into trivial and non-trivial types, the former being sets of instructions that are only
applicable to a specific situation, or a task that needs to further explanation, the latter being
instructions that will provide answers given any compatible input. Texts on algorithmics often
give the example of a recipe as a useful metaphor for understanding the concept, though in fact
this is slightly inaccurate: the recipe is more like software (see below).
Algorithms form the basis of modern mathematics and most importantly here, the foundation of
computing. However in themselves algorithms are not accessible to computers, they need to be
translated into a form that computers have been programmed to understand. This process,
known as coding (or hacking) produces software. Software is essentially composed of many
coded algorithms linked together to produce a desired output from the hardware. In the
metaphor mentioned above, the software is therefore the recipe. Computer hardware is not in
itself usually algorithmic, rather it is composed of many physical switches (however small) which
3 For more on the history of algorithms, see Chabert et al. .
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
have two positions, on/off, 1/0 etc. These switches then respond to instructions from the
software, once it has been translated (assembled) into binary machine code4.
Algorithmic Surveillance
The term ‘algorithmic surveillance’ was coined by Norris and Armstrong in their
pioneering book, The Maximum Surveillance Society. It is in literal terms surveillance that
makes use of automatic step-by-step instructions. However it is used specifically to refer to
surveillance technologies that make use of computer systems to provide more than the raw data
observed. This can range from systems that classify and store simple data, through more
complex systems that compare the captured data to other data and provide matches, to systems
that attempt to predict events based on the captured data.
Thus many surveillance technologies currently in use have algorithmic aspects, but not all. A citycentre CCTV system that provides images that are watched and analysed by guards or police is
not algorithmic. If such a system contains a computer which compares the faces of people
captured by the cameras which those of known offenders, then it is. If typists enter in the health
details of a patient into the Health Service computer, then it is algorithmic to a limited extent in
that software determines the extent of the information that can be entered, however it becomes
what is usually understood as algorithmic surveillance when, for example, a program is installed
which compares the patient records against signs of particular disease risk-factors, and defines
or categorises patients automatically.
Algorithmic Surveillance in Practice
There are now many algorithmic surveillance systems which watch over almost all aspects of this
planet and beyond (if one includes systems like the Hubble deep-space telescope and the
Cassini project). Many of these systems monitor the non-human (water and electricity flow etc.)
and are thus left largely unconsidered by social researchers; although there was a temporary
wave of concern prior to the year 2000 with the fear of the so-called Millenium Bug that
apparently had the potential to cause many of these systems to fail or malfunction. There are
many algorithmic systems which have a hybrid monitoring function, for example the recordings
of cash withdrawals from ATM machines, credit and debit card transactions and purchases in
stores to which we refered above.
There are also systems which algorithmically record data and sort about things, but things which
are related to human beings for example, car number plate recognition. Again these systems do
indirectly monitor people, but there is no necessary correlation between a particular human and
a number plate although this is quite likely and in some cases legally restricted. Systems like
movement recognition can be used both for nonhuman and inhuman things and human beings
depending on the circumstances and details of the technology used. Examples of these again are
often about flow management for example, the Prismatica/Cromatica movement-recognition
developed for the London Underground to ensure the movement of passengers is efficient and
safe. The original system as it turned out in operation had the unintended consequence of being
able to detect potential suicides – as it was observed that they remained relatively motionless on
4 For more on algorithms and computing, see Harel .
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
the platform for longer periods than most before jumping – but again this an
indirect consequence of the behaviour of human beings observed through a system of flow
management. These systems are extremely interesting because, whatever their intention, they do
transform the context of social interaction in quite fundamental ways creating what Lianos and
Douglas call Automated Socio-Technical Environments (ASTEs).
Recent years have however seen the largely experimental introduction of automated systems for
the direct monitoring of human beings based on physical traits unique to the individual. These
‘biometric’ identification systems include: gait recognition; fingerprint and palmprint recognition;
facial recognition; and iris recognition. Each has its own technical merits and drawbacks and
each is suitable for different uses in varying physical environments. The oldest of these are handgeometry recognition systems5 which internally have remained largely unchanged since the
1970s, and which still work very well in environments where access is restricted to a relatively
small database of people.
The Growth of Algorithmic Surveillance
Before the attacks of September 11th 2001, the biometrics industry was expanding steadily but
not spectacularly and was also facing increasing opposition from civil rights and privacy groups.
In the immediate aftermath of the attacks, particularly in the USA, there was a general
assumption that rights arguments would lose out during what one of us has elsewhere
characterised as a period of ‘surveillance surge’ wherein those
with an interest in new surveillance technologies promote them to a polity shocked enough by
events not to consider their efficiency, effectiveness or wider implications as carefully as they
might normally do.
Zureik 6 shows that within a few weeks of the terrorist attacks almost 17 bills were
introduced in the United States Congress, including measures “to tighten immigration, visa, and
naturalization procedures, allow tax benefits to companies that use biometrics, and check
employee background at border and maritime check points.”
He concludes that:
the combination of public fear, lobbying efforts of the industry, and linkages
between political and economic interests, have catapulted the industry to centre
stage in the fight against terrorism – an industry that until September 11 was a
marginal player in the security field (ibid.)
On the Silent Politics of the Software Algorithm
Having argued that technology is political, and introduced algorithmic surveillance systems, we
now want to claim that the politics of information technology (in the form of software algorithms)
is, in a sense, of a different order . We want to contend that
5 Manual fingerprinting is of course far older, but not initially automated, and even now remains only
partially so in most countries.
6 Quotations taken from a pre-publication proof (no page numbers).
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
scrutinising information technology is particularly problematic since information technology, in
particular algorithms, is what we would term a silent technology as opposed to a salient
technology . Obviously we do not see this distinction as a dichotomy but rather
as a continuum. As an attempt to draw this distinction some aspects are highlighted in Table 1
Table 1: Silent versus Salient Technology
Facial recognition algorithms in ‘smart’ CCTV is a particularly good example of a silent
technology. The facial recognition capability can be imbedded into existing CCTV networks,
making its operation impossible to detect. Furthermore, it is entirely passive in its operation. It
requires no participation or consent from its targets—it is “non-intrusive, contact-free process”
 . Its application is flexible. It can as easily be used by a
supermarket to monitor potential shoplifters (as was proposed and later abandoned, by the
Borders bookstore), by casinos to track potential fraudsters, by law enforcement to monitor
spectators at a Super Bowl match (as was done in Tampa, Florida), or used for identifying
‘terrorists’ at airports (as is currently in operation at various US airports). However, most
important is the obscurity of its operation.
This obscurity is due to two factors. First, most of the software algorithms at the heart of facial
recognition systems are propriety software objects. Thus, it is very difficult to get access to them
for inspection and scrutiny. More specifically, even if you can go through the code line by line, it
is impossible to inspect that code in operation, as it becomes implemented through multiple
layers of translation for its execution. At the most basic level we have electric currents flowing
through silicon chips, at the highest level we have programme instructions, yet it is almost
impossible to trace the connection between these as it is being executed. Thus, it is virtually
impossible to know if the code you inspected is the code being executed, when executed. In
short, software algorithms are operationally obscure. Second, most of the algorithms in facial
recognition are based on very sophisticated statistical methods that only a handful of experts can
interpret and understand. Indeed it seems that even they have been surprised by the behaviour
of their algorithms . Thus, for most ordinary members of society facial
recognition systems are somewhat exotic and obscure ‘black boxes’. After all they do well what
we find difficult to do — identify faces. This obscurity together with their obvious sophistication
may give them a legitimacy beyond that which they deserve. In moments of uncertainty they may
be taken as more authoritative than the humans involved — this could have important
implications as we will argue and show below.
Silent technology is:
Salient technology is:
Embedded / hidden
On the ‘surface’ /conspicuous
Passive operation
(limited user involvement)
Active operation
(fair user involvement)
Application flexibility
(open ended)
Application stability
(form/operation/outcome)
Transparent
(form/operation/outcome)
Mobile (soft-ware)
Located (hard-ware)
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
How then can we scrutinise these software algorithms? The only recourse we have to evaluating
these algorithms is to look at their performance under controlled conditions as was done in the
Facial Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) of 2000 and 2002. These evaluations will be the core
of our analysis below. This is not entirely satisfactory as these tests are mostly focused on the
evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of the systems and not focused on the discovery of
biases as such. In addition such tests are carried out through a highly interested and biased set of
parties: a transatlantic but US-military and intelligence dominated collective led by the US
Department of Defense (DoD).
It is our argument that the silent nature of information technology makes it difficult for society to
scrutinise it. Furthermore, this inability to scrutinise creates unprecedented opportunities for this
silent and ‘invisible’ micro politics to become pervasive . Thus, we
tend to have extensive community consultation and impact studies when we build a new
motorway. However, we tend not to do this when we install CCTV in public places or when
we install FRSs in public spaces such as airports, shopping malls, etc. To put is simply: most
informed people understand the cost (economic, personal, social, environmental) of a
motorway, however they do not understand the cost of FRSs in ‘smart’ CCTV. This paper is
an attempt to make this cost more visible.
3. The politics of Facial Recognition Systems
Getting a digital face: the facial recognition system
Figure 1 below depicts the typical way that a facial recognition system (FRS) system can be
made operational.
Figure 1: Overview of FRS
 
The first step is the capturing of a face image. This would normally be done using a still or video
camera. As such it can be incorporated into existing ‘passive’ CCTV systems. However,
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
locating a face image in the field of vision is not a trivial matter. The effectiveness of the whole
system is dependent on the quality of the captured face image. The face image is passed to the
recognition software for recognition (identification or verification). This would normally involve a
number of steps such as normalising the face image and then creating a ‘template’ of ‘print’ to
be compared to those in the database. If there is a ‘match’ then an alarm would solicit an
operator’s attention to verify the match and initiate the appropriate action. The match can either
be a true match which would lead to investigative action or it might be a ‘false positive’ which
means the recognition algorithm made a mistake and the alarm would be cancelled. Each
element of the system can be located at different locations within a network, making it easy for a
single operator to respond to a variety of systems.
For our analysis we want to concentrate on steps two and three of the system. We want to
scrutinise the FR algorithms, the image database (also called the gallery) and the operators. At
each of these points important decisions are made which may have an important political
implication.
Facial Recognition Algorithms and R eduction
Research in software algorithms for facial recognition has been ongoing for the last 30 years or
so . However, advances in information technology and statistical methods
have given impetus to this development with seemingly excellent recognition results and low
error rates—at least in ideal laboratory conditions. It is possible to identify two main categories
of algorithms according to Gross et al. :
• Image template algorithms. These algorithms use a template-based method to calculate the
correlation between a face and one or more standard templates to estimate the face identity.
These standard templates tend to capture the global features of a gallery of face images.
Thus, the individual face identity is the difference between (or deviation from) the general or
‘standard’ face. This is an intuitive approach since we as humans tend to look for distinctive
features (or differences from the general) when we identify individuals. Some of the
methods used are: Support Vector Machines (SVM), Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), Neural Networks, Kernel Methods etc. The most commercially known template
based algorithm is the MIT Bayesian Eigenface technique, which has been developed with
the PCA method. During various tests conducted in 1996, its performance was consistently
near the top compared to other available at the time.
• Geometry feature-based algorithms. These methods capture the local facial features and
their geometric relationships. They often locate anchor points at key facial features (eyes,
nose, mouth, etc), connect these points to form a net and then measure the distances and
angles of the net to create a unique face ‘print’. The most often cited of these is the
technique known as Local Feature Analysis (LFA), which is used in the Identix (formerly
Visionics) face recognition system called FaceIt. The LFA method, in contrast to the PCA
technique, is less sensitive to variations in lighting, skin tone, eye glasses, facial expression,
hair style, and individual’s pose up to 35 degrees.
The commonality in both of these groups of techniques is the issue of reduction. In order to be
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
efficient in processing and storage the actual face image gets reduced to a numerical
representation (as small as 84 bytes or 84 individual characters in the case of FaceIt). With this
reduction certain information is disregarded (as incidental or irrelevant) at the expense of others.
It is here that we need to focus our analysis. What are the consequences of the process of
reduction? It would be best to understand this through some detailed study of the logic and
operation of these algorithms in diverse settings with diverse databases. This has not yet being
done .
Nevertheless, with our limited knowledge we can make some logical conclusions and then see
how these may play out in the FRVT 2002 evaluations. How will the reduction effect the
performance of these algorithms?
Template based algorithms. In these algorithms certain biases become built into the
standard template. It obviously depends on the gallery used to create the standard template
as well as the range of potential variations within a population. For example, because
minorities tend to deviate the most from the standard template they might become easier to
recognise.
Feature based algorithms. These algorithms do not have an initial bias. However, because
of the reduction the ‘face prints’ generated are in close proximity to each other. Thus, as the
gallery database increases more and more face prints are generated in ever diminishing
proximity, thereby making the discrimination required for the recognition task more difficult.
Therefore the operation of the system deteriorates rapidly as the database increases (this is
also true for template based algorithms). It also makes the system dependent on good
quality face images. The implication of this is that the system will operate at its best with a
small database and good quality face capture, such as an operator assisted face capture
(reintroducing the operator bias). In addition to this it will tend to be better at identifying
those that are more distinctive, or less similar, to those already in the database (such as
minorities).
Thus, in both cases we would expect some form of bias to emerge as a result of the reduction.
Is this conclusion borne out by the performance of these algorithms in the FRVT? Let us now
consider the results of these evaluations.
The Evaluations: Reduction, Operation and Error
The most significant evaluation of FRSs happened with the Facial Recognition Vendor Tests of
2002 . These test were independent tests sponsored by a host of
organizations such as Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the Department
of State and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. This evaluation followed in the footsteps of the
earlier FRVT of 2000 and the FERET evaluations of 1994, 95 and 96. In the FRVT 2002 ten
FRS vendors participated in the evaluations. The FRVT of 2002 were more significant than any
of the previous evaluations because of:
The use of a large database (37437 individuals)
The use of a medium size database of outdoor and video images
Some attention given to demographics
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
The large database (referred to as the HCInt data set) is a subset of a much larger database
which was provided by the Visa Services Directorate, Bureau of Consular Affairs of the U.S.
Department of State. The HCInt data set consisted of 121,589 images of 37,437 individuals
with at least three images of each person. All individuals were from the Mexican non-immigrant
visa archive . The images were typical visa application type photographs with a universally
uniform background, all gathered in a consistent manner.
The medium size database consisted of a number outdoor and video images from various
sources. Figure 2 below gives an indication of the images in the database. The top row contains
images taken indoors and the bottom contains outdoor images taken on the same day. Notice
the quality of the outdoor images. The face is consistently located in the frame and similar in
orientation to the indoor images.
Figure 2: Indoor and outdoor images from the medium data base.
 
For the identification task an image of an unknown person is provided to a system (assumed to
be in the database). The system then compares the unknown image (called the probe image) to
the database of known people. The results of this comparison are then presented by the system,
to an operator, in a ranked listing of the top n ‘candidates’ (referred to as the ‘rank’, typically
anywhere from 1 to 50). If the correct image is somewhere in the top n, then the system is
considered to have performed the identification task correctly. Figure 3 below indicates the
performance at rank 1, 10 and 50 for the three top performers in the evaluation.
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
Figure 3: Performance at rank 1, 10 and 50 for the three top performers in the evaluation
 
With the very good images from the large database (37,437 images) the identification
performance of the best system at rank one is 73% at a false accept rate of 1%. There is a
tradeoff between the recognition rates and the level of ‘false accepts’ (incorrect identification)
one is prepared to accept, the false accept rate. If you are prepared to accept a higher false
accept rate then the recognition performance can go up. However, this will give you more cases
of false identification to deal with. This rate is normally a threshold parameter that can be set by
the operators of the system.
What are the factors that that can detract from this ‘ideal’ performance? There might be many.
The FRVT 2002 considered three:
Indoor versus outdoor images
The time delay between the database image and the probe image
The size of the database
The identification performance drops dramatically when outdoor images are used—in spite of
the fact that they can be judge as relatively good—as indicated above. One would not expect a
typical video camera to get this quality of image all the time. For the best systems the
recognition rate for faces captured outdoors (i.e. less than ideal circumstances) was only 50% at
a false accept rate of 1%. Thus, as the report concluded: “face recognition from outdoor
imagery remains a research challenge area.” The main reason for this problem is that the
algorithm cannot distinguish between the change in tone, at the pixel level, caused by a relatively
dark shadow, versus such a change caused by a facial feature. As such it starts to code
shadows as facial features. The impact of this on the identification may be severe if it happens to
be in certain key areas of the face.
As one would expect, the identification performance also decreases as time laps increases
between the acquisition of the database image and the newly captured probe image presented to
a system. FRVT 2002 found that for the top systems, performance degraded at approximately
5% points per year. It is not unusual of the security establishment to have a relatively old
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
photograph of a suspect. Thus, a two year old photograph will take 10% off the identification
performance. A study by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology found that two
sets of mugshots taken 18 months apart produced a recognition rate of only 57% . Gross et al found an even more dramatic deterioration. In their evaluation
the performance dropped by 20% in recognition rate for images just two weeks apart.
Obviously these evaluations are not directly comparable. Nevertheless, there is a clear indication
that there may be a significant deterioration when there is a time gap between the database
image and the probe image.
What about the size of the database? For the best system, “the top-rank identification rate was
85% on a database of 800 people, 83% on a database of 1,600, and 73% on a database of
37,437. For every doubling of database size, performance decreases by two to three overall
percentage points” . What would this mean for extremely large
databases? For example the UK fingerprint database consists of approximately 5.5 million
records. If one had a similar size ‘mugshot’ database how will the algorithms perform in
identifying a probe image in that database? If one takes the decrease to be 2.5% for every
doubling of the database, and use 73% at 37,437 as the baseline, then one would expect the
identification performance to be approximately 55% in ideal conditions and as low as 32% in
less than ideal conditions.
To conclude this discussion we can imagine a very plausible scenario where we have a large
database, less than ideal image due to factors such as variable illumination, outdoor conditions,
poor camera angle, etc, and the probe image is relatively old, a year or two. Under these
conditions the probability to be recognized is very low, unless one sets the false accept rate to a
much higher level, which means than there is a risk that a high number of individual may be
subjected to scrutiny for the sake of a few potential identifications. What will be the implications
of this for practice? We will take up this point again below. Obviously we do know how these
factors would act together and they are not necessarily cumulative. Nevertheless it seems
reasonable to believe that there will be some interaction that would lead to some cumulative
Such a conclusion can make sense of the Tampa Police Department case reported by ACLU
 as well as the Palm Beach International Airport also reported by
the ACLU. In the Tampa case the system was abandoned because of all the false positive
alarms it generated. As far as it could be ascertained it did not make one single positive
identification. In the Palm Beach Airport case the system achieved a mere 47% correct
identifications of a group of 15 volunteers using a database of 250 images . In
Newham, UK, the police admitted that the FaceIt system had not made a single positive
identification, in spite of working with a small database. One could argue that there might not
have been the potential for a match to be made as none of the individual in the database actually
appeared in the street. Nevertheless, the system could not ‘spot’ a Guardian journalist, placed
in the database, that intentionally presented himself in the two zones covered by the system
 . These cases indicate the complexity of real world scenarios. We now want to
move to the focal concern of this paper namely the question of biases in the algorithms
themselves.
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
Reduction and Biased Code
The most surprising outcome – for those involved – of the FRVT 2002 is the realization that the
algorithms displayed particular identification biases. First, recognition rates for males were higher
than females. For the top systems, identification rates for males were 6% to 9% points higher
than that of females. For the best system, identification performance on males was 78% and for
females was 79%. Second, recognition rates for older people were higher than younger people.
For 18 to 22 year olds the average identification rate for the top systems was 62%, and for 38
to 42 year olds was 74%. For every ten years increase in age, on average performance
increases approximately 5% through age 63. Unfortunately they could not check race as the
large data set consisted of mostly Mexican non-immigrant visa applicants. However, research
by Givens et al. , using PCA algorithms, has confirmed the biases in the FRVT 2002
(except for the gender bias) and also found a significant race bias. This was confirmed using
balanced databases and controlling for other factors. They concluded that: “Asians are easier
[to recognize] than whites, African-Americans are easier than whites, other race members are
easier than whites, old people are easier than young people, other skin people are easier to
recognize than clear skin people…” (8). Their results are indicated in Figure 4 below.
Figure 4: Factors making it harder or easier to correctly identify a probe image presented
to a system
 
These results were also found in another context by Furl, Phillips and O’Toole in their
study of recognition performance by thirteen different algorithms. One can legitimacy ask
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
whether these differences, probably in the order of 5-10%, really makes a difference? Are they
not rather trivial? We would argue that taken by themselves they may seem rather trivial.
However, as we argued earlier on, it is when these trivial differences become incorporated into
a network of practices that the may become extremely important. This is what we now want to
explore: the politics of the digital face as it becomes imbedded in practices.
4. The politics of the digital face
FRS’s: Efficient, Effective and Neutral
Many security analysts see FRSs as the ideal biometric to deal with the new emerging security
environment. They claim that it is efficient (FaceIt only requires a single 733 Mhz Pentium PC
to run) and effective, often quoting close to 80% recognition rates from the FRVT 2002
evaluation while leaving out of the discussion issues of the quality of the images used in the
FRVT, size of the database, the elapsed time between database image and probe image, etc.
But most of all they claim that these systems “performs equally well on all races and both
genders. Does not matter if population is homogeneous or heterogeneous in facial appearance”
(Faceit technical specification7). This claim is not only made by the suppliers of FRSs such as
Identix and Imagis Technologies. It is also echoed in various security forums: “Face recognition
is completely oblivious to differences in appearance as a result of race or gender differences and
is a highly robust Biometrics”8 Even the critical scholar Gary Marx argued that
algorithmic surveillance provides the possibility of eliminating discrimination. The question is not
whether these claims are correct or not. One could argue that in a certain sense they are correct.
The significance of these claims is the way they frame the technology. It presents the technology
itself as neutral and unproblematic. More than this it presents the technology as a solution to the
problem of terrorism. Atick of Identix claimed, in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, that with FaceIt
the US has the “ability to turn all of these cameras around the country into a national shield”
 . He might argue that in the face of terrorism ‘minor’ injustices (biases in the
algorithms) and loss of privacy is a small price to pay for security. This may be so, although we
would disagree.
Nevertheless, our main concern is that these arguments present the technical artifacts in isolation
with disregard to the socio-technical networks within which they will become imbedded. As
argued above, it is not just the micro-politics of the artifact that is the issue. It is how these
become multiplied and magnified as they become tied to other practices that is of significance.
We need to understand the ‘network effects’, as it were, of the micro-politics of artifacts. This is
especially so for silent digital technology. There is every reason to believe that the silent and
non-invasiveness of FRSs make it highly desirable as a biometric for digital surveillance. It is
therefore important that this technology becomes scrutinized for its potential in the sociotechnical network of digital surveillance. Thus, not just as isolated objects as was done in the
FRVTs but in its multiplicity of implementations and practices. We would claim it is here where
7 
8 -computers.com/biometrics/face.html
 
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
the seemingly trivial biases may become very important as they become incorporated into actual
practices.
FRS’s in Practice: Alarms, Biases and Suspects
There is an urgent need for an in-depth study of FRSs in practice and others). However, since we currently only have a limited
number of systems in operation and due to the sensitivity of these implementations it is unlikely
that we would be able do so in the near future. Thus, in the face of this limitation, we propose to
outline what we consider to be a highly probable scenario of how these digital biases may
become incorporated into other practices that would render these seemingly trivial biases
significant.
Based on the FRVT of 2002 we know that, although FRSs have the capability to achieve a 70-
85% accuracy rate, this is only in ideal circumstances. The system’s performance degrades
significantly in an uncontrolled ‘face-in-the-crowd’ environment, with a large database, and
where there is an elapsed time between the database image and the probe image. This would
seem to us to be a usual rather than an unusual situation. What will happen if the system’s
performance degrades under these rather usual conditions?
We would propose that two possibilities are most likely. First, it is possible that the operators
will become so used to false positives that they will start to treat all alarms as false positives
thereby rendering the system useless. Alternatively, they may deal with it by increasing the
identification threshold (requesting the system to reduce the number of false positives). This will
obviously also increase the false negatives, thereby raising all sorts of questions about the value
of the system into question. However, more important to us, with an increased threshold small
differences in identifiability (the biases outlined above) will mean that those that are easier to
identify by the algorithms (African-Americans, Asians, dark skinned persons and older people)
will have a greater probability of triggering the alarm. If the alarm is an actual positive
recognition then one could argue that nothing is lost. However, it also means that these groups
would be subjected to a higher probability of scrutiny as false positives, i.e. mistaken identity.
Moreover we would propose that this scrutiny will be more intense as it would be based on the
assumption that the system is working at a higher level and therefore would be more accurate.
In such a case existing biases, against the usual suspects (such as minorities), will tend to come
into play . The operators may even override their own
judgements as they may think that the system under such high conditions of operation must ‘see
something’ that they do not. This is highly likely as humans are not generally very good a facial
recognition in pressurised situations as was indicated in a study by Kemp et al. . Thus,
under these conditions the bias group (African-Americans, Asians, dark skinned persons and
older people) may be subjected to disproportionate scrutiny, thereby creating a new type of
‘digital divide’ .
How likely is this scenario? We believe it to be more likely than we presume. We have only the
following anecdotal evidence reported in the Discover Magazine of an installation at the Fresno
Yosemite International Airport to suggest:
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
“[The system] generates about one false positive for every 750 passengers
scanned, says Pelco vice president Ron Cadle. Shortly after the system was
installed, a man who looked as if he might be from the Middle East set the
system off. “The gentleman was detained by the FBI, and he ended up spending
the night,” says Cadle. “We put him up in a hotel, and he caught his flight the
next day.”
 
To produce only one false positive per 700 passengers the system had to operate with a very
restricted false positive rate, thereby suggesting that an alarm must ‘mean something’. Notice
that one of the false positives was a man supposedly from ‘Middle Eastern’ origin. The
individual was detained and questioned by the FBI because “looked as if he might be from the
Middle East” in spite of the fact that he was obviously a false positive. There could be many
explanations for this action. Nevertheless, it is likely that they may have decided to detain him
‘just in case’ the system saw something they did not see. This case clearly demonstrates the
scenario we outline above. Our analysis has demonstrated that seemingly trivial differences in
recognition rates, within the algorithm, can indeed have important political implications for some
when it becomes incorporated into a whole set of socio-technical surveillance practices.
One might imagine that in an environment where there is an acute sense of vulnerability it would
not be unreasonable to store these false positives in a database ‘just in case’. These false
positive may then become targets for further scrutiny. Why? Just because they have features that
make them more distinctive. We are not saying that this will happen. We are merely trying to
indicate how seemingly trivial ‘technical issues’ can add up to political ideologies at the expense
of some for the sake of others. This is the issue of the politics of FRSs. This is particularly
dangerous politics in the case of silent technologies such as FRSs.
Other areas remain problematic.In a legal-technical review of the technology based largely on a
previous FRVT, Michael Bromby claims that facial recognition offers a significant
improvement over human identification, which can be extremely limited. However he is also
careful to argue that because of shortcomings, it can only be considered as supplementary to
other human and technological forms of recognition. In fact the flaws in Facial Recognition are
similar to those of human identification: the problems of environmental conditions, angle of view,
the gradual decrease in ability to recognise as the number of individual faces to choose from
increases, the inability to deal with aging faces, and so on. Psychological research has shown
that human beings can only definitively recognise a limited number of people, and whilst this has
sometimes been attributed to evolutionary factors in human neural development, Facial
Recognition’s troubles with larger numbers may indicate that human facial types are simply more
limited in their basic variety than we often assume. The problem is that the simplest technical
solution – increasing the number of variables – leads to increasing complexity (and therefore
more problems) and also potentially makes the systems prey to less fundamental changes in
faces: hair, colour etc.
More complex solutions, for example, the use of predictive algorithms (as for example in the
Cromatica system operating on the London Underground) and neural networks (connectionism)
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
to allow heuristics (learning) in recognition systems, or ‘best guess’ and fuzzy logic systems, take
the system further away from the (at least relative) certainty about identity demanded by the
state and other users and more towards simulation or reconstruction. Surveillance of course has
always had a strong connection to simulation , but it seems
that with heuristic systems and even with simpler technologies analysed by FRVT 2002 like
normalisaton and three-dimensional morphing (where several images are converted into a virtual
model of the head), we are moving further along the spectrum towards outright simulation which
raises questions as to what exactly software-driven surveillance systems are ‘seeing’. The
complex modeling technologies also make the problem of enrolment – the difficulties of
obtaining the necessary images for the database – still more problematic.
A vital point is that the human actants involved in facial recognition collectives need to be aware
of these limitations. And it is not always evident that they are. A paper by Clive Reedman,
former Director of the UK’s Police Information Technology Organisation (PITO) posted onto
the Biometrics discussion list, refers to “the success of a CCTV/Facial Recognition
implementation in London’s East End” , when we have seen that success is
hardly how the implementation of the FaceIT system in Newham can be characterised. Indeed
the same paper lists quite clearly the theoretical attractions of facial recognition to law
enforcement:
manually attempting to find a ‘face in the crowd’, or identify a suspect from
pictures of known offenders is a notoriously difficult task, as well as a very
costly one in terms of police time. Just watch a single video monitor in a local
council’s control room for hours on end waiting for a particular individual to
appear for a second or two and you will soon realise the concept of ‘face
blindness’. See the success of a television programme such as the BBC’s
Crimewatch, which relies heavily on the fact that images can be shared amongst
a national audience and you will soon grasp that the chances of identifying an
individual increase dramatically the wider that audience is. 
However if there is any ‘law’ in the history of technology it is that technologies are rarely used in
ways that their inventors intended. Mitch Gray in a recent piece asks ‘Will we recognise
the facial recognition society?’ This is the right question with the wrong focus. There will not be
a facial recognition society, only partly because societies are never entirely defined by particular
technologies even in the era of ASTEs, but mainly because the limits of facial recognition may
mean that it will only ever be of limited use on its own. The use of facial recognition in the way in
which Reedman describes it above is far from the techno-optimistic PR of Biometrics
companies, rather is seen more mundanely as an efficient labour-saving device. The Tampa
experience suggests however that notions of efficiency are also questionable. Gray concentrates
on the development of micro-expression recognition technologies, but given the problems of
facial recognition at much more basic stages, it seems that this is some distance away.
None of this means that progress will slow the development and improvement of FRS’s. There
is no doubt in our minds that facial biometrics will remain a very important part of the future
security infrastructure. Kopel and Krause report that: “As of June 2001 the Departments
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
of Justice and Defence had given about $21.3 million and $24.7 million, respectively, to the
research and development of FRSs.” Its perceived efficiency, ease of implementation and
invisible nature make FRS the ideal biometric technology for the foreseeable future.
Conclusions
This paper has shown simply that at present FRS’s do not work in the way that is claimed by
their manufacturers, and that their use is at present highly limited in conjunction with open-street
CCTV. However the current enthusiasm for FRS’s means that FRS’s require careful scrutiny
and regulation. We can not remain naïve about such a powerful technology. On the other hand,
facial recognition can also be seen as merely a temporarily fashionable biometric amongst many
other surveillance technologies currently being advanced, and it is not the success or failure of
particular technologies that is driving the development of surveillance, but a move towards
integration of multiple technologies and new ways of managing information flow from these
multiple technologies.
This has important implications for theorising CCTV in that it emphasises that surveillance at
root is founded on sorting and categorisation not on vision . Theorising visibility
or vision cannot therefore provide in itself a general understanding of ‘surveillance’. Further it
emphasises the necessity of a socio-technical approach which is able to integrate technological
development into a more general understanding of what ‘society’ means, rather than seeing it as
something external to core social variables.
An important part of our democratic society is our supposed equality before the law.
Unfortunately, as many studies of police practices have shown, this is not always the case
 . These studies show that humans carry their biases into their workplace. That it is
not possible to simply exclude these prejudices from your workplace behaviour if they are
already part of your social make-up. Nevertheless, we are mostly aware of this. As such, one
can always legitimately appeal for further consideration and scrutiny. Indeed we have developed
a variety of mechanisms and procedures to scrutinise the behaviour of law enforcement officers.
However, when it comes to technology we mostly assume it to be neutral and value free. Thus,
we tend not to subject artefacts to the same level of scrutiny.
It is our view that this social and technical distinction with respect to technology is inappropriate
for two reasons: (a) technical artefact already embody values in its design, it is ‘society made
durable’ as suggested by Latour, and (b) technical artefact never act in isolation but become
imbedded into a socio-technical network in which the micro-politics of the artefact can become
multiplied and sized upon in many unexpected ways . We
believe we have given an illustration of this as exemplified in FRS. What would the policy
implication of such an analysis be. There are many. We will highlight the following:
A need for more detailed studies of FR algorithms with a particular emphasis on biases. We
need to understand why these biases emerge and what we ought to do to eliminate or limit
Introna and Wood: Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance
Surveillance & Society 2(2/3)
A need for more detailed studies of actual implementations of FRSs. What are the
appropriate ways to imbed this technology into a larger security infrastructure
The development of an appropriate legal framework to prevent the misuse of the technology
(especially as private installations increase). There is no doubt that this technology will also
contribute to ‘surveillance creep’ as argued by Marx .
A very strong legal framework that prohibit or control the circulation of individuals facial
biometric (‘face prints’) without due process.
Obviously more in-depth study of actual installations of FRS’s and a continuous and careful
watch on technological development in the biometrics industry and its political economy are
required. Nevertheless, we believe we have demonstrated that there are many aspects of this
silent technology that still needs to be scrutinised. It is not feasible to remain naïve to the politics
of such a powerful technology.