HAL Id: inria-00548587
 
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Human Detection Using Oriented Histograms of Flow
and Appearance
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs, Cordelia Schmid
To cite this version:
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs, Cordelia Schmid. Human Detection Using Oriented Histograms of Flow
and Appearance. European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV ’06), May 2006, Graz, Austria.
pp.428–441, ￿10.1007/11744047_33￿. ￿inria-00548587￿
Human Detection using Oriented Histograms
of Flow and Appearance
Navneet Dalal, Bill Triggs and Cordelia Schmid
GRAVIR-INRIA, 655 avenue de l’Europe, Montbonnot 38330, France
 
Abstract. Detecting humans in ﬁlms and videos is a challenging problem owing to the motion of the subjects, the camera and the background and to variations in pose, appearance, clothing, illumination and background clutter. We develop a detector for standing and moving people in videos with possibly moving
cameras and backgrounds, testing several different motion coding schemes and
showing empirically that orientated histograms of differential optical ﬂow give
the best overall performance. These motion-based descriptors are combined with
our Histogram of Oriented Gradient appearance descriptors. The resulting detector is tested on several databases including a challenging test set taken from
feature ﬁlms and containing wide ranges of pose, motion and background variations, including moving cameras and backgrounds. We validate our results on
two challenging test sets containing more than 4400 human examples. The combined detector reduces the false alarm rate by a factor of 10 relative to the best
appearance-based detector, for example giving false alarm rates of 1 per 20,000
windows tested at 8% miss rate on our Test Set 1.
Introduction
Detecting humans in video streams is a challenging problem owing to variations in
pose, body shape, appearance, clothing, illumination and background clutter. Moving cameras or backgrounds make it even harder. Potential applications include ﬁlm
and television analysis, on-line pedestrian detection for smart vehicles and video
surveillance. Although single-image appearance based detectors have made considerable advances in recent years (e.g. ), they are not yet reliable enough for many
practical applications. On the other hand, certain kinds of movement are very characteristic of humans, so detector performance can potentially be improved by including
motion information. Most existing work in this area assumes that the camera and the
background are essentially static. This greatly simpliﬁes the problem because the mere
presence of motion already provides a strong cue for human presence. For example,
Viola et al. ﬁnd that including motion features markedly increases the overall performance of their system, but they assume a ﬁxed surveillance camera viewing a largely
static scene. In our case, we wanted a detector that could be used to analyse ﬁlm and TV
content, or to detect pedestrians from a moving car – applications in which the camera
and the background often move as much as the people in the scene, if not more. The
main challenge is thus to ﬁnd a set of features that characterize human motion well,
while remaining resistant to camera and background motion.
Fig. 1. Sample images from our human motion database, which contains moving people
with signiﬁcant variation in appearance, pose, clothing, background, illumination, coupled with moving cameras and backgrounds. Each pair shows two consecutive frames.
This paper introduces and evaluates a number of motion-based feature sets for human detection in videos. In particular it studies oriented histograms of various kinds of
local differences or differentials of optical ﬂow as motion features, evaluating these both
independently and in combination with the Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) appearance descriptors that we originally developed for human detection in static images
 . The new descriptors are designed to capture the relative motion of different limbs
while resisting background motions. Combining them with the appearance descriptors
reduces the false alarm rate by an order of magnitude in images with movement while
maintaining the performance of the original method in stationary images.
The detectors are evaluated on two new and challenging feature ﬁlm based data sets,
giving excellent results. Fig. 1 shows some typical image pairs from our ‘Test Set 1’ (see
Contents. § 2 brieﬂy reviews the state-of-art in human detection in static and moving
images. § 3 describes the overall system architecture. § 4–7 respectively describe the
appearance descriptors, the motion descriptors, the optical ﬂow methods and the training and test data sets that we used. § 8 studies the effect of representation choices and
parameter settings on performance, and § 9 summarizes the results.
Previous Work
We will only mention a few of the more recent works on human detection here – see
Gavrilla’s survey for older references. A polynomial SVM based pedestrian detector
(upright whole-body human detector) using rectiﬁed Haar wavelets as input descriptors
is described in , with a parts (subwindow) based variant in . The pedestrian
detector of Gavrila & Philomen takes a more direct approach, extracting edge images and matching them to a set of learned exemplars using chamfer distance. This
has recently been extended to a practical real-time pedestrian detection system . The
success of SIFT appearance descriptors for object recognition has motivated several recent approaches. Mikolajczyk et al. use position-orientation histograms of
binary image edges as image features, combining seven “part” (subwindow) detectors
to build a static-image detector that is robust to occlusions. Our own static detector 
uses a dense grid of SIFT-like blocks with a linear SVM for static-image person detection, giving false alarm rates 1–2 orders of magnitude lower than . Leibe et al. 
developed an effective static-image pedestrian detector for crowded scenes by coding
Compute optical
differential flow
Weighted vote
into spatial &
orientation cells
Contrast normalize
over overlapping
spatial blocks
Compute image
Weighted vote
into spatial &
orientation cells
Contrast normalize
over overlapping
spatial blocks
Collect HOG's
over detection
Consecutive
Primary input
Motion descriptor computation
Appearance descriptor computation
Fig. 2. The feature extraction process for our combined detector.
local image patches against a learned codebook and combining the resulting bottom up
labels with top-down reﬁnement.
Regarding person detectors that incorporate motion descriptors, Viola et al. 
build a detector for static-camera surveillance applications, using generalized Haar
wavelets and block averages of spatiotemporal differences as image and motion features and a computationally efﬁcient rejection chain classiﬁer trained with
AdaBoost feature selection. The inclusion of motion features increases the performance by an order of magnitude relative to a similar static detector. Other surveillance
based detectors include the ﬂow-based activity recognition system of Haritaoglu et al.
 . Efros et al. used appearance and ﬂow features in an exemplar based detector
for long shots of sports players, but quantitative performance results were not given.
Overall Architecture
This paper focuses on developing effective motion features so we have adopted a single
relatively simple learning framework as a baseline in most of our experiments. For
simplicity, we concentrate on detecting people who are upright and fully or almost fully
visible. However they may be stationary or moving, against a background that may be
stationary or moving. Linear SVM’s are used as a baseline classiﬁer. They offer
good performance relative to other linear classiﬁers and they are fast to run, providing at
least a prospect of reliable real time detection. Three properties make them valuable for
comparative testing work: reliable, repeatable training; the ability to handle large data
sets gracefully; and good robustness to different choices of feature sets and parameters.
Nonlinear SVM’s typically achieve slightly lower error rates, but this comes at the cost
of greatly increased run time and in practice we ﬁnd that the main conclusions about
feature sets remain unchanged.
Our person detector combines appearance descriptors extracted from a single frame
of a video sequence with motion descriptors extracted from either optical ﬂow or spatiotemporal derivatives against the subsequent frame. It scans a 64×128 pixel window
across the image at multiple scales, running a linear SVM classiﬁer on the descriptors extracted from each resulting image window. The classiﬁer is trained to make
person/no-person decisions using a set of manually labeled training windows. Fig. 2
gives an overview of the feature extraction process. Image gradient vectors are used to
produce weighted votes for local gradient orientation and these are locally histogrammed
to produce an appearance descriptor (SIFT / HOG process) . Differentials of optical
ﬂow are fed to a similar oriented voting process based on either ﬂow orientation or
oriented spatial gradients of ﬂow components. Each descriptor set is normalized over
local, overlapping blocks of spatial cells, and the resulting normalized histograms are
concatenated to make the detection window descriptor vector used in the detector.
For the learning process we use a method similar to that of . We start with a set
of training images (here consecutive image pairs so that ﬂow can be used) in which all
of the positive training windows (ones containing people) have been manually marked.
A ﬁxed set of initial negative training windows was selected by randomly sampling the
negative images. A preliminary classiﬁer is trained on the marked positives and initial
negatives, and this is used to search the complete set of negative images exhaustively
for false alarms. As many of these “hard negatives” as will ﬁt into the available RAM
are selected randomly and added to the training set, and the ﬁnal classiﬁer is trained.
Each classiﬁer thus has its own set of hard negatives. This retraining procedure signiﬁcantly increases the performance of every detector that we have tested. Additional
rounds of search for hard negatives make little difference, so are not used. In most of
the experiments below the RAM is limited to 1.5 GB, so the larger the descriptor vector,
the smaller the number of hard examples that can be included. We think that this is fair
as memory is typically the main resource limitation during training.
In use, the algorithm runs a detection window across the image at all positions and
scales, giving a detection score at each point. Negative scores are zeroed and a 3D
position-scale mean shift process is run to identify signiﬁcant local peaks in the
resulting score. If above threshold, these are declared as detections. Currently there is
no attempt to enforce temporal continuity of detections: the detector runs independently
in each pair of images.
Appearance Descriptors
The static-image part of our descriptor set uses Histogram of Oriented Gradient
grids (HOG) – a close relation of the descriptor in Lowe’s SIFT approach – to code
visual appearance. Brieﬂy, the HOG method tiles the detector window with a dense
grid of cells, with each cell containing a local histogram over orientation bins. At each
pixel, the image gradient vector is calculated and converted to an angle, voting into the
corresponding orientation bin with a vote weighted by the gradient magnitude. Votes are
accumulated over the pixels of each cell. The cells are grouped into blocks and a robust
normalization process is run on each block to provide strong illumination invariance.
The normalized histograms of all of the blocks are concatenated to give the windowlevel visual descriptor vector for learning. To reduce aliasing, spatial and angular linear
interpolation, and in some cases Gaussian windowing over the block, are used during
voting. The blocks overlap spatially so that each cell appears several times with different
normalizations, as this typically improves performance. See for further details and a
study of the effects of the various parameters. The same default parameter settings are
used here.
Motion Descriptors
To use motion for human detection from moving cameras against dynamic backgrounds
we need features that characterize human movements well while remaining resistant to
typical camera and background motions. Most of the existing motion descriptors, such
as the phase based features of Fleet & Jepson and the generalized wavelet features of
Viola et al. , use absolute motions and hence work well only when the camera and
background are largely static. Nor do these representations take into account the lessons
learned from the SIFT / HOG family of descriptors . This section introduces
descriptors that use differential ﬂow to cancel out most of the effects of camera motion
and HOG like oriented histogram voting to obtain robust coding.
First note that the image ﬂow induced by camera rotation (pan, tilt, roll) varies
smoothly across the image irrespective of 3D depth boundaries, and in most applications
it is locally essentially translational because signiﬁcant camera roll is rare. Thus, any
kind of local differential or difference of ﬂow cancels out most of the effects of camera
rotation. The remaining signal is due to either depth-induced motion parallax between
the camera, subject and background, or to independent motion in the scene. Differentials of parallax ﬂows are concentrated essentially at 3D depth boundaries, while those
of independent motions are largest at motion boundaries. For human subjects, both
types of boundaries coincide with limb and body edges, so ﬂow differentials are good
cues for the outline of a person. However we also expect internal dynamics such as relative limb motions to be quite discriminant for human motions and differentials taken
within the subject’s silhouette are needed to capture these. Thus, ﬂow-based features
can focus either on coding motion (and hence depth) boundaries, or on coding internal
dynamics and relative displacements of the limbs.
Notation: Ix, Iy denote images containing the x (horizontal) and y (vertical) components of optical ﬂow, Iw = (Ix, Iy) denote the 2D ﬂow image (w = (x, y)), and
y denote the corresponding x- and y-derivative differential ﬂow images.
dyIx is the y-derivative of the x component of optical ﬂow.
Motion Boundary Based Coding
For motion boundary coding it is natural to try to capture the local orientations of motion edges by emulating the static-image HOG descriptors . The simplest approach
is to treat the two ﬂow components Ix, Iy as independent ‘images’, take their local
gradients separately, ﬁnd the corresponding gradient magnitudes and orientations, and
use these as weighted votes into local orientation histograms in the same way as for the
standard gray scale HOG. We call this family of schemes Motion Boundary Histograms
(MBH) (see Fig. 3). A separate histogram can be built for each ﬂow component, or the
two channels can be combined, e.g. by the winner-takes-all voting method used to handle color channels in . We ﬁnd that separate histograms are more discriminant. As
with standard gray scale HOG, it is best to take spatial derivatives at the smallest possible scale ([1, 0, −1] mask) without any form of smoothing.
Fig. 3. Illustration of the MBH descriptor. (a,b) Reference images at time t and t+1.
(c,d) Computed optical ﬂow, and ﬂow magnitude showing motion boundaries. (e,f) Gradient magnitude of ﬂow ﬁeld Ix, Iy for image pair (a,b). (g,h) Average MBH descriptor
over all training images for ﬂow ﬁeld Ix, Iy.
Internal / Relative Dynamics Based Coding
One could argue that the static appearance descriptor already captures much of the
available boundary information, so that the ﬂow based descriptor should focus more on
capturing complementary information about internal or relative motions. This suggests
that ﬂow differences should be computed between pairs of nearby, but not necessarily
neighboring, points, and that angular voting should be based on the direction of the
ﬂow difference vector, not the direction of the spatial derivative displacement. So in
opposition to MBH, we use (Ix
x) and (Ix
y) as the pairs for angular voting, and
the simple x, y derivatives are replaced by spatial differences taken at larger scales,
perhaps in several different directions. We will call this family of schemes Internal
Motion Histograms (IMH). Ideally, IMH descriptors would directly capture the relative
movements of different limbs, e.g. left vs. right leg, but choosing the necessary spatial
displacements for differencing would require reliable part detectors. Instead we test
simple variants based on ﬁxed spatial displacements, as follows:
IMHdiff is the simplest IMH descriptor. It takes ﬁne-scale derivatives, using (Ix
y) to create two relative-ﬂow-direction based oriented histograms. As with
MBH, using separate orientation histograms for the x- and y-derivatives is better than
combining them. Variants of IMHdiff use larger (but still central) spatial displacements
for differencing – 5 pixels apart ([1, 0, 0, 0, −1] mask), or even 7 – and take spatial
differencing steps along several different directions, e.g. including diagonal axes.
IMHcd uses the blocks-of-cells structure of the HOG descriptors differently. It uses
3×3 blocks of cells, in each of the 8 outer cells computing ﬂow differences for each
pixel relative to the corresponding pixel in the central cell and histogramming to give
an orientation histogram1. Figure 4(a) illustrates. The resulting 8 histograms are normalized as a block. The motivation is that if the person’s limb width is approximately
1 IMHcd uses non-central cell-width spatial differences that access only pixels within the block,
whereas IMHdiff uses central differences and in the boundary cells it accesses pixels that lie
outside the block.
Fig. 4. Different coding schemes for IMH descriptors. (a) One block of IMHcd coding
scheme. The block is partitioned into cells. The dots in each cell represent the cell pixels. The arrows emerging from the central cell show the central pixel used to compute
differences for the corresponding pixel in the neighbouring cell. Similar differences are
computed for each of the 8 neighbouring cells. Values +1 and −1 represent the difference weights. (b) The wavelet operators used in the IMHwd motion coding scheme.
the same as the cell size, IMHcd can capture relative displacements of the limbs w.r.t.
to the background and nearby limbs. The results in § 8 support this hypothesis.
IMHmd is similar to IMHcd, but instead of using the corresponding pixel in the central
cell as a reference ﬂow, it uses the average of the corresponding pixels in all 9 cells. The
resulting 9 histograms are normalized as a block.
IMHwd is also similar to IMHcd but uses Haar wavelet like operators rather than
non-central differences, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
ST Diff . We also evaluated a scheme inspired by Viola et al. based on simple spatiotemporal differencing rather than ﬂow. For each pixel, its 3×3 stride-8 neighborhood
at the next time step is taken and its image intensity is subtracted from each of these 9
pixels. The absolute values are accumulated over each cell to make a 9 bin histogram
for the cell, which then undergoes the usual block normalization process.
Descriptor Parameters.
For the combined ﬂow and appearance detectors with the optimal cell size of 8×8 pixels, memory constraints limit us to a total of about 81 histogram bins per cell. (Increasing the histogram size beyond this is possible, but it reduces the number of hard
negatives that can be ﬁtted into memory during re-training to such an extent that performance suffers). In the experiments below, we test: MBH with 9 gradient orientations, 2
separate ﬂow components, and 4× block overlap; IMHdiff with 2 displacements (horizontal and vertical [1, 0, −1] masks), 9 ﬂow orientations and 4× block overlap; and
IMHcd, IMHwd and IMHmd with eight 8-pixel displacements and 6 ﬂow orientations.
All of the methods use orientation histograms with votes weighted by vector modulus followed by a block-level normalization – essentially the same scheme as the original HOG descriptor . We tested various different bin sizes, normalization schemes,
etc. with similar conclusions to . For both MBH and IMHdiff, ﬁne (9 bin) orientation coding with 2×2 blocks of 8×8 pixel cells seem to be best. 3 × 3 blocks of
cells (9× block overlap) perform better for the ﬂow-only MBH classiﬁer, but for the
combined detectors the performance of this combination drops owing to the increased
feature size. Changing the cell size from 8 × 8 to 6 × 6 only reduces the performance
slightly. Good normalization of the blocks is critical and for the ﬂow descriptors Lowe’s
hysteresis-based L2 normalization seems to do signiﬁcantly better than L2 or L1-sqrt
normalization. We tried larger displacement masks (3- and 5- pixel displacement) for
MBH but found that the performance drops. For the IMHcd/wd/md schemes, 6 and 9
orientation bins give the same performance (we use 6 below), and Lowe’s hysteresis
based L2 normalization still works best, but only by a small margin.
We also evaluated variants that use the least squares image prediction error of the
estimated ﬂow as a ﬂow quality metric, down-weighting the histogram vote in proportion to exp(−|e|/σ), where e is the ﬁtting error over the local 5 × 5 window. This very
slightly (≲1%) improves the performance provided that σ is not set too small.
We also tested various motion descriptors that do not use orientation voting (e.g.
based simply on the modulus of velocity), but the results were signiﬁcantly worse.
Optical Flow Estimation
We tried several optical ﬂow methods. Our initial testing was done with the Otago implementation of the Proesmans et al. multi-scale nonlinear diffusion based algorithm. This gives dense high-quality sub-pixel motion estimates but it is computationally expensive (15 seconds per frame). Also, motion boundaries are critical for human
detection and we recently began to suspect that the Otago ﬂows were over-regularized
for this application. To test this we implemented a simple but fast ﬂow method based
on the constant brightness assumption . Flow is found top-down in a multi-scale
approach, with initial ﬂow estimates made at a coarse scale propagated downwards and
reﬁned in ﬁne scale steps. The ﬂow w is estimated independently at each pixel by solving a damped Linear Least Squares equation w = (A⊤A + βI)−1A⊤b over a small
N × N neighborhood, where b is an N 2 column vector encoding the temporal image
differences, A is an N 2 × 2 matrix of spatial gradients [Ix, Iy], and β is a damping
factor included to reduce numerical issues arising from singular A⊤A. The model does
not include any explicit spatial regularization or smoothing and its ﬂow estimates are
visibly less accurate than the Otago ones, but our experiments show that using it in the
combined detector reduces false positives by a factor of more than 3 at 8% miss rate. In
fact, any regularization aimed at improving the ﬂow smoothness appears to reduce the
detector performance. Our method is also much faster than the Otago one, running in 1
second on DVD resolution 752 × 396 images, with N = 5 and a scale reﬁnement step
of 1.3. The new method is used in all of the experiments in § 8 unless otherwise noted.
We also tested motion descriptors based on an MPEG-4 block matcher taken from
the www.xvid.org codec. No attempt was made to enforce motion continuity between blocks. Even though the matching estimates were visually good, the detection
results were not competitive. We think that there are several reasons for this. Firstly,
block matching provides only one vote for each cell, whereas with optical ﬂow each
pixel provides a separate vote into the histogram. Secondly, the block matching ﬂow estimates do not have deep sub-pixel accuracy. Experiments on rounding the ﬂow values
from the Otago code showed that even 1/10 of a pixel of rounding causes the performance to drop signiﬁcantly (the need for accurate orientation voting is one reason for
this). Thirdly, 8×8 MPEG blocks are too large for the best results.
To train our detectors, we selected shots from various movie DVDs and personal digital camera video sequences and annotated the humans in them. Our main training set,
‘Training Set 1’, was obtained from 5 different DVDs. It contains a total of 182 shots
with 2781 human examples (5562 including left-right reﬂections). We created two test
sets. ‘Test Set 1’ contains 50 shots and 1704 human examples from unseen shots from
the DVDs used in Training Set 1. Test Set 2 is more challenging, containing 2700 human
examples from 128 shots from 6 new DVDs.
We have also used the static-image training and test sets from (available at
 In this paper, we call these
the ‘Static Training/Test Sets’. They contain respectively 2416 training and 1132 test
images. Even though the Static Training Set has no (zero) ﬂow, we ﬁnd that including
it along with Training Set 1 signiﬁcantly improves the performance of both the static
and the combined detectors (see § 8). More precisely, the detector performance on Test
Set 1 improves, without changing that of the static detector on the Static Test Set. This
is perhaps because the Set 1 images contain many poses that do not appear in the Static
sets – notably running and other rapid actions.
Experiments
To quantify the performance of the various detectors we plot Detection Error Tradeoff
(DET) curves, i.e. Miss Rate (1 −Precision or NFalseNeg/(NFalseNeg + NTruePos))
versus False Positives Per Window tested (FPPW) on logarithmic scales. DET plots
present the same information as Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves in a
more readable form. Lower curves are better.
We begin by comparing the results of the motion descriptors introduced above,
trained and tested on Set 1. Figure 5(a,b) give results respectively for detectors learned
with the motion descriptors alone, and for detectors that include both these features and
the HOG appearance descriptors. The oriented histogram of differential ﬂow schemes
MBH and IMHdiff with the Proesmans ﬂow method dominate the motion-only results.
In fact for the video test sets (which do contain many frames without much visible
movement) these motion features alone are within an order of magnitude of the static
HOG detector and signiﬁcantly better than the static Haar wavelet detector. When motion and appearance features are combined, neither the Proesmans ﬂow method nor the
MBH descriptors perform so well and it is IMHcd and IMHmd computed using our
ﬂow method that are the leaders. Below we use SHOG + IMHcd as the default combined detector, although SHOG + IMHmd would lead to similar conclusions.
DET − train (set1) / test (set1)
false positives per window (FPPW)
DET − train (set1) / test (set1)
false positives per window (FPPW)
SHOG + MBH
SHOG + IMHdiff
SHOG + IMHcd
SHOG + IMHmd
SHOG + IMHwd
SHOG + STDiff
SHOG + P−IMHcd
Fig. 5. A comparison of the different motion descriptors, trained on Training Set 1 and
tested on Test Set 1, using: (a) the motion feature set alone; and (b) the motion feature
set combined with the SHOG appearance descriptor. The preﬁx ‘P’ in the MBH and
IMH legends denotes the same methods using Proesmans’ ﬂow estimates.
Fig. 5 shows that motion-only results are not a good guide to the performance of the
combined detector. The reduced spread of the results in the combined case suggests that
there is a considerable degree of redundancy between the appearance and motion channels. In particular, IMHdiff and MBH are the schemes with the smallest spatial strides
and thus the greatest potential for redundancy with the human boundary cues used by
the appearance based descriptors – factors that may explain their reduced performance
after combination. Similarly, the strong regularization of the Proesmans’ ﬂow estimates
may make them effective cues for motion (and hence occlusion) boundaries, while the
unregularized nature of ours means that they capture motion within thin limbs more accurately and hence provide information that is more complementary to the appearance
descriptors.
Figure 6 demonstrates the overall performance of a selection of our detectors on
several different test sets. Unless otherwise noted, the detectors are trained on the combined Set 1 and Static Training Sets. The static (appearance based) detectors shown are:
SHOG – the HOG detector of ; SHOG (static) – SHOG trained on the Static Training
Set alone, as in ; and Wavelet – our version of the static Haar wavelet based detector
of . Two combined detectors are also shown: SHOG + IMHcd – SHOG combined
with the IMHcd ﬂow feature (8-pixel steps in 8-neighbor directions); and SHOG + ST
Diff – SHOG combined with Viola et al. spatiotemporal differences .
Again the good performance of the SHOG + IMHcd combination is apparent. The
absolute results on Test Set 2 are an order of magnitude worse than on Test Set 1 owing
to the more challenging nature of the images, but the relative rankings of the different
methods are remarkably stable. Overall, on video data for which motion estimates are
available, the false alarm rates of the best combined detectors are an order of magnitude
lower than those for the best static-appearance-based ones.
DET − train (set1+static) / test (set1)
false positives per window (FPPW)
SHOG+IMHcd
SHOG+STDiff
SHOG (trained on only static)
DET − train (set1+static) / test (set2)
false positives per window (FPPW)
SHOG+IMHcd
SHOG+STDiff
SHOG (trained on only static)
DET − train (set1+static) / test (set1+static)
false positives per window (FPPW)
SHOG + IMHcd
SHOG + STDiff
SHOG (trained on only static)
DET − train (set1+static) / test (set2+static)
false positives per window (FPPW)
SHOG + IMHcd
SHOG + STDiff
SHOG (trained on only static)
Fig. 6. An overview of the performance of our various detectors. All detectors are
trained on Training Set 1 combined with the Static Training Set with ﬂow set to zero.
They are tested respectively on: (a) Test Set 1; (b) Test Set 2; (c) Test Set 1 plus the
Static Test Set; (d) Test Set 2 plus the Static Test Set.
Given that we want methods that can detect people reliably whether or not they are
moving, we were concerned that the choice of method might be sensitive to the relative
proportion of moving and of static people in the videos. To check this, we tested the
detectors not only on the pure video Test Sets 1 and 2, but also on the combination of
these with the Static Test Set (again with static image ﬂows being zero). The results are
shown in ﬁg. 6(c–d). Diluting the fraction of moving examples naturally reduces the
advantage of the combined methods relative to the static ones, but the relative ranking
of the methods remains unchanged. Somewhat surprisingly, table 1 shows that when
used on entirely static images for which there is no ﬂow, the best combined detectors
do marginally better the best static one. The images here are from the Static Test Set,
with the detectors trained on Training Set 1 plus the Static Training Set as before.
Figure 7 shows some sample detections of the combined detector (SHOG + IMHcd
trained on Set 1 + Static) on images from Test Set 2. Set 2 contains challenging images
Fig. 7. Sample detections on Test Set 2 from the combined SHOG + IMHcd detector
trained on Set 1 + Static. Note the variations in pose, appearance, background and
lightning.
SHOG + IMHcd
SHOG + ST Diff
Table 1. The miss rates of various detectors trained on Set 1 + Static images and tested
on purely Static images. Despite the complete lack of ﬂow information, the combined
detectors provide slightly better performance than the static one.
taken from different ﬁlms from the training images. Here there are shots of people in
Indian costume, some dance sequences, and people in crowds that are different from
anything seen in the training images.
The experiments shown here use linear SVMs. Informal tests with Gaussian kernel
SVMs suggest that these would reduce false positives by an additional factor of about
2, at a cost of a 5000-fold increase in run time.
Mixture of Experts. The combined-feature detectors above are monolithic – they concatenate the motion and appearance features into a single large feature vector and train
a combined classiﬁer on it. We have also tested an alternative Mixture of Experts architecture. In this, separate detectors are learned from the appearance features and from
the motion features, and a second stage classiﬁer is then trained to combine the (real
valued scalar) outputs of these to produce a combined detector. In our case the second
stage classiﬁer is a linear SVM over a 2D feature space (the appearance score and the
motion score), so the ﬁnal system remains linear in the input features. This approach
keeps the feature space dimensions relatively low during training, thus allowing more
hard negatives to be included at each stage. (Indeed, for the 2D second stage classi-
ﬁer there can be millions of them). In our experiments these effects mitigate the losses
due to separate training and the linear Mixture of Experts classiﬁer actually performs
slightly better than the best monolithic detector. For now the differences are marginal
(less than 1%), but the Mixture of Experts architecture provides more ﬂexibility and
may ultimately be preferable. The component classiﬁers could also be combined in a
more sophisticated way, for example using a rejection cascade to improve the
Summary and Conclusions
We have developed a family of high-performance detectors for fully visible humans in
videos with moving people, cameras and backgrounds. The detectors combine gradient based appearance descriptors with differential optical ﬂow based motion descriptors in a linear SVM framework. Both motion and appearance channels use oriented
histogram voting to achieve a robust descriptor. We studied various different motion
coding schemes but found that although there are considerable performance differences
between them when motion features alone are used, the differences are greatly reduced
when the features are used in combination with static appearance descriptors. The best
combined schemes used motion descriptors based on oriented histogramming of differences of unregularized multiscale ﬂow relative to corresponding pixels in adjacent cells
(IMHcd) or to local averages of these (IMHmd).
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the European Union research projects
ACEMEDIA and PASCAL. SVMLight proved reliable for training large-scale SVM’s.
We thank Matthijs Douze for his comments on the manuscript.