High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models
Robin Rombach1 *
Andreas Blattmann1 ∗
Dominik Lorenz1
Patrick Esser
Bj¨orn Ommer1
1Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich & IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
 
By decomposing the image formation process into a sequential application of denoising autoencoders, diffusion
models (DMs) achieve state-of-the-art synthesis results on
image data and beyond. Additionally, their formulation allows for a guiding mechanism to control the image generation process without retraining. However, since these
models typically operate directly in pixel space, optimization of powerful DMs often consumes hundreds of GPU
days and inference is expensive due to sequential evaluations. To enable DM training on limited computational
resources while retaining their quality and ﬂexibility, we
apply them in the latent space of powerful pretrained autoencoders. In contrast to previous work, training diffusion
models on such a representation allows for the ﬁrst time
to reach a near-optimal point between complexity reduction and detail preservation, greatly boosting visual ﬁdelity.
By introducing cross-attention layers into the model architecture, we turn diffusion models into powerful and ﬂexible generators for general conditioning inputs such as text
or bounding boxes and high-resolution synthesis becomes
possible in a convolutional manner. Our latent diffusion
models (LDMs) achieve new state-of-the-art scores for image inpainting and class-conditional image synthesis and
highly competitive performance on various tasks, including text-to-image synthesis, unconditional image generation
and super-resolution, while signiﬁcantly reducing computational requirements compared to pixel-based DMs.
1. Introduction
Image synthesis is one of the computer vision ﬁelds with
the most spectacular recent development, but also among
those with the greatest computational demands.
Especially high-resolution synthesis of complex, natural scenes
is presently dominated by scaling up likelihood-based models, potentially containing billions of parameters in autoregressive (AR) transformers . In contrast, the promising results of GANs have been revealed to be
mostly conﬁned to data with comparably limited variability
as their adversarial learning procedure does not easily scale
to modeling complex, multi-modal distributions. Recently,
diffusion models , which are built from a hierarchy of
denoising autoencoders, have shown to achieve impressive
*The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
ours (f = 4)
PSNR: 27.4 R-FID: 0.58
DALL-E (f = 8)
PSNR: 22.8 R-FID: 32.01
VQGAN (f = 16)
PSNR: 19.9 R-FID: 4.98
Boosting the upper bound on achievable quality with
less agressive downsampling. Since diffusion models offer excellent inductive biases for spatial data, we do not need the heavy spatial downsampling of related generative models in latent space, but
can still greatly reduce the dimensionality of the data via suitable
autoencoding models, see Sec. 3. Images are from the DIV2K 
validation set, evaluated at 5122 px. We denote the spatial downsampling factor by f. Reconstruction FIDs and PSNR are
calculated on ImageNet-val. ; see also Tab. 8.
results in image synthesis and beyond ,
and deﬁne the state-of-the-art in class-conditional image
synthesis and super-resolution . Moreover, even
unconditional DMs can readily be applied to tasks such
as inpainting and colorization or stroke-based synthesis , in contrast to other types of generative models . Being likelihood-based models, they do not
exhibit mode-collapse and training instabilities as GANs
and, by heavily exploiting parameter sharing, they can
model highly complex distributions of natural images without involving billions of parameters as in AR models .
Democratizing High-Resolution Image Synthesis
belong to the class of likelihood-based models, whose
mode-covering behavior makes them prone to spend excessive amounts of capacity (and thus compute resources)
on modeling imperceptible details of the data . Although the reweighted variational objective aims to address this by undersampling the initial denoising steps, DMs
are still computationally demanding, since training and
evaluating such a model requires repeated function evaluations (and gradient computations) in the high-dimensional
space of RGB images. As an example, training the most
powerful DMs often takes hundreds of GPU days (e.g. 150 -
1000 V100 days in ) and repeated evaluations on a noisy
version of the input space render also inference expensive,
 
so that producing 50k samples takes approximately 5 days
 on a single A100 GPU. This has two consequences for
the research community and users in general: Firstly, training such a model requires massive computational resources
only available to a small fraction of the ﬁeld, and leaves a
huge carbon footprint . Secondly, evaluating an already trained model is also expensive in time and memory,
since the same model architecture must run sequentially for
a large number of steps (e.g. 25 - 1000 steps in ).
To increase the accessibility of this powerful model class
and at the same time reduce its signiﬁcant resource consumption, a method is needed that reduces the computational complexity for both training and sampling. Reducing
the computational demands of DMs without impairing their
performance is, therefore, key to enhance their accessibility.
Departure to Latent Space
Our approach starts with
the analysis of already trained diffusion models in pixel
space: Fig. 2 shows the rate-distortion trade-off of a trained
model. As with any likelihood-based model, learning can
be roughly divided into two stages: First is a perceptual
compression stage which removes high-frequency details
but still learns little semantic variation. In the second stage,
the actual generative model learns the semantic and conceptual composition of the data (semantic compression). We
thus aim to ﬁrst ﬁnd a perceptually equivalent, but computationally more suitable space, in which we will train diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis.
Following common practice , we separate training into two distinct phases:
First, we train
an autoencoder which provides a lower-dimensional (and
thereby efﬁcient) representational space which is perceptually equivalent to the data space. Importantly, and in contrast to previous work , we do not need to rely on excessive spatial compression, as we train DMs in the learned
latent space, which exhibits better scaling properties with
respect to the spatial dimensionality. The reduced complexity also provides efﬁcient image generation from the latent
space with a single network pass.
We dub the resulting
model class Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs).
A notable advantage of this approach is that we need to
train the universal autoencoding stage only once and can
therefore reuse it for multiple DM trainings or to explore
possibly completely different tasks . This enables efﬁcient exploration of a large number of diffusion models for
various image-to-image and text-to-image tasks. For the latter, we design an architecture that connects transformers to
the DM’s UNet backbone and enables arbitrary types
of token-based conditioning mechanisms, see Sec. 3.3.
In sum, our work makes the following contributions:
(i) In contrast to purely transformer-based approaches
 , our method scales more graceful to higher dimensional data and can thus (a) work on a compression level
which provides more faithful and detailed reconstructions
than previous work (see Fig. 1) and (b) can be efﬁciently
Figure 2. Illustrating perceptual and semantic compression: Most
bits of a digital image correspond to imperceptible details. While
DMs allow to suppress this semantically meaningless information
by minimizing the responsible loss term, gradients (during training) and the neural network backbone (training and inference) still
need to be evaluated on all pixels, leading to superﬂuous computations and unnecessarily expensive optimization and inference.
We propose latent diffusion models (LDMs) as an effective generative model and a separate mild compression stage that only eliminates imperceptible details. Data and images from .
applied to high-resolution synthesis of megapixel images.
(ii) We achieve competitive performance on multiple
tasks (unconditional image synthesis, inpainting, stochastic
super-resolution) and datasets while signiﬁcantly lowering
computational costs. Compared to pixel-based diffusion approaches, we also signiﬁcantly decrease inference costs.
(iii) We show that, in contrast to previous work 
which learns both an encoder/decoder architecture and a
score-based prior simultaneously, our approach does not require a delicate weighting of reconstruction and generative
abilities.
This ensures extremely faithful reconstructions
and requires very little regularization of the latent space.
(iv) We ﬁnd that for densely conditioned tasks such
as super-resolution, inpainting and semantic synthesis, our
model can be applied in a convolutional fashion and render
large, consistent images of ∼10242 px.
(v) Moreover, we design a general-purpose conditioning
mechanism based on cross-attention, enabling multi-modal
training. We use it to train class-conditional, text-to-image
and layout-to-image models.
(vi) Finally,
we release pretrained latent diffusion
autoencoding
https : / / github .
com/CompVis/latent-diffusion which might be
reusable for a various tasks besides training of DMs .
2. Related Work
Generative Models for Image Synthesis The high dimensional nature of images presents distinct challenges
to generative modeling. Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) allow for efﬁcient sampling of high resolution
images with good perceptual quality , but are difﬁ-
cult to optimize and struggle to capture the full
data distribution . In contrast, likelihood-based methods emphasize good density estimation which renders optimization more well-behaved.
Variational autoencoders
(VAE) and ﬂow-based models enable efﬁcient
synthesis of high resolution images , but sample quality is not on par with GANs. While autoregressive
models (ARM) achieve strong performance
in density estimation, computationally demanding architectures and a sequential sampling process limit them to
low resolution images. Because pixel based representations
of images contain barely perceptible, high-frequency details , maximum-likelihood training spends a disproportionate amount of capacity on modeling them, resulting
in long training times. To scale to higher resolutions, several
two-stage approaches use ARMs to model
a compressed latent image space instead of raw pixels.
Recently, Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DM) ,
have achieved state-of-the-art results in density estimation
 as well as in sample quality . The generative power
of these models stems from a natural ﬁt to the inductive biases of image-like data when their underlying neural backbone is implemented as a UNet . The best
synthesis quality is usually achieved when a reweighted objective is used for training. In this case, the DM corresponds to a lossy compressor and allow to trade image quality for compression capabilities. Evaluating and optimizing
these models in pixel space, however, has the downside of
low inference speed and very high training costs. While
the former can be partially adressed by advanced sampling
strategies and hierarchical approaches ,
training on high-resolution image data always requires to
calculate expensive gradients. We adress both drawbacks
with our proposed LDMs, which work on a compressed latent space of lower dimensionality. This renders training
computationally cheaper and speeds up inference with almost no reduction in synthesis quality (see Fig. 1).
Two-Stage Image Synthesis To mitigate the shortcomings of individual generative approaches, a lot of research
 has gone into combining the
strengths of different methods into more efﬁcient and performant models via a two stage approach. VQ-VAEs use autoregressive models to learn an expressive prior
over a discretized latent space. extend this approach to
text-to-image generation by learning a joint distributation
over discretized image and text representations. More generally, uses conditionally invertible networks to provide a generic transfer between latent spaces of diverse domains. Different from VQ-VAEs, VQGANs employ a ﬁrst stage with an adversarial and perceptual objective to scale autoregressive transformers to larger images.
However, the high compression rates required for feasible
ARM training, which introduces billions of trainable parameters , limit the overall performance of such approaches and less compression comes at the price of high
computational cost . Our work prevents such tradeoffs, as our proposed LDMs scale more gently to higher
dimensional latent spaces due to their convolutional backbone. Thus, we are free to choose the level of compression
which optimally mediates between learning a powerful ﬁrst
stage, without leaving too much perceptual compression up
to the generative diffusion model while guaranteeing high-
ﬁdelity reconstructions (see Fig. 1).
While approaches to jointly or separately learn
an encoding/decoding model together with a score-based
prior exist, the former still require a difﬁcult weighting between reconstruction and generative capabilities and
are outperformed by our approach (Sec. 4), and the latter
focus on highly structured images such as human faces.
To lower the computational demands of training diffusion models towards high-resolution image synthesis, we
observe that although diffusion models allow to ignore
perceptually irrelevant details by undersampling the corresponding loss terms , they still require costly function
evaluations in pixel space, which causes huge demands in
computation time and energy resources.
We propose to circumvent this drawback by introducing
an explicit separation of the compressive from the generative learning phase (see Fig. 2). To achieve this, we utilize
an autoencoding model which learns a space that is perceptually equivalent to the image space, but offers signiﬁcantly
reduced computational complexity.
Such an approach offers several advantages: (i) By leaving the high-dimensional image space, we obtain DMs
which are computationally much more efﬁcient because
sampling is performed on a low-dimensional space. (ii) We
exploit the inductive bias of DMs inherited from their UNet
architecture , which makes them particularly effective
for data with spatial structure and therefore alleviates the
need for aggressive, quality-reducing compression levels as
required by previous approaches . (iii) Finally, we
obtain general-purpose compression models whose latent
space can be used to train multiple generative models and
which can also be utilized for other downstream applications such as single-image CLIP-guided synthesis .
3.1. Perceptual Image Compression
Our perceptual compression model is based on previous
work and consists of an autoencoder trained by combination of a perceptual loss and a patch-based 
adversarial objective . This ensures that the reconstructions are conﬁned to the image manifold by enforcing local realism and avoids bluriness introduced by relying
solely on pixel-space losses such as L2 or L1 objectives.
More precisely, given an image x ∈RH×W ×3 in RGB
space, the encoder E encodes x into a latent representa-
tion z = E(x), and the decoder D reconstructs the image from the latent, giving ˜x = D(z) = D(E(x)), where
z ∈Rh×w×c. Importantly, the encoder downsamples the
image by a factor f = H/h = W/w, and we investigate
different downsampling factors f = 2m, with m ∈N.
In order to avoid arbitrarily high-variance latent spaces,
we experiment with two different kinds of regularizations.
The ﬁrst variant, KL-reg., imposes a slight KL-penalty towards a standard normal on the learned latent, similar to a
VAE , whereas VQ-reg. uses a vector quantization
layer within the decoder. This model can be interpreted
as a VQGAN but with the quantization layer absorbed
by the decoder. Because our subsequent DM is designed
to work with the two-dimensional structure of our learned
latent space z = E(x), we can use relatively mild compression rates and achieve very good reconstructions. This is
in contrast to previous works , which relied on an
arbitrary 1D ordering of the learned space z to model its
distribution autoregressively and thereby ignored much of
the inherent structure of z. Hence, our compression model
preserves details of x better (see Tab. 8). The full objective
and training details can be found in the supplement.
3.2. Latent Diffusion Models
Diffusion Models are probabilistic models designed to
learn a data distribution p(x) by gradually denoising a normally distributed variable, which corresponds to learning
the reverse process of a ﬁxed Markov Chain of length T.
For image synthesis, the most successful models 
rely on a reweighted variant of the variational lower bound
on p(x), which mirrors denoising score-matching .
These models can be interpreted as an equally weighted
sequence of denoising autoencoders ϵθ(xt, t); t = 1 . . . T,
which are trained to predict a denoised variant of their input
xt, where xt is a noisy version of the input x. The corresponding objective can be simpliﬁed to (Sec. B)
LDM = Ex,ϵ∼N(0,1),t
∥ϵ −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2
with t uniformly sampled from {1, . . . , T}.
Generative Modeling of Latent Representations With
our trained perceptual compression models consisting of E
and D, we now have access to an efﬁcient, low-dimensional
latent space in which high-frequency, imperceptible details
are abstracted away.
Compared to the high-dimensional
pixel space, this space is more suitable for likelihood-based
generative models, as they can now (i) focus on the important, semantic bits of the data and (ii) train in a lower dimensional, computationally much more efﬁcient space.
Unlike previous work that relied on autoregressive,
attention-based transformer models in a highly compressed,
discrete latent space , we can take advantage of
image-speciﬁc inductive biases that our model offers. This
crossattention
Latent Space
Conditioning
Diffusion Process
denoising step
skip connection
Pixel Space
Denoising U-Net
We condition LDMs either via concatenation or by a
more general cross-attention mechanism. See Sec. 3.3
includes the ability to build the underlying UNet primarily from 2D convolutional layers, and further focusing the
objective on the perceptually most relevant bits using the
reweighted bound, which now reads
LLDM := EE(x),ϵ∼N(0,1),t
∥ϵ −ϵθ(zt, t)∥2
The neural backbone ϵθ(◦, t) of our model is realized as a
time-conditional UNet . Since the forward process is
ﬁxed, zt can be efﬁciently obtained from E during training,
and samples from p(z) can be decoded to image space with
a single pass through D.
3.3. Conditioning Mechanisms
Similar to other types of generative models ,
diffusion models are in principle capable of modeling
conditional distributions of the form p(z|y).
be implemented with a conditional denoising autoencoder
ϵθ(zt, t, y) and paves the way to controlling the synthesis
process through inputs y such as text , semantic maps
 or other image-to-image translation tasks .
In the context of image synthesis, however, combining
the generative power of DMs with other types of conditionings beyond class-labels or blurred variants of the input
image is so far an under-explored area of research.
We turn DMs into more ﬂexible conditional image generators by augmenting their underlying UNet backbone with
the cross-attention mechanism , which is effective for
learning attention-based models of various input modalities . To pre-process y from various modalities (such
as language prompts) we introduce a domain speciﬁc encoder τθ that projects y to an intermediate representation
τθ(y) ∈RM×dτ , which is then mapped to the intermediate
layers of the UNet via a cross-attention layer implementing
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
· V , with
Q · ϕi(zt), K = W (i)
K · τθ(y), V = W (i)
Here, ϕi(zt) ∈RN×di
ϵ denotes a (ﬂattened) intermediate
representation of the UNet implementing ϵθ and W (i)
LSUN-Churches
Samples from LDMs trained on CelebAHQ , FFHQ , LSUN-Churches , LSUN-Bedrooms and classconditional ImageNet , each with a resolution of 256 × 256. Best viewed when zoomed in. For more samples cf. the supplement.
Q ∈Rd×dτ & W (i)
K ∈Rd×dτ are learnable projection matrices . See Fig. 3 for a visual depiction.
Based on image-conditioning pairs, we then learn the
conditional LDM via
LLDM := EE(x),y,ϵ∼N(0,1),t
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, t, τθ(y))∥2
where both τθ and ϵθ are jointly optimized via Eq. 3. This
conditioning mechanism is ﬂexible as τθ can be parameterized with domain-speciﬁc experts, e.g. (unmasked) transformers when y are text prompts (see Sec. 4.3.1)
4. Experiments
LDMs provide means to ﬂexible and computationally
tractable diffusion based image synthesis of various image
modalities, which we empirically show in the following.
Firstly, however, we analyze the gains of our models compared to pixel-based diffusion models in both training and
inference. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that LDMs trained in VQregularized latent spaces sometimes achieve better sample
quality, even though the reconstruction capabilities of VQregularized ﬁrst stage models slightly fall behind those of
their continuous counterparts, cf. Tab. 8. A visual comparison between the effects of ﬁrst stage regularization schemes
on LDM training and their generalization abilities to resolutions > 2562 can be found in Appendix D.1. In E.2 we list
details on architecture, implementation, training and evaluation for all results presented in this section.
4.1. On Perceptual Compression Tradeoffs
This section analyzes the behavior of our LDMs with different downsampling factors f ∈{1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32} (abbreviated as LDM-f, where LDM-1 corresponds to pixel-based
DMs). To obtain a comparable test-ﬁeld, we ﬁx the computational resources to a single NVIDIA A100 for all experiments in this section and train all models for the same
number of steps and with the same number of parameters.
Tab. 8 shows hyperparameters and reconstruction performance of the ﬁrst stage models used for the LDMs compared in this section. Fig. 6 shows sample quality as a function of training progress for 2M steps of class-conditional
models on the ImageNet dataset. We see that, i) small
downsampling factors for LDM-{1,2} result in slow training progress, whereas ii) overly large values of f cause stagnating ﬁdelity after comparably few training steps. Revisiting the analysis above (Fig. 1 and 2) we attribute this to
i) leaving most of perceptual compression to the diffusion
model and ii) too strong ﬁrst stage compression resulting
in information loss and thus limiting the achievable quality. LDM-{4-16} strike a good balance between efﬁciency
and perceptually faithful results, which manifests in a signiﬁcant FID gap of 38 between pixel-based diffusion
(LDM-1) and LDM-8 after 2M training steps.
In Fig. 7, we compare models trained on CelebA-
HQ and ImageNet in terms sampling speed for different numbers of denoising steps with the DDIM sampler 
and plot it against FID-scores .
LDM-{4-8} outperform models with unsuitable ratios of perceptual and conceptual compression. Especially compared to pixel-based
LDM-1, they achieve much lower FID scores while simultaneously signiﬁcantly increasing sample throughput. Complex datasets such as ImageNet require reduced compression rates to avoid reducing quality. In summary, LDM-4
and -8 offer the best conditions for achieving high-quality
synthesis results.
4.2. Image Generation with Latent Diffusion
We train unconditional models of 2562 images on
LSUN-Churches
-Bedrooms and evaluate the i) sample quality and ii)
their coverage of the data manifold using ii) FID and
ii) Precision-and-Recall . Tab. 1 summarizes our results. On CelebA-HQ, we report a new state-of-the-art FID
of 5.11, outperforming previous likelihood-based models as
well as GANs. We also outperform LSGM where a latent diffusion model is trained jointly together with the ﬁrst
stage. In contrast, we train diffusion models in a ﬁxed space
Text-to-Image Synthesis on LAION. 1.45B Model.
’A street sign that reads
“Latent Diffusion” ’
’A zombie in the
style of Picasso’
’An image of an animal
half mouse half octopus’
’An illustration of a slightly
conscious neural network’
’A painting of a
squirrel eating a burger’
’A watercolor painting of a
chair that looks like an octopus’
’A shirt with the inscription:
“I love generative models!” ’
Samples for user-deﬁned text prompts from our model for text-to-image synthesis, LDM-8 (KL), which was trained on the
LAION database. Samples generated with 200 DDIM steps and η = 1.0. We use unconditional guidance with s = 10.0.
Figure 6. Analyzing the training of class-conditional LDMs with
different downsampling factors f over 2M train steps on the ImageNet dataset. Pixel-based LDM-1 requires substantially larger
train times compared to models with larger downsampling factors
(LDM-{4-16}). Too much perceptual compression as in LDM-32
limits the overall sample quality. All models are trained on a single NVIDIA A100 with the same computational budget. Results
obtained with 100 DDIM steps and κ = 0.
Comparing LDMs with varying compression on the
CelebA-HQ (left) and ImageNet (right) datasets. Different markers indicate {10, 20, 50, 100, 200} sampling steps using DDIM,
from right to left along each line. The dashed line shows the FID
scores for 200 steps, indicating the strong performance of LDM-
{4-8}. FID scores assessed on 5000 samples. All models were
trained for 500k (CelebA) / 2M (ImageNet) steps on an A100.
and avoid the difﬁculty of weighing reconstruction quality
against learning the prior over the latent space, see Fig. 1-2.
We outperform prior diffusion based approaches on all
but the LSUN-Bedrooms dataset, where our score is close
to ADM , despite utilizing half its parameters and requiring 4-times less train resources (see Appendix E.3.5).
CelebA-HQ 256 × 256
FFHQ 256 × 256
DC-VAE 
ImageBART 
VQGAN+T. (k=400)
U-Net GAN (+aug) 
10.9 (7.6)
PGGAN 
StyleGAN 
ProjectedGAN 
LDM-4 (ours, 500-s†)
LDM-4 (ours, 200-s)
LSUN-Churches 256 × 256
LSUN-Bedrooms 256 × 256
ImageBART 
ImageBART 
PGGAN 
StyleGAN 
StyleGAN 
StyleGAN2 
ProjectedGAN 
ProjectedGAN 
LDM-8∗(ours, 200-s)
LDM-4 (ours, 200-s)
Evaluation metrics for unconditional image synthesis.
CelebA-HQ results reproduced from , FFHQ from
 . †: N-s refers to N sampling steps with the DDIM 
sampler. ∗: trained in KL-regularized latent space. Additional results can be found in the supplementary.
Text-Conditional Image Synthesis
CogView† 
self-ranking, rejection rate 0.017
LAFITE† 
GLIDE∗ 
277 DDIM steps, c.f.g. s = 3
Make-A-Scene∗ 
c.f.g for AR models s = 5
20.03±0.33
250 DDIM steps
LDM-KL-8-G∗
30.29±0.42
250 DDIM steps, c.f.g. s = 1.5
Evaluation of text-conditional image synthesis on the
256 × 256-sized MS-COCO dataset: with 250 DDIM 
steps our model is on par with the most recent diffusion and
autoregressive methods despite using signiﬁcantly less parameters. †/∗:Numbers from / 
Moreover, LDMs consistently improve upon GAN-based
methods in Precision and Recall, thus conﬁrming the advantages of their mode-covering likelihood-based training
objective over adversarial approaches. In Fig. 4 we also
show qualitative results on each dataset.
Figure 8. Layout-to-image synthesis with an LDM on COCO ,
see Sec. 4.3.1. Quantitative evaluation in the supplement D.3.
4.3. Conditional Latent Diffusion
Transformer Encoders for LDMs
By introducing cross-attention based conditioning into
LDMs we open them up for various conditioning modalities previously unexplored for diffusion models. For textto-image image modeling, we train a 1.45B parameter
KL-regularized LDM conditioned on language prompts on
LAION-400M . We employ the BERT-tokenizer 
and implement τθ as a transformer to infer a latent
code which is mapped into the UNet via (multi-head) crossattention (Sec. 3.3). This combination of domain speciﬁc
experts for learning a language representation and visual
synthesis results in a powerful model, which generalizes
well to complex, user-deﬁned text prompts, cf. Fig. 8 and 5.
For quantitative analysis, we follow prior work and evaluate
text-to-image generation on the MS-COCO validation
set, where our model improves upon powerful AR 
and GAN-based methods, cf. Tab. 2. We note that applying classiﬁer-free diffusion guidance greatly boosts
sample quality, such that the guided LDM-KL-8-G is on par
with the recent state-of-the-art AR and diffusion models for text-to-image synthesis, while substantially reducing parameter count. To further analyze the ﬂexibility of
the cross-attention based conditioning mechanism we also
train models to synthesize images based on semantic layouts on OpenImages , and ﬁnetune on COCO , see
Fig. 8. See Sec. D.3 for the quantitative evaluation and implementation details.
Lastly, following prior work , we evaluate our best-performing class-conditional ImageNet models with f ∈{4, 8} from Sec. 4.1 in Tab. 3, Fig. 4 and
Sec. D.4. Here we outperform the state of the art diffusion model ADM while signiﬁcantly reducing computational requirements and parameter count, cf. Tab 18.
Convolutional Sampling Beyond 2562
By concatenating spatially aligned conditioning information to the input of ϵθ, LDMs can serve as efﬁcient general-
Precision↑
BigGan-deep 
250 DDIM steps
ADM-G 
250 DDIM steps
LDM-4 (ours)
103.49±1.24
250 DDIM steps
LDM-4-G (ours)
247.67±5.59
250 steps, c.f.g , s = 1.5
Table 3. Comparison of a class-conditional ImageNet LDM with
recent state-of-the-art methods for class-conditional image generation on ImageNet . A more detailed comparison with additional baselines can be found in D.4, Tab. 10 and F. c.f.g. denotes
classiﬁer-free guidance with a scale s as proposed in .
purpose image-to-image translation models. We use this
to train models for semantic synthesis, super-resolution
(Sec. 4.4) and inpainting (Sec. 4.5). For semantic synthesis, we use images of landscapes paired with semantic maps
 and concatenate downsampled versions of the semantic maps with the latent image representation of a f = 4
model (VQ-reg., see Tab. 8). We train on an input resolution
of 2562 (crops from 3842) but ﬁnd that our model generalizes to larger resolutions and can generate images up to the
megapixel regime when evaluated in a convolutional manner (see Fig. 9). We exploit this behavior to also apply the
super-resolution models in Sec. 4.4 and the inpainting models in Sec. 4.5 to generate large images between 5122 and
10242. For this application, the signal-to-noise ratio (induced by the scale of the latent space) signiﬁcantly affects
the results. In Sec. D.1 we illustrate this when learning an
LDM on (i) the latent space as provided by a f = 4 model
(KL-reg., see Tab. 8), and (ii) a rescaled version, scaled by
the component-wise standard deviation.
The latter, in combination with classiﬁer-free guidance , also enables the direct synthesis of > 2562 images for the text-conditional LDM-KL-8-G as in Fig. 13.
A LDM trained on 2562 resolution can generalize to
larger resolution (here: 512×1024) for spatially conditioned tasks
such as semantic synthesis of landscape images. See Sec. 4.3.2.
4.4. Super-Resolution with Latent Diffusion
LDMs can be efﬁciently trained for super-resolution by
diretly conditioning on low-resolution images via concatenation (cf. Sec. 3.3). In a ﬁrst experiment, we follow SR3
Figure 10. ImageNet 64→256 super-resolution on ImageNet-Val.
LDM-SR has advantages at rendering realistic textures but SR3
can synthesize more coherent ﬁne structures. See appendix for
additional samples and cropouts. SR3 results from .
 and ﬁx the image degradation to a bicubic interpolation with 4×-downsampling and train on ImageNet following SR3’s data processing pipeline. We use the f = 4 autoencoding model pretrained on OpenImages (VQ-reg., cf.
Tab. 8) and concatenate the low-resolution conditioning y
and the inputs to the UNet, i.e. τθ is the identity. Our qualitative and quantitative results (see Fig. 10 and Tab. 5) show
competitive performance and LDM-SR outperforms SR3
in FID while SR3 has a better IS. A simple image regression model achieves the highest PSNR and SSIM scores;
however these metrics do not align well with human perception and favor blurriness over imperfectly aligned
high frequency details .
Further, we conduct a user
study comparing the pixel-baseline with LDM-SR. We follow SR3 where human subjects were shown a low-res
image in between two high-res images and asked for preference. The results in Tab. 4 afﬁrm the good performance
of LDM-SR. PSNR and SSIM can be pushed by using a
post-hoc guiding mechanism and we implement this
image-based guider via a perceptual loss, see Sec. D.6.
SR on ImageNet
Inpainting on Places
User Study
Pixel-DM (f1)
Task 1: Preference vs GT ↑
Task 2: Preference Score ↑
Table 4. Task 1: Subjects were shown ground truth and generated
image and asked for preference. Task 2: Subjects had to decide
between two generated images. More details in E.3.6
Since the bicubic degradation process does not generalize
well to images which do not follow this pre-processing, we
also train a generic model, LDM-BSR, by using more diverse degradation. The results are shown in Sec. D.6.1.
Image Regression 
LDM-4 (ours, 100 steps)
emphLDM-4 (ours, big, 100 steps)
LDM-4 (ours, 50 steps, guiding)
Table 5. ×4 upscaling results on ImageNet-Val. (2562); †: FID
features computed on validation split, ‡: FID features computed
on train split; ∗: Assessed on a NVIDIA A100
train throughput
sampling throughput†
Model (reg.-type)
samples/sec.
hours/epoch
LDM-1 (no ﬁrst stage)
LDM-4 (KL, w/ attn)
LDM-4 (VQ, w/ attn)
LDM-4 (VQ, w/o attn)
Table 6. Assessing inpainting efﬁciency. †: Deviations from Fig. 7
due to varying GPU settings/batch sizes cf. the supplement.
4.5. Inpainting with Latent Diffusion
Inpainting is the task of ﬁlling masked regions of an image with new content either because parts of the image are
are corrupted or to replace existing but undesired content
within the image. We evaluate how our general approach
for conditional image generation compares to more specialized, state-of-the-art approaches for this task. Our evaluation follows the protocol of LaMa , a recent inpainting
model that introduces a specialized architecture relying on
Fast Fourier Convolutions . The exact training & evaluation protocol on Places is described in Sec. E.2.2.
We ﬁrst analyze the effect of different design choices for
the ﬁrst stage. In particular, we compare the inpainting ef-
ﬁciency of LDM-1 (i.e. a pixel-based conditional DM) with
LDM-4, for both KL and VQ regularizations, as well as VQ-
LDM-4 without any attention in the ﬁrst stage (see Tab. 8),
where the latter reduces GPU memory for decoding at high
resolutions. For comparability, we ﬁx the number of parameters for all models. Tab. 6 reports the training and sampling
throughput at resolution 2562 and 5122, the total training
time in hours per epoch and the FID score on the validation
split after six epochs. Overall, we observe a speed-up of at
least 2.7× between pixel- and latent-based diffusion models
while improving FID scores by a factor of at least 1.6×.
The comparison with other inpainting approaches in
Tab. 7 shows that our model with attention improves the
overall image quality as measured by FID over that of .
LPIPS between the unmasked images and our samples is
slightly higher than that of . We attribute this to 
only producing a single result which tends to recover more
of an average image compared to the diverse results produced by our LDM cf. Fig. 21. Additionally in a user study
(Tab. 4) human subjects favor our results over those of .
Based on these initial results, we also trained a larger diffusion model (big in Tab. 7) in the latent space of the VQregularized ﬁrst stage without attention. Following ,
the UNet of this diffusion model uses attention layers on
three levels of its feature hierarchy, the BigGAN residual
block for up- and downsampling and has 387M parameters
Figure 11. Qualitative results on object removal with our big, w/
ft inpainting model. For more results, see Fig. 22.
instead of 215M. After training, we noticed a discrepancy
in the quality of samples produced at resolutions 2562 and
5122, which we hypothesize to be caused by the additional
attention modules. However, ﬁne-tuning the model for half
an epoch at resolution 5122 allows the model to adjust to
the new feature statistics and sets a new state of the art FID
on image inpainting (big, w/o attn, w/ ft in Tab. 7, Fig. 11.).
5. Limitations & Societal Impact
Limitations
While LDMs signiﬁcantly reduce computational requirements compared to pixel-based approaches,
their sequential sampling process is still slower than that
of GANs. Moreover, the use of LDMs can be questionable when high precision is required: although the loss of
image quality is very small in our f = 4 autoencoding models (see Fig. 1), their reconstruction capability can become
a bottleneck for tasks that require ﬁne-grained accuracy in
pixel space. We assume that our superresolution models
(Sec. 4.4) are already somewhat limited in this respect.
Societal Impact
Generative models for media like imagery are a double-edged sword: On the one hand, they
40-50% masked
All samples
LDM-4 (ours, big, w/ ft)
0.246± 0.042
0.137± 0.080
LDM-4 (ours, big, w/o ft)
0.257± 0.047
0.142± 0.085
LDM-4 (ours, w/ attn)
0.257± 0.042
0.144± 0.084
LDM-4 (ours, w/o attn)
0.259± 0.041
0.145± 0.084
LaMa †
0.243± 0.038
0.134± 0.080
CoModGAN 
RegionWise 
DeepFill v2 
EdgeConnect 
Table 7. Comparison of inpainting performance on 30k crops of
size 512 × 512 from test images of Places . The column 40-
50% reports metrics computed over hard examples where 40-50%
of the image region have to be inpainted. †recomputed on our test
set, since the original test set used in was not available.
enable various creative applications, and in particular approaches like ours that reduce the cost of training and inference have the potential to facilitate access to this technology and democratize its exploration. On the other hand,
it also means that it becomes easier to create and disseminate manipulated data or spread misinformation and spam.
In particular, the deliberate manipulation of images (“deep
fakes”) is a common problem in this context, and women in
particular are disproportionately affected by it .
Generative models can also reveal their training data
 , which is of great concern when the data contain
sensitive or personal information and were collected without explicit consent. However, the extent to which this also
applies to DMs of images is not yet fully understood.
Finally, deep learning modules tend to reproduce or exacerbate biases that are already present in the data . While diffusion models achieve better coverage of the
data distribution than e.g. GAN-based approaches, the extent to which our two-stage approach that combines adversarial training and a likelihood-based objective misrepresents the data remains an important research question.
For a more general, detailed discussion of the ethical
considerations of deep generative models, see e.g. .
6. Conclusion
We have presented latent diffusion models, a simple and
efﬁcient way to signiﬁcantly improve both the training and
sampling efﬁciency of denoising diffusion models without degrading their quality. Based on this and our crossattention conditioning mechanism, our experiments could
demonstrate favorable results compared to state-of-the-art
methods across a wide range of conditional image synthesis
tasks without task-speciﬁc architectures.
This work has been supported by the German Federal Ministry for
Economic Affairs and Energy within the project ’KI-Absicherung - Safe
AI for automated driving’ and by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
project 421703927.