One-pass Multi-task Networks with Cross-task
Guided Attention for Brain Tumor Segmentation
Chenhong Zhou, Changxing Ding, Xinchao Wang, Zhentai Lu, Dacheng Tao,
Abstract—Class imbalance has emerged as one of the major
challenges for medical image segmentation. The model cascade
(MC) strategy, a popular scheme, signiﬁcantly alleviates the
class imbalance issue via running a set of individual deep
models for coarse-to-ﬁne segmentation. Despite its outstanding
performance, however, this method leads to undesired system
complexity and also ignores the correlation among the models.
To handle these ﬂaws in the MC approach, we propose in this
paper a light-weight deep model, i.e., the One-pass Multi-task
Network (OM-Net) to solve class imbalance better than MC
does, while requiring only one-pass computation for brain tumor
segmentation. First, OM-Net integrates the separate segmentation
tasks into one deep model, which consists of shared parameters
to learn joint features, as well as task-speciﬁc parameters to
learn discriminative features. Second, to more effectively optimize
OM-Net, we take advantage of the correlation among tasks to
design both an online training data transfer strategy and a
curriculum learning-based training strategy. Third, we further
propose sharing prediction results between tasks, which enables
us to design a cross-task guided attention (CGA) module. By
following the guidance of the prediction results provided by
the previous task, CGA can adaptively recalibrate channel-wise
feature responses based on the category-speciﬁc statistics. Finally,
a simple yet effective post-processing method is introduced
to reﬁne the segmentation results of the proposed attention
network. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed techniques. Most impressively, we
achieve state-of-the-art performance on the BraTS 2015 testing
set and BraTS 2017 online validation set. Using these proposed
approaches, we also won joint third place in the BraTS 2018
challenge among 64 participating teams. The code is publicly
available at 
Index Terms—Brain tumor segmentation, magnetic resonance
imaging, class imbalance, convolutional neural networks, multitask learning, channel attention.
I. INTRODUCTION
RAIN tumors are one of the most deadly cancers worldwide. Among these tumors, glioma is the most common
type . The average survival time for glioblastoma patients
is less than 14 months . Timely diagnosis of brain tumors is
thus vital to ensuring appropriate treatment planning, surgery,
and follow-up visits . As a popular non-invasive technique,
Corresponding author: Changxing Ding.
C. Zhou and C. Ding are with the School of Electronic and Information
Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510000,
China (e-mail: ; ).
X. Wang is with Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of
Technology, Hoboken, USA.
Z. Lu is with Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Image
Processing, School of Biomedical Engineering, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.
D. Tao is with the UBTech Sydney Artiﬁcial Intelligence Centre and the
School of Information Technologies, Faculty of Engineering and Information
Technologies, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) produces markedly different types of tissue contrast and has thus been widely
used by radiologists to diagnose brain tumors . However,
the manual segmentation of brain tumors from MRI images
is both subjective and time-consuming . Therefore, it is
highly desirable to design automatic and robust brain tumor
segmentation tools.
Recently, deep learning-based methods such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) – , have become increasingly popular and achieved signiﬁcant progress in brain tumor
segmentation tasks. Unfortunately, a severe class imbalance
problem usually emerges between healthy tissue and tumor
tissue, as well as between intra-tumoral classes. This problem
causes the healthy tissue to be dominant during the training
phase and degrades the optimization quality of the model.
To handle the class imbalance problem, many recent studies
have employed the Model Cascade (MC) strategy – .
More speciﬁcally, the MC strategy decomposes medical image
segmentation into two or more tasks, each of which is achieved
by an individual model. The most common MC framework for
segmentation tasks – incorporates two models, where
the ﬁrst one detects regions of interest (ROIs) via coarse
segmentation, while the second conducts ﬁne segmentation
within the ROIs. Therefore, MC can effectively alleviate class
imbalance via coarse-to-ﬁne segmentation. In spite of its
effectiveness, however, MC has several disadvantages. First,
it usually requires multiple deep models to be trained, which
substantially increases both the system complexity and the
storage space consumption. Second, each model is trained
separately using its own training data, which ignores the
correlation between the deep models. Third, MC runs the
deep models one by one, which leads to alternate GPU-CPU
computations and a lack of online interactions between tasks.
Here, we propose adopting multi-task learning to overcome
the shortcomings of MC. In more detail, we aim to decompose
multi-class brain tumor segmentation into three separate yet
interconnected tasks. While MC trains one individual network
for each task, as shown in Fig. 1(a), we incorporate the three
tasks into a single model and propose a One-pass Multi-task
Network (OM-Net). The proposed OM-Net not only makes use
of the relevance of these tasks to each other during the training
stage, but also simpliﬁes the prediction stage by implementing
one-pass computation, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Furthermore,
an effective training scheme inspired by curriculum learning
is also designed: instead of training the three tasks together
all the time, we gradually add the tasks to OM-Net in an
increasing order of difﬁculty; this is beneﬁcial for improving
the convergence quality of the model.
 
Fig. 1. Illustrations of (a) a three-model cascade pipeline and (b) our proposed
OM-Net. The model cascade pipeline contains three networks that segment
different tumor regions sequentially. OM-Net is a novel end-to-end deep model
that simpliﬁes prediction using one-pass computation.
Moreover, the fact that OM-Net integrates three tasks provides the possibility of online interaction between these tasks,
which produces more beneﬁts. First, the online training data
transfer strategy we propose here enables the three tasks to
share training data. Therefore, certain tasks obtain more training data, and the overall optimization quality can be improved.
Second, we construct a novel channel attention module, named
Cross-task Guided Attention (CGA), by sharing prediction
results between tasks. In CGA, the prediction results of a
preceding task can guide the following task to obtain categoryspeciﬁc statistics for each channel beforehand. This categoryspeciﬁc information further enables CGA to predict channelwise dependencies with regard to a speciﬁc category of voxels.
By contrast, existing self-attention models such as the popular
‘squeeze & excitation’ (SE) block , do not make use of
such external guidance. Without external guidance, SE blocks
only predict a single weight for each channel. However, there
are usually multiple categories in a patch, and the importance
of each channel varies for different categories. The proposed
CGA module handles this problem by predicting the categoryspeciﬁc channel attention.
To further reﬁne the segmentation results of OM-Net, we
also propose a new post-processing scheme. The efﬁcacy of
the proposed methods is systematically evaluated on three
popular brain tumor segmentation datasets, namely BraTS
2015, 2017, and 2018. Experimental results indicate that OM-
Net outperforms MC, despite having only one-third of the
model parameters of MC. The CGA module further promotes
the performance of OM-Net by a signiﬁcant margin.
A preliminary version of this paper has previously been
 
version proposes the novel CGA module, improves the postprocessing method, and includes more experimental investigation. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
brieﬂy review the related works for brain tumor segmentation
in Section II, then provide the details of the OM-Net model in
Section III. Experimental settings and datasets are detailed in
Section IV, while the experimental results and analysis are
presented in Section V. Finally, we conclude the paper in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we brieﬂy review approaches in two domains
related to our proposed model: namely, brain tumor segmentation and attention mechanism.
A. Brain Tumor Segmentation
In recent years, deep learning-based methods such as CNNs
have dominated the ﬁeld of automatic brain tumor segmentation. The architectures of deep models – have developed rapidly from single-label prediction (classifying only the
central voxel of the input patch) to dense-prediction (making
predictions for all voxels in the input patch simultaneously).
For instance, Pereira et al. designed a deep model equipped
with small convolutional kernels to classify the central voxel
of the input 2D patch. Moreover, Havaei et al. introduced
a novel 2D two-pathway deep model to explore additional
contextual information. The above methods make predictions
based on 2D patches, ignoring the 3D contextual information.
To handle this problem, Kamnitsas et al. introduced
the DeepMedic model, which extracts information from 3D
patches using 3D convolutional kernels. The abovementioned
methods make predictions only for a single voxel or a set of
central voxels within the input patch, meaning that they are
slow in the inference stage. To promote efﬁciency, encoderdecoder architectures such as fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) and U-Net have been widely adopted to realize
dense prediction. For instance, Chen et al. designed a
voxelwise residual network (VoxResNet) to make predictions
for all voxels within the input 3D patch. Zhao et al. introduced a uniﬁed framework integrating FCNs and conditional
random ﬁelds (CRFs) . This framework realizes end-toend dense prediction with appearance and spatial consistency.
The issue of class imbalance is commonly encountered in
medical image segmentation, especially brain tumor segmentation. To address this problem, many recent studies have
adopted the MC strategy – to perform coarse-to-ﬁne
segmentation. In particular, the common two-model cascaded
framework has been widely adopted in many applications,
including renal segmentation in dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI (DCE-MRI) images , cancer cell detection in phase
contrast microscopy images , liver and lesion segmentation , volumetric pancreas segmentation in CT images
 , calcium scoring in low-dose chest CT images , etc.
Moreover, MC can incorporate more stages to achieve better
segmentation performance. For instance, Wang et al. 
divided the brain tumor segmentation into three successive
binary segmentation problems: namely, the segmentation of
the complete tumor, tumor core, and enhancing tumor areas in
MRI images. Since MC effectively alleviates class imbalance,
its results are very encouraging.
Despite its effectiveness, however, MC is cumbersome in
terms of system complexity; moreover, it ignores the correlation among tasks. Accordingly, in this paper, we adopt multitask learning to overcome the disadvantages inherent in MC.
By implementing the sharing of model parameters and training
data, our proposed OM-Net outperforms MC using only onethird of the model parameters of MC.
B. Attention Mechanism
Attention is a popular tool in deep learning that highlights
useful information in feature maps while suppressing irrelevant
information. The majority of existing studies , – 
belong to the category of self-attention models, meaning that
they infer attentions based only on feature maps. These models
can be roughly categorized into three types, namely hard
regional attention, soft spatial attention, and channel attention.
Moreover, some studies combine two or more types of attention in one uniﬁed model – . The spatial transformer
network (STN) is a representative example of a hard
attention model. STN selects and reshapes important regions
in feature maps to a canonical pose to simplify inference. STN
performs at the coarse region-level while neglecting the ﬁne
pixel-level saliency . In comparison, soft spatial attention
models aim to evaluate pixel-wise importance in the spatial
dimension. For instance, Wang et al. proposed a residual
attention learning method that adds soft weights to feature
maps via a residual unit, in order to reﬁne the feature maps.
Complementary to spatial attention, channel attention aims
to recalibrate channel-wise feature responses. The ‘squeeze &
excitation’ (SE) block is one of the most popular channel
attention models due to its simplicity and efﬁciency. However,
this model was originally proposed for image classiﬁcation
and object detection tasks, but may not be optimal for image
segmentation tasks; this is because SE blocks are based on the
average response of all voxels in each channel and recalibrate
each channel with a single weight, regardless of which category the voxels belong to. However, there are usually multiple
categories of voxels in one patch, and the importance of each
channel varies between the different categories. Several existing studies have already tried to alleviate the abovementioned
problems experienced by SE blocks during segmentation tasks.
For example, Pereira et al. designed a segmentation SE
(SegSE) block that produces a channel descriptor for each
voxel in feature maps; consequently, the obtained channel
attention map is of the same size as the feature maps. Voxelwise multiplication between the feature maps and the attention
map produces the re-weighted features.
Furthermore, the proposed CGA module also aims to solve
the problems of SE blocks for segmentation. Unlike the
existing self-attention models , – , we make use of
the special structure of OM-Net to provide cross-task guidance
for the learning of category-speciﬁc channel attention.
III. METHOD
In this section, we ﬁrst present a strong segmentation
baseline based on MC, then introduce the model structure
and training strategy of OM-Net. Next, we further explain the
principles of OM-Net from the perspective of the attention
mechanism, and subsequently propose the CGA module that
promotes the performance of OM-Net by predicting robust
channel attention. Finally, we propose a simple but effective
post-processing method in order to reﬁne the segmentation
results of the attention network.
A. A Strong Baseline Based on Model Cascade
According to , tumors can be divided into the following
classes: edema (ED), necrotic (NCR), non-enhancing tumor
(NET), and enhancing tumor (ET). Following , we consistently merge NCR and NET into one class. Performance is
evaluated on three re-deﬁned tumor regions: complete tumor
(including all tumor classes), tumor core (including all tumor
classes except edema), and enhancing tumor (including only
the enhancing tumor class). Under this deﬁnition, three regions
satisfy the hierarchical structure of tumor subregions, each of
which completely covers the subsequent one. Based on this
observation, brain tumor segmentation can be decomposed into
three separate yet interconnected tasks. In the following, we
design an MC model that includes three independent networks
and forms a strong baseline for OM-Net. Each network is
trained for a speciﬁc task. These three tasks are detailed below.
1) Coarse segmentation of the complete tumor. We utilize
the ﬁrst network to detect the complete tumor region as an
ROI. We randomly sample training patches within the brain
and train the network as a ﬁve-class segmentation task: three
tumor classes, normal tissue, and background. In the testing
stage, we simply sum the predicted probabilities of all tumor
classes to obtain a coarse tumor mask. 2) Reﬁned segmentation
for the complete tumor and its intra-tumoral classes. We dilate
the above coarse tumor mask by 5 voxels in order to reduce
false negatives. Next, the labels of all voxels in the dilated
region are predicted again as a ﬁve-class segmentation task
by the second network. Training data are sampled randomly
within the dilated ground-truth complete tumor area. 3) Precise
segmentation for the enhancing tumor. Due to the extreme
class imbalance, it is very difﬁcult to conduct precise segmentation of the enhancing tumor. To handle this problem, a
third network is introduced specially for the segmentation of
enhancing tumor. Similarly, the training patches for this task
are randomly sampled within the ground-truth tumor core area.
It should be noted here that training patches for the three tasks
are sampled independently, even if the sampling areas for the
three tasks are nested hierarchically.
The network structures for the above three tasks are the
same except for the ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer. The adopted
structure is a 3D variant of the FusionNet , as shown
in Fig. 2. We crop the MRI images to patches of size
32 × 32 × 16 × 4 voxels as input for the network. Here, the
ﬁrst three numbers correspond to the input volume, while the
last number (4) denotes the four MRI modalities: FLAIR,
T1-weighted (T1), T1 with gadolinium enhancing contrast
(T1c), and T2-weighted (T2). Due to the lack of contextual
information, the segmentation results of the boundary voxels
in the patch may be inaccurate. Accordingly, we adopt the
overlap-tile strategy proposed in during inference. In brief,
we sample 3D patches with a stride of 20 × 20 × 5 voxels
within the MRI image. For each patch, we retain only the
predictions of voxels within the central region (20 × 20 × 5
voxels) and abandon the predictions of the boundary voxels.
The predictions of all central regions from the sampled patches
are stitched together to constitute the segmentation results of
the whole brain. This strategy is also utilized in the following
Input : Data
Output : Label
Convolutional layer:
3h 3 h 3 (BN) + ReLu
Downsampling with
Maxpooling layer:
Residual block with 3
Convolutional layers
and 1 skip connection
Upsampling with
Deconvolutional layer:
2h 2 h 2 (stride: 2)
Convolutional layer:
Fig. 2. The network structure for each task, which is composed of ﬁve basic building blocks. Each block is represented by a different type of colored cube.
The number below each cube refers to the number of feature maps. C equals to 5, 5, and 2 for the ﬁrst, second, and third task respectively. SoftmaxWithLoss
is adopted as the loss function and applied to the output of each task. (Best viewed in color)
During the inference stage of MC, the three networks
have to be run one by one since the ROI of one task is
obtained by considering the results of all preceding tasks.
More speciﬁcally, we employ the ﬁrst network to generate a
coarse mask for the complete tumor; subsequently, all voxels
within the dilated area of the mask are classiﬁed by the
second network, from which the precise complete tumor and
tumor core areas can be obtained. Finally, the third network is
utilized to scan all voxels in the tumor core region in order to
determine the precise enhancing tumor area. Thus, there are
three alternate GPU-CPU computations carried out during the
MC inference process.
B. One-pass Multi-task Network
Despite its promising performance, MC not only encounters
disadvantages due to its system complexity, but also neglects
the relevance among tasks. We can observe that the essential
difference among these tasks lies in the training data rather
than the model architecture. Therefore, we propose a multitask learning model that integrates the three tasks involved
in MC into one network. Each task in this model has its
own training data that is exactly the same as the data in MC.
Moreover, each task has an independent convolutional layer,
a classiﬁcation layer, and a loss layer. The other parameters
are shared to make use of the correlation among the tasks.
Thanks to the multi-task model, we can obtain the prediction
results of the three classiﬁers simultaneously through one-pass
computation. As a result, we name the proposed model the
One-pass Multi-task Network, or OM-Net.
As the difﬁculty levels of these three tasks progressively
increase, we propose to train OM-Net more effectively by
employing curriculum learning , which is useful for improving the convergence quality of machine learning models.
More speciﬁcally, instead of training the three tasks together
all the time, we gradually introduce the tasks to the model
in an order of increasing difﬁculty. The model structure and
training strategy of OM-Net are illustrated in Fig. 3. First,
OM-Net is trained with only the ﬁrst task in order to learn the
basic knowledge required to differentiate between tumors and
normal tissue. This training process lasts until the loss curve
displays a ﬂattening trend.
The second task is then added to OM-Net; this means
that the ﬁrst and the second tasks are trained together. As
illustrated in Fig. 3, we concatenate Data-1 and Data-2 along
the batch dimension to form the input for OM-Net. We split
the features generated by the shared backbone model along
the batch dimension; here, the splitting position in the batch
dimension is the same as the concatenation position of training
data. We then obtain task-speciﬁc features and use the sliced
features to optimize task-speciﬁc parameters. Moreover, we
argue that not only knowledge (model parameters) but also
learning material (training data) can be transferred from the
easier course (task) to the more difﬁcult course (task) during
curriculum learning. Since the sampling areas for the three
tasks are hierarchically nested, we propose the following
online training data transfer strategy. The training patches in
Data-1 that satisfy the following sampling condition can be
transferred to assist the training of the second task:
1 {li ∈Ccomplete}
where li is the label of the i-th voxel in the patch, Ccomplete
denotes the set of all tumor classes, N is the number of voxels
in the input patch, and 0.4 is set to meet the patch sampling
condition of the second task. We thus concatenate the features
of these patches in Data-1 with Feature-2, then compute the
loss for the second task. The training process in this step
continues until the loss curve of the second task displays a
ﬂattening trend.
Finally, the third task and its training data are introduced to
OM-Net, meaning that these three tasks are trained together.
The concatenation and slicing operations are similar to those in
the second step. The training patches from Data-1 and Data-2
that satisfy the following sampling condition can be transferred
Shared backbone model
Concatenate
data along batch
Classifier-1
Classifier-2
Classifier-3
If Ineq.(2)
If Ineq.(1)
Split features
along batch
Fig. 3. Network structure of OM-Net in the training stage. For the i-th task, its training data, feature maps, and outputs of the classiﬁcation layer are denoted
as Data-i, Feature-i, and Output-i, respectively. The light blue rectangles marked with ‘Concat’ and ‘Split’ represent the concatenation and splitting operations,
respectively, while the blue arrows represent the batch dimension. SoftmaxWithLoss is adopted as the loss function and applied to the output of each task.
The shared backbone model refers to the network layers outlined by the yellow dashed line in Fig. 2.
to the third task:
1 {li ∈Ccore}
where Ccore indicates the tumor classes belonging to the tumor
core. Similarly, 0.5 is chosen to meet the patch sampling
condition of the third task. The threshold in Ineq. (1) is
smaller than that in Ineq. (2); this is because the center points
of training patches for the second task are sampled within
the dilated area of the complete tumor. By comparison, the
center points of training patches for the third task are sampled
within the ground-truth area of the tumor core. This means
that one training patch for the second task may include more
than 50% non-tumor voxels, while one training patch for the
third task includes at most 50% non-core voxels. Therefore,
we set the thresholds in Ineq. (1) and Ineq. (2) to 0.4 and
0.5, respectively. The three tasks are trained together until
convergence occurs. In conclusion, the OM-Net equipped with
the curriculum learning-based training strategy has three main
components: 1) a deep model based on multi-task learning that
realizes coarse-to-ﬁne segmentation via one-pass computation;
2) a stepwise training scheme that progresses from easy to
difﬁcult; 3) the transfer of training data from the easier task
to the more difﬁcult task.
In the inference stage, the data concatenation, feature slicing, and data transfer operations in Fig. 3 are removed, and the
3D patches of an MRI image are fed into the shared backbone
model. Feature-1, Feature-2, and Feature-3 are now the same
for each patch. The prediction results of the three tasks can be
obtained simultaneously by OM-Net. These results are fused
in exactly the same way as in the MC baseline. Moreover, OM-
Net is different from the existing multi-task learning models
for brain tumor segmentation , . The principle behind
these models , involves the provision of multiple
supervisions for the same training data. By contrast, OM-
Net aims to achieve coarse-to-ﬁne segmentation by integrating
tasks with their own training data into a single model.
C. Cross-task Guided Attention
The coarse-to-ﬁne segmentation strategy adopted by OM-
Net can be regarded as a type of cascaded spatial attention,
since the segmentation results of one task determine the ROI
for the following task. In the following, we further enhance
the performance of OM-Net from the perspective of channel
attention. In particular, we propose a novel and effective
channel attention model that makes use of cross-task guidance
to solve the problems experienced by the popular SE block for
the segmentation task.
As explained in Section II, the global average pooling
(GAP) operation in the SE block ignores the dramatic variation
in volume of each class within the input patch. We solve this
problem by computing statistics in category-speciﬁc regions
rather than in a whole patch. However, the category-speciﬁc
regions for common CNNs are unknown until we reach the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer; therefore, this is a chicken-and-egg
problem. Fortunately, OM-Net allows us to estimate categoryspeciﬁc regions beforehand by sharing the prediction results
between tasks. More speciﬁcally, in the training stage, we
let Feature-2 and Feature-3 (shown in Fig. 3) pass through
the ﬁrst and second task of OM-Net, respectively. In this
way, we obtain the coarse segmentation results for the second and third tasks respectively. It is worth noting that this
strategy introduces only negligible additional computation in
the training stage and no extra computation in the testing
stage. This is because Feature-1, Feature-2, and Feature-3 are
exactly the same in the testing stage, as the concatenation and
slicing operations in Fig. 3 are removed during testing. Since
we introduce cross-task guidance for the proposed channel
attention block, we refer to it as Cross-task Guided Attention
(CGA). We also rename Classiﬁer-2 and Classiﬁer-3 in Fig.
3 once equipped with CGA as CGA-tumor and CGA-core,
respectively. The overall architecture of OM-Net equipped
with CGA modules is illustrated in Fig. 4. Note that cross-task
guidance takes place only in the forward pass, meaning that
the back-propagations of the three tasks are still independent.
As illustrated in Fig. 5, we take CGA-tumor as an example
to illustrate the structure of the CGA module. This module
Shared model
Classifier-1
Data-1 forward flow
Data-2 forward flow
Data-3 forward flow
All data forward flow
Cross-task forward flow for Data-2
Cross-task forward flow for Data-3
Fig. 4. The overall architecture of OM-Net equipped with CGA modules in
the training stage. D-i, F-i, and O-i are abbreviations for Data-i, Featurei, and Output-i, which denote the training data, features, and outputs for
the i-th task, respectively. Feature-2 and Feature-3 pass through the ﬁrst
and second task respectively to obtain their own coarse prediction results
beforehand. We refer to these two operations as cross-task forward ﬂow for
Data-2 and Data-3, represented by the green and red dotted lines respectively.
These coarse predictions are utilized as cross-task guidance to help generate
category-speciﬁc channel attention. SoftmaxWithLoss is adopted as the loss
function and applied to the output of each task. The training data transfer
strategy described in Fig. 3 is omitted for clarity in this ﬁgure.
is composed of two blocks: (a) a category-speciﬁc channel
importance (CSCI) block, and (b) a complementary segmentation (CompSeg) block. In Fig. 5, all 4D feature maps and
probability maps are simpliﬁed into 3D cubes to enable better
visualization. In more detail, the height of one cube denotes the
number of channels in feature maps. P ∈RW ×H×L×5 denotes
a probability tensor predicted by the preceding task and is
represented as a pink cube. The number 5 next to the cube for
P refers to the number of classes, which we have explained
in the MC baseline. The grey cube F ∈RW ×H×L×32 denotes
the input feature maps of the current task for the CGA module.
Moreover, the number 32 next to the cube for F denotes its
number of channels.
1) CSCI Block: As illustrated in Fig. 5(a), the CSCI block
utilizes both P estimated by the preceding task and F to
estimate the importance of each channel for the segmentation of tumor and non-tumor categories, respectively. More
speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst compute Pt and Pn; each of these values
refers to the probability of one voxel belonging to the tumor
and non-tumor categories, respectively:
Pt(i, j, k) =
P(i, j, k, c),
Pn(i, j, k) =
c∈Cnon−tumor
P(i, j, k, c),
where {Pt, Pn} ∈RW ×H×L×1. Ctumor and Cnon−tumor
refer to the sets of classes that belong to the tumor and
non-tumor categories, respectively. Ctumor includes all tumor
reshape & transpose
reshape & transpose
Structure of the CGA-tumor module. (a) Category-speciﬁc channel
importance (CSCI) block; (b) complementary segmentation (CompSeg) block.
The elements in mt and mn describe the importance of each channel for
one category of voxels within the patch, which are utilized to recalibrate the
channel-wise feature responses.
classes, while Cnon−tumor contains normal tissue and background. We then reshape Pt and Pn to RN×1, respectively,
where N is equal to W × H × L and denotes the number
of voxels in a patch. Similarly, F is reshaped to RN×32.
Subsequently, we perform matrix multiplication between the
reshaped F and the reshaped Pt, then apply L1 normalization
for the obtained vector:
i,: · Re(Pt)
k,: · Re(Pt)
where mt ∈R32×1, while Re(·) denotes the reshape operation. Similarly,
i,: · Re(Pn)
k,: · Re(Pn)
Elements in mt and mn describe the importance of each channel for the segmentation of tumor and non-tumor categories,
respectively. Compared with the popular SE block, which
squeezes the global information of each channel into a single
value in order to describe its importance, CGA makes use of
ﬁner category-speciﬁc statistics to evaluate the importance of
each channel for one speciﬁc category.
2) CompSeg Block: Inspired by , we further propose a
complementary segmentation (CompSeg) block that performs
segmentation via two complementary pathways. These two
pathways can make full use of the category-speciﬁc channel
importance information (mt and mn) to improve segmentation performance. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the two pathways
focus on the segmentation of the tumor and non-tumor voxels
respectively. The CompSeg block can be described in more
detail as follows. First, mt and mn are used to recalibrate
each channel in F, respectively:
Ut = Fscale(mt, F) =
tf2, · · ·, m32
Un = Fscale(mn, F) =
nf2, · · ·, m32
where fi ∈RW ×H×L is the i-th channel in F. mi
are the i-th elements in mt and mn, respectively. The recalibrated feature maps Ut and Un highlight the more important
channels and suppress the less important ones for tumors and
non-tumors, respectively. These maps are then individually fed
into a 1 × 1 × 1 convolutional classiﬁcation layer to produce
their own score maps, St and Sn. {St, Sn} ∈RW ×H×L×C,
where C refers to the number of classes for the current task.
The two score maps are more sensitive to tumor and nontumor classes respectively. Therefore, we merge the two score
maps via weighted averaging:
˜S(i, j, k, c) = Pt(i, j, k)·St(i, j, k, c)+Pn(i, j, k)·Sn(i, j, k, c),
where ˜S ∈RW ×H×L×C. Finally, we feed ˜S into another 1 ×
1 × 1 convolutional layer to obtain the ultimate prediction
results S for the current task.
As illustrated in Fig. 5, Pt and Pn are used twice in
the CGA module. The ﬁrst time, we use Pt and Pn in
the CSCI block to provide category-speciﬁc probabilities, by
which we calculate mt and mn; these two vectors embed the
interdependencies between channels with regard to different
categories. The second time, we use them in the CompSeg
block as soft spatial masks to merge two score maps by means
of weighted averaging and produce the ﬁnal segmentation
results. Because all tasks are integrated in OM-Net, we are able
to obtain Pt and Pn for use as cross-task guidance to compute
category-speciﬁc statistics for each channel, thereby obtaining
improved channel attentions. By comparison, the popular SE
block ignores category-speciﬁc statistics and reweights each
channel with a single weight. In the experiment section, we
justify the effectiveness of both the CSCI block and the
CompSeg block.
The model structures of the CGA-tumor and CGA-core
modules are almost the same; there are only two trivial and
intuitive differences. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the ﬁrst difference
lies in the position where we introduce the cross-task guidance;
for the CGA-core module, it is introduced from the second
task of OM-Net. Second, the counterparts of Pt and Pn in
CGA-core indicate the probability of each voxel belonging to
the core and non-core tumor categories, respectively.
D. Post-processing
We can observe from many prior studies – , , ,
 , that post-processing is an efﬁcient way to improve
segmentation performance by reﬁning the results of CNNs.
For example, some small clusters of the predicted tumors
are removed in , , , . In addition, conditional
random ﬁeld (CRF) is commonly used as a post-processing
step in , . In particular, Zhao et al. proposed a
post-processing method comprising six steps to boost the
segmentation performance by a large margin.
In this paper, we introduce a simple and ﬂexible postprocessing method in order to reﬁne the predictions of the
proposed networks. Our method is mainly inspired by ,
but consists of fewer steps and adopts K-means clustering
to achieve automatic classiﬁcation rather than deﬁning the
thresholds of voxel intensities in .
Step 1: We remove isolated small clusters with volumes
smaller than a threshold τV OL. τV OL = min , where Vmax denotes the volume of the largest 3D
connected tumor area predicted by the proposed model. This
step can slightly improve the Dice score for the complete
tumor, as false positives are removed.
Step 2: It is observed that non-enhancing voxels are likely
to be misclassiﬁed as edema if the predicted enhancing tumor
area is small . Accordingly, we propose a K-means-based
method to handle this problem, as follows.
Let vole and volt denote the volumes of enhancing tumor
and complete tumor in the predicted results, respectively.
Moreover, vole(n) and volt(n) refer to the volumes of enhancing tumor and complete tumor in the n-th 3D connected tumor
area, respectively. If vole/volt < 0.1, vole(n)/volt(n) <
0.05, and vole(n) < 1000, the K-means clustering algorithm is
employed. Based on their intensity values in the MRI images,
the segmented edema voxels in the n-th connected component
are clustered into two groups. Finally, the average intensity of
each group in the T1c channel is computed. We convert the
labels of voxels in the group with the lower averaged intensity
to the non-enhancing class. The labels of the voxels in the
other group remain unchanged.
In the experiment section, we show that the second step
signiﬁcantly improves the Dice score of the tumor core. As this
step only changes the labels of the voxels predicted as edema,
it will not affect the segmentation results of the complete
tumor or enhancing tumor.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we provide the datasets used to validate our
approaches, the evaluation metrics, and the implementation
A. Datasets
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods,
we conduct experiments on the BraTS 2018 , – ,
BraTS 2017 , – , and BraTS 2015 , datasets.
There are four modalities for each MRI image. All images in
the three datasets have been co-registered, interpolated and
skull-stripped. The dimensions of all images are 240 × 240 ×
155 voxels.
The BraTS 2018 dataset contains three subsets: the training
set, testing set, and validation set. The training set comprises
210 cases of high-grade gliomas (HGG) and 75 cases of lowgrade gliomas (LGG). The testing and validation sets contain
191 cases and 66 cases respectively with hidden ground-truth.
The evaluation metrics of the testing and validation sets are
computed using an online evaluation platform .
The BraTS 2017 dataset shares an identical training set with
BraTS 2018. Compared with BraTS 2018, it has a smaller
validation set comprising 46 cases. The evaluation of the
validation set is conducted online .
The BraTS 2015 dataset consists of a training set including
274 MRI images and a testing set including 110 MRI images.
Performance evaluation of the testing set is also conducted
using an online evaluation platform .
B. Evaluation Metrics
We follow the ofﬁcial evaluation metrics for each dataset.
There are a number of different metrics, namely the Dice
score, Positive Predictive Value (PPV), Sensitivity, and Hausdorff distance, each of which is deﬁned below:
FP + 2TP + FN ,
Sensitivity =
Haus(T, P) = max{sup
d(t, p), sup
where the number of false negative, true negative, true positive,
and false positive voxels are denoted as FN, TN, TP, and FP,
respectively. sup represents the supremum and inf denotes the
inﬁmum, while t and p denote the points on surface T of the
ground-truth regions and surface P of the predicted regions,
respectively. d(·, ·) is the function that computes the distance
between points t and p. Dice score, PPV, and Sensitivity
measure the voxel-wise overlap between the ground-truth and
the predicted results . The Hausdorff distance evaluates
the distance between the surface of the ground-truth regions
and that of the predicted regions. Moreover, Hausdorff95 is
a metric of Hausdorff distance used to measure the 95%
quantile of the surface distance. As the Dice score is the overall
evaluation metric, adopted consistently across all the BraTS
challenges, we adopt it as the main metric for evaluation in
line with existing works – , , , , , ,
 , , , , , .
C. Implementation Details
During pre-processing, we normalize the voxel intensities
within the brain area to have zero mean and unit variance
for each MRI modality. The numbers of training patches are
around 400,000, 400,000, and 200,000 for the ﬁrst, second,
and third task respectively. SoftmaxWithLoss is adopted as the
loss function consistently. All implementations are based on
the C3D1 – package, which is a modiﬁed 3D version
of Caffe . The models are trained using stochastic gradient
1 
ABLATION STUDIES ON THE LOCAL VALIDATION SUBSET OF BRATS
Parameters
OM-Net + SE
OM-Net + CGA
OM-Net + CGA−
OM-Net + CGAt
OM-Net + CGAn
OM-Net + CGAp
descent with a momentum of 0.99 and a batchsize of 20 for
each task. The learning rate of all networks is initially set to
0.001, which is divided by 2 after every four epochs. We train
each network in MC for 20 epochs. Similarly, we train OM-
Net for 1 epoch, 1 epoch, and 18 epochs for its three steps,
respectively. Therefore, the three tasks in OM-Net are trained
for 20, 19, and 18 epochs, respectively.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We ﬁrst carry out ablation studies to demonstrate the validity
of each contribution proposed in this paper. We then compare
the performance of the proposed methods with state-of-theart brain tumor segmentation approaches on the BraTS 2015,
2017, and 2018 datasets.
A. Ablation Studies
The training set of BraTS 2018 is randomly divided into two
subsets to enable convenient evaluation. These two subsets
are a training subset and a local validation subset, which
consist of 260 and 25 MRI images respectively. Quantitative
results of this local validation subset are presented in Table I.
Here, the one-model, two-model, and three-model cascades are
denoted as MC1, MC2, and MC3, respectively. In the below,
we conduct a series of experiments to prove the effectiveness
of each component in the proposed approach.
1) Effectiveness of Model Cascade Strategy: From Table
I, we can observe that with the increase of model number
in MC, Dice scores steadily improve. These results prove the
contribution of each deep network in MC. Unfortunately, the
number of parameters increases along with the number of
models, leading to increased storage consumption and system
complexity.
2) Effectiveness of One-pass Multi-task Network: We compare the performance of OM-Net with that of the MC strategy
in Table I. Despite having only one-third of the parameters
of MC3, OM-Net consistently obtains better segmentation
performance, especially for Dice scores on the tumor core
and enhancing tumor. Moreover, we additionally train OM-
Net0 (a naive multi-task learning model without stepwise
training or training data transfer) and OM-Netd (a multi-task
learning model without stepwise training, but with training
data transfer). It can be seen that OM-Net outperforms both
OM-Net0 and OM-Netd; this demonstrates the effectiveness
of the data transfer strategy and the curriculum learning-based
training strategy.
3) Effectiveness of Cross-task Guided Attention: To compare the performance of the CGA module with that of the
SE block, we further test the OM-Net + SE model where an
SE block is inserted before each Classiﬁer-i (1 ≤i ≤3)
module of OM-Net in Fig. 3. Experimental results in Table
I show that OM-Net + CGA outperforms both OM-Net and
OM-Net + SE. In particular, it outperforms OM-Net by as
much as 2.28% on Dice score for the tumor core region.
Moreover, there is a slight performance drop for enhancing
tumor of 0.14%. However, on much larger data sets (see Table
II, III, IV) where the experimental results are more stable, we
observe that CGA consistently improves the Dice score on
enhancing tumor. In comparison, there is no clear difference
in performance between OM-Net and OM-Net + SE. This
can be explained from two perspectives. First, the GAP
operation in the SE block ignores category-speciﬁc statistics;
second, recalibrating each channel with the same weight for
all categories is suboptimal for segmentation. The proposed
CGA module effectively handles the above two problems, and
therefore achieves better performance than the SE block. In
addition, the model size of OM-Net + CGA is smaller than
both OM-Net and OM-Net + SE. We can thus safely attribute
the performance gains to the CGA module rather than to the
additional parameters.
Next, we conduct additional experimental investigation into
the CGA module in order to prove the validity of both the
CSCI block and the CompSeg block.
• To justify the effectiveness of the CSCI block, we visualize some feature maps produced by the shared backbone
model, as shown in Fig. 6. It should be noted that, in the
interests of intuitive and clear visualization, we choose to
visualize the feature maps of a complete 2D slice rather
than those of a 3D patch. To achieve this, we stitch F-
2 and O-1 of 3D patches in Fig. 4 respectively to form
the whole feature maps and probability maps. We then
select the feature maps F and probability map P of a
certain slice and calculate mt and mn corresponding to
this slice, according to Eqs. 5 and 6, respectively. The
channels corresponding to the ﬁve largest and ﬁve smallest values in mt are presented in Fig. 6(c) and Fig. 6(d),
respectively. Similarly, the channels with the ﬁve largest
and ﬁve smallest values in mn are presented in Fig.
6(e) and Fig. 6(f), respectively. As deconvolution layers
are used in the model, there are inevitable checkboard
artifacts; however, these do not affect the observations.
It is clear that the feature maps shown in Fig. 6(c)
do indeed have strong responses for the tumor region,
which should be highlighted for the segmentation of the
tumor region. In contrast, the feature maps in Fig. 6(d)
have weak responses for the tumor region, but strong
responses for the non-tumor region; therefore, they will
be suppressed in CGA for the segmentation of the tumor
region. Similarly, consistent observations can be found
in Fig. 6(e) and Fig. 6(f). The above analysis proves the
validity of the CSCI block in generating the categoryspeciﬁc channel dependence.
• Furthermore, we also justify the effectiveness of the
CompSeg block, where Pt and Pn are used a second
time. We additionally train a model without using Pt
and Pn, which simply performs an element-wise addition
between St and Sn in Fig. 5(b), denoted as OM-Net
+ CGA−. Experimental results in Table I reveal that
OM-Net + CGA signiﬁcantly outperforms OM-Net +
CGA−; this is because OM-Net + CGA employs soft
spatial masks (Pt and Pn) to fuse two complementary
prediction results. This performance comparison proves
the validity of Pt and Pn used in the CompSeg block.
In addition, we also test another two models: OM-Net +
CGAt is a model whose CompSeg block only includes
the upper branch in Fig. 5(b), while OM-Net + CGAn
is a model whose CompSeg block only incorporates the
lower branch in Fig. 5(b). The experimental results are
reported in Table I. From the table, it can be seen that
OM-Net + CGA outperforms both OM-Net + CGAt and
OM-Net + CGAn. Accordingly, we can conclude that the
two pathways in the CompSeg block can make full use
of the complementary information, which is beneﬁcial for
the segmentation task.
4) Effectiveness of Post-processing: To justify the effectiveness of the proposed post-processing operation, we apply
it to reﬁning the segmentation results of both OM-Net and
OM-Net + CGA, denoted as OM-Netp and OM-Net + CGAp
respectively in Table I. First, compared with OM-Net, it is
shown that OM-Netp can slightly improve the Dice score for
the complete tumor due to false positives having been removed
in the ﬁrst post-processing step; meanwhile, it signiﬁcantly
improves the Dice score of tumor core by 2.6% because of
the second post-processing step. Moreover, the performance
comparison between OM-Net + CGA and OM-Net + CGAp
shows that post-processing operation consistently brings about
performance improvement for the complete tumor and tumor
core regions.
In conclusion, the above experimental results justify the
effectiveness of the proposed techniques. Qualitative comparisons between MC3, OM-Net, OM-Net + CGA, and OM-
Net + CGAp are also provided in Fig. 7. It is clear that
the proposed methods steadily improve the quality of brain
tumor segmentation. This is consistent with the quantitative
comparisons in Table I.
B. Performance Comparison on BraTS 2015 Testing Set
In this experiment, the performance of MC3, OM-Net, and
OM-Net + CGA is evaluated on the testing set of the BraTS
Fig. 6. Visualization of the feature maps output from the shared backbone model in OM-Net + CGA. We present the feature maps of a complete 2D slice
for intuitive and clear visualization. (a) The Flair modality on the 75th slice of the sample BraTS18 2013 21 1 in the BraTS 2018 training set. (b) Its
corresponding ground truth. (c) Heat maps corresponding to the channels with the ﬁve largest values in mt. (d) Heat maps corresponding to the channels
with the ﬁve smallest values in mt. (e) Heat maps corresponding to the channels with the ﬁve largest values in mn. (f) Heat maps corresponding to the
channels with the ﬁve smallest values in mn.
2015 dataset. Each of these models is trained using the entire
training set of the dataset. Experimental results are tabulated
in Table II. From this table, we can make the following
observations.
First, we compare the segmentation performance of MC3,
OM-Net, OM-Net + CGA, and OM-Net + CGAp. It is evident
that OM-Net has clear advantages over MC3, with 1% higher
Dice scores on both tumor core and enhancing tumor. OM-
Net + CGA further promotes the Dice score of OM-Net
by 1% on enhancing tumor. Moreover, following reﬁnement
by the proposed post-processing method, the Dice scores of
OM-Net + CGA improve signiﬁcantly by 1% and 4% on
complete tumor and tumor core, respectively. These results
are consistent with comparisons on the local validation subset
of BraTS 2018.
Second, we compare the performance of OM-Net + CGAp
with state-of-the-art methods. Our results exhibit clear advantages over those obtained by the comparison methods , ,
 , . In particular, our results outperform the popular
DeepMedic model by 2%, 8%, and 2% in terms of Dice
scores on complete tumor, tumor core, and enhancing tumor,
respectively. Furthermore, OM-Net + CGAp also outperforms
the method in which adopts more pre-processing and postprocessing operations. At the time of this submission, OM-Net
+ CGAp ranks ﬁrst on the online leaderboard of BraTS 2015,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
C. Performance Comparison on BraTS 2017 Validation Set
Since access to the testing set of BraTS 2017 was closed
after the challenge, we evaluate the proposed methods on the
online validation set and compare them with other participants
in Table III.
First, we train the MC3, OM-Net, OM-Net + SE, and OM-
Net + CGA models using the training subset of 260 MRI
images. The following observations can be made. OM-Net
outperforms MC3, especially for the Dice scores on enhancing
tumor. The SE block cannot improve the performance of
OM-Net in terms of Dice scores; in fact, it reduces the
Dice score of OM-Net by 1.18% on enhancing tumor. In
comparison, OM-Net + CGA outperforms both OM-Net and
OM-Net + SE by a signiﬁcant margin. Speciﬁcally, its Dice
scores are 1.88% and 2.09% higher than those of OM-Net
on tumor core and enhancing tumor respectively; this again
Fig. 7. Example segmentation results on the local validation subset of BraTS 2018. From left to right: Ground truth, MC3, OM-Net, OM-Net + CGA, and
OM-Net + CGAp results overlaid on FLAIR image; edema (green), necrosis and non-enhancing (blue), and enhancing(red).
proves the effectiveness of the CGA module. In addition, OM-
Net + CGAp considerably improves the Dice score on tumor
core, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed postprocessing method.
Second, to further boost the performance of OM-Net +
CGA, we divide the training data into ten folds and obtain
an ensemble system using the following scheme: we train
one model using nine folds of training data and pick the best
snapshot on the rest one fold. We repeat this process and obtain
10 models as an ensemble (denoted as OM-Net + CGA⋆). A
similar strategy was used in . Table III shows that OM-Net
+ CGA⋆consistently obtains higher Dice scores than OM-
Net + CGA. We further apply the proposed post-processing
method to OM-Net + CGA⋆, denoted as OM-Net + CGA⋆p.
It can clearly be seen that the proposed post-processing method
improves the Dice score of OM-Net + CGA⋆by as much as
1.48% for tumor core.
Third, we present comparisons between OM-Net + CGA⋆p
and some state-of-the-art methods on the online validation
leaderboard, which comprises more than 60 entries. It is clear
that OM-Net + CGA⋆p outperforms all other methods in
terms of Dice scores. It is further worth noting that other
top entries, such as Kamnitsas et al. , also combined
multiple models to boost performance; moreover, Wang et al.
 integrated nine single-view models from three orthogonal
views to achieve excellent performance. The above comparisons demonstrate the superiority of our proposed methods.
D. Performance Comparison on BraTS 2018 Dataset
We also make additional comparisons on the BraTS 2018
dataset. As BraTS 2018 and 2017 share the same training
dataset, we directly evaluate the same models in the previous
experiments on the validation set of BraTS 2018. The BraTS
2018 Challenge is intensely competitive, with more than
100 entries displayed on the online validation leaderboard.
Therefore, we only present comparisons between our methods
and the top entries in Table IV. Our observations are as
First, comparison results between MC3, OM-Net, OM-Net
+ SE, and OM-Net + CGA are consistent with those in Table
III. We can see that OM-Net achieves better performance than
MC3 on enhancing tumor with a visible margin. Moreover, despite having only a single model and without post-processing,
OM-Net is able to outperform more than 70% of entries on the
leaderboard. In addition, OM-Net + CGA outperforms OM-
Net by 1.26% and 1.45% in terms of Dice scores on tumor
core and enhancing tumor, respectively. By comparison, SE
cannot improve the performance of OM-Net in terms of Dice
Second, by implementing the model ensemble and the postprocessing operation, OM-Net + CGA⋆p obtains higher Dice
scores as expected, achieving very competitive performance on
the leaderboard. It is worth noting that the model ensemble
strategy was also applied in , , . The approach
described in also decomposes the multi-class brain tumor
segmentation into three tasks. It achieves top performance by
training 10 models as an ensemble, the inputs of which are
PERFORMANCE ON BRATS 2015 TESTING SET (%)
Positive Predictive Value
Sensitivity
OM-Net + CGA
OM-Net + CGAp
Isensee et al. 
Chen et al. 
Zhao et al. 
Kamnitsas et al. 
MEAN VALUES OF DICE AND HAUSDORFF95 METRICS ON BRATS 2017
VALIDATION SET
Hausdorff95 (mm)
OM-Net + SE
OM-Net + CGA
OM-Net + CGAp
OM-Net + CGA⋆
OM-Net + CGA⋆p
Wang et al. 
Kamnitsas et al. 
large patches of size 160 × 192 × 128 voxels. Large input
patches lead to considerable memory consumption; therefore,
32GB GPUs are employed in to train this model. In
comparison, OM-Net utilizes small patches of size 32×32×16
voxels, making it memory-efﬁcient and capable of being
trained or deployed on low-cost GPU devices. We can thus
conclude that OM-Net is very competitive and has its own
advantages.
More impressively, beneﬁtting from the techniques proposed
in this paper, we obtained the joint third position among 64
teams on the testing set of the BraTS 2018 Challenge2. More
detailed results of this challenge are introduced in . In
conclusion, the effectiveness of the proposed methods has been
demonstrated through comparisons on the above three datasets.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel model, OM-Net, for
brain tumor segmentation that is tailored to handle the class
2 
MEAN VALUES OF DICE AND HAUSDORFF95 METRICS ON BRATS 2018
VALIDATION SET
Hausdorff95 (mm)
OM-Net + SE
OM-Net + CGA
OM-Net + CGAp
OM-Net + CGA⋆
OM-Net + CGA⋆p
Myronenko 
Isensee et al. †
† To facilitate fair comparison, we report the performance of without private training data.
imbalance problem. Unlike the popular MC framework, OM-
Net requires only one-pass computation to perform coarseto-ﬁne segmentation. OM-Net is superior to MC because it
not only signiﬁcantly reduces the model size and system
complexity, but also thoroughly exploits the correlation between the tasks through sharing parameters, training data,
and even prediction results. In particular, we propose a CGA
module that makes use of cross-task guidance information
to learn category-speciﬁc channel attention, enabling it to
signiﬁcantly outperform the popular SE block. In addition,
we introduce a novel and effective post-processing method
for use in reﬁning the segmentation results in order to achieve
better accuracy. Extensive experiments were conducted on
three popular datasets; the results of these experiments prove
the effectiveness of the proposed OM-Net model, and further
demonstrate that OM-Net has clear advantages over existing
state-of-the-art methods for brain tumor segmentation.