Running head: ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Learning Analytics: Ethical Issues and Dilemmas
Sharon Slade
The Open University, UK
Paul Prinsloo
University of South Africa
Author note:
Correspondence concerning this article should be directed to Sharon Slade, Faculty of
Business and Law, The Open University, Foxcombe Hall, Boars Hill, Oxford, UK.
Contact: 
Paul Prinsloo, Directorate for Curriculum and Learning Development, University of South
Africa, TVW 4-69, P O Box 392, Unisa, 0003, South Africa
Contact: 
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
The field of learning analytics has the potential to enable higher education institutions to
increase their understanding of their students’ learning needs and to use that understanding to
positively influence student learning and progression. Analysis of data relating to students
and their engagement with their learning is the foundation of this process. There is an
inherent assumption linked to learning analytics that knowledge of a learner’s behavior is
advantageous for the individual, instructor and educational provider. It seems intuitively
obvious that a greater understanding of a student cohort and of the learning designs and
interventions to which they best respond would be of benefit to students and, in turn, for the
retention and success rate of the institution. Yet, such collection of data and its use faces a
number of ethical challenges, including issues of the location and interpretation of data;
informed consent, privacy and the de-identification of data; and the classification and
management of data.
Approaches taken to understand the opportunities and ethical challenges of learning
analytics necessarily depend on a range of ideological assumptions and epistemologies. This
paper proposes a socio-critical perspective on the use of learning analytics. Such an approach
highlights the role of power, the impact of surveillance, the need for transparency and an
acknowledgment that student identity is a transient, temporal and context-bound construct.
Each of these affects the scope and definition of the ethical use of learning analytics. We
propose six principles as a framework for a number of considerations to guide higher
education institutions to address ethical issues in learning analytics and challenges in contextdependent and appropriate ways.
Keywords: Ethics, framework, higher education, learning analytics
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Learning Analytics: Ethical Issues and Dilemmas
Learning analytics is cited as one of the key emerging trends in higher education
 . There remain, however, a number of
issues in need of further research and reflection , not least of which is
consideration of its ethical use and practices. In the field of learning analytics, discussions
around the ethical implications of increasing an institution’s scrutiny of student data typically
relates to ownership of that data and to student privacy issues. Although many authors in the
field refer to ethical issues, there are few integrated and coherent attempts to map ethical
concerns and challenges pertaining to the use of learning analytics in higher education.
Approaches taken to understand the opportunities and ethical challenges of learning
analytics necessarily depend on a range of ideological assumptions and epistemologies. For
example, if we approach learning analytics from the perspective of resource optimization in
the context of the commoditization of higher education , the ethical
issues appear different than those resulting from a socio-critical perspective. In addition,
learning analytics has evolved from a range of research areas such as social network analysis,
latent semantic analysis and dispositions analysis . Each of these domains
has its own, often overlapping, ethical guidelines and codes of conduct which address similar
concerns such as the ownership of data, privacy, and consumer or patient consent, etc.
For this article, we situate learning analytics within an understanding of power
relations between learners, higher education institutions and other stakeholders (e.g.,
regulatory and funding frameworks). Such power relations can be considered from the
perspective of Foucault’s Panopticon, where structural design allows a central authority to
oversee all activity. In the case of learning analytics, such oversight or surveillance is often
available only to the institution, course designers and faculty, and not to the student .
This paper references existing research on learning analytics, adding an integrated
overview of different ethical issues from a socio-critical perspective. A socio-critical
perspective entails being critically aware of the way our cultural, political, social, physical
and economic contexts and power-relationships shape our responses to the ethical dilemmas
and issues in learning analytics . Ethical issues for learning analytics
fall into the following broad, often overlapping categories:
a) The location and interpretation of data
b) Informed consent, privacy and the de-identification of data
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
c) The management, classification and storage of data
Such ethical issues are not unique to education, and similar debates relating to the use
of data to inform decisions and interventions are also found in the health sector , human resource management , talent
management , homeland security , and
biopolitics . Of specific concern here are the implications of
viewing learning analytics as moral practice, recognizing students as participatory agents
with developmental and temporal identities and learning trajectories and the need for
reciprocal transparency. Learning analytics as moral practice functions as a counter-narrative
to using student data in service of neoliberal consumer-driven market ideologies .
We conclude this article by proposing a number of grounding principles and
considerations from which context-specific and context-appropriate guidelines can be
developed.
Perspectives on Ethical Issues in Learning Analytics
Published literature on the ethical considerations in learning analytics tends to focus
on issues such as the historical development of research ethics in Internet research, the
benefits of learning analytics for a range of stakeholders, and issues of privacy, informed
consent and access to data sets. Given that many of these overlap, the following review of
literature is structured to highlight systematically a range of different ethical issues for
learning analytics in higher education. We aim also to highlight a number of issues that either
have not yet been considered within the context of learning analytics, or have not been
considered fully.
A Working Definition of Learning Analytics
Oblinger differentiates between learning analytics and approaches
including business intelligence and academic analytics, defining learning analytics as
focusing on “students and their learning behaviors, gathering data from course management
and student information systems in order to improve student success.” For this article, we
define learning analytics as the collection, analysis, use and appropriate dissemination of
student-generated, actionable data with the purpose of creating appropriate cognitive,
administrative and effective support for learners.
An Overview of the Purposes and Collection of Educational Data
Ethical challenges and issues in the use of educational data can be usefully viewed in
the context of the history of Internet research ethics, and against the backdrop of the
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
development of research ethics after cases such as the Tuskegee experiment , the release of the Nuremberg Code in 1947 and the World Medical
Association’s Declaration of Helsinki adopted in 1964. Throughout there has emerged an
attempt to find a balance between “individual harms and greater scientific knowledge”
 . The advent of the Internet exposed new areas for concern, often
lying outside traditional boundaries and guidelines for ethical research. As a way to provide
guidance for the complexities of conducting research on Internet populations and data,
Internet Research Ethics emerged in the early 1990s. This was followed in 2000 by the
formation of the Ethics Working Group by the Association of Internet Researchers.
Higher education institutions have always analyzed data to some extent, but the sheer
volume of data continues to rise along with institutions’ computational capacity, the
prevalence of visualization tools and the increasing demand for the exploitation of data. As a
result, there are a growing number of ethical issues regarding the collection and analyses of
educational data, issues that include greater understanding and transparency regarding the
“purposes for which data is being collected and how sensitive data will be handled”
 . Legal frameworks such as the US Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act focus largely on how information is used outside an institution rather than on its
use within the institution, and Oblinger argues that it is crucial that institutions inform
students “what information about them will be used for what purposes, by whom, and for
what benefit” (p.12).
Subotzky and Prinsloo suggest that there is a need for a reciprocal sharing of
appropriate and actionable knowledge between students and the delivering institution. Such
knowledge of students may facilitate the offering of just-in-time and customized support
allowing students to make more informed choices and act accordingly.
The Educational Purpose of Learning Analytics
In stark contrast to the advances of data use in other fields (for example, patient
information in health care) ,higher education “has traditionally been inefficient in its data use,
often operating with substantial delays in analyzing readily evident data and feedback” . Despite the probable advantages of using learning analytics to
measure, collect, analyze and report “data about learners and their contexts, for purposes of
understanding and optimizing learning and the environments in which it occurs” , there remain a number of ethical challenges and issues impacting its
optimization in higher education.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
While educational data serve a number of purposes (e.g., for reporting on student
success and study subsidies), Booth emphasizes that learning analytics also has the
potential to serve learning. A learning analytics approach may make education both personal
and relevant, and allow students to retain their own identities within the bigger system.
Optimal use of student-generated data may result in institutions having an improved
comprehension of the life-worlds and choices of students, allowing both institution and
students to make better and informed choices, and respond faster to actionable and identified
needs .
Several authors refer to the obligation that institutions have to act on knowledge gained through
analytics. It is fair to say that there may also be instances where institutions decide not to act
on data. It might be argued that the gains offered by responding to student cohorts with a
certain set of shared characteristics or behaviors are of minor benefit, or are less beneficial
than making equivalent or lower investments of resources elsewhere. The recent
EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research survey confirms that the
greatest concern relating to the growing use of learning analytics expressed by a range of
members is the financial cost of implementation, rather than issues of privacy or misuse of
The decision to act or not to act, and the costs and ethical considerations of either,
have to be considered in the specific context of application. Not all data harvested will
necessarily involve or trigger a response on the part of the institution. This raises the point
that although not all data will be actionable, it may increase institutions’ understanding of
student success and retention.
At some point, all institutions supporting student learning must decide what their
main purpose really is: to maximize the number of students reaching graduation, to improve
the completion rates of students who may be regarded as disadvantaged in some way, or
perhaps to simply maximize profits. The ways in which learning analytics are applied by an
institution will vary in accordance with which of these is deemed to be its primary concern.
Further, and perhaps more importantly for the institution’s ability to maintain positive
relations with its students, the ways in which students perceive the use of such surveillance
will also vary in accordance with their own understanding of the institution’s purpose and
motivation. The management of students’ understanding and perceptions is therefore a major
priority for any institution which seeks to embed learning analytics into its standard
operations.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Amidst the emphasis on the role of data and analyses for reporting on student success,
retention and throughput, it is crucial to remember that learning analytics has huge potential
to primarily serve learning . When institutions emphasize the
analysis and use of data primarily for reporting purposes, there is a danger of seeing students
as passive producers of data resulting in learning analytics used as “intrusive advising”
 . If the intention is to use data collected from students for
other purposes, there is a responsibility on the part of the institution to make that known.
Power and Surveillance in Learning Analytics
Owing to the inherently unequal power relations in the use of data generated by
students in their learning journey, we propose a socio-critical framework which allows us to
address a range of ethical questions such as levels of visibility, aggregation and surveillance.
Whilst online surveillance and the commercialization possibilities of online data are
themselves under increasing scrutiny , the ease
with which we now share data on social networking sites may suggest an increasing
insouciance or a less guarded approach to privacy . Dawson
 , for example, found that students altered their online behaviors (e.g. range of topics
discussed and writing style) when aware of institutional surveillance. Albrechtslund explores the notion of participatory surveillance focusing on surveillance as
“mutual, horizontal practice”, as well as the social and “playful aspects” of surveillance . Knox 
provides a very useful typology of surveillance, highlighting inter alia the difference between
surveillance and monitoring, automation and visibility, and various aspects of rhizomatic and
predictive surveillance. Rhizomatic surveillance highlights the dynamic, multidirectional
flow of the act of surveillance in a synopticon where the many can watch the few. The
synopticon and panopticon function concurrently and interact .
The increasing surveillance in teaching and learning environments also affects the
work and identities of tutors, faculty and administrators, disrupting existing power relations
and instituting new roles and responsibilities .
The following sections discuss a range of ethical issues grouped within three, broad,
overlapping categories, namely:
1. The location and interpretation of data
2. Informed consent, privacy and the de-identification of data
3. The management, classification and storage of data
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
1. The Location and Interpretation of Data
It is now the case that “significant amounts of learner activity take place externally [to
the institution]… records are distributed across a variety of different sites with different
standards, owners and levels of access” . This flags the difficulties
associated with attempting to enforce a single set of guidelines relating to ethical use across
such a range of sites, each with its own data protection standards, for instance.
In addition, there are questions around the nature and interpretation of digital data as
fully representative of a particular student (cohort). Correlations between different variables
may be assumed when dealing with missing and incomplete data around usage of the
institution’s learning management system (LMS) . Such
assumptions may be influenced by the analyst’s own perspectives and result in
subconsciously biased interpretations. The distributive nature of networks and the inability to
track activity outside of an institution’s internal systems also impacts the ability to get a
holistic picture of students’ life-worlds. Not only do we not have all the data, a lot of the data
that we do have requires “extensive filtering to transform the ‘data exhaust’ in the LMS log
file into educationally relevant information” .
There are implications, too, of ineffective and misdirected interventions resulting
from faulty learning diagnoses which might result in “inefficiency, resentment, and
demotivation” . In addition, systematized modeling of
behaviors, which necessarily involves making assumptions (e.g. regarding the permanency of
students’ learning contexts) , can determine and limit how institutions behave toward and
react to their students, both as individuals and as members of a number of different cohorts.
Ess, Buchanan and Markham concur that there is a need to consider the individual
within what may be a very large and depersonalized data set even if that individual is not
recognizable. Actions influenced by a cohort of which a student is a single part may still
adversely impact on that student’s options. In his recent article, Harvey warns
that “this process portends a reification of identities, with support allocated by association
rather than individual need”.
Given the wide range of information which may be included in such models, there is a
recognized danger of potential bias and oversimplification . In accepting the inevitability of this, should we also question the
rights of the student to remain an individual and whether it is appropriate for students to have
an awareness of the labels attached to them? Are there some labels which should be
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
prohibited? As students become more aware of the implications of such labeling, the
opportunity to opt out or to actively misrepresent certain characteristics to avoid labeling can
diminish the validity of the remaining data set. Many institutions are employing learning
analytics to nudge students toward study choices or to adopt support strategies which are
assumed to offer greater potential for success , but what is the obligation for the
student to either accept explicit guidance or to seek support which may be in conflict with
their own preferences or study goals ? There is a risk of a “return to
behaviorism as a learning theory if we confine analytics to behavioral data” .
2. Informed Consent, Privacy and the De-identification of Data
Whilst students are increasingly aware of the growing prevalence of data mining to
monitor and influence buying behavior, it is not clear that they are equally aware of the extent
to which this occurs within an educational setting. Epling, Timmons and Wharrad 
discuss issues around the acceptability of student surveillance and debate who the real
beneficiaries are. Use of data for non-educational purposes is flagged explicitly by Campbell
et al referring to the use of student related data for fundraising, for example. Wel and
Royakkers discuss the ethics of tracking and analyzing student data without their
explicit knowledge. Interestingly, Land and Bayne discuss the broad acceptance of
student surveillance and cite studies in which they record that the concept of logging
educational activities seems to be quite acceptable to students. The notion of online privacy
as a social norm is increasingly questioned .
Considering the general concern regarding surveillance and its impact on student and
faculty privacy, Petersen points to the importance of the de-identification of data
before the data is made available for institutional use, including the option to “retain unique
identifiers for individuals in the data set, without identifying the actual identity of the
individuals” (p.48). This latter point addresses the need to provide interventions for groups of
students based on their characteristics or behaviors whilst ensuring their anonymity within the
larger data set.
3. The Classification and Management of Data
Petersen proposes a holistic approach to transparent data management
including a need for a “comprehensive data-governance structure to address all the types of
data used in various situations” addressing the need to create “a data-classification system
that sorts data into categories that identify the necessary level of protection.” (pp. 46-47). He
suggests a need to appoint data stewards to oversee standards and controls and set policies
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
relating to, for example, data access, and data custodians to ensure adherence to policy and
procedures without the power to determine who can and who can not access data sets. While
Petersen’s comments deal specifically with general data management, learning
analytics may also benefit from such an approach.
With regard to the importance of trust in monitoring and surveillance , we agree that the classification of data,
as proposed by Petersen , is an essential element in ensuring that appropriate access to
different types of data will be regulated.
Integral to contemplating the ethical challenges in learning analytics is a consideration
of the impact of the tools used. Wagner and Ice explore the relevance of pattern
recognition and business intelligence techniques in the evolving learning analytics landscape
which provide scope for increased success by guiding stakeholders to “recognize the
proverbial right place and right time” (p.34).While pattern recognition has huge potential for
delivering custom-made and just-in-time support to students, there is a danger, as highlighted
by Pariser that pattern recognition can result in keeping individuals prisoner to past
choices. Pariser suggests that the use of personalized filters hints of “autopropaganda,
indoctrinating us with our own ideas, amplifying our desire for things that are familiar”, and
that “knowing what kinds of appeals specific people respond to gives you the power to
manipulate them on an individual basis” (p. 121). As we propose in the later section on
ethical considerations, the algorithms used by institutions invariably reflect and perpetuate
current biases and prejudices. The dynamic nature of student identity necessitates that we
take reasonable care to allow students to act outside of imposed algorithms and models.
Student Identity as Transient Construct
While the classification of data is the basis for determining access to different
categories of data as well as determining appropriate institutional responses to different types
of categories by a range of institutional stakeholders (including students themselves), it is
crucial that the analysis of data in learning analytics keeps in mind the temporality of
harvested data and the fact that harvested data only allows us a view of a person at a
particular time and place. While categorizing data is necessary, categorizing students and
faculty based on historical data is, at least currently, error prone and incomplete. Institutions
should also recognize the plurality of student identity. Sen suggests that we
should recognize identities as “robustly plural, and that the importance of one identity need
not obliterate the importance of others.” Students, as agents, make choices – “explicitly or by
implication – about what relative importance to attach, in a particular context, to the
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
divergent loyalties and priorities that may compete for precedence” .
Towards an Ethical Framework
While the above literature review provided an overview on a range of ethical issues in
learning analytics. we now turn to providing an integrated, social-critical ethical framework
and principles for learning analytics, and discussion of a number of considerations which
follow these principles.
The review left us with the question of: How do we address both the potential of
learning analytics to serve learning and the associated ethical challenges? One approach
might be the formulation of institutional codes of conduct. Bienkowski et al , for
example, cite work done in preparation of the US Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
which clarifies access to data sets (e.g., access primarily for research, accountability, or
institutional improvement) set against the need to maintain student privacy. In Australia,
Nelson and Creagh have begun work on a Good Practice Guide for using learning
analytics which details the needs of key stakeholders and the implications of a set of
proposed rights for each. The viability of implementing such codes of conduct on a large
scale, and how these might address the use of all data in an online environment in which the
data and its applications has the potential to increase and evolve, should therefore be a
priority in the debate of learning analytics and its ethical implications. Land and Bayne
 propose that institutional codes of conduct should cover informed consent, the
purpose and extent of data tracking, the transparency of data held, ownership and the
boundaries of data usage.
Petersen proposes adherence to the principles found in the US Federal
Trade Commission’s “Fair Information Practice Principles” which cover the elements of
informed consent, allowing different options regarding the use of data, individuals’ right to
check the accuracy and completeness of information, preventing unauthorized access, use and
disclosure of data and provisions for enforcement and redress. Buchanan proposes
three ethical principles, namely “respect for persons, beneficence, and justice” (p.84). Not
only should individuals be regarded as autonomous agents, but vulnerable individuals with
diminished or constrained autonomy (including students) should be protected from harm and
While many of the above provide useful pointers for learning analytics, seeing
learning analytics as a moral practice with its primary contribution of increasing the
effectiveness of learning necessitates a different (but not contradictory) set of principles.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Principles for an Ethical Framework for Learning Analytics
Our approach holds that an institution’s use of learning analytics is going to be based
on its understanding of the scope, role and boundaries of learning analytics and a set of moral
beliefs founded on the respective regulatory and legal, cultural, geopolitical and socioeconomic contexts. Any set of guidelines concerned with the ethical dilemmas and challenges
in learning analytics will necessarily also be based on a set of epistemological assumptions.
As such, it would be almost impossible to develop a set of universally valid guidelines which
could be equally applicable within any context. It should however be possible to develop a set
of general principles from which institutions can develop their own sets of guidelines
depending on their contexts.
We propose here a number of principles as a guiding framework for considering
learning analytics as moral practice.
Principle 1: Learning analytics as moral practice
In response to the increasingly analytic possibilities facing the current institution of
higher education, learning analytics should do much more than contribute to a “data-driven
university” or lead to a world where we are “living under the sword of data.” We agree with
Biesta that
evidence-based education seems to favor a technocratic model in which it is assumed
that the only relevant research questions are about the effectiveness of educational
means and techniques, forgetting, among other things, that what counts as ‘effective’
crucially depends on judgments about what is educationally desirable. (p.5)
Education cannot and should not be understood as “as an intervention or treatment
because of the noncausal and normative nature of educational practice and because of the fact
that the means and ends in education are internally related” . Learning
analytics should not only focus on what is effective, but also aim to provide relevant pointers
to decide what is appropriate and morally necessary. Education is primarily a moral practice,
not a causal one. Therefore learning analytics should function primarily as a moral practice
resulting in understanding rather than measuring .
Principle 2: Students as agents
In stark contrast to seeing students as producers and sources of data, learning analytics
should engage students as collaborators and not as mere recipients of interventions and
services . Not only should students provide
informed consent regarding the collection, use and storage of data, but they should also
voluntarily collaborate in providing data and access to data to allow learning analytics to
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
serve their learning and development, and not just the efficiency of institutional profiling and
interventions . Kruse and Pongsajapan propose a
“student-centric”, as opposed to an “intervention-centric”, approach to learning analytics.
This suggests the student should be seen
as a co-interpreter of his (sic) own data - and perhaps even as a participant in the
identification and gathering of that data. In this scenario, the student becomes aware
of his (sic) own actions in the system and uses that data to reflect on and potentially
alter his behavior. (pp. 4-5)
To value students as agents, making choices and collaborating with the institution in
constructing their identities (however transient) can furthermore be a useful (and powerful)
antidote to the commercialization of higher education in the context
of the impact of skewed power relations, monitoring and surveillance .
Principle 3: Student identity and performance are temporal dynamic constructs
Integral in learning analytics is the notion of student identity. It is crucial to see
student identity as a combination of permanent and dynamic attributes. During students’
enrollment, their identities are in continuous flux and as such, they find themselves in a
“Third Space” where their identities and competencies are in a permanent liminal state
 . The ethical implications of this are that learning analytics
provides a snapshot view of a learner at a particular time and context. This not only
necessitates the need for longitudinal data but has implications for the storage
and permanency of data. Mayer-Schönberger warns that forgetting is a
“fundamental human capacity.” Students should be allowed to evolve and adjust and learn
from past experiences without those experiences, due to their digital nature, becoming
permanent blemishes on their development history. Student profiles should not become
“etched like a tattoo into … [their] digital skins” . Data
collected through learning analytics should therefore have an agreed-upon lifespan and expiry
date, as well as mechanisms for students to request data deletion under agreed-upon criteria.
Principle 4: Student success is a complex and multidimensional phenomenon
While one of the benefits of learning analytics is to contribute to a better
understanding of student demographics and behaviors , it is important to see
student success is the result of “mostly non-linear, multidimensional, interdependent
interactions at different phases in the nexus between student, institution and broader societal
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
factors” . While learning analytics offer huge opportunities to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of student learning, our data is incomplete , “dirty” and our
analyses vulnerable to misinterpretation and bias .
Principle 5: Transparency
Important for learning analytics as moral practice is that higher education institutions
should be transparent regarding the purposes for which data will be used, under which
conditions, who will have access to data and the measures through which individuals’ identity
will be protected. The assumption that participating in public online forums provides blanket
permission for use of data should not be acceptable . Higher education
institutions have an obligation to protect participant data on the institutional LMS, and also to
inform students of possible risks when teaching and learning occurs outside the boundaries of
institutional jurisdiction.
Principle 6: Higher education cannot afford to not use data
The previous five principles provide guidance for those higher education institutions
using or planning to use data. The sixth principle makes it clear that higher eduction
institutions cannot afford to not use learning analytics. The triggers for adopting learning
analytics will depend on an institution’s answer to the earlier question regarding their main
purpose. Whether it be for profit or improving the outcome for students, institutions should
use available data to better understand and then engage with, and indeed ameliorate, the
outcomes . To
ignore information which might actively help to pursue an institution’s goals seems shortsighted in the extreme. Institutions are accountable, whether it is to shareholders, to
government or to students themselves. Learning analytics allows higher education institutions
to assist all stakeholders to penetrate “the fog that has settled over much of higher education”
 .
Considerations for Learning Analytics as Moral Practice
In line with the proposal by Ess et al , we propose a number of considerations
rather than a code of practice to allow for flexibility and the range of contexts in which they
might need to be applied. The following considerations are structured to address issues
regarding benefits, consent, vulnerability and harm, data, and governance and resource
allocation.
Who Benefits and Under What Conditions?
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
The answer to this question is the basis for considering the ethical dimensions of
learning analytics. From the literature review, it is clear that both students and the institution
should benefit, and that the most benefit is derived when students and institutions collaborate
as stakeholders in learning analytics. Students are not simply recipients of services or
customers paying for an education. They are and should be active agents in determining the
scope and purpose of data harvested from them and under what conditions (e.g., deidentification). On the other hand, it is clear that in order to deliver increasingly effective and
appropriate learning and student support, higher education institutions need to optimize the
selection of data harvested and analyzed. We strongly suspect that students should be
informed that, in order to deliver a personalized and appropriate learning experience, higher
education needs not only to harvest data, but also to ensure that de-identification of data
should not hamper personalization. Agreeing on the need for and purpose of harvesting data
under certain provisions provides a basis of trust between the institution and students. Both
parties to the agreement realize that the veracity and comprehensiveness of data will allow
optimum personalization, appropriate learning and support and cost effectiveness.
Conditions for Consent, De-identification and Opting Out
While informed consent is an established practice in research, the same cannot be said
for use of student data within other educational contexts. Given that the scope and nature of
available data have changed dramatically, we should re-visit the notion of informed consent
in the field of learning analytics.
Is informed consent a sine qua non or are there circumstances in which other
principles override the need for informed consent? There are many examples in different
fields (e.g., bioethics) where the principle of informed consent can be waived under
predetermined circumstances or if existing legislation is sufficient (e.g., data protection
legislation). In extreme cases, informed consent may be forgone if the benefit to the many
exceeds the needs of the individual. In the context of learning analytics, we might suggest
that there are few, if any, reasons not to provide students with information regarding the uses
to which their data might be put, as well as the models used (as far as they may be known at
that time), and to establish a system of informed consent. Given the continuing advances in
technology and our understanding of the effective applications of learning analytics, this
consent may need to be refreshed on a regular basis. As Herring states, the changing
composition of student groupings over time suggests that obtaining informed consent may be
problematic. She suggests the need to achieve a reasonable balance between allowing quality
research to be conducted and protecting users from potential harm. In practice, this may
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
translate to provision of a broad definition of the range of potential uses to which a student’s
data may be put, some of which may be less relevant to the individual.
Buchanan , referring to the work of Lawson , suggests a nuanced
approach to consent which offers (students) a range of options for withholding (partial)
identification of individuals where they are part of a published study. In the light of this, it
seems reasonable to distinguish between analyzing and using anonymized data for reporting
purposes to regulatory bodies or funding purposes and other work on specific aspects of
student engagement. In the context of reporting purposes, we support the notion that the
benefit for the majority supersedes the right of the individual to withhold permission for use
of his or her data. Students may, however, choose to opt out of institutional initiatives to
personalize learning – on condition that students are informed and aware of the consequences
of their decision.
Institutions should also provide guarantees that student data will be permanently deidentified after a certain number of years, depending on national legislation and regulatory
frameworks.
Vulnerability and Harm
Definitions. How do we define vulnerability and harm and prevent potential harm,
not only to students but to all stakeholders? In considering this issue, we might think about
aspects such as implicit or explicit discrimination (whereby one student receives, or does not
receive, support based on what might externally be considered to be a random personal
characteristic), labeling (where students may be branded according to some combination of
characteristics and treated - potentially for the duration of their studies – as somehow
different from others) and the validity of treating groupings of students in a particular way
based on assumptions made about their shared characteristics. One way to address the
potential role of bias and stereotyping is to adopt a position of “Rawlsian blindness” where students’ demographic and prior educational records are not used from
the outset to predict their chances of success and failure. On the other hand, is it ethical to
ignore the predictive value of research evidence in particular contexts?
We suggest that the potential for bias and stereotyping in predictive analysis should
be foregrounded in institutional attempts to categorize students’ risk profiles. Institutions
should provide additional opportunities for these students either to prove the initial predictive
analyses wrong or incomplete, or to redeem themselves despite any initial institutional doubt
regarding their potential. In determining what might constitute vulnerability in the context of
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
learning analytics, institutions should aim to ensure that analyses are conducted on robust and
suitably representative datasets.
Redress for students. If a system of transparency and informed consent is adopted, it
might be argued that the potential for allegations of misuse and harm is minimized. It is
unlikely though that approaches can be fully comprehensive in their consideration of
potential (future) scenarios, and it is feasible that a student may argue that they have been
disadvantaged (perhaps by not receiving the perceived advantages that another student has).
Bollier provides an example of a future whereby low risk (and therefore low cost)
students may seek preferential treatment (reduced entrance requirements, perhaps) at a “cost”
to perceived high risk students. At this stage, it is difficult to assess longer term implications,
although most higher education institutions will have in place clear complaints and appeals
systems, which will perhaps warrant revision.
Redress for institutions. Conversely, if systems and approaches are transparent,
there is increased potential for student abuse of the system. What recourse do institutions
have when students provide false or incomplete information which may provide them with
additional support at a cost to the institution (and to other students)? Student regulations
typically contain statements which allow the institution to terminate registration if
information given is untrue or misleading, and there are other less draconian measures which
might also be adopted.
Data Collection, Analyses, Access and Storage
Collection of data. In collecting data from disparate sources, institutions need to take
due care to ensure not to “amplify error” due to the “different standards, owners and levels of
access” on different sites . It is generally accepted that data on the
institutional LMS provides an incomplete picture of learners’ learning journeys. As learners’
digital networks increasingly include sources outside of the LMS, institutions may utilize
data from outside the LMS (e.g., Twitter and Facebook accounts, whether study-related or
personal) in order to get more comprehensive pictures of students’ learning trajectories. The
inclusion of data from sites not under the jurisdiction of an institution raises a number of
concerns given that universities have no control of external sites’ policies, and the
authentication of student identity is more problematic. Students have the right to be informed
on the sites used to gather information and to give informed consent regarding the scope and
right of the institution to harvest, analyze and use data from such sources. Registration
information should be explicit regarding the broader uses to which student data may be put.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Analyses of Data. Institutions should commit themselves to take due care to prevent
bias and stereotyping, always acknowledging the incomplete and dynamic nature of
individual identity and experiences. Algorithms used in learning analytics inherently may
reflect and perpetuate the biases and prejudices in cultural, geopolitical, economic and
societal realities. As Subotzky and Prinsloo state, our predictive models explain
only “a portion of the wide range of behaviours that constitute the universe of social
interactions” between students and institution. Students and the institution therefore share a
mutual responsibility which “depends upon mutual engagement, which, in turn, depends on
actionable mutual knowledge” .
Care should be taken to ensure that the contexts of data analyzed are carefully
considered before tentative predictions and analyses are made. Data harvested in one context
may not be directly transferable to another. Predictive models and algorithms should take
reasonable care to prevent “autopropaganda” and allow for serendipity and for
students to act outside of modeled profiles and suggestions for action.
Access to data. In line with Kruse and Pongsajapan’s proposal for “studentcentric” learning analytics, we propose that students have a right to be assured that their data
will be protected against unauthorized access and that their informed consent (as discussed
above) is guaranteed when their data is used. Given the unequal power relationship between
student and institution, the institution should take steps to safeguard access to student data
and provide students with processes for redress should unauthorized persons gain access to
their personal data.
In practice, owing to the nature of regulatory, funding and accreditation frameworks,
a variety of stakeholders do access student data. In cases where employers fund students’
study, sponsors may have rights to data relating to student progress. It is suggested that
students have ready access to their personalized stored data, as well as an overview of those
stakeholders granted access to specific datasets. Institutions should also take reasonable steps
to make students aware of the scope and nature of their data-trails when using a range of
social networking sites in the course of their studies. While institutions cannot be held
responsible for the level of students’ digital literacy, there is possible a strong case to support
digital literacy as an integral part of the attributes of graduates .
When teaching and learning opportunities incorporate social networks outside of the
institutional LMS, institutions should also ensure that learners are explicitly informed of the
public nature and possible misuse of information posted on these sites, and instructors should
consider the ramifications before using such sites.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Preservation and storage of data. While ownership of data in non-Internet based
research is fairly straightforward, ownership of data obtained from the Internet is less clear,
and the lack of international boundaries “confound ownership, as databanks, datasets, servers,
find their homes across borders” . Institutions should provide
guarantees and guidelines with regard to the preservation and storage of data in line with
national and international regulatory and legislative frameworks. Students should be
informed that their data will be encrypted. Many countries have put in place legal
frameworks to ensure that individuals can apply for the correction or permanent deletion of
any personal information held about them that may be inaccurate, misleading or outdated. For
example, in the South African context, the Promotion of Access to Information Act 2 of 2000
provides individuals with “a level of direct influence over the processing of their personal
information” . Petersen suggests:
One of the first tasks of a data-governance body is to inventory campus data sources
and create a data-classification system that sorts data into categories that identify the
necessary level of protection. This process may necessarily be different for a private
versus a public institution, since state laws or regulations may require that certain
information be available to the public. A typical classification scheme for a public
college or university might include the categories of (1) public, (2) non-public, and
(3) sensitive or regulated. (para. 5)
Governance and resource allocation
Higher education institutions should, depending on national legislative and regulatory
frameworks, ensure the effective governance and stewardship of data. Petersen states that “The most important step that any campus can take is to create a comprehensive
data-governance structure to address all the types of data used in various situations.” This
implies not only the strategic conceptualization of learning analytics but also appropriate
structural and resource allocation. The allocation of resources inevitably relates to purpose
and benefit. Before embarking on the application of a learning analytics approach, the
institution (or faculty) should be clear about what its key drivers for success are, what
constraints exist, and which conditions must be met.
Conclusions
Despite the substantial uncertainties, the continuing growth of learning analytics means that
we need to consider not only the vast opportunities offered for better and more effective
decision making in higher education but also explore the ethical challenges
in institutionalizing learning analytics as a means to drive and shape student support.
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS
Reflecting on the future directions for research ethics in networked environments (“Research
ethics 2.0”), Buchanan remarks: “[a]s social networking, hyper-blogging,
folksonomies, Wikis, etc., continue to change social interaction, research itself and this
research ethics must change”. Researchers and ethics boards should “work in tandem to forge
the next generation of research ethics, one that still embraces core principles while creating
new opportunities for important research endeavors” (p.103).
Learning analytics is primarily a moral and educational practice, serving better and
more successful learning. The inherent peril and promise of having access to, and analyzing
“big data” necessitates a careful consideration of the ethical dimensions and
challenges of learning analytics. The proposed principles and considerations included within
this paper provide an ethical framework for higher education institutions to offer contextappropriate solutions and strategies to increase the quality and effectiveness of teaching and
ETHICAL ISSUES AND DILEMMAS