Point-GNN: Graph Neural Network for 3D Object Detection in a Point Cloud
Weijing Shi and Ragunathan (Raj) Rajkumar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{weijings, rajkumar}@cmu.edu
In this paper, we propose a graph neural network to
detect objects from a LiDAR point cloud.
Towards this
end, we encode the point cloud efﬁciently in a ﬁxed radius near-neighbors graph. We design a graph neural network, named Point-GNN, to predict the category and shape
of the object that each vertex in the graph belongs to. In
Point-GNN, we propose an auto-registration mechanism to
reduce translation variance, and also design a box merging and scoring operation to combine detections from multiple vertices accurately.
Our experiments on the KITTI
benchmark show the proposed approach achieves leading
accuracy using the point cloud alone and can even surpass fusion-based algorithms. Our results demonstrate the
potential of using the graph neural network as a new approach for 3D object detection. The code is available at
 
1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D environment is vital in robotic perception. A point cloud that composes a set of points in space
is a widely-used format for 3D sensors such as LiDAR. Detecting objects accurately from a point cloud is crucial in
applications such as autonomous driving.
Convolutional neural networks that detect objects from
images rely on the convolution operation. While the convolution operation is efﬁcient, it requires a regular grid as
input. Unlike an image, a point cloud is typically sparse and
not spaced evenly on a regular grid. Placing a point cloud on
a regular grid generates an uneven number of points in the
grid cells. Applying the same convolution operation on such
a grid leads to potential information loss in the crowded
cells or wasted computation in the empty cells.
Recent breakthroughs in using neural networks 
allow an unordered set of points as input.
Studies take
advantage of this type of neural network to extract point
cloud features without mapping the point cloud to a grid.
However, they typically need to sample and group points
Figure 1. Three point cloud representations and their common processing methods.
iteratively to create a point set representation.
The repeated grouping and sampling on a large point cloud can
be computationally costly. Recent 3D detection approaches
 often take a hybrid approach to use a grid and
a set representation in different stages. Although they show
some promising results, such hybrid strategies may suffer
the shortcomings of both representations.
In this work, we propose to use a graph as a compact
representation of a point cloud and design a graph neural
network called Point-GNN to detect objects. We encode
the point cloud natively in a graph by using the points as the
graph vertices. The edges of the graph connect neighborhood points that lie within a ﬁxed radius, which allows feature information to ﬂow between neighbors. Such a graph
representation adapts to the structure of a point cloud directly without the need to make it regular. A graph neural
network reuses the graph edges in every layer, and avoids
grouping and sampling the points repeatedly.
Studies have looked into using graph
neural network for the classiﬁcation and the semantic segmentation of a point cloud. However, little research has
looked into using a graph neural network for the 3D object
detection in a point cloud. Our work demonstrates the feasibility of using a GNN for highly accurate object detection
in a point cloud.
Our proposed graph neural network Point-GNN takes
the point graph as its input. It outputs the category and
bounding boxes of the objects to which each vertex belongs. Point-GNN is a one-stage detection method that detects multiple objects in a single shot. To reduce the translation variance in a graph neural network, we introduce an
 
auto-registration mechanism which allows points to align
their coordinates based on their features. We further design
a box merging and scoring operation to combine detection
results from multiple vertices accurately.
We evaluate the proposed method on the KITTI benchmark. On the KITTI benchmark, Point-GNN achieves the
state-of-the-art accuracy using the point cloud alone and
even surpasses sensor fusion approaches. Our Point-GNN
shows the potential of a new type 3D object detection approach using graph neural network, and it can serve as a
strong baseline for the future research. We conduct an extensive ablation study on the effectiveness of the components in Point-GNN.
In summery, the contributions of this paper are:
• We propose a new object detection approach using
graph neural network on the point cloud.
• We design Point-GNN, a graph neural network with an
auto-registration mechanism that detects multiple objects in a single shot.
• We achieve state-of-the-art 3D object detection accuracy in the KITTI benchmark and analyze the effectiveness of each component in depth.
2. Related Work
Prior work in this context can be grouped into three categories, as shown in Figure 1.
Point cloud in grids. Many recent studies convert a point
cloud to a regular grid to utilize convolutional neural networks. projects a point cloud to a 2D Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) image and uses a 2D CNN for object detection. 
projects a point cloud to both a BEV image and a Front
View (FV) image before applying a 2D CNN on both. Such
projection induces a quantization error due to the limited
image resolution. Some approaches keep a point cloud in
3D coordinates. represents points in 3D voxels and applies 3D convolution for object detection. When the resolution of the voxels grows, the computation cost of 3D CNN
grows cubically, but many voxels are empty due to point
sparsity. Optimizations such as the sparse convolution 
reduce the computation cost. Converting a point cloud to a
2D/3D grid suffers from the mismatch between the irregular
distribution of points and the regular structure of the grids.
Point cloud in sets. Deep learning techniques on sets such
as PointNet and DeepSet show neural networks can
extract features from an unordered set of points directly. In
such a method, each point is processed by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to obtain a point feature vector. Those features are aggregated by an average or max pooling function
to form a global feature vector of the whole set. further
proposes the hierarchical aggregation of point features, and
generates local subsets of points by sampling around some
key points. The features of those subsets are then again
grouped into sets for further feature extraction. Many 3D
object detection approaches take advantage of such neural
networks to process a point cloud without mapping it to a
grid. However, the sampling and grouping of points on a
large scale lead to additional computational costs. Most object detection studies only use the neural network on sets
as a part of the pipeline. generates object proposals
from camera images and uses to separate points that belong to an object from the background and predict a bounding box. uses as a backbone network to generate
bounding box proposals directly from a point cloud. Then,
it uses a second-stage point network to reﬁne the bounding boxes. Hybrid approaches such as 
use to extract features from local point sets and place
the features on a regular grid for the convolutional operation. Although they reduce the local irregularity of the point
cloud to some degree, they still suffer the mismatch between
a regular grid and the overall point cloud structure.
Point cloud in graphs. Research on graph neural network
 seeks to generalize the convolutional neural network to
a graph representation. A GNN iteratively updates its vertex
features by aggregating features along the edges. Although
the aggregation scheme sometimes is similar to that in deep
learning on sets, a GNN allows more complex features to
be determined along the edges. It typically does not need
to sample and group vertices repeatedly. In the computer
vision domain, a few approaches represent the point cloud
as a graph. uses a recurrent GNN for the semantic
segmentation on RGBD data. partitions a point cloud to
simple geometrical shapes and link them into a graph for semantic segmentation. look into classifying a point
cloud using a GNN. So far, few investigations have looked
into designing a graph neural network for object detection,
where an explicit prediction of the object shape is required.
Our work differs from previous work by designing a
GNN for object detection. Instead of converting a point
cloud to a regular gird, such as an image or a voxel, we
use a graph representation to preserve the irregularity of a
point cloud. Unlike the techniques that sample and group
the points into sets repeatedly, we construct the graph once.
The proposed Point-GNN then extracts features of the point
cloud by iteratively updating vertex features on the same
graph. Our work is a single-stage detection method without the need to develop a second-stage reﬁnement neural
networks like those in .
3. Point-GNN for 3D Object Detection in a
Point Cloud
In this section, we describe the proposed approach to detect 3D objects from a point cloud. As shown in Figure 2,
the overall architecture of our method contains three components: (a) graph construction, (b) a GNN of T iterations,
Figure 2. The architecture of the proposed approach. It has three main components: (a) graph construction from a point cloud, (b) a graph
neural network for object detection, and (c) bounding box merging and scoring.
and (c) bounding box merging and scoring.
3.1. Graph Construction
Formally, we deﬁne a point cloud of N points as a set
P = {p1, ..., pN}, where pi = (xi, si) is a point with both
3D coordinates xi ∈R3 and the state value si ∈Rk a klength vector that represents the point property. The state
value si can be the reﬂected laser intensity or the features
which encode the surrounding objects. Given a point cloud
P, we construct a graph G = (P, E) by using P as the vertices and connecting a point to its neighbors within a ﬁxed
radius r, i.e.
E = {(pi, pj) | ∥xi −xj∥2 < r}
The construction of such a graph is the well-known ﬁxed
radius near-neighbors search problem. By using a cell list to
ﬁnd point pairs that are within a given cut-off distance, we
can efﬁciently solve the problem with a runtime complexity
of O(cN) where c is the max number of neighbors within
the radius .
In practice, a point cloud commonly comprises tens of
thousands of points.
Constructing a graph with all the
points as vertices imposes a substantial computational burden. Therefore, we use a voxel downsampled point cloud ˆP
for the graph construction. It must be noted that the voxels
here are only used to reduce the density of a point cloud and
they are not used as the representation of the point cloud.
We still use a graph to present the downsampled point cloud.
To preserve the information within the original point cloud,
we encode the dense point cloud in the initial state value si
of the vertex. More speciﬁcally, we search the raw points
within a r0 radius of each vertex and use the neural network
on sets to extract their features. We follow and
embed the lidar reﬂection intensity and the relative coordinates using an MLP and then aggregate them by the Max
function. We use the resulting features as the initial state
value of the vertex. After the graph construction, we process the graph with a GNN, as shown in Figure 2b.
3.2. Graph Neural Network with Auto-Registration
A typical graph neural network reﬁnes the vertex features by aggregating features along the edges.
(t+1)th iteration, it updates each vertex feature in the form:
= gt(ρ({et
ij | (i, j) ∈E}), vt
ij = f t(vt
where et and vt are the edge and vertex features from the
tth iteration. A function f t(.) computes the edge feature between two vertices. ρ(.) is a set function which aggregates
the edge features for each vertex. gt(.) takes the aggregated
edge features to update the vertex features. The graph neural network then outputs the vertex features or repeats the
process in the next iteration.
In the case of object detection, we design the GNN to re-
ﬁne a vertex’s state to include information about the object
where the vertex belongs. Towards this goal, we re-write
Equation (2) to reﬁne a vertex’s state using its neighbors’
= gt(ρ({f t(xj −xi, st
j) | (i, j) ∈E}), st
Note that we use the relative coordinates of the neighbors
as input to f t(.) for the edge feature extraction. The relative coordinates induce translation invariance against the
global shift of the point cloud. However, it is still sensitive to translation within the neighborhood area. When a
small translation is added to a vertex, the local structure of
its neighbors remains similar. But the relative coordinates
of the neighbors are all changed, which increases the input
variance to f t(.). To reduce the translation variance, we
propose aligning neighbors’ coordinates by their structural
features instead of the center vertex coordinates. Because
the center vertex already contains some structural features
from the previous iteration, we can use it to predict an alignment offset, and propose an auto-registration mechanism:
= gt(ρ({f(xj −xi + ∆xi
i is the coordination offset for the vertices to register
their coordinates. ht(.) calculates the offset using the center vertex state value from the previous iteration. By setting
ht(.) to output zero, the GNN can disable the offset if necessary. In that case, the GNN returns to Equation (3). We analyze the effectiveness of this auto-registration mechanism
in Section 4.
As shown in Figure 2b, we model f t(.), gt(.) and ht(.)
using multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) and add a residual
connection in gt(.).
We choose ρ(.) to be Max for its
robustness . A single iteration in the proposed graph network is then given by:
ij = MLP t
f([xj −xi + ∆xi
g(Max({eij |(i, j) ∈E})) + st
where [, ] represents the concatenation operation.
Every iteration t uses a different set of MLP t, which
is not shared among iterations. After T iterations of the
graph neural network, we use the vertex state value to predict both the category and the bounding box of the object
where the vertex belongs. A classiﬁcation branch MLPcls
computes a multi-class probability. Finally, a localization
branch MLPloc computes a bounding box for each class.
For the object category, the classiﬁcation branch computes a multi-class probability distribution {pc1, ..., pcM }
for each vertex. M is the total number of object classes, including the Background class. If a vertex is within a bounding box of an object, we assign the object class to the vertex.
If a vertex is outside any bounding boxes, we assign the
background class to it. We use the average cross-entropy
loss as the classiﬁcation loss.
c are the predicted probability and the onehot class label for the i-th vertex respectively.
For the object bounding box, we predict it in the 7
degree-of-freedom format b = (x, y, z, l, h, w, θ), where
(x, y, z) represent the center position of the bounding box,
(l, h, w) represent the box length, height and width respectively, and θ is the yaw angle. We encode the bounding box
with the vertex coordinates (xv, yv, zv) as follows:
δx = x −xv
, δy = y −yv
, δz = z −zv
δl = log( l
), δh = log( h
), δw = log( w
δθ = θ −θ0
where lm, hm, wm, θ0, θm are constant scale factors.
The localization branch predicts the encoded bounding
box δb = (δx, δy, δz, δl, δh, δw, δθ) for each class. If a vertex is within a bounding box, we compute the Huber loss 
between the ground truth and our prediction. If a vertex is
outside any bounding boxes or it belongs to a class that we
do not need to localize, we set its localization loss as zero.
We then average the localization loss of all the vertices:
1(vi ∈binterest)
lhuber(δ −δgt)
To prevent over-ﬁtting, we add L1 regularization to each
MLP. The total loss is then:
ltotal = αlcls + βlloc + γlreg
where α, β and γ are constant weights to balance each loss.
3.4. Box Merging and Scoring
As multiple vertices can be on the same object, the neural network can output multiple bounding boxes of the same
object. It is necessary to merge these bounding boxes into
one and also assign a conﬁdence score. Non-maximum suppression (NMS) has been widely used for this purpose. The
common practice is to select the box with the highest classiﬁcation score and suppress the other overlapping boxes.
However, the classiﬁcation score does not always reﬂect
the localization quality. Notably, a partially occluded object can have a strong clue indicating the type of the object
but lacks enough shape information. The standard NMS can
Algorithm 1: NMS with Box Merging and Scoring
Input: B = {b1, ..., bn}, D = {d1, ..., dn}, Th
B is the set of detected bounding boxes.
D is the corresponding detection scores.
Th is an overlapping threshold value.
Green color marks the main modiﬁcations.
1 M ←{}, Z ←{}
2 while B ̸= empty do
i←argmax D
for bj in B do
if iou(bi, bj) > Th then
B←B −bj, D←D −dj
m ←median(L)
o ←occlusion(m)
z ←(o + 1) P
bk∈L IoU(m, bk)dk
M←M ∪m, Z←Z ∪z
16 return M, Z
pick an inaccurate bounding box base on the classiﬁcation
score alone.
To improve the localization accuracy, we propose to calculate the merged box by considering the entire overlapped
box cluster. More speciﬁcally, we consider the median position and size of the overlapped bounding boxes. We also
compute the conﬁdence score as the sum of the classiﬁcation scores weighted by the Intersection-of-Union (IoU)
factor and an occlusion factor. The occlusion factor represents the occupied volume ratio. Given a box bi, let li, wi,
hi be its length, width and height, and let vl
unit vectors that indicate their directions respectively. xj
are the coordinates of point pj. The occlusion factor oi is
pj∈bi(vT xj)−min
pj∈bi(vT xj) (10)
We modify standard NMS as shown in Algorithm 1. It
returns the merged bounding boxes M and their conﬁdence
score Z. We will study its effectiveness in Section 4.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset
We evaluate our design using the widely used KITTI object detection benchmark . The KITTI dataset contains
7481 training samples and 7518 testing samples. Each sample provides both the point cloud and the camera image. We
only use the point cloud in our approach. Since the dataset
only annotates objects that are visible within the image, we
process the point cloud only within the ﬁeld of view of the
image. The KITTI benchmark evaluates the average precision (AP) of three types of objects: Car, Pedestrian and
Cyclist. Due to the scale difference, we follow the common
practice and train one network for the Car
and another network for the Pedestrian and Cyclist. For
training, we remove samples that do not contain objects of
4.2. Implementation Details
We use three iterations (T = 3) in our graph neural network. During training, we limit the maximum number of
input edges per vertex to 256. During inference, we use all
the input edges. All GNN layers perform auto-registration
using a two-layer MLPh of units (64, 3). The MLPcls is
of size (64, #(classes)). For each class, MLPloc is of size
(64, 64, 7).
Car: We set (lm, hm, wm) to the median size of Car bounding boxes (3.88m, 1.5m, 1.63m). We treat a side-view car
with θ ∈[−π/4, π/4] and a front-view car θ ∈[π/4, 3π/4]
as two different classes. Therefore, we set θ0 = 0 and
θ0 = π/2 respectively. The scale θm is set as π/2. Together with the Background class and DoNotCare class, 4
classes are predicted. We construct the graph with r = 4m
and r0 = 1m. We set ˆP as a downsampled point cloud
by a voxel size of 0.8 meters in training and 0.4 meters in inference.
MLPf and MLPg, are both of sizes
(300, 300). For the initial vertex state, we use an MLP
of (32, 64, 128, 300) for embedding raw points and another
MLP of (300, 300) after the Max aggregation. We set
Th = 0.01 in NMS.
Pedestrian and Cyclist. Again, we set (lm, hm, wm) to the
median bounding box size. We set (0.88m, 1.77m, 0.65m)
for Pedestrian and (1.76m, 1.75m, 0.6m) for Cyclist. Similar to what we did with the Car class, we treat frontview and side-view objects as two different classes. Together with the Background class and the DoNotCare class,
6 classes are predicted. We build the graph using r = 1.6m,
and downsample the point cloud by a voxel size of 0.4 meters in training and 0.2 meters in inference. MLPf and
MLPg are both of sizes (256, 256). For the vertex state
initialization, we set r0 = 0.4m.
We use a an MLP
of (32, 64, 128, 256, 512) for embedding and an MLP of
(256, 256) to process the aggregated feature. We set Th =
0.2 in NMS.
We train the proposed GNN end-to-end with a batch size
of 4. The loss weights are α = 0.1, β = 10, γ = 5e −7.
We use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a stair-case
learning-rate decay. For Car, we use an initial learning rate
of 0.125 and a decay rate of 0.1 every 400K steps. We
trained the network for 1400K steps. For Pedestrian and
Pedestrian
UberATG-ContFuse 
LiDAR + Image
AVOD-FPN 
LiDAR + Image
F-PointNet 
LiDAR + Image
UberATG-MMF 
LiDAR + Image
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
PointPillars 
PointRCNN 
Our Point-GNN
Table 1. The Average Precision (AP) comparison of 3D object detection on the KITTI test dataset.
Pedestrian
UberATG-ContFuse 
LiDAR + Image
AVOD-FPN 
LiDAR + Image
F-PointNet 
LiDAR + Image
UberATG-MMF 
LiDAR + Image
VoxelNet 
SECOND 
PointPillars 
Our Point-GNN
Table 2. The Average Precision (AP) comparison of Bird’s Eye View (BEV) object detection on the KITTI test dataset.
Cyclist, we use an initial learning rate of 0.32 and a decay
rate of 0.25 every 400K steps. We trained it for 1000K
4.3. Data Augmentation
To prevent overﬁtting, we perform data augmentation on
the training data. Unlike many approaches 
that use sophisticated techniques to create new ground truth
boxes, we choose a simple scheme of global rotation, global
ﬂipping, box translation and vertex jitter.
During training, we randomly rotate the point cloud by yaw ∆θ ∼
N(0, π/8) and then ﬂip the x-axis by a probability of 0.5.
After that, each box and points within 110% size of the
box randomly shift by (∆x ∼N(0, 3), ∆y = 0, ∆z ∼
N(0, 3)). We use a 10% larger box to select the points to
prevent cutting the object. During the translation, we check
and avoid collisions among boxes, or between background
points and boxes. During graph construction, we use a random voxel downsample to induce vertex jitter.
We have submitted our results to the KITTI 3D object detection benchmark and the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) object
detection benchmark. In Table 1 and Table 2, we compare
our results with the existing literature. The KITTI dataset
evaluates the Average Precision (AP) on three difﬁculty levels: Easy, Moderate, and Hard. Our approach achieves the
leading results on the Car detection of Easy and Moderate
level and also the Cyclist detection of Moderate and Hard
level. Remarkably, on the Easy level BEV Car detection,
we surpass the previous state-of-the-art approach by 3.45.
Also, we outperform fusion-based algorithms in all categories except for Pedestrian detection. In Figure 3, we provide qualitative detection results on all categories. The results on both the camera image and the point cloud can be
visualized. It must be noted that our approach uses only
the point cloud data. The camera images are purely used
for visual inspection since the test dataset does not provide
ground truth labels. As shown in Figure 3, our approach still
detects Pedestrian reasonably well despite not achieving the
top score. One likely reason why Pedestrian detection is not
as good as that for Car and Cyclist is that the vertices are not
dense enough to achieve more accurate bounding boxes.
4.4. Ablation Study
For the ablation study, we follow the standard practice
 and split the training samples into a training
split of 3712 samples and a validation split of 3769 samples.
We use the training split to train the network and evaluate
its accuracy on the validation split. We follow the same
protocol and assess the accuracy by AP. Unless explicitly
modiﬁed for a controlled experiment, the network conﬁguration and training parameters are the same as those in the
Figure 3. Qualitative results on the KITTI test dataset using Point-GNN. We show the predicted 3D bounding box of Cars (green), Pedestrians (red) and Cyclists (blue) on both the image and the point cloud. Best viewed in color.
BEV AP (Car)
3D AP (Car)
Table 3. Ablation study on the val. split of KITTI data.
previous section. We focus on the detection of Car because
of its dominant presence in the dataset.
Box merging and scoring. In Table 3, we compare the object detection accuracy with and without box merging and
scoring. For the test without box merging, we modify line
11 in Algorithm 1. Instead of taking the median bounding box, we directly take the bounding box with the highest
classiﬁcation score as in standard NMS. For the test without box scoring, we modify lines 12 and 13 in Algorithm 1
to set the highest classiﬁcation score as the box score. For
the test without box merging or scoring, we modify lines
11, 12, and 13, which essentially leads to standard NMS.
Row 2 of Table 3 shows a baseline implementation that uses
standard NMS with the auto-registration mechanism. As
shown in Row 3 and Row 4 of Table 3, both box merging
and box scoring outperform the baseline. When combined,
as shown in Row 6 of the table, they further outperform the
individual accuracy in every category. Similarly, when not
using auto-registration, box merging and box scoring (Row
5) also achieve higher accuracy than standard NMS (Row
1). These results demonstrate the effectiveness of the box
scoring and merging.
Auto-registration mechanism. Table 3 also shows the accuracy improvement from the auto-registration mechanism.
As shown in Row 2, by using auto-registration alone, we
also surpass the baseline without auto-registration (Row 1)
on every category of 3D detection and the moderate and
hard categories of BEV detection. The performance on the
easy category of BEV detection decreases slightly but remains close. Combining the auto-registration mechanism
with box merging and scoring (Row 6), we achieve higher
accuracy than using the auto-registration alone (Row 2).
However, the combination of all three modules (Row 6)
does not outperform box merging and score (Row 5). We
hypothesize that the regularization likely needs to be tuned
after adding the auto-registration branch.
We further investigate the auto-registration mechanism
by visualizing the offset ∆x in Equation 4. We extract ∆x
from different GNN iterations and add them to the vertex
position. Figure 4 shows the vertices that output detection
results and their positions with added offsets. We observe
Figure 4. An example from the val. split showing the vertex locations with added offsets. The blue dot indicates the original position of the vertices. The orange, purple, and red dots indicate the
original position with added offsets from the ﬁrst, the second, and
the third graph neural network iterations. Best viewed in color.
BEV AP (Car)
3D AP (Car)
iterations
Table 4. Average precision on the KITTI val. split using different
number of Point-GNN iterations.
that the vertex positions with added offsets move towards
the center of vehicles. We see such behaviors regardless
of the original vertex position. In other words, when the
GNN gets deeper, the relative coordinates of the neighbor
vertices depend less on the center vertex position but more
on the property of the point cloud. The offset ∆x cancels
the translation of the center vertex, and thus reduces the sensitivity to the vertex translation. These qualitative results
demonstrate that Equation 4 helps to reduce the translation
variance of vertex positions
Point-GNN iterations. Our Point-GNN reﬁne the vertex
states iteratively. In Table 4, we study the impact of the
number of iterations on the detection accuracy. We train
Point-GNNs with T = 1, T = 2, and compare them with
T = 3, which is the conﬁguration in Section 4.3.1. Additionally, we train a detector using the initial vertex state directly without any Point-GNN iteration. As shown in Table
4, the initial vertex state alone achieves the lowest accuracy
since it only has a small receptive ﬁeld around the vertex.
Without Point-GNN iterations, the local information cannot ﬂow along the graph edges, and therefore its receptive
ﬁeld cannot expand. Even with a single Point-GNN iteration T = 1, the accuracy improves signiﬁcantly. T = 2
has higher accuracy than T = 3, which is likely due to the
training difﬁculty when the neural network goes deeper.
Running-time analysis. The speed of the detection algorithm is important for real-time applications such as autonomous driving. However, multiple factors affect the running time, including algorithm architecture, code optimization and hardware resource. Furthermore, optimizing the
implementation is not the focus of this work.
BEV AP (Car)
3D AP (Car)
scanning line
Table 5. Average precision on downsampled KITTI val. split.
a breakdown of the current inference time helps with future optimization. Our implementation is written in Python
and uses Tensorﬂow for GPU computation. We measure
the inference time on a desktop with Xeon E5-1630 CPU
and GTX 1070 GPU. The average processing time for one
sample in the validation split is 643ms. Reading the dataset
and running the calibration takes 11.0% time (70ms). Creating the graph representation consumes 18.9% time (121ms).
The inference of the GNN takes 56.4% time (363ms). Box
merging and scoring take 13.1% time (84ms).
Robustness on LiDAR sparsity. The KITTI dataset collects point cloud data using a 64-scanning-line LiDAR.
Such a high-density LiDAR usually leads to a high cost.
Therefore, it is of interest to investigate the object detection
performance in a less dense point cloud. To mimic a LiDAR
system with fewer scanning lines, we downsample the scanning lines in the KITTI validation dataset. Because KITTI
gives the point cloud without the scanning line information,
we use k-means to cluster the elevation angles of points into
64 clusters, where each cluster represents a LiDAR scanning line. We then downsample the point cloud to 32, 16, 8
scanning lines by skipping scanning lines in between. Our
test results on the downsampled KITTI validation split are
shown in Table 5. The accuracy for the moderate and hard
levels drops fast with downsampled data, while the detection for the easy level data maintains a reasonable accuracy
until it is downsampled to 8 scanning lines. This is because
that the easy level objects are mostly close to the LiDAR,
and thus have a dense point cloud even if the number of
scanning lines drops.
5. Conclusion
We have presented a graph neural network, named Point-
GNN, to detect 3D objects from a graph representation
of the point cloud. By using a graph representation, we
encode the point cloud compactly without mapping to a
grid or sampling and grouping repeatedly. Our Point-GNN
achieves the leading accuracy in both the 3D and Bird’s Eye
View object detection of the KITTI benchmark. Our experiments show the proposed auto-registration mechanism reduces transition variance, and the box merging and scoring
operation improves the detection accuracy. In the future, we
plan to optimize the inference speed and also fuse the inputs
from other sensors.