Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation:
Region and Boundary Information Integration⋆
J. Freixenet, X. Mu˜noz, D. Raba, J. Mart´ı, and X. Cuf´ı
University of Girona. Institute of Informatics and Applications.
Campus de Montilivi s/n. 17071. Girona, Spain
{jordif,xmunoz,draba,joanm,xcuf}@eia.udg.es
Abstract. Image segmentation has been, and still is, a relevant research
area in Computer Vision, and hundreds of segmentation algorithms
have been proposed in the last 30 years. However, it is well known
that elemental segmentation techniques based on boundary or region
information often fail to produce accurate segmentation results. Hence,
in the last few years, there has been a tendency towards algorithms
which take advantage of the complementary nature of such information.
This paper reviews diﬀerent segmentation proposals which integrate
edge and region information and highlights 7 diﬀerent strategies and
methods to fuse such information. In contrast with other surveys
which only describe and compare qualitatively diﬀerent approaches,
this survey deals with a real quantitative comparison. In this sense,
key methods have been programmed and their accuracy analyzed and
compared using synthetic and real images. A discussion justiﬁed with
experimental results is given and the code is available on Internet.
Keywords: grouping and segmentation, region based segmentation,
boundary based segmentation, cooperative segmentation methods.
Introduction
One of the most important operations in Computer Vision is segmentation .
The aim of image segmentation is the domain-independent partition of the image
into a set of regions which are visually distinct and uniform with respect to some
property, such as grey level, texture or colour. The problem of segmentation has
been, and still is, an important research ﬁeld and many segmentation methods
have been proposed in the literature (see surveys ). Many segmentation
methods are based on two basic properties of the pixels in relation to their local
neighbourhood: discontinuity and similarity. Methods based on some discontinuity property of the pixels are called boundary-based methods, whereas methods
based on some similarity property are called region-based methods. Unfortunately, both techniques, boundary-based and region-based, often fail to produce
accurate segmentation results . With the aim of improving the segmentation
⋆This work was partially supported by the Departament d’Universitats, Recerca i
Societat de la Informaci´o de la Generalitat de Catalunya.
A. Heyden et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2002, LNCS 2352, pp. 408–422, 2002.
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
process, a large number of new algorithms which integrate region and boundary
information have been proposed over the last few years. Among other features,
one of the main characteristics of these approaches is the time of fusion: embedded in the region detection or after both processes .
– Embedded integration can be described as integration through the deﬁnition
of new parameters or a new decision criterion for segmentation. In the most
habitual strategy, ﬁrstly, the edge information is extracted and is then used
within the segmentation algorithm which is mainly based on regions. For
example, edge information can be used to deﬁne the seed points from which
regions are grown. The aim of this integration strategy is to use boundary
information as the means of avoiding many of the common problems of
region-based techniques.
– Post-processing integration is performed after processing the image using
the two diﬀerent approaches (boundary-based and region-based techniques).
Edge and region information are extracted independently in a preliminary
step. A posterior fusion process tries to exploit the dual information in order
to modify, or reﬁne, the initial segmentation obtained by a single technique.
The aim of this strategy is the improvement of the initial results and the
production of a more accurate segmentation.
Although many surveys on image segmentation have been published, as
stated above, none of them focus on the integration of region and boundary information. To overcome this lack, this paper discusses the most relevant segmentation techniques developed in recent years which integrate region and boundary information. Therefore, neither clustering methods nor texture segmentation
have been included in this survey, stated they constitute a separated item. After analyzing more than 50 region-boundary cooperative algorithms, we have
clearly identiﬁed 7 diﬀerent strategies. First we distinguish between embedded
and post-processing methods. Within the embedded methods we diﬀerentiate
between those using boundary information for seed placement purposes, and
those which use this information to establish an appropriate decision criterion.
Within the post-processing methods, we diﬀerentiate three diﬀerent approaches:
over-segmentation, boundary reﬁnement, and selection evaluation. After stating
a classiﬁcation, we discuss in depth each one of these approaches, emphasizing
in some cases relevant aspects related to the implementation of the methods: for
example, in the boundary reﬁnement strategy, the use of snakes or multiresolution techniques. Finally, in order to compare the performance of the analyzed
methods, we have implemented such algorithms, so a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of each strategy is given. Therefore, objective conclusions are
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes and
classiﬁes the diﬀerent approaches to the embedded integration, while Section 3
analyses the proposals for the post-processing strategy. Section 4 discusses the
methods analyzing the experimental results obtained by using synthetic and real
data. Finally, the conclusions drawn from this study are summarized in Section 5.
J. Freixenet et al.
Embedded Integration
The embedded integration strategy usually consists of using the edge information, previously extracted, within a region segmentation algorithm. It is well
known that in most region-based segmentation algorithms, the manner in which
initial regions are formed and the criteria for growing them are set a priori. Hence,
the resulting segmentation will inevitably depend on the particular growth chosen , as well as the choice of the initial region growth points . Some recent
proposals try to use boundary information in order to avoid these problems.
According to the manner in which this information is used, it is possible to
distinguish two tendencies:
1. Control of decision criterion: edge information is included in the deﬁnition of the decision criterion which controls the growth of the region.
2. Guidance of seed placement: edge information is used as a guide in order
to decide which is the most suitable position to place the seed (or seeds) of
the region-growing process.
Control of Decision Criterion
The Region Growing and the Split and Merge are the typical region based segmentation algorithms. Although both share the essential concept of homogeneity, the way they carry out the segmentation process is really diﬀerent in the
decisions taken. For this reason, and in order to facilitate the analysis of this
approach, we have developed two diﬀerent algorithms named A1 and A2 based
on Split and Merge, and Region growing respectively.
A1: Split and Merge. Typical split and merge techniques consist of two
basic steps. First, the whole image is considered as one region. If this region does
not satisfy a homogeneity criterion the region is split into four quadrants (subregions) and each quadrant is tested in the same way; this process is recursively
repeated until every square region created in this way contains homogeneous
pixels. Next, in the second step, all adjacent regions with similar attributes may
be merged following other (or the same) criteria. The criterion of homogeneity
is generally based on the analysis of the chromatic characteristics of the region.
A region with small standard deviation in the color of its members (pixels)
is considered homogeneous. The integration of edge information allows adding
to this criterion another term to take into account. So, a region is considered
homogeneous when is totally free of contours.
A1 is an algorithm based on the ideas of Bonnin and his colleagues who proposed in a region extraction based on a split and merge algorithm controlled
by edge detection. The criterion to decide the split of a region takes into account
edge and intensity characteristics. More speciﬁcally, if there is no edge point on
the patch and if the intensity homogeneity constraints are satisﬁed, then the
region is stored; otherwise, the patch is divided into four sub-patches, and the
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
process is recursively repeated. The homogeneity intensity criterion is rendered
necessary due to the possible failures of the edge detector. After the split phase,
the contours are thinned and chained into edges relative to the boundaries of
the initial regions. Later, a ﬁnal merging process takes into account edge information in order to solve possible over-segmentation problems. In this last step,
two adjacent initial regions are merged only if there are no edges on the common
A2: Region Growing. Region growing algorithms are based on the growth
of a region whenever its interior is homogeneous according to certain features
as intensity, color or texture. The implemented algorithm follows the strategy
of a typical Region Growing: it is based on the growth of a region by adding
similar neighbours. Region Growing is one of the simplest and most popular
algorithms for region based segmentation. The most traditional implementation
starts by choosing a starting point called seed pixel. Then, the region grows by
adding similar neighbouring pixels according to a certain homogeneity criterion,
increasing step by step the size of the region. So, the homogeneity criterion has
the function of deciding whether a pixel belongs to the growing region or not.
The decision of merging is generally taken based only on the contrast between
the evaluated pixel and the region. However, it is not easy to decide when this
diﬀerence is small (or large) enough to take a decision. The edge map provides an
additional criterion on that, such as the condition of contour pixel when deciding
to aggregate it. The encounter of a contour signiﬁes that the process of growing
has reached the boundary of the region, so the pixel must not be aggregated and
the growth of the region has ﬁnished.
The algorithm implemented A2, is based on the work of Xiaohan et al. ,
who proposed a homogeneity criterion consisting of the weighted sum of the
contrast between the region and the pixel, and the value of the modulus of the
gradient of the pixel. A low value of this function indicates the convenience of
aggregating the pixel to the region. A similar proposal was suggested by Kara
et al. , where at each iteration, only pixels having low gradient values (below
a certain threshold) are aggregated to the growing region. On the other hand,
Gambotto proposed using edge information to stop the growing process.
His proposal assumes that the gradient takes a high value over a large part
of the region boundary. Thus, the iterative growing process is continued until
the maximum of the average gradient computed over the region boundary is
Guidance of Seed Placement
The placement of the initial seed points can be stated as a central issue on the
obtained results of a region-based segmentation. Despite their importance, the
traditional region growing algorithm chooses them randomly or using a set a
priori direction of image scan. In order to make a more reasonable decision, edge
information can be used to decide what is the most correct position in which
J. Freixenet et al.
to place the seed. It is generally accepted that the growth of a region has to
start from inside it (see ). The interior of the region is a representative
zone and allows the obtention of a correct sample of the region’s characteristics.
On the other hand, it is necessary to avoid the boundaries between regions
when choosing the seeds because they are unstable zones and not adequate to
obtain information over the region. Therefore, this approach, named A3, uses
the edge information to place the seeds in the interior of the regions. The seeds
are launched in placements free of contours and, in some proposals, as far as
possible from them.
The algorithm proposed by Sinclair has been taken as the basic reference
for the implementation of A3. In this proposal, the Voronoi image generated from
the edge image is used to derive the placement of the seeds. The intensity at
each point in a Voronoi image is the distance to the closest edge. The peaks
in the Voronoi image, reﬂecting the farthest points from the contours, are then
used as seed points for region growing. Nevertheless, A3 avoids the necessity
of extracting the edge image, which involves the diﬃcult step of binarization,
generating the Voronoi image directly from the gradient image.
On the other hand, edge information can also be used to establish a speciﬁc
order for the processes of growing. As is well known, one of the disadvantages of
the region growing and merging processes is their inherently sequential nature.
Hence, the ﬁnal segmentation results depend on the order in which regions are
grown or merged. The edge based segmentation allows for deciding this order, in
some cases simulating the order by which humans separate segments from each
other in an image (from large to small) , or in other proposals giving the
same opportunities of growing to all the regions .
Post-processing Integration
In contrast to the works analysed up to this point, which follow an embedded
strategy, the post-processing strategy carries out the integration a posteriori to
the segmentation of the image by region-based and boundary-based algorithms.
Region and edge information is extracted separately in a preliminary step, and
then integrated. Post-processing integration is based on fusing results from single
segmentation methods attempting to combine the map of regions (generally
with thick and inaccurate boundaries) and the map of edge outputs (generally
with ﬁne and sharp lines, but dislocated) with the aim of providing an accurate
and meaningful segmentation. We have identiﬁed three diﬀerent approaches for
performing these tasks:
1. Over-segmentation: this approach consists of using a segmentation
method with parameters speciﬁcally ﬁxed to obtain an over-segmented result. Then additional information from other segmentation techniques is used
to eliminate false boundaries which do not correspond with regions.
2. Boundary Reﬁnement: this approach considers the region segmentation
result as a ﬁrst approach, with well deﬁned regions, but inaccurate bound-
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
aries. Information from edge detection is used to reﬁne region boundaries
and to obtain a more precise result.
3. Selection-Evaluation: in this approach, edge information is used to evaluate the quality of diﬀerent region-based segmentation results, with the aim
of choosing the best. This third set of techniques deal with the diﬃculty of
establishing adequate stopping criteria and thresholds in region segmentation.
Over-Segmentation
This approach emerged due to the diﬃculty of establishing an adequate homogeneity criterion for region growing. As Pavlidis and Liow suggested , the
major reason which explains why region growing produces so much false boundaries is that the deﬁnition of region uniformity is too strict, as when they insist on
approximately constant brightness while in reality brightness may vary linearly
within a region. It is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd uniformity criteria which exactly match
these requirements and not generate false boundaries. Summarizing, they argued
that the results can be signiﬁcantly improved if all region boundaries qualiﬁed
as edges are checked rather than attempting to ﬁne-tune the uniformity criteria.
The methodology of this approach starts with the obtention of an oversegmented result segmentation, which is achieved by properly setting the parameters of the algorithm. This result is then compared with the result from the
dual approach: each boundary is checked to see if it is coherent in both results.
When this correspondence does not exist the boundary is considered false and
is removed. At the end, only real boundaries are preserved.
The implemented algorithm A4 follows the most habitual technique, which
consists of obtaining the over-segmented result using a region-based algorithm.
Every initial boundary is checked by analysing its coherence with the edge map,
where real boundaries must have high gradient values, while low values correspond to false contours. Concretely, A4 is based on the work of Gagalowicz and
Monga , where two adjacent regions are merged if the average gradient on
their boundary is lower than a ﬁxed threshold. A similar work was presented by
Pavlidis and Liow , which includes a criterion in the merging decision in order to eliminate the false boundaries that have resulted from the data structure
On the other hand, it is also possible to carry out this approach starting with
the over-segmented result obtained from a boundary based approach .
Then, region information allows diﬀerentiation between true and false contours.
The boundaries are checked analyzing the chromatic and textural characteristic
at both sides of the contour. A real boundary limits with two regions, so it has
diﬀerent characteristics on both sides. An exemplar work is that proposed by
Philipp and Zamperoni , who proposed starting with a high-resolution edge
extractor, and then, according to the texture characteristics of the extracted
regions, deciding whether to suppress or prolong a boundary.
J. Freixenet et al.
Boundary Reﬁnement
As described above, region-based segmentation yields a good detection of true
regions, although as is well known that the resultant sensitivity to noise causes
the boundary of the extracted region to be highly irregular. This approach, which
we have called boundary reﬁnement, considers region-based segmentation as a
ﬁrst approximation to segmentation. Typically, a region-growing procedure is
used to obtain an initial estimate of a target region, which is then combined with
salient edge information to achieve a more accurate representation of the target
boundary. As in the over-segmentation proposals, edge information permits here,
the reﬁnement of an initial result. Examples of this strategy are the works of
Haddon and Boyce , Chu and Aggarwal or the most recent of Sato et
al. . Nevertheless, two basic techniques can be considered as common ways
to reﬁne the boundary of the regions:
1. Multiresolution: this technique is based on the analysis at diﬀerent scales.
A coarse initial segmentation is reﬁned by increasing the resolution.
2. Boundary Reﬁnement by Snakes: another possibility is the integration
of region information with dynamic contours, concretely snakes. The reﬁnement of the region boundary is performed by the energy minimization of the
A5: Multiresolution. The multiresolution approach is an interesting strategy
to carry out the reﬁnement. The analysis operates on the image at diﬀerent
scales, using a pyramid or quadtree structure. The algorithm consists of an upward and a downward path; the former has the eﬀect of smoothing or increasing
the resolution in class space, at the expense of a reduction in spatial resolution,
while the latter attempts to regain the lost spatial resolution, preserving the
newly won class resolution. The assumption underlying this procedure is invariance across scales: those nodes in an estimate considered as interior to a region
are given as the same class as their “fathers” at lower resolution.
The A5 algorithm is based on the work of Spann and Wilson , where the
strategy uses a quadtree method using classiﬁcation at the top level of the tree,
followed by boundary reﬁnement. A non-parametric clustering algorithm is used
to perform classiﬁcation at the top level, yielding an initial boundary, followed
by downward boundary estimation to reﬁne the result. A recent work following
the same strategy can be found in .
A6: Boundary Reﬁnement by Snakes. The snake method is known to solve
such problems by locating the object boundary from an initial plan. However,
snakes do not try to solve the entire problem of ﬁnding salient image contours.
The high grey-level gradient of the image may be due to object boundaries as
well as noise and object textures, and therefore the optimization functions may
have many local optima. Consequently, in general, active contours are sensitive
to initial conditions and are only really eﬀective when the initial position of
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
the contour in the image is suﬃciently close to the real boundary. For this
reason, active contours rely on other mechanisms to place them somewhere near
the desired contour. In ﬁrst approximations to dynamic contours, an expert
is responsible for putting the snake close to an intended contour; its energy
minimization carries it the rest of the way. However, region segmentation could
be the solution of the initialization problem of snakes. Proposals concerning
integrated methods consist of using the region segmentation result as the initial
contour of the snake. Here, in the design of A6, the segmentation process is
typically divided into two steps: First, a region growing with a seed point in the
target region is performed, and its corresponding output is used for the initial
contour of the dynamic contour model; Second, the initial contour is modiﬁed
on the basis of energy minimization.
The A6 algorithm is implemented following the ideas of Chan et al. ,
where the greedy algorithm is used to ﬁnd the minimum energy contour. This
algorithm searches for the position of the minimum energy by adjusting each
point on the contour during iteration to a lower energy position amongst its
eight local neighbours. The result, although not always optimal, is comparable
to that obtained by variational calculus methods and dynamic programming.
The advantage is that their method is faster. Similar proposals are the works
of V´erard et al. and Jang et al. . Curiously, all these algorithms are
tested on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) images, but this is not a mere
coincidence. Accurate segmentation is critical for diagnosis in medical images.
However, it is very diﬃcult to extract the contour which exactly matches the
target region in MRI images. Integrated methods seem to be a valid solution to
achieve an accurate and consistent detection.
Selection-Evaluation
In the absence of object or scene models or ground truth data, it is critical to
have a criterion which enables evaluation of the quality of a segmentation. In
this sense, a set of proposals have used edge information to deﬁne an evaluation
function which qualiﬁes the quality of a region-based segmentation. The purpose
is to achieve diﬀerent results by changing parameters and thresholds on a region
segmentation algorithm, and then to use the evaluation function to choose the
best result. This strategy permits solution of the traditional problems of region
segmentation, such as the deﬁnition of an adequate stopping criterion or the
setting of appropriate thresholds. The evaluation function measures the quality
of a region based segmentation according to the coherence with the edge map.
The best region segmentation is that in which the boundaries of the regions
correspond in major measure to the contours.
The A7 algorithm is based on the work of Siebert where edge information
is used to adjust the criterion function of a region-growing segmentation. For each
seed, A7 creates a whole family of segmentation results (with diﬀerent criterion
functions) and then, based on the local quality of the region’s contour, picks
the best one. The contrast between both sides of the boundary is proposed as a
measure of contour strength to evaluate the segmentation quality. More formally,
J. Freixenet et al.
the contour strength is expressed as the sum of the absolute diﬀerences between
each pixel on the contour of a region and the pixels in the 4-neighbourhood of
these contour points which are not part of the region. However, Siebert suggests
that slightly improved results at higher computational costs can be expected
if the contour strength is based on the gradient at each contour pixel rather
than on the intensity diﬀerence. Hence, this second option has been the solution
adopted in our implementation. Similar algorithms are proposed by Fua and
Hanson (a pioneer proposal), LeMoigne and Tilton , or Hojjatoleslami
and Kittler .
Experimental Results
The methods surveyed (A1-A7) have been programmed and their accuracy analyzed over synthetic and real test images such as like the ones shown in ﬁgure 1.
The wide range of numerous and indeterminate characteristics of real images
makes it very complicated to achieve an accurate comparison of the experimental
results. As a rule, the segmentation results can only be judged either by using
manually segmented images as reference, which implies a tedious and subjective
task , or by visual comparison to the original images , or just applying
quality measures corresponding to human intuition . Hence, the use of carefully designed synthetic images appears to be a more suitable benchmark for an
objective and quantitative evaluation of diﬀerent segmentation algorithms .
Despite that suitability, the use of real images is also highly advisable as they
provide useful results when realistic characteristics arise. Therefore, the algorithms evaluation has been performed jointly using real and synthetic images.
The results obtained from the real ones have been evaluated by comparing them
with manual segmentation, due to the subjective nature of the segmentation
of real images. The set of synthetic images generated to test the algorithms
follows the method proposed by Zhang , where the form of the objects of
the images changes from a circle to an elongated ellipse. To make synthetic images more realistic, a 5x5 average low-pass ﬁlter is applied to produce a smooth
transition between objects and background. Then, a zero-mean Gaussian white
noise is added to simulate noise eﬀect. The noise samples have been generated
with diﬀerent variance parameters. On the other hand, selected real images are
well-known standard test images extracted from the USC-SIPI image database
(University of Southern California-Signal and Image Processing Institute). All
test images are size 256 × 256 pixels.
The Evaluation Method
The evaluation of image segmentation is performed with several quantitative
measures proposed by Huang and Dom . Concretely, boundary-based and
region-based performance evaluation schemes are proposed. The boundary-based
approach evaluates segmentation in terms of both localization and shape accuracy of extracted regions, while the region-based approach assesses the segmentation quality in terms of both size and location of the segmented regions.
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
Fig. 1. A subset of the real and synthetic test images used in the trials.
Boundary-Based Evaluation. The boundary-based scheme is intended to
evaluate segmentation quality in terms of the precision of the extracted region
boundaries. Let B represent the boundary point set derived from the segmentation and GB the boundary ground truth. Two distance distribution signatures
are used, one from ground truth to the estimated, denoted by DB
G, and the other
from the estimated to ground truth, denoted by DG
A distance distribution signature from a set B1 to a set B2 of boundary
points, denoted by DB2
B1, is a discrete function whose distribution characterizes
the discrepancy, measured in distance, from B1 and B2. Deﬁne the distance from
an arbitrary point x in set B1 to B2 as the minimum absolute distance from x
to all the points in B2, d(x, B2) = min{dE(x, y)}, ∀yϵB2, where dE denotes the
Euclidean distance between points x and y. The discrepancy between B1 and
B2 is described by the shape of the signature, which is commonly measured by
its mean and standard deviation. As a rule, a DB2
B1 with a near-zero mean and a
small standard deviation indicates high quality of the image segmentation.
Region-Based Evaluation. The region-based scheme evaluates the segmentation accuracy in the number of regions, the locations and the sizes. Let the
segmentation be S and the corresponding ground truth be GS. The goal is to
quantitatively describe the degree of mismatch between them.
Measures are based on the concept of directional Hamming distance from
one segmentation S1
1, . . . Rn
1 } to another segmentation S2
2, . . . Rn
2 }, denoted by DH(S1 =⇒S2). First, the correspondence between
the labels of both segmentation results is established: each region Ri
is associated with a region Rj
1 from S1 such that Ri
1 is maximal. So, the
directional Hamming distance from S1 to S2 is deﬁned as:
DH(S1 =⇒S2) =
J. Freixenet et al.
Original image
Fig. 2. Segmentation results over the peppers image. From top to bottom and left to
right: original image and results when using the implemented algorithms (A1-A7).
where |.| denote the size of a set. Therefore, DH(S1 =⇒S2) is the total area
under the intersections between all Ri
2ϵS2 and their non-maximal intersected
regions from S1.
A region-based performance measure based on normalized Hamming distance
is deﬁned as p = 1 −DH(S=⇒GS)+DH(GS=⇒S)
, where |S| is the image size and
pϵ . The smaller the degree of mismatch, the closer the p is to one. Moreover,
two types of errors are deﬁned: missing rate em
R and false alarm rate Ef
former indicates the percentage of the points in GS being mistakenly segmented
into the regions in S which are non-maximal with respect to the corresponding
region GS; while the latter describes the percentage of points in S falling into
the regions of GS which are non-maximal intersected with the region under
consideration. We therefore have
R = DH(S =⇒GS)
R = DH(GS =⇒S)
The Results
The implemented algorithms A1 to A7 have been applied to a set of 22 test
images, including real and synthetic ones. Due to the limited space, we only show
the detailed results of two images, while a summary of the results is provided for
the remaining. A more complete report including the code, description and full
details of the behaviour of each algorithm over the whole set of test images, can
be accessed on The results obtained
with the 7 algorithms over the peppers image are shown in ﬁgure 2. On the other
hand, tables 1 and 2 show a set of quantitative results expressed in terms of the
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
Table 1. Segmentation results over synthetic test images. Performance of the 7 algorithms over the image 1(2nd row, 1st column), and the average of the results of the
algorithms over 12 synthetic images.
Region-based
Boundary-based
Circle Image Evaluation
Summary of Synthetic Images Evaluation
Table 2. Segmentation results over real test images. Performance of the 7 algorithms
over the image 1(1st row, 1st column), and the average of the results of the algorithms
over 10 real images.
Region-based
Boundary-based
Peppers Image Evaluation
Summary of Real Images Evaluation
region and boundary evaluation parameters (described in section 4.1), as well as
the execution time outlining the complexity of each algorithm.
Taking into account the quality of the results from a region-based scheme of
evaluation, it will be noticed that the best results are reached by the A3 and
A4 algorithms. Moreover, the importance of an appropriated placement of the
starting seed points has been proved, which is generally forgotten or placed on
a secondary priority in many region-based algorithms. On the other hand, the
validity of the over-segmentation strategy has been proved by the good rates provided by the A4 algorithm. As a general rule, it will be noticed that the missing
R is bigger than the false alarm rate ef
R. This is mainly due to the presence
J. Freixenet et al.
of noise in images, which causes the appearance of holes inside the regions of the
segmentation result. It can be easily avoided by either pre-processing the image
with a smoothing ﬁlter, or post-processing by merging the smallest regions. The
exception to this problem is the A5 algorithm (multiresolution strategy), where
an initial coarse region segmentation is performed on lower resolution achieving
the eﬀect of smoothing.
The analysis of the segmentation results from a boundary-based scheme of
evaluation yields the assumption that the boundary reﬁnement strategy (A5 and
A6 algorithms) is best. In fact, these results corroborate the expected ones stated
that the obtention of a precise boundary is the main target for these methods.
In this sense, the accuracy obtained by the A6 algorithm, which is based on the
energy minimization of a snake, is remarkable.
The computational cost for each algorithm is another relevant feature to
consider. After analyzing the experimental results, the high cost of A1 and A7
algorithms will be noticed. The reason of the high cost of A1 can be found in the
recursive nature of its split and merge based algorithm. The “slowness” of A7 is
due to the necessity of generating diﬀerent region-based segmentation results in
order to choose the best. So, ﬁnding a balance between the computational cost
and the ﬁnal accuracy of the results is mandatory. Nevertheless, both algorithms
could be easily transported and executed over a parallel multiprocessor, which
would considerably reduce the time of execution. In contrast, A6 does not have
an excessively high cost. This can be easily explained when you consider that
the placement of the snake from the region-based segmentation results allows
initiation of the energy minimization very close to the ﬁnal position. Hence, the
suitable boundary is reached with few iterations.
Conclusions
The objective of this paper is a comparative survey of 7 of the most frequently
used strategies to perform segmentation based on region and boundary information. The diﬀerent methods have been programmed and their accuracy analyzed
with real and synthetic images. Experimental results demonstrate that there is
a strong similarity between the results obtained from synthetic and real images.
The performance of the diﬀerent algorithms over the set of synthetic images
can be extrapolated to the results obtained over real ones, which seems to corroborate the remark made by Zhang , who noticed the convenience of using
synthetic images in order to achieve an objective comparison of segmentation
algorithms. Nevertheless, this statement can only be aﬃrmed for the studied
images and the studied algorithms.
The experimental results point out that, in general, post-processing algorithms give better results than embedded ones. Concretely, based on the region
evaluation parameters, the algorithms A4 and A5 (post-processing) and A3 (embedded) are the ones which produce better results, while based on the boundary
evaluation parameters, the algorithms A5 and A6 are the best. In conclusion,
the best results were obtained with the Multiresolution strategy (algorithm A5)
Yet Another Survey on Image Segmentation
which provides the best performance according to the simplicity of the algorithm
and the accuracy of the results. Further work is to validate these results over a
wide set of diﬀerent images, such as medical and satellite images.