The General Primordial Cosmic Perturbation
Martin Bucher,∗Kavilan Moodley† and Neil Turok‡
DAMTP, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge
Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
 )
We consider the most general primordial cosmological perturbation in a universe ﬁlled with photons, baryons, neutrinos, and a hypothetical cold dark
matter (CDM) component within the framework of linearized perturbation
theory. We present a careful discussion of the diﬀerent allowed modes, distinguishing modes which are regular at early times, singular at early times, or
pure gauge. As well as the familiar growing and decaying adiabatic modes and
the baryonic and CDM isocurvature modes, we identify two neutrino isocurvature modes. In the ﬁrst, the ratio of neutrinos to photons varies spatially
but the net density perturbation vanishes. In the second the photon-baryon
plasma and the neutrino ﬂuid have a spatially varying relative bulk velocity,
balanced so that the net momentum density vanishes. Possible mechanisms
which could generate the two neutrino isocurvature modes are discussed. If
one allows the most general regular primordial perturbation, all quadratic
correlators of observables such as the microwave background anisotropy and
matter perturbations are completely determined by a 5 × 5, real, symmetric
matrix-valued function of co-moving wavenumber. In a companion paper we
examine prospects for detecting or constraining the amplitudes of the most
general allowed regular perturbations using present and future CMB data.
I. INTRODUCTION
A key challenge of modern cosmology is understanding the nature of the primordial
ﬂuctuations that eventually led to the formation of large scale structure in our universe.
One possibility is that the ﬂuctuations were generated in a period of inﬂation prior to the
radiation dominated era of the hot big bang. As inﬂation ended the ﬂuctuations would
then have been imprinted as initial conditions for the radiation era on scales far beyond the
∗E-mail: 
†E-mail: 
‡E-mail: 
Hubble radius. The second possibility is that the structure was generated through some
causal mechanism operating within the standard big bang radiation and matter eras. In
this paper we focus on the ﬁrst option, that the ﬂuctuations were imprinted early in the
radiation era as linear ﬂuctuations in the metric and in the matter and radiation content.
For several good reasons the possibility that the primordial perturbations were adiabatic
has been the focus of most interest to date. If the relative abundances of diﬀerent particle
species were determined directly from the Lagrangian describing local physics, one would
expect those abundance ratios to be spatially constant because all regions of the universe
would share an identical early history, independent of the long wavelength perturbations.
The stress-energy present in the universe would then be characterized on large scales by a
single, spatially uniform equation of state. Such ﬂuctuations are termed adiabatic and are
the simplest possibility for perturbing the matter content and the geometry of the universe.
They are also naturally predicted by the simplest inﬂationary models , although there also
exist more complex models giving other types of perturbations . For a recent discussion
see ref. .
Nevertheless, there is no a priori reason why the situation could not be more complicated with abundance ratios varying from place to place. Perturbations of this sort are
known as isocurvature, or sometimes entropy, perturbations. Most studies of isocurvature
perturbations have examined the possibility that the primordial perturbations were entirely
isocurvature with a vanishing primordial adiabatic component and have sought to explore
whether such pure isocurvature models could explain the observed structure in the universe
 – .
In this paper we adopt a more phenomenological approach, which we believe is now warranted by the prospect of upcoming precision measurements of the CMB anisotropy on small
scales. Ground based and balloon borne telescopes and the MAP and PLANCK satellites
will provide very detailed measurements of the primordial ﬂuctuations . Most work on
how to interpret this data has focused on parameter estimation starting from the assumption that the initial perturbations were generated by an inﬂationary model speciﬁed by a
small number of undetermined free parameters . Adiabatic perturbations, characterized
by an amplitude and spectral index, as well as tensor ﬂuctuations also characterized by two
parameters are usually assumed, and based on these assumptions a host of cosmological
parameters, such as Ωtotal, Ωb, ΩΛ, h, Nν, are to be inferred from the observed CMB multipole moments. While the prospects of such measurements are beguiling, they rely heavily
on assumptions regarding the form of the primordial perturbations.
We feel that those
assumptions are worth checking against the data using an approach that assumes neither
inﬂation nor any other favorite theoretical model.
For learning about the fundamental physics responsible for structure formation, determining whether the primordial ﬂuctuations were in fact Gaussian and adiabatic is at least as
important and interesting as measuring the values of cosmological parameters. For this purpose the relevant question is not whether primordial isocurvature perturbations oﬀer a viable
alternative to adiabatic perturbations, which has been the focus of prior work, but rather
how and to what extent can observations constrain the presence of isocurvature modes.
Rather than considering a particular isocurvature model, it seems appropriate to consider
the most general primordial perturbation possible without adding new physics to the hot
big bang era. In other words, we assume a universe ﬁlled with neutrinos, photons, leptons
and baryons, and a cold dark matter (CDM) component and then try to place constraints
on the amplitudes of all possible perturbation modes.
As mentioned above, we shall need to make a simplifying assumption to limit the parameter space of possible perturbations to reasonable size. We shall assume that the ﬂuctuations
were indeed primordial—that is, that the perturbation modes were excited by physics operating at a very early epoch preceding the hot radiation dominated era and that no new
dynamics inﬂuenced the perturbations at late times. Here ‘late’ means well before decoupling, so that whatever decaying modes were excited earlier had a chance to decay before
inﬂuencing the observed structure in our cosmic microwave sky. This assumption excludes
cosmic defect models (i.e., strings, global textures, etc.) of structure formation where a
detailed understanding of the dynamics of the order parameter ﬁeld is required to determine
the unequal time correlations at late times .
How should the most general perturbation be characterised?
This question has historically generated some confusion in the literature. The standard terminology refers to
‘growing,’ ‘decaying,’ and ‘gauge’ modes, the latter referring to modes aﬀected by general
coordinate transformations preserving the chosen gauge condition. In this paper as in most
work on cosmological perturbations we shall use synchronous gauge. The variables in other
common gauges (e.g., Newtonian gauge) are merely linear combinations of the synchronous
gauge variables and their time derivatives. In synchronous gauge, the two gauge modes for
scalar perturbations are easily identiﬁed. The ﬁrst corresponds to time-independent spatial
reparametrizations of the constant time hypersurfaces. In this mode the metric perturbation
is constant and the matter is unperturbed. The second corresponds to deformations of these
hypersurfaces through a spatially dependent shift in the time direction. For the latter gauge
mode, which diverges at early times, both the matter variables and the metric are perturbed.
Indeed this mode may be regarded as a shift in the time of the big bang singularity. The
remaining modes are then deﬁned modulo the two gauge modes.
We characterise the remaining modes as either ‘regular’ or ‘singular,’ according to their
behavior as the time since the big bang tends to zero. This terminology is preferable to
the standard one because it includes constant modes such as the neutrino velocity mode
we shall discuss. In this paper we shall treat only the ‘regular’ modes (i.e., those regular
up to the gauge modes). There are several reasons for this. Singular modes are necessarily
decaying as one proceeds forward in time away from the big bang, so if they are present at
some very early time with linear amplitude so that a perturbative treatment is valid they
quickly become irrelevant. A second reason is that even if the perturbation amplitude is
small the perfect ﬂuid approximation breaks down at early times for the singular modes.
Higher moments in the Boltzmann hierarchy become progressively more important as one
goes back in time, and specifying the initial conditions involves specifying an inﬁnite number
of constants. The perfect ﬂuid approximation seems essential to a simple speciﬁcation of
primordial initial perturbations. Of course, decaying modes might be produced by some
late time physics (such as cosmic defects) operating well after the big bang, but our point
here is that it would appear very diﬃcult to characterise them without introducing explicit
source terms. In contrast, the ‘regular’ modes are completely characterised by specifying
the leading terms in a power series expansion in conformal time of the low moments of the
phase space density—that is, the density and velocity of the ﬂuids.
Having characterised the regular perturbations by the leading terms in the power series
for the metric and ﬂuid densities and velocities, any quadratic observable (e.g., the matter
power spectrum or the cosmic microwave anisotropy power spectrum) is then completely
determined by a primordial power spectral matrix, which rather than a single function of k
as it would be for growing mode adiabatic perturbations is a 5 × 5, real, symmetric matrix
function of k. The oﬀ-diagonal elements establish correlations between the modes. As long
as only quadratic observables are considered, no assumption of Gaussianity is required.
The counting arises as follows. Each cosmological ﬂuid is described by two ﬁrst order
equations, so each ﬂuid introduces two new perturbation modes. However, in synchronous
gauge, as mentioned, there is one gauge mode aﬀecting the ﬂuid perturbations. For a single
ﬂuid there is therefore just one regular, growing mode perturbation, and no physical (i.e.,
non-gauge) decaying mode. A convenient way to deal with the gauge mode is to identify
it with the velocity of the cold dark matter. By a coordinate choice this may be chosen
initially to be zero. If it is assumed that the cold dark matter couples to the other ﬂuids
only via gravity, there is no scattering term to consider, and with coordinates chosen so that
the velocity is initially zero, it remains so for all times. If we now introduce photons and
baryons, four new modes arise. The ﬁrst is an adiabatic decaying mode. There are also the
baryon isocurvature and cold dark matter isocurvature modes, where the initial conditions
contain equal and opposite perturbations of the photon density and the baryon or cold dark
matter densities, respectively. The fourth new mode is that in which the photon and baryon
ﬂuids have a relative velocity that diverges at early times and the ﬂuid approximation breaks
down. So far we have three regular modes. Let us now introduce neutrinos into the picture.
We shall imagine we are setting up the perturbations after neutrino decoupling (T ∼MeV,
t ∼seconds). For our purposes there is no distinction between the diﬀerent neutrino species
nor between neutrinos and antineutrinos, since we are only interested in how perturbations in
the neutrino ﬂuid aﬀect cosmological observations of the density and microwave background
today. Two new perturbation modes are introduced, the ﬁrst a neutrino isocurvature density
perturbation and the second a neutrino isocurvature velocity perturbation. In the latter, we
can arrange the neutrino and photon-baryon ﬂuids to have equal and opposite momentum
density. In the approximation that we ignore the collision term coupling neutrinos to the
photon-baryon ﬂuid, which is valid after neutrino decoupling, and in the small time limit
there is no divergence in this mode.
The neutrino isocurvature velocity perturbation may be considered as primordial as long
as one takes primordial to mean ‘generated after one second’ but well before photon-baryon
decoupling. Of course similar remarks apply to the cold dark matter, baryon isocurvature
or neutrino isocurvature perturbations. Namely if we go back far enough in cosmic history,
where the various conservation laws for baryon or lepton number break down, or where the
cold dark matter was initially generated or reached thermal equilibrium, then a description
of the form we are using would also break down. Since one second is still quite early, and
certainly well before photon-baryon decoupling, we regard it admissible to consider the possibility of ‘primordial’ neutrino velocity perturbations. Possible mechanisms for generating
them shall be discussed in a separate paper .
A primeval baryon isocurvature model (PBI) was introduced by Peebles in which a
universe with just baryons, radiation, and neutrinos is assumed and primordial perturbations
in the baryon-to-photon ratio are assumed. Since at early times the baryons contribute
negligibly to the total density, such perturbations lack an adiabatic, or curvature, component
at early times.
Compared to an Ω= 1 CDM model PBI gives: (1) lower small-scale
relative peculiar velocities, (2) greater large-scale ﬂow velocities, (3) earlier reionization,
and (4) earlier galaxy and star formation . The consequences of PBI and comparison
with observations have been studied by a number of authors .
Bond and Efstathiou have considered a CDM isocurvature model in which the
CDM-to-photon ratio varies spatially. A possible mechanism for generating such perturbations arises in models with axion dark matter in which scale invariant ﬂuctuations of
the axion ﬁeld A(x) are converted into density ﬂuctuations after the axion ﬁeld acquires
a mass in the QCD phase transition . Under the assumption that quantum ﬂuctuations during inﬂation impart a scale free spectrum of ﬂuctuations to the axion ﬁeld, so that
δA(k) ∼k−3/2, and that δA(k) ≪¯A, a scale-free spectrum of Gaussian ﬂuctuations in the
axion-to-photon ratio is generated. The resulting spectrum of density ﬂuctuations today has
the same power law on large scales as for adiabatic ﬂuctuations with a scale free spectrum
Pρ(k) ∼k1, but compared to adiabatic, scale-free perturbations the turnover to Pρ(k) ∼k−3
power law behavior on small scales occurs on a larger scale for the isocurvature case. For the
amplitude of density perturbations normalized on small scales (for example, using σ8), this
gives about thirty times more power in the matter perturbations on large scales and entails
an excessive CMB anisotropy on large angles. This work has been extended to consider
mixtures of CDM isocurvature and adiabatic ﬂuctuations, low density universes, and more
recent CMB data .
The neutrino isocurvature modes discussed here allow for a spatially varying relative
density of photons and neutrinos and a relative velocity between the photon and neutrino
components as well. For the neutrino isocurvature density mode, the total density perturbation vanishes but the relative density of neutrinos and photons varies spatially. On superhorizon scales, the neutrinos and photons evolve similarly but upon entering the horizon the
neutrinos free stream, developing nonvanishing higher moments of the neutrino phase space
density Fνℓ(k), while because of Thomson scattering the photons continue to behave much
as a perfect ﬂuid. These distinct behaviors subsequently generate perturbations in the total
density. For the neutrino isocurvature velocity mode, the rest frames of the neutrino and the
photon ﬂuids do not coincide. The relative velocities are such that initially the perturbation
in the total momentum density vanishes. If this last condition were not satisﬁed, the metric
perturbation generated by this mode would diverge at early times, rendering the mode a
singular mode, which according to the discussion above should be excluded. But the lack of
divergence owing to this cancellation makes this an admissible regular perturbation mode.
The neutrino isocurvature mode solutions are implicit in the work of Rebhan and Schwarz
 and of Challinor and Lasenby , but their implications were not explored.
A possible obstacle to exciting neutrino isocurvature modes arises at early times, from
processes in which neutrinos are generated or scattered. If the neutrino chemical potentials
vanish, so that there are in each generation precisely as many neutrinos as antineutrinos,
a spatially varying relative density can only be established at a temperature suﬃciently
low that the processes turning photons into neutrino-antineutrino pairs and vice versa had
already been frozen out—that is, below a few MeV. Nonvanishing chemical potentials for
the various neutrino species can protect variations in the ratio (ρν/ργ) from erasure by processes involving ν¯ν annihilation, and observational constraints that would rule out neutrino
chemical potentials of the required magnitude are lacking. L-violating processes mediated
through sphalerons, unsuppressed at temperatures above the electroweak phase transition,
can readjust the neutrino chemical potentials µνe, µνµ, and µντ and, moreover, can convert lepton asymmetries in the neutrino sector into baryon asymmetry, but if the neutrino
chemical potentials satisfy µνe + µνµ + µντ = 0, then no tendency favoring sphalerons over
anti-sphalerons is introduced and the net eﬀect of these electroweak processes vanishes. Recall that the neutrino overdensity is proportional to µνe
2. Similarly, for the
neutrino isocurvature velocity mode scattering of neutrinos with other components dampens
this mode at very early times, and for this mode to be relevant there must exist a process
capable of exciting it after this dampening eﬀect has frozen out.
There exist many candidate mechanisms that might generate these neutrino isocurvature
modes. The neutrino density isocurvature mode could be generated during inﬂation if the
theory included a light scalar ﬁeld carrying lepton number, with mass much smaller than
the Hubble constant during inﬂation. During inﬂation this ﬁeld would be excited but
would contribute negligibly to the density of the universe. After inﬂation, when the Hubble
constant fell below the mass of the scalar ﬁeld it would oscillate and decay, producing a lepton
asymmetry. We would expect the neutrino chemical potential to be proportional to the scalar
ﬁeld value, so the most natural possibility would be Gaussian, scale invariant perturbations
in the neutrino chemical potential, with the density perturbation in the neutrinos being
proportional to the square of the chemical potential.
The neutrino velocity mode could have been excited by the decay of relics such as cosmic
strings, walls, or superstrings, surviving until after the neutrinos had decoupled and then
decaying into neutrinos. The neutrino ﬂuid produced in such processes would be perturbed
both in its density and velocity, and these perturbations would be isocurvature in character
 . Another possibility for exciting the modes arises from magnetic ﬁelds frozen into the
plasma whose stress gradients impart a velocity to the photon-lepton-baryon plasma but
not to the neutrino component.
II. IDENTIFYING THE MODES
We now turn to identifying the possible perturbation modes using synchronous gauge
with the line element
ds2 = a2(τ) ·
−dτ 2 + (δij + hij) dxidxj i
For spatial dependence of a given wavenumber k, we deﬁne
hij(k, τ) = eik·x ·
ˆki ˆkj h(k, τ) +
ˆki ˆkj −1
Our discussion generally follows the notation of ref. .
The linearized Einstein equations are
2H˙h = (4πGa2) δT 0
k2 ˙η = (4πGa2) (¯ρ + ¯p)θ,
¨h + 2H˙h −2k2η = −(8πGa2) δT i
¨h + 6¨η + 2H(˙h + 6 ˙η) −2k2η = −(24πGa2)(¯ρ + ¯p)σ
where we deﬁne (¯ρ + ¯p)θ = ikj T 0j and (¯ρ + ¯p)σ = −(ˆkiˆkj −1
j. We deﬁne H = ˙a/a.
With only a single ﬂuid, θ is simply the divergence (∇· v).
Assuming N ﬂuids, labeled (J = 1, . . ., N), one may rewrite the above as
ΩJ(1 + wJ)θJ,
¨h + 2H˙h −2k2η = −9H2 X
¨h + 6¨η + 2H(˙h + 6 ˙η) −2k2η = −12H2Ωνσν
where wJ = pJ/ρJ and c2
s = ∂pJ/∂ρJ. In the last equation only the neutrino contribution to
the anisotropic stress is included. At early times only the neutrino contribution is relevant,
but later when the photons and baryons begin to decouple the photon quadrupole moment
must also be included.
For the photons, the equations of motion at early times before the baryonic component
of the ﬂuid was signiﬁcant are
4k2δγ = 0.
Similarly, for the neutrinos, after neutrino decoupling at temperatures of ∼1 MeV, we have
4k2δν + k2σν = 0,
2θν + ˙h + 6 ˙η
where σν = Fν2/2 is the quadrupole moment of the neutrino phase space density and Fνl is
the l-th multipole, in the notation used below.
The photon and neutrino evolution equations above diﬀer only in the presence of an
anisotropic stress term σν. Photons, because of their frequent scattering by charged leptons
and baryons, at early times are unable to develop a quadrupole moment in their velocity
distribution. Neutrinos, on the other hand, develop signiﬁcant anisotropic stresses upon
crossing the horizon. The addition of an extra degree of freedom that would result from the
equation for ˙σν is avoided by setting σν = 0 at τ = 0.1
For a CDM component, the equations of motion are
1If we were to consider the physical decaying mode with η ∝τ −1, we would ﬁnd this condition cannot be satisﬁed. As discussed above, decaying modes are inevitably associated with the
breakdown of the ﬂuid approximation at early times.
˙δc + θc + 1
˙θc + Hθc = 0.
At later times, when Ωb becomes comparable to Ωγ, the photon equations of motion are
modiﬁed as follows:
4 δγ + aneσT(θγ −θb) = 0.
Here a is the scale factor, ne is the electron density, and σT is the Thomson scattering cross
section. The baryon equations of motion are
˙δb + θb + 1
˙θb + Hθb + 4
aneσT(θb −θγ) = 0.
At early times, the characteristic time for the synchronization of the photon and baryon
velocities tbγ ≈1/(neσT) is small compared to the expansion time texp ≈aτ and to the
oscillation period tosc ≈(aτ/k). (We use units where the speed of light c = 1.)
deviation of (θγ −θb) from zero rapidly decays away. This may be seen by subtracting the
second equation of 9 from that of 8 and regarding Hθb + 1
3k2δγ as a forcing term. In the
limit σT →∞, one obtains θb = θγ—in other words, a tight coupling between the baryons
and the photons. Therefore, at early times we may set θb = θγ = θγb.
In the tight coupling approximation the evolution equation for θγb is obtained by adding
the second equation of 8 multiplied by 4
3Ωγ to the second equation of 9 multiplied by Ωb,
so that the scattering terms cancel giving
˙θγb = −ΩbHθγb + 1
and the baryon and photon density contrasts evolve according to
˙δb = −θγb −1
In the absence of baryon isocurvature perturbations, δγ = 4
3δb, making one of these equations
redundant, but both equations are required for the most general type of perturbation.
Although an excellent approximation early on, the tight coupling assumption breaks
down at later times as the photons and baryons decouple, and for a more accurate description the two equations in 8 for the time derivatives of the monopole and dipole moments of
the velocity of the photon phase space distribution must be replaced by the following inﬁnite hierarchy of equations for the time derivatives of higher order moments of the photon
distribution function as well:
+ aneσT(θb −θγ),
10aneσTFγ2,
ℓFγ(ℓ−1) −(ℓ+ 1)Fγ(ℓ+1)
where ℓ≥3 for the last equation. Initially, as τ →0, Fγℓ= 0 for ℓ≥2. If this condition
were relaxed an inﬁnite number of decaying modes would appear. The ﬂuid approximation
for the photons, eqn. 8, is obtained using only the ﬁrst two of the above equations combined
with the approximation Fγ2 = 0.
To describe the neutrinos during and after horizon crossing requires a Boltzman hierarchy
for δν, θν, Fνℓidentical to the one above except that the Thomson scattering terms are
omitted. This assumes that neutrino masses are irrelevant.
Before solving the Einstein equations 4, we ﬁrst identify the two gauge modes resulting from the residual gauge freedom remaining within synchronous gauge. A general in-
ﬁnitesimal gauge transformation considered to linear order is a coordinate transformation
xµ →x′µ(x) where xµ = x′µ + ǫµ(x). From the transformation rule for tensors
µν(x′) = ∂xξ
∂x′ν gξη(x),
it follows that
δgµν = ǫξ ∂g(0)
where g(0)
µν is the unperturbed, zeroth-order metric.
Applying 14 to the metric ds2 =
−(1 −h00)dτ 2 + 2h0i dτdxi + (δij + hij)dxidxji
τ = τ ′ + T(x, τ),
x = x′ + S(x, τ)
where S and T are regarded as inﬁnitesimal, one obtains
δh00 = −2˙a
a T(x, τ) −2 ˙T(x, τ),
δh0i = −T,i(x, τ) + ˙Si(x, τ),
δhij = Si,j + Sj,i + 2˙a
For the density contrast for a perfect ﬂuid component labeled by α, one obtains δ(δα) =
−3(1 + wα)HT. After a gauge transformation the velocity is shifted by δv = −˙S(x, τ) for
all components.
The synchronous gauge condition δh00 = 0 implies that T(x, τ) = A(x)/a(τ), and δh0i =
0 implies that
S(x, τ) = B(x) + ∇A(x)
δhij = 2˙a
a2 A(x)δij + 2A,ij
a(τ) + Bi,j + Bj,i.
For a radiation-dominated universe [with a(τ) = τ] considering for the moment only a
single wavenumber, we ﬁnd that2
τ 2δij −2kikj ln(τ)
A(k) + 2B kikj
τ 2 −2k2 ln(τ)
To obtain a more accurate power series expansion close to the time of matter-radiation
equality and to consider the baryon and CDM isocurvature modes, we assume a scale factor
evolution for a universe ﬁlled with matter and radiation: a(τ) = τ +τ 2. At matter-radiation
equality aeq = 1/4 and τeq = (
2 −1)/2. Since H = (2τ + 1)/(τ 2 + τ) has a pole at τ = −1,
the resulting power series solutions are expected to diverge beyond the unit circle.
For the matter-radiation universe, with a(τ) = τ + τ 2 eqn. 20 is modiﬁed to become
" 6(1 + 2τ)
τ 2(1 + τ)2 −2k2 ln
" (1 + 2τ)
τ 2(1 + τ)2
We now present the power series solutions. Rγ and Rν represent the fractional contribution of photons and neutrinos to the total density at early times deep within the radiation
dominated epoch. (We ignore possible eﬀects due to nonvanishing neutrino masses). We
also assume that we are considering the perturbations after the annihilation of electrons and
positrons, so that the latter have dumped their energy into the photon background. For
Nν species of massless neutrinos we deﬁne R = 7
3 and we have Rγ = (1 + R)−1 and
Rν = R(1 + R)−1.
Adiabatic Growing Mode.
12(15 + 4Rν)k2τ 2,
2Note that the gauge mode A disagrees with eqns. and of ref. , which are incorrect.
3(12 + Rν)k2τ 2.
Baryon Isocurvature Mode.
h = 4Ωb,0τ −6Ωb,0τ 2,
3Ωb,0τ + Ωb,0τ 2,
δc = −2Ωb,0τ + 3Ωb,0τ 2,
δb = 1 −2Ωb,0τ + 3Ωb,0τ 2,
3Ωb,0τ + 4Ωb,0τ 2,
3Ωb,0τ + 4Ωb,0τ 2,
3Ωb,0k2τ 2,
3Ωb,0k2τ 2,
3(2Rν + 15)k2τ 3.
There is no regular baryon velocity mode because of the tight coupling of the baryons to
the photons.
CDM Isocurvature Mode.
h = 4Ωc,0τ −6Ωc,0τ 2,
3Ωc,0τ + Ωc,0τ 2,
δc = 1 −2Ωc,0τ + 3Ωc,0τ 2,
δb = −2Ωc,0τ + 3Ωc,0τ 2,
3Ωc,0τ + 4Ωc,0τ 2,
3Ωc,0τ + 4Ωc,0τ 2,
3Ωc,0k2τ 2,
3Ωc,0k2τ 2,
3(2Rν + 15)k2τ 3.
The CDM velocity mode may be identiﬁed with the gauge mode. This can be seen from the
equation for the CDM velocity which is decoupled from the other equations. θCDM behaves
as τ −1 at early times.
If there were several species of CDM, however, a new physical,
non-gauge relative velocity mode would arise, which would be divergent at early times.
Neutrino Isocurvature Density Mode.
h = Ωb,0Rν
6(15 + 4Rν)k2τ 2,
δc = −Ωb,0Rν
k2τ + 3Ωb,0Rν
2(15 + 4Rν)k2τ 2.
Physically, one starts with a uniform energy density, with the sum of the neutrino and
photon densities unperturbed. When a mode enters the horizon, the photons behave as a
perfect ﬂuid, while the neutrinos free stream, creating nonuniformity in the energy density,
pressure, and momentum density, thus sourcing metric perturbations.
Neutrino Isocurvature Velocity Mode.
3(5 + 4Rν)kτ +
(5 + 4Rν)(15 + 4Rν)
δc = −3Ωb,0
kτ −3Ωb,0Rν(Rγ + 2)
kτ −Ωb,0Rν(Rγ + 2)
3kτ −Ωb,0Rν
k + 3Ωb,0Rν
θν = k −(9 + 4Rν)
6(5 + 4Rν)k3τ 2,
3(5 + 4Rν)kτ +
(5 + 4Rν)(15 + 4Rν)kτ 2,
7(5 + 4Rν)k2τ 2.
Here the neutrinos and photons start with uniform total density and uniform density ratio
but with relative velocities matched so that initially the total momentum density vanishes. If
the relative momenta were not perfectly matched, the metric perturbation generated would
diverge at early times, as in the adiabatic decaying mode. But because of the perfect match,
a divergence at early times is avoided.
It is also possible, at least in principle, to consider regular modes with higher moments
of Fνℓwith ℓ≥3 excited initially, as was considered in ref. ; however, it is diﬃcult to
envision plausible mechanisms for exciting these higher moment modes.
Newtonian Potentials. In this paper we have used synchronous gauge, but for completeness we give the form of the Newtonian potentials for the regular modes presented above.
The Newtonian potentials φ and ψ are related to the synchronous variables as follows:
2k2[¨h + 6¨η + H(˙h + 6 ˙η)],
2k2[˙h + 6 ˙η].
We deﬁne the Newtonian potentials according to the convention ds2 = a2(τ)[−dτ 2(1+2φ)+
dxi dxj δij(1−2ψ)]. We now give the Newtonian potentials to leading order. For the growing
adiabatic mode
(15 + 4Rν),
(15 + 4Rν).
For the neutrino isocurvature density mode
(15 + 4Rν),
(15 + 4Rν).
For the neutrino isocurvature velocity mode
(15 + 4Rν)k−1τ −1,
(15 + 4Rν)k−1τ −1.
The potentials for the baryon isocurvature mode are
φ = (4Rν −15)Ωb,0
2(15 + 2Rν) τ,
ψ = −(4Rν −15)Ωb,0
6(15 + 2Rν)
and for the CDM isocurvature mode are
φ = (4Rν −15)Ωc,0
2(15 + 2Rν) τ,
ψ = −(4Rν −15)Ωc,0
6(15 + 2Rν)
It is curious that the Newtonian potential diverges at early times for the neutrino isocurvature velocity mode while in synchronous gauge there is no singularity. It appears that
synchronous gauge is a more physical gauge and that Newtonian gauge is inadequate for
modes based on anisotropic stresses. The dimensionless Ricci curvature a2(τ)τ 2R is nonsingular at early times. In any case, synchronous gauge is more physical in the sense that
its evolution is local whereas in Newtonian gauge the evolution of the shape of the constant
cosmic time hypersurfaces depends on how matter behaves inﬁnitely far away (because the
gauge choice is deﬁned in terms of the scalar-vector-tensor decomposition, which is nonlocal). The divergence of the Newtonian potentials arises from the need to warp the surfaces
of constant cosmic time so as to put the metric in a spatially isotropic form; however, there
is nothing at all physical about this particular form. The neutrino isocurvature velocity
mode was excluded in ref. because of the behavior of the Newtonian potentials at early
times; however, when a physical phenomemon can be described in a nonsingular manner in
some gauge, its singularity in another gauge should be regarded as a coordinate singularity.
III. DISCUSSION
We have identiﬁed ﬁve nondecaying modes corresponding to each wavenumber: an adiabatic growing mode, a baryon isocurvature mode, a CDM isocurvature mode, a neutrino
CMB Anisotropy for the Neutrino Isocurvature Density Mode. We plot
ℓ(ℓ+ 1)cℓ/2π for the neutrino isocurvature density mode (the dashed curves) for initial power
spectra Pδν ∼kα where α = −3.0, . . . , −2.4 increasing in increments of 0.1 from bottom to top at
large ℓ. The adiabatic growing mode (the solid curve) with a scale-invariant spectrum is included
for comparison. All curves are normalized to COBE. For the lowest curve the variations in the
photon-to-neutrino ratio obey a scale-invariant initial power spectrum.
CMB Anisotropy for the Neutrino Isocurvature Velocity Mode. We plot
ℓ(ℓ+ 1)cℓ/2π for the neutrino isocurvature velocity mode (the dashed curves) for initial power
spectra Pvν ∼kα with α = −3.0, . . . , −2.0 increasing in increments of 0.2 from bottom to top at
large ℓ. α = −2.0 corresponds to a white noise initial power spectrum in the divergence of the
velocity ﬁeld, possibly resulting from a large number of small explosions.
density isocurvature mode, and a neutrino velocity isocurvature mode. Under the assumption that the primordial perturbations are small enough so that the linear theory suﬃces,
two-point derived observables are completely determined by the generalization of the power
spectrum given by the correlation matrix
⟨Am(k)An(−k)⟩
where the indices (m, n = 1, . . ., 5) label the modes, independently of whether or not the
primordial ﬂuctuations were Gaussian. In Figs. 1 and 2 the shape of the CMB moments
for the neutrino isocurvature modes are indicated. In this computation the cosmological
parameters H0 = 50km s−1, Ωb = 0.05, Ωc = 0.95 were assumed. In a companion paper,
we examine prospects for constraining the amplitudes of these modes using upcoming MAP
and PLANCK data.
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank David Spergel for useful discussions at an
early stage of this project. The CMB spectra were computed using a modiﬁed version of the
code CMBFAST written by Uros Seljak and Matias Zaldarriaga. We would like to thank
Anthony Challinor, Anthony Lasenby, and Dominik Schwarz for useful comments.
work was supported in part by the UK Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council.
KM was supported by the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the UK.