International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning
Volume 4, Number 2.
ISSN: 1492-3831
October – 2003
Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and
theoretical rationale for interaction
Terry Anderson
Athabasca University – Canada’s Open University
No topic raises more contentious debate among educators than the role of interaction as a crucial
component of the education process. This debate is fueled by surface problems of definition and
vested interests of professional educators, but is more deeply marked by epistemological
assumptions relative to the role of humans and human interaction in education and learning. The
seminal article by Daniel and Marquis challenged distance educators to get the mixture
right between independent study and interactive learning strategies and activities. They quite
rightly pointed out that these two primary forms of education have differing economic,
pedagogical, and social characteristics, and that we are unlikely to find a “perfect” mix that meets
all learner and institutional needs across all curricula and content. Nonetheless, hard decisions
have to be made.
Even more than in 1979, the development of newer, cost effective technologies and the nearly
ubiquitous (in developed countries) Net-based telecommunications system is transforming, at
least, the cost and access implications of getting the mix right. Further, developments in social
cognitive based learning theories are providing increased evidence of the importance of
collaborative activity as a component of all forms of education – including those delivered at a
distance. Finally, the context in which distance education is developed and delivered is changing
in response to the capacity of the semantic Web to support interaction, not
only amongst humans, but also between and among autonomous agents and human beings.
Thus, the landscape and challenges of “getting the mix right” have not lessened in the past 25
years, and, in fact, have become even more complicated. This paper attempts to provide a
theoretical rationale and guide for instructional designers and teachers interested in developing
distance education systems that are both effective and efficient in meeting diverse student
learning needs.
Defining and Valuing Interaction in Distance Education
Interaction has long been a defining and critical component of the educational process and
context. Yet it is surprisingly difficult to find a clear and precise definition of this multifaceted
concept in the education literature. In popular culture, the use of the term to describe everything
from toasters to video games to holiday resorts, further confuses precise definition. I have
discussed these varying definitions at greater length in an earlier document , and
so will confine discussion here to an acceptance of Wagner’s definition as “reciprocal
events that require at least two objects and two actions. Interactions occur when these objects and
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
events mutually influence one another” (p. 8). This definition departs from Daniel and Marquis’s
stipulation that interaction should refer “in a restrictive manner to cover only those activities
where the student is in two-way contact with another person (or persons)” . As was articulated by Moore , and Juler , and as I too will argue,
interaction between students and content has long been recognized as a critical component of both
campus-based and distance education.
Interaction (or its derivative term interactivity) serves a variety of functions in the educational
transaction. Sims has listed these functions as allowing for learner control, facilitating
program adaptation based on learner input, allowing various forms of participation and
communication, and as aiding the development of meaningful learning. In addition, interactivity
is fundamental to creation of the learning communities espoused by Lipman , Wenger
 , and other educational theorists who focus on the critical role of community in learning.
Finally, the value of another person’s perspective, usually gained through interaction, is a key
learning component in constructivist learning theories , and in inducing
mindfulness in learners .
Interaction has always been valued in education. As long ago as 1916, John Dewey referred to a
form of internal interaction as the defining component of the educational process that occurs
when the student transforms the inert information passed to them from another, and constructs it
into knowledge with personal application and value . Later, from a distance
education perspective, Holmberg argued for the superiority of individualized interaction
between student and tutor when supported by written postal correspondence or via real time
telephone tutoring. Holmberg also introduced us to the idea of simulated interaction that defines
the writing style appropriate for independent study models of distance education programming,
which he referred to as “guided didactic interaction.” Garrison and Shale defined all forms
of education (including that delivered at a distance) as essentially interactions between content,
students, and teachers. Laurillard constructed an ideal conversational model of learning
applicable to all forms of education in which interaction between students and teachers plays the
critical role. Finally, Bates argued that interactivity should be the primary criteria for
selecting media for educational delivery. Thus, there is a long history of study and recognition of
the critical role of interaction in supporting and even defining education.
Interaction and Education
Despite the functional definitions of interaction listed above, it still remains a challenge to define
when an interaction has pedagogical or educational value. Certainly not all interactions have
formal educational value as illustrated by light social conversation in a pub, or the prescribed
interaction between a pilot and an air-traffic controller. However, even those two examples can be
the context in which informal learning by either or both parties occurs. For the purposes of this
paper, I will distinguish between interaction leading to learning in any informal context and those
types of interaction that occur in a formal education context. Informal interaction can, and often
does, lead to learning outside of any influence of a formal education institution or accreditation
process. However, interaction in formal education contexts is specifically designed to induce
learning directed towards defined and shared learning objectives or outcomes. Interaction with a
teacher is often an important component of a formal learning experience. However, since both
formal and informal learning can result from interaction between and amongst students alone, or
as result of interaction between student and content, the participation of a teacher cannot be a
defining feature of an educational interaction. Further, it is obvious that there are qualitative
differences in the quality and value of interaction as a contributor to learning in both formal and
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
informal learning contexts. To simplify the arguments presented in this paper, I have not
addressed these qualitative differences, although remind the reader that all types of interaction
should be assessed by their contribution to the learning process.
Modes of Interaction
Anderson and Garrison described the three more common types of interaction discussed in
the distance education literature involving students (student-student; student-teacher; studentcontent), and extended the discussion to the other three types of interaction (teacher-teacher;
teacher-content; content-content) as shown in Figure 1. In Anderson , I discussed the
various costs, benefits, and research questions associated with each of these modes of interaction.
I also suggested that due to the increasing computational power and storage capacity of
computers (Moore’s Law), their increase in functionality when networked (Metcalfe’s Law), and
related geometric increases in a host of technical developments , there is
pressure and opportunity to transform student-teacher and student-student interaction into
enhanced forms of student-content interaction. Further, the development of programming tools
and environments will continue to make this transformation easier and, in some cases, within the
technical domain of non-programming teachers and subject matter experts. However, I have not
clearly articulated a theoretical basis for judging the appropriate amounts of each of the various
forms of possible interaction.
Figure 1. Modes of Interaction in Distance Education from Anderson and Garrison, .
Equivalency of Interaction
After years of sometimes acrimonious debate, it seems clear that there is no single medium that
supports the educational experience in a manner that is superior in all ways to that supported via
other media. Clark’s and Kozma’s classic debate, and the long list of “no
significant difference” studies compiled by Russell , give evidence to a complicated
interaction between content, student preference and need, institutional capacity and preference,
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
Student-student interaction is critical for learning designs based upon constructivist
learning theories, but less critical to cognitive and behaviorist learning theory based
approaches.
and teaching and learning approaches to learning. Despite the high degree of rhetoric from
constructivist and feminist educational theorists of the value of interaction in creating
interdependence in the learning sequence , there is also evidence that many students deliberately choose learning programs
that allow them to minimize the amount of student-teacher and student-student interaction
required . Over the years, in my own distance teaching, I have been
informally polling students about the relative advantage and disadvantage of various forms of
mediated and face-to-face, synchronous and asynchronous, educational activities. From these
polls, I conclude that there is a wide range of need and preference for different combinations of
paced and un-paced, synchronous and asynchronous activity, and also a strong desire for variety
and exposure to different modes and modularities of educational provision and activity.
From these observations and from the literature debate, I have developed an equivalency theorem
as follows.
Deep and meaningful formal learning is supported as long as one of the three
forms of interaction (student–teacher; student-student; student-content) is at a
high level. The other two may be offered at minimal levels, or even eliminated,
without degrading the educational experience.
High levels of more than one of these three modes will likely provide a more
satisfying educational experience, though these experiences may not be as cost or
time effective as less interactive learning sequences.
This theorem implies that an instructional designer can substitute one type of interaction for one
of the others (at the same level) with little loss in educational effectiveness – thus the label of an
equivalency theory. There are a number of other corollaries and implications based on the current
post-industrial education context that can be drawn from this theorem, and I have attempted to
provide a start at this process in the following lists.
Student Interaction
Quality educational programming requires high levels of interaction by students in at
least one area, and can substitute for minimal to no interaction in the other two.
Student-teacher interaction currently has the highest perceived value amongst students,
and thus commands highest market value.
Some student-teacher interactions can be automated, and thus substituted in whole or
part, through the development and use of content resources, and especially those utilizing
autonomous teacher agents. This practice migrates Net based forms of student-teacher
interaction (emails, conferencing discussion, etc.) to student-content interactions (teacher
videos, virtual labs, personalized FAQs, etc.).
Most forms of student-content interaction can be recorded and displayed asynchronously
to substitute for student-student interaction by time or technology bound students.
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
Student-student interaction is critical for skill proficiency needed for collaborative or
cooperative tasks. Thus, most effective learning to reach these goals maximizes studentstudent interaction.
Student-content interaction is most accessible, and most readily adapted, via
individualized “student portfolios,” that can influence design, assessment, or delivery
customizations (mass customization).
Teacher Interaction
Traditional approaches to teaching of each discipline, biases teachers towards different
mixes of interaction.
Teacher-student interaction is generally the least scaleable type of interaction, and thus is
usually substituted for by student-content interaction in mass education systems.
Teacher agents can perform many of the functions that currently consume teacher time,
especially those of a bookkeeping, clerical, or organizational nature, thus migrating
teacher-student and teacher-content interaction to content-student and content-content
interaction.
Some teacher interaction can be transformed into learning objects (videos, animations,
assessment programs etc.), thus migrating student-teacher interaction to student-content
interaction.
As professional students of their discipline, teachers, need professional development and
knowledge building opportunities throughout their careers. Deep and meaningful learning
to a professional, requires high levels of interaction in at least one of teacher-teacher;
teacher-learner; teacher-content domains. High levels of one, allow for reductions in the
other two.
Teacher-teacher collaboration is critical to the current model of university based research
production and evaluation.
Content Interaction
Content, having only volition ascribed to it by humans, is the most flexible of actors,
“willing” to undertake any combination and quantity of interaction.
The cost and restrictions on value of content interaction is falling much faster than
interaction involving the other two forms of interaction (Moore’s and Metcalfe’s Laws),
and thus is expanding in all areas, putting a premium value and cost on human based
interaction: student-student, student-teacher, and teacher-teacher.
The semantic Web provides an environment in which content can be
formalized and manipulated, stored, searched, and computed automatically through
autonomous agent technologies. Such capacity will allow development of much more
useful teacher and learner agents, encouraging migration to content-based forms of
interaction.
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
The value of the content is dependent on the extent to which it engages students or
teachers in interaction, leading to relevant knowledge construction. There is also a direct
relationship between this capacity for interaction and resulting engagement, mindfulness,
and motivation.
Assessing the Level of Interactivity
Differentiating between high and low levels of interactivity is largely a quantitative exercise in
which a researcher, developer, or the participants themselves, count the number of times they are
actively engaged with the other participants or content. There is some evidence to suggest value
in “vicarious interaction,” in which non-active participants gain from observing and empathizing
with active participants . However, high levels of
interaction generally require the actors to be personally active and engaged in the interaction.
Although there will be qualitative differences in the extent of individual involvement in the
interaction, these differences are largely individualized and difficult to prescribe or assess across
the large numbers of participants typically found in current education systems. Thus, for planning
or development purposes, designers are encouraged to build into their programs strategic amounts
of each type of interaction, and to develop activities that will encourage this amount of
interaction.
Examples of Applying the Equivalency Theorem to
Popular Education Delivery Modes
The following examples illustrate the operation of the equivalency theorem in most common
forms of campus and distance delivered education systems.
Classroom Delivery
The traditional lecture mode of delivery has medium levels of student-teacher interaction, usually
low levels of student-student interaction, and medium to low levels of student-content interaction.
For these reasons, I am not alone in critiquing the lecture format , and note its
historical genesis in being read to from scarce content (hand-scribed books). Its value in an era of
ubiquitous content is thus reduced. Recent efforts at enhancing lecture theatres through use of
multimedia equipment, and especially enabling access to net resources in “smart classrooms,”
will increase the quality of student-content interaction, and thus the potential to increase levels of
deep and meaningful learning.
Efforts at enhancing teacher-student interaction through an increase in teacher immediacy
 , or through use of theatrical or multimedia presentation
techniques, can also be expected to increase the quality of student-teacher interaction. Further
efforts at enhancing student-student interaction in the classroom through case or problem based
learning activities, have long been shown to increase not only student achievement, but also
student completion and enjoyment rates . In these types of activities, increased
student-student interaction is substituting for student-teacher interaction.
When classroom delivery takes the form of a traditional seminar among relatively small numbers
of students and a teacher, the levels of student-student and student-teacher interaction increase
with generally increased levels of learning and satisfaction. Access to “smart classroom”
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
technologies is generally less necessary in seminars, as high levels of learning are already being
achieved through high levels of student-student and student-teacher interaction.
Traditional Distance Education Delivered via
Mail or Electronic Correspondence
In this mode, specially designed independent study materials are constructed with the explicit
intent of providing high levels of student-content interaction. As noted, attention to the creation of
a personal voice in the content, and attention to ways to create “guided didactic interaction” in the
text materials, can create high levels of student-content interaction. In more recent times,
independent study materials have been delivered electronically and enhanced through addition of
java applets, automated testing, and quiz forms of feedback, simulations, adaptive computer
assisted instruction, and other applications of “learning objects.” Each of these technologies
enhances student-content interaction and thus, if well designed and applied appropriately, is likely
to enhance the learning experience. Student-teacher interaction is possible in independent study,
but generally does not happen to a great extent with the majority of learners .
Rather, efforts are made to create study paths that allow students to learn with minimal amounts
of interaction with the teacher, other than to provide occasional formative and definite summative
student assessment. Student-student interaction is also usually minimized allowing for maximum
flexibility, start and finish times for courses, and capacity for students to set their own pace
through the learning content. Thus, independent study provides high levels of learning by
maximizing student-content interaction, and getting away with minimal amounts of studentteacher and student-student interaction.
Having stated that student-teacher interaction is generally low, there are ways in which it can be
expanded in a cost effective manner. In particular, the call centre system developed at Athabasca
University allows students extended access (7 days a week, 12 hours a day) to call centre staff
who are equipped with frequently asked question databases, course syllabi, and a limited amount
of content knowledge to answer a wide variety of student inquiries in timely fashion. Adria and
Woudstra report that over 80 per cent of questions and concerns from over 11,000
registered students are handled successfully by call centre staff, thereby reducing the cost of
administration related student-teacher interaction, and allowing more time for high quality
academic interaction.
Audio and Video Conferencing
Audio and video conferencing provide slightly less accessible and ‘leaner’ interaction between
and amongst teachers and students, due to the inherent technological distance between students
and teachers imposed by the mediating technology. There is a further reduction in paralinguistic
clues in audio teleconferencing as opposed to video conferencing, so that, in sum, there are only
medium levels of student-teacher interaction. Student–content interaction is also at medium levels
– if the conferences are enhanced with graphics or Net cruising capability as is supported in many
of the new Internet-based conferencing systems now appearing on the market. High levels of
student-student interaction are possible and, indeed, this level is the mantra of proponents of
synchronous conferencing education systems .
However, there is much anecdotal and some empirical evidence that
teachers often use the media almost exclusively for delivery of lectures. If the conference is
designed to support high levels of student-student interaction, then there is high potential for high
levels of learning. I have been particularly struck by the differences in the amount and intensity of
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
student-student interaction, as delivery of video and audio conferencing has moved from the
dedicated learning center to the home or workplace. We documented the extent of ‘side-talk’ –
student-student interaction in the learning center that was not shared with other sites or the
teacher. We found that in more than half of the time, these student-student interactions were both
on track and conducive to learning . Now, as we progress to
delivery directly to individual homes and offices, I notice a drop off of student-student interaction
as the side-talk channel is reduced or eliminated, and the distractions of home life or alluring
availability of Web surfing and email, increase the challenge of engaging students in studentstudent or student-teacher interaction.
Web-based Courses
The current stampede of educational institutions to mount and deliver “Web courses” has given
rise to a large variation of models and modes of delivery. All use the Web differently, making
categorization difficult. Web-based courses delivered using audio or video graphic systems such
as Centra or E-Luminate share the same technical and pedagogical strengths and weaknesses of
earlier video and audio-graphic systems. Canned streaming video lectures share more
characteristics with the delivery classroom in which they were captured, than more radical forms
of instructional design that the Web is capable of supporting. Earlier forms of computer assisted
instruction are now being ported to the Web, thus reducing the inconvenience and cost of burning
and distributing CDs, while retaining most of the pedagogical characteristics of their earlier
instructional format.
The most common, and currently most pedagogically attractive, forms of Web delivery described
in the literature are those based upon extensive use of text based computer mediated
communications. In our content analysis studies of transcripts of these interactions , we
have shown how creation of adequate levels of cognitive, social, and teaching presence are
associated with high levels of deep and meaningful learning. This form of distance delivery
places a premium on quality student-student interaction that is supported in a format that allows
for asynchronous reflection and scholarly expression in text format. This high level of studentstudent interaction capacity allows for reduced student-teacher interaction, the capacity to make
effective use of peer moderators , and facilitates students sharing
and discussing student-content learning resources gathered or created by students .
I am also impressed with the capacity of the Web to support enhanced levels of content
interaction, and for autonomous agents to be created to assist both teachers and students in the
educational process. For example, work by the Open Digital Markup Language defines “an
extensible language and vocabulary (data dictionary) for the expression of terms and conditions
over any content including permissions, constraints, obligations, conditions, and offers and
agreements with rights holders” . ODRL can thus
be configured to allow content itself control, monitor, and manage access to it by students and
teachers. An excellent example of the use of student agents is the I-Help system developed by Jim
Greer and his colleagues at the University of Saskatchewan . This system
allows each student to create an agent that seeks out and negotiates with other student agents for
personalized assistance and help (provided by email by other students). The system selects and
values previous student assistance, finds those students who are most available and most
knowledgeable, and negotiates a fee for services rendered. Thus, the system is stimulating and
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
tracking student-student interaction, allowing less dependence on student-teacher or studentcontent interaction as predicted by my equivalence theorem.
An Interaction-based Model of e-Learning
This interaction theorem leads us to view education as resulting from the creation of opportunities
for each of the three major actors to interact with each other. This interaction is modeled in Figure
Figure 2. A Model of Online learning
The model in Figure 2 illustrates the two major human actors – learners and teachers, and their
interactions with each other and with content. Learners can, of course, interact directly with
content that they find in multiple formats, and especially on the Web, however many choose to
have their learning sequenced, directed, and credentialed through the assistance of a teacher. This
interaction can take place within a community of inquiry (left side of Figure 2) using a variety of
Net-based synchronous and asynchronous (video, audio, computer conferencing, chats, or virtual
world) interaction. These environments are particularly rich and encourage the development of
social skills, collaborative learning, and the development of personal relationships amongst
participants as components of the learning process. However, the community binds learners in
time, forcing regularly sessions or at least group paced learning. Community models are also
generally more expensive as they suffer from an inability to scale to large numbers of learners.
For example, many proponents of computer conferencing based learning place a practical limit
less than 30 students per teacher facilitated class . A second model of learning (on
the right of Figure 2) illustrates the learning tools and activities associated with independent
learning. Common tools used in this mode include computer assisted learning tutorials, drills,
synthesis of content retrieved from the Net and simulations. Virtual labs in which students
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
complete simulations of lab experiments, and sophisticated search and retrieval tools, are also
becoming common tools for learning individually. Texts in either print (and now distributed and
read online) have long been used as the basis for conveying teacher interpretations and insights
into knowledge in independent study. However, it should also be emphasized, that although
engaged in independent study, the independent study student is not alone. Often colleagues in the
workplace, peers located locally or distributed across the Net, and family, have been shown to be
significant sources of support and assistance to independent study learners .
The model helps instantiate the interaction theory by showing a sample of particular technologies
and learning activities that a designer or teacher selects when developing an effective course or
learning sequence.
Conclusion
The equivalency theorem proposed in this paper is not as complicated nor as technically detailed
as other theories relevant to distance education .
However, its simplicity allows it to function as an accessible heuristic for distance education
delivery design. The role of theory in science, education, and particularly instructional design has
been much discussed and is seen as multifaceted. My intent with
this article has not been to generate “grand theory” that explains and predicts behavior in a system
as complex as an educational interaction. Nor has it my intent to develop the type of logicodeductive theory valued in the natural sciences for their capacity to generate testable hypotheses.
Rather, it has more in common with grounded theory investigation , in
which researchers are urged to go beyond description of data to generate inferences about
phenomena they encounter in order that both researchers and practitioners are better able to
interpret their findings, and meaningfully and purposively change their practice.
Wilson described three functions that a good educational theory performs. First, it helps to
envision new worlds. The interaction equivalency theorem illustrates our capacity to effectively
substitute one form of interaction for another. Getting the mix right involves a series of tradeoffs,
and knowing how one type of interaction can effectively substitute for another, provides an
essential decision making skill in the distance educators’ knowledge base. Second, a good theory
helps us make things. As new communications technology are brought to market, they seek their
place in the arsenal of available tools, propelled by often effusive praise of early adopters and
salespersons with vested interests. This theory helps us to position them and make judgments as
to their potential effectiveness and efficiency in program planning. Finally, Wilson argues that a
good theory keeps us honest. I hope this small theoretical piece encourages dialogue within our
community of practice. It challenges us to critically evaluate just how much of the educational
process can be composed of interaction with non-human entities, and further, to consider how
much of the human interaction should take place face-to-face or in real time. These questions are
not easily answered, but such reflective discourse is critical to the growth of our discipline and
individual practice. It is also apparent that this theorem is a developing work that will benefit
from comments, critiques, and expansion by other researchers and distance education
practitioners.
Many distance educators come to their profession with a profound commitment to humanize the
distance education process through provision of effective student-teacher interaction. These
educators are threatened by models of distance education that are designed to reduce cost and
access, primarily by reducing or even eliminating student-teacher interaction. The theorem and
model described in this paper provides examples of many types of effective distance education
Anderson ~ Getting the Mix Right Again: An updated and theoretical rationale for interaction
programming based upon a variety of types and mixes of interaction. I am convinced that many
of these alternatives should be focused on creating the most cost effective and accessible
alternatives that can scale to meet the burgeoning global demand for effective and affordable life
long learning opportunities. In most cases, these models will drastically reduce the amount of
teacher-student interaction, and substitute it with increased student-student and student-content
interaction. For many, this scenario is a frightening one, but one that is in keeping with our
tradition of expanding educational access and opportunity, and thus not one we should abhor.