Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
The Challenges of Online Learning
Supporting and Engaging the Isolated Learner
Jenna Gillett-Swan
Queensland University of Technology
 
Higher education providers are becoming increasingly aware of the diversity
of their current and potential learners and are moving to provide a range of
options for their engagement. The increasingly flexible delivery modes
available for university students provide multiple pathways and opportunities
for those seeking further education. In changing between and across modes,
a one-size-fits-all approach is often used. That is, internal content is
converted into a form deemed suitable for an external delivery. However,
there is a significant problem with the one-size-fits-all approach for external
students who feel or experience isolation. When compared to their internal
counterparts, these students often face a number of barriers to their full
participation in coursework units. These barriers may not be experienced by
those engaging in these same units via face-to-face or blended enrolment
modes and therefore present another type of learner to consider in the
planning and implementation of learning activities online. The barriers to
participation appear particularly evident in groupwork activities. The online
environment also presents challenges for many academic staff who
increasingly require higher levels of technological competency and
proficiency on top of their regular academic workload. Drawing on
reflections of several years of facilitating student learning online, this paper
provides one lecturer’s perspective and critical commentary on some of the
challenges faced by external students and the implications of an increasingly
online delivery framework for practice.
external students, isolated learners, technology, challenges, online learning,
competence
Introduction
Higher education providers are becoming increasingly aware of the diversity of their current and
potential learners. This is demonstrated by their providing a range of options for their engagement.
Increasingly flexible delivery modes are available for university students provide multiple
pathways and opportunities for those seeking further education . This could
be through “traditional” face-to-face delivery (internal), online (external), or mixed (blended)
modes of enrolment. Even within these enrolment modes, students often opt to undertake different
units (subjects) in different ways . As universities increasingly move towards
fully online and blended teaching modes, there is much discussion as to what this means for
pedagogy . While many of the practices that are used in face-to-face contact modes can be
adapted and utilised in the online context, it is not simply the case of applying a “one size fits all
approach” which is what teaching staff relatively unfamiliar with the online environment tend to
do. This is where either the content or delivery used in other, usually face-to-face contexts, is
adapted to a seemingly compatible online format and therefore deemed suitable for all learners and
cohorts across each mode. Instead, scales of adaptation and differentiation within the approach
should be used to better differentiate between different learners as well as different contexts of
teaching via online and live modes.
When it comes to technology, Orlando and Attard stated that “teaching with technology is
not a one size fits all approach as it depends on the types of technology in use at the time and also
the curriculum content being taught” (p. 119). This means that the incorporation of technology
provides additional factors for consideration in terms of teaching pedagogy and construction of
learning experiences. Despite this, it is “often taken for granted that technologies can ‘enhance
learning’” with the prevailing assumption becoming that
technological incorporation, learning enhancement, and student engagement are mutually and
inextricably linked. However, in creating individually tailored differentiated instruction for each
learner within and across each cohort, additional workload pressures on those seeking to engage
with the online environment can be created as teaching staff seek to respond, often reactively, to
the individual learning and engagements needs of each cohort.
The problems with a “one size fits all” approach are particularly highlighted in collaborative
learning tasks (group work) where individual differences between and across cohorts can be
highlighted. This may be because the generalised pedagogical assumptions associated with
collaborative learning tasks are often applied to the online environment where there may be less
focus on the delivery and more attention to the task/content .
Therefore, the assumption that students will both know and be able to work in groups regardless of
mode prevails through a seemingly universal one-size-fits-all application. In addition to the typical
challenges that students can experience in group activities regardless of mode, the online
environment presents added challenges for the external or isolated learner particularly through
considerations around their engagement, access, community, and support. In reflecting on a
lecturer’s perspective for facilitating learning online, this paper offers strategies for those
preparing to teach in an online environment focused around pedagogical strategies for supporting
learners through the development and facilitation of group presentation collaborative learning
activities. Based on several years of experience, the following insights are provided to encourage
those with uncertainty or inexperience in facilitating an online learning environment a starting
point so that they can understand and support their learners.
The isolated learner
The barriers to participation that external students may experience are particularly evident in
collaborative learning tasks through group work, group presentations and group assessments
 . Some of the issues
experienced can be personal such as: anxiety associated with using technology; being out of one’s
comfort zone; (perception of) inequity in assessment, particularly in “group” assignments; and, the
(perceived) inability or difficulty in peer interaction, particularly in presentations. Despite the best
intentions of teaching staff to provide equitable and beneficial learning experiences for all
students, regardless of enrolment mode, many academic staff members feel apprehensive and not
suitably equipped to teach via wholly (or mostly) online particularly as they themselves may be
still learning to use some of the platforms . This can leave learners in an
isolated place where they may also have varying levels of competency and proficiency using
different forms of IT and are therefore somewhat on their own when it comes to the online
learning environment through different Learning Management Systems (LMS). This is particularly
highlighted in collaborative learning tasks where individuals may be barely managing to navigate
the system on their own, let alone needing to traverse the complex environments of group
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
interaction and social negotiation . While
group work is an important element within education that aids in developing numerous
interpersonal and transferable employable skills, an increasing number of potential hurdles to
achievement beyond those commonly associated with traditional group work experiences may
serve to further alienate isolated learners causing their disengagement, withdrawal, or ultimate
exclusion from engaging with and accessing the course materials and associated learning activities.
While the online environment provides opportunities for the ways education is delivered and
accessed by learners, assessment practices are often limited in the variety and modes in which they
are allocated in the online environment . For example,
where group presentations within the tertiary environment have been traditionally conducted via
predominantly face-to-face mediums ,
the online environment presents additional opportunities for summative assessment with group
presentations that are not limited to a solely live option. Even so, online group presentation
assessments do not appear to be common practice which may be due to some of the difficulties
experienced by both students and academics in using an online delivery platform . This is where “the sharing of ‘good practice’ and ‘lessons learned’ among
members of the higher education community can help academic teachers concentrate on effective
uses of technology and to avoid the unnecessary duplication of effort and expense” .
University students choosing to undertake study online have indicated a preference for online
assessment and often perceive their learning experiences to be enhanced through online media
 . However, the preferences may be different for those with limited choice in
delivery mode because of additional work or the family commitments that may restrict their ability
to engage in alternative and perhaps preferred face-to-face or blended enrolment modes . Within the context of pre-service teacher education,
the implementation of online assessment also serves to enhance their knowledge and
understanding of ways to use new technologies in their future teaching practice . Extending this, it might also provide preparation for Business
graduates in their future participation in online meetings or collaborations. This experience, in
turn, provides additional benefits for student learning beyond the unit level. An increasingly digital
world highlights the importance of proficiency in interaction and experience using technology as a
communicative medium.
Increasingly, students in all disciplines, including those in business, management, and education,
are choosing to study while engaged in varying degrees of employment .
These students have the flexibility of opting for part-time and/or external modes of study to
provide increased options for interaction, participation, and ultimately completion of their degree
programs . This range of additional factors therefore serves to further
isolate the multitasking external student as increasing numbers of barriers to success are put in
place. It is therefore vital that focused consideration of these cohorts and ways to better facilitate
their participation are discussed . Many of these students also bring with
them varying levels of confidence and familiarity with using technology to engage in university
units and despite communicated preferences for online submission modes, also exhibit
apprehension and anxiety around completing group assessments online.
Alongside the increasing digitalisation of many workplaces, new “types” of learners emerge who
may be more digitally competent than previous generations due to their “digital native” status
 . However, assumptions around technological capacity
and proficiency serve little benefit when considering collaborative learning tasks. Instead, the
focus should primarily be on how the interactions and group work tasks can be supported and
facilitated, rather than the mode or means for doing so. To this end, the importance of facilitating
and supporting social interaction and relationship development is important . The assumption that growing up around technology and having
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
greater access to technology would make one more digitally capable is erroneous as individuals
may still have a preference for non-technological mediums, and have varying levels of competence
and capacity with digital platforms. Furthermore, external student cohorts may also consist of
mature age (non-digitally native students), which further complicates the assumption of digital
preference, digital competency and digital ability for online learners. Therefore, regardless of the
demographic of the cohort, assumptions around technological preference and capacities should be
sidelined at least until the necessary social and peer support mechanisms are in place. Adapting to
the online environment can be a challenge for both facilitators and students alike .
This does not necessarily mean that a facilitator with less proficiency or confidence in navigating
digital technologies will not be able to provide suitable and beneficial learning experiences for
external students. Jaques and Salmon described the significance of recognising the
importance of understanding learners and their capabilities as comparable to choosing what
technologies to use. The importance of building relationships in the online environment both
between facilitator and student(s) and student/student is reinforced if seeking to facilitate group
activities, as relationships are central to effective group work.
In addition to social relationship building as enhancing the student experience online, other factors
that play a significant role in student success in the online space include cognitive complexity and
intellectual stimulation. As Boling et al. described, “it is now more important than ever for
online instructors to provide students with experiences that challenge their higher-order cognitive
skills as opposed to simply transferring content to them” (p. 118). The ability of an instructor to
facilitate and develop student higher-order thinking skills is equally important in both online and
face-to-face delivery modes particularly when seeking to engage students in group activities.
While the specific scaffolding may be slightly different for internal and external student cohorts,
the outcomes still seek to optimise student learning while making use of the potential of the
electronic platform in different ways (e.g., synchronously or asynchronously). Drawing upon the
advantages and flexibility inherent within the online environment provides wide-ranging
opportunities for assessment that can incorporate a range of technologies that are not limited by the
technological limitations present in a more traditional, face-to-face environment and presentation
modes .
The range of synchronous and asynchronous modes of communication that can be used in the
online learning environment present additional opportunities for interaction and participation for
externally enrolled students particularly in relation to group work activities . This is in the ways that students interact with one another, interact with the teaching staff,
and interact with the content/subject matter through multiple formats .
Additional benefits such as the ability for both facilitators and peers to offer help in “real time,”
the adaptability of the environment in catering for individuals, and the ability for students to have
a greater participatory role in the design of the learning environment, each contribute to the
rationale for incorporating online learning approaches in education and as a
way that both students and facilitators can better support the isolated learner.
Online Group Assessments
The ability for immediate feedback to be provided through the online environment also enhances
the potential for assessment delivered and submitted in this way . Problems of
assessment such as technical issues, complexity, sequencing of activities and learning a new
medium have been identified as presenting obstacles to the incorporation of multimedia
application and assessment in the learning environment . However, greater student participation and access to learning may be enabled by
removing some of the barriers experienced by externally enrolled students, particularly in the
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
context of online group assessments. Providing additional scaffolding to support the student online
learning experience as well as embracing the flexibility inherent in the online
environment can also support these processes and more fully involve the isolated learner in the online learning
and group work experiences.
There may be an assumption that students studying externally will be disadvantaged in group
presentations when compared to the group presentation delivery and activities that can be
completed by their face-to-face peers. As such, group presentations are less frequently
incorporated in the online assessment repertoire than other types of group work activities. When
considering group assessment for example, it appears to be slightly more complicated to facilitate
real-time online interaction when you may have students “dialling in” from different time zones
who each have varying Internet capabilities and speeds. When provided with multiple study and
enrolment options, the “isolated” student is often one who opts to study in this way to provide
increased flexibility in engagement and participation to cater for their other commitments such as
work, child-care, travel, volunteer work, international study, or other caring responsibilities. How
then can equitable and comparable group assessment experiences be provided that do not
disadvantage either cohort of student (internal/external) and similarly do not cause any additional
undue stress or tension beyond what could be reasonably expected when completing any university
assessment task?
It is becoming increasingly apparent that even students who are enrolled internally are choosing to
engage as a group using their own forms of technology to facilitate their own learning experiences
and interactions online . This is done through online mediums such as Google
Communities or Facebook Groups where, despite having access to face-to-face interaction options,
students plan, meet, practice, research, discuss, and prepare their group presentations in the online
environment. This provides an opportunity for those involved in facilitating online learning
environments to rethink the way that assessments are constructed between and across cohorts as
well as ways to collaboratively involve both internal and external cohorts. Supporting this is the
notion of “boundary-less groups” where different modes and models of group formation and outcomes are enabled. These
groups involve flexibility in technology and face-to-face interaction in the ability for group work
to be facilitated in different combinations of same time/same place (in person or online), same
time/different place through synchronous communication mechanisms, or asynchronously
accessed at different times, in different places. As Jaques and Salmon explained, “as long
as each individual has time not only to become relaxed with technology, but also to other members
of the group without meeting, there are many advantages” (p. 20). This, in turn, supports the
isolated student by way of technological proficiency and competence, social support, interaction,
and skill development.
As students are increasingly tending towards using online media in ways of their choosing, there is
tremendous potential for both internal and external students to be able to work together for group
presentations as a collective cohort, particularly if there is no blended mode offering. This
internal/external hybrid option via “boundary-less grouping” should be considered differently to
blended enrolment modes as the cohorts of internal and external students can still operate as both
distinct and hybrid forms within and across the various enrolment modes offered within each unit.
In the same way that students studying online can choose to meet face-to-face if they can arrange
it, those studying face-to-face are increasingly choosing to meet online. This challenges
assumptions around disadvantage in groupwork when completing units externally as there is no
difference between the ways that students studying externally have to engage and the ways that
those students studying internally choose to engage. The only difference then between the cohorts
is the element of choice in the decisions. Even this can be mediated through staff providing (and
accepting) a range of submission modes that are open for all cohorts such as face-to-face, video, or
Skype/live online presentations .
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
An applied example
As a consequence of continual improvement and redesign of units to maximise student-learning
experiences, student preference for using online media in combination with a staggered face-toface approach was able to be tested for two units across two universities. This emerged through a
significant change to each unit where, instead of offering both external and internal modes of
enrolment, all students were provided a face-to-face class at the start of semester and flexibility in
engagement with the teaching staff and peers throughout the remaining weeks using online
platforms of their choosing. While the reflections and observations discussed thus far were not the
driver of this significant change in learning design, they did enable further observations to examine
whether both internal and external students were tending towards online engagement regardless of
their enrolled delivery mode. The findings could therefore be used to inform subsequent practice
and external unit delivery.
Despite previous anecdotal evidence and a prevailing assumption that so-called millennials ) have a preference towards technological media, there
was a significant decrease in engagement, participation and interaction when this flexibility was
provided. For example, based on LMS analytic data, interaction and participation from a class of
40 students decreased significantly within a 3-week period from around 95% interaction in the first
week dropping to 37% interaction by Week 3 with no interaction using the agreed platforms from
Week 5 onwards. This is despite each class group of students choosing their platform (e.g., Google
Community, Facebook, Collaborate, and Wiki) and the facilitator encouraging interaction through
weekly prompt questions and topics in the same way they would engage in face-to-face classes.
This is also despite all students (internal and external alike) indicating via either anonymous online
survey or live class poll at the start of semester that their preference would be to make more use
the online delivery platform. In each unit, while the content/subject-matter did not change, the
flexibility in accessing the content did. That is, all content for all weeks of each of the units was
available from the start of semester. This meant that students could engage with the content at a
pace of their choosing provided they completed (at the minimum) the topic assigned to the week.
The increased flexibility provided through the freedom to engage and the open accessibility of
content may have instead meant that many students deprioritised engaging with the content as they
could do it “at any time” rather than via a gradual release.
While the assessment for one of the units remained the same, the assessment for the other unit
changed from a group to an individual presentation. While it could be questioned whether the
noticeable decrease in interaction and engagement was also due to the change in assessment from a
group to individual presentation (live or video) in that students no longer “needed” to interact with
their peers to succeed in the unit, this conclusion may only be able to be applied to one of the units
as the assessment for the other unit did not change. This presents an interesting dichotomy where
students may be increasingly tending towards preference for the online medium when it comes to
group presentations and group assignments, but ultimately still prefer the face-to-face and live
interaction of individually focused units/tasks. This is somewhat ironic when the online medium
appears to favour individualised rather than group tasks to enable greater engagement and
flexibility in interaction.
Questions around structured versus self-directed and self-regulated learning and group versus individual tasks further complicate an already complicated area of online
delivery and practice. In this space, catering for the individual learning needs and individual
differences of each of the learners may present some additional challenges than in a face-to-face
context. While students can go “underneath the radar” in both online and face-to-face learning
environments, unless a student reaches out or makes their issues known to the facilitator, the
online environment means that students that may benefit from additional support or assistance may
be missed. A struggling face-to-face student may turn up to class and not ask any questions, but
the facilitator can still determine that they are in need of support through observing the
interactions, participation, and circulating during the learning activities. The student’s physical
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
attendance may be their silent request for help. This is in contrast to the online learning
environment where the facilitator may never actually “see” any of the students. They may see the
posts online or various levels of interaction and engagement, but without being able to use tools
commonly used by teachers to identify those in need of further assistance or support, those in need
of help may go unnoticed. This may be despite the facilitator making regular individual contact
with each student, checking for understanding, and offering various support or access to external
support. Does the flexibility inherent in the online environment then serve to further isolate the
already isolated learner? While the insights above reflect on the implementation and redesign of
two units, previous and subsequent delivery of these and other units online reveal that these are
consistent challenges observed and experienced by both students and facilitators alike.
Reflecting on implications for tertiary educational practice
Online media can provide multiple benefits for both staff and students in supporting students’
learning experiences particularly for isolated students . Despite student acknowledgement of the benefits in
supporting their learning through the technology, a difficulty arises through the limits around the
technical capability of the software particularly in terms of its functionality. As revealed through
student feedback and experience from numerous online classes over several years, this can often
be a source of frustration for students and facilitators/staff as it can make normally simple tasks
such as viewing a video increasingly complex. Additionally, when completing assessments, such
as group presentations online, the comparatively limited ability to interact face-to-face and draw
upon non-verbal cues and body language of the audience can be an inhibiting factor. Even so, the
importance of being able to engage your viewers/listeners/colleagues using an online, sometimes
not visual (e.g., teleconference) format is an increasingly important skill in the modern workplace
and emphasises the importance of clear, concise, and focused communication skills . The accessibility and ease of access of the online medium tends to make it an easier
platform for a group assignment than providing limited or no focused support. Some of the ways
that these barriers can be reduced involve regular emails (weekly from pre-semester), drop-in
sessions, step-by-step instructions for how to access and use each of the platforms and
technologies, overviews of how sessions will be run, expectations, ability to access information
and sessions at other times, reminders for what should be prepared for each week, interactive
schedules through the LMS, user-friendly layout in LMS, and opportunities for consultation
(online, off-line and via email). For this reason, a number of strategies (such as those outlined
above) can be incorporated that require little facilitator expertise and competency but can have
significant effects on supporting students and their learning outcomes in the online space .
With an apparent increase in both internal and external student preference for using online media
(e.g., through social media) in the preparation, establishment and management of group
assignments, additional possibilities for assessment are potentiated . For
example, blended delivery classrooms with blended group presentations or cross-mode
presentations where the internal students deliver to the external classes and vice versa. Future
delivery could offer opportunities for group formation to consist of both internal and external
students moving towards a more “blended” approach embedded in multi-offering units rather than
the internal and external student cohorts being considered as wholly distinct and different.
Experience with a wider range of delivery modes and exposure to less common assessment
methods would be particularly useful for these students in developing their pre-industry experience
to enable a wider repertoire of work-ready skills to be developed.
However, when considering the earlier example where students engaged less with technology
despite having additional flexibility and freedom of choice, it becomes apparent that it may not
necessarily be the medium that is the preference. Instead, the medium may merely be the mode for
facilitating interaction among students to aid in developing a sense of community where mutual
goals can be obtained . The students then experience a
sense of belonging to the online group and an intrinsic desire to engage, participate and actively
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
contribute to the learning experiences. A challenge therefore remains for the facilitator to find a
platform that can effectively encourage and develop a sense of community online amongst the
students and with the facilitator while also extending their skills, confidence and capabilities
utilising the online form to reduces the anxieties associated with engaging in learning in this way.
Challenges in the online space and limitations of specific LMS software such as BlackBoard
Collaborate (e.g., video features/capabilities) can slow down interaction and provide limits to
functionality while also adding to the time limitations and frustrations experienced by both
facilitators/staff and students. It may also contribute to the sense of community and shared
frustration with the cohort. In this way, students and staff are brought together to collaboratively
overcome challenges experienced in the online space in the same way they might work together to
overcome technological challenges together in their future work environments. Even though the
planning and delivery of activities in tutorials can be adapted to cater for the technological
limitations of different software, the online experience could be more streamlined and smooth with
using more features and functionality with the software or a greater ability to work to the existing
capabilities of the software and still be able to deliver a comparable experience.
Personal factors can also impact on student access and participation in the online learning
environment . Commitments such as caring for young children or being
called into work can affect the attendance and participation of students in regularly scheduled
tutorials/live sessions. In the same way that the external student pathway offers increased access,
flexibility and convenience in that students can more easily manage their commitments while
engaging in education, this increased flexibility can also cause additional issues through
distractions and an inability to fully participate in any live, scheduled contact hours per week. This
occurs even if students nominate specific days/times (often well before/after hours) to have a live
session each week so they could schedule it in. Some examples of personal factors that impact
student ability to participate include, caring responsibilities (e.g., “Sorry guys, the baby is crying,
I’ll be back in a while”) or employment responsibilities (e.g., “Work just called, I have to go”). A
question then arises as to whether providing flexibility in ways to access education (i.e., online
rather than face-to-face) can provide students with as complete an education as if they were
participating in a distraction-free environment. A comparison of attendance records over the
semester across a sample of internal tutorials for the same unit revealed that there was significantly
higher consistent attendance in the weekly tutorials than the attendance in the sample internal
tutorials. This indicated that while the external students may have short term personal factors that
may have distracted or directed their attention away from the learning experiences provided
through the live sessions, as a whole they were significantly more committed to attending and
making the most of the opportunity provided through flexibility in engagement. It is better that the
students have opportunities to engage with some/most of the available content than not at all.
Transferability to “real world” contexts
Even with the ever-evolving tertiary education landscape in the online environment across
different university contexts and disciplines, it is apparent that students have an ongoing desire to
learn and develop practical skills – an area that students often feel is underrepresented through
their degree outside practical work experience opportunities . While the links between unit content, assessment and discipline specific
knowledge is clearer in some disciplines than others, student feedback suggests that, as a whole,
they often see theory and practice as separate rather than interrelated and interwoven elements.
The 21st century world is becoming increasingly digitised which is another reason why it is
important for academics to be more aware of the specifics of their cohorts and learners and find
ways to engage with and support isolated learners. The tools and techniques used throughout each
unit’s program can be used in reciprocal ways where students can provide feedback to the teaching
staff, receive feedback from the teaching staff, and also see how their feedback informs subsequent
practice and delivery in real-time, rather than for the (potential) benefit of future students. These
are strategies that also replicate what they will likely experience in the workforce regardless of
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
discipline, from management (e.g., 360 degree feedback processes), teaching (e.g., behaviour
management, student feedback and assessment), to general communication skills (e.g., responding
to emails, pitching ideas, developing professional relationships).
Even though a facilitator may incorporate a range of activities and learning experiences that
explores unit content in a variety of ways, explicitly indicating the real-world links and articulating
how specific industry skills are being developed through the activities and making those
connections clearer for the students aids in demonstrating relevance of the content and increasing
student engagement . Incorporating flexibility within learning
environments allows discussions to evolve when deconstructing content and a number of ways to
explore the subject matter to develop while also fostering the sense of community and building
relationships.
Diversity in their own learning and assessment experiences adds to university students’ workready toolkits in providing them with direct experience of different ways to cater for a diverse
range of individuals in a variety of contexts and settings that they may interact with in their future
work environments. Further diversification of assessment tasks that include both internal and
external cohorts may be a worthwhile implementation for academics seeking to engage with the
online space in different ways and planning online teaching practices. This would also aid in
addressing some of the interaction limitations identified by external students in their preference to
have access to a range of ways to interact with their peers.
Conclusion
The reflections presented throughout this paper have provided an overview for considering some
of the contexts around external student cohorts and how some of the (perceived) barriers to
external student participation can be overcome. Through emphasising the importance of providing
considered and focused support for isolated students from a lecturer’s perspective, a number of
insights can be gained.
The reflections throughout this paper potentiate the ability for the perception of difference between
internal and external student cohorts to be minimised and the potential for maximising student
learning regardless of discipline, mode of enrolment, or type of task. There remain a number of
opportunities to minimise student barriers to participation even with differing levels of facilitator
technological confidence and competence. The importance of continued critically reflective
academic practice to assure the best learning outcomes possible for all student cohorts is also
emphasised in focusing on social relationship and community building in the online environment,
rather than a dominant concern with the technological complexities of the online space. In doing
so, some of the student anxieties and issues associated with external delivery modes may be
overcome and benefit the students through the pedagogical methods employed in the online
environment.
Each of the strategies described throughout the paper require very little technological capacity on
behalf of the facilitator, but each aid in developing the sense of community and belonging that may
be needed to better facilitate an interactive and engaging online learning experience for external
students and seek to reduce the barriers often felt by isolated students. This may therefore
encourage student intrinsic motivation to participate in the content and make meaningful
contributions to different online communities of learners.
Sharing reflective experiences of assessment and delivery with others becomes an important part
of enhancing student learning experiences and developing strong communities of practice within
higher educational contexts. As a firm believer in the importance of lifelong learning and
development, the importance of ongoing and continual critical reflective practice and improvement
is crucial. This aids in providing relevant and current examples of practice, while also ensuring
that students are being equipped with knowledge and skills that are relevant, beneficial and enable
them to exhibit best practice in their own future work endeavours. Through focusing on ways to
Journal of Learning Design
Gillett-Swan
2017 Vol. 10 No. 1
Special Issue: Business Management
support learners in a variety of contexts, across a variety of modes, the transition to more fully
online learning experiences can be more seamless for both students and facilitators alike.