Perception & Psychophysics
1992. 52 (1), 18-36
On the perception of shape from shading
DOROTHY A. KLEFFNER and V. S. RAMACHANDRAN
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California
The extraction of three-dimensional shape from shading is one of the most perceptually compelling, yet poorly understood, aspects of visual perception. In this paper, we report several new
experiments on the manner in which the perception of shape from shading interacts with other
visual processes such as perceptual grouping, preattentive search C'pop-out"), and motion perception. Our specific findings are as follows: (1) The extraction of shape from shading information incorporates at least two "assumptions" or constraints-first, that there is a single light source
illuminating the whole scene, and second, that the light is shining from "above" in relation to
retinal coordinates. (2)Tokens defined by shading can serve as a basis for perceptual grouping
and segregation. (3) Reaction time for detecting a single convex shape does not increase with the
number of items in the display. This "pop-out" effect must be based on shading rather than on
differences in luminance polarity, since neither left-right differences nor step changes in luminance
resulted in pop-out. (4) When the subjects were experienced, there were no search asymmetries
for convex as opposed to concave tokens, but when the subjects were naive, cavities were much
easier to detect than convex shapes. (5) The extraction of shape from shading can also provide
an input to motion perception. And finally, (6)the assumption of "overhead illumination" that
leads to perceptual grouping depends primarily on retinal rather than on "phenomenal" or gravitational coordinates. Taken collectively, these findings imply that the extraction ofshape from shading is an "early" visual process that occurs prior to perceptual grouping, motion perception, and
vestibular (as well as "cognitive") correction for head tilt. Hence, there may be neural elements
very early in visual processing that are specialized for the extraction of shape from shading.
We use three-dimensional (3-D) depth perception to
find our way around the world and to manipulate objects that we encounter. Although the retinal image is
two-dimensional, somehow the brain is able to use the
information from this image to yield an experience of solidity and depth.
Of the numerous mechanisms used by the visual system
to recover the third dimension, the ability to use shading
is probably phylogenetically one of the most primitive.
One reason for believing this is that in the natural world,
animals have often evolved the principle of countershading
to conceal their shapes from predators; they have pale bellies that serve to neutralize the effects of the sun shining
from above . The prevalence of countershading in a variety of animals (including fishes) suggests
that shading must be a very important source of information about 3-D shapes.
Although artists have long recognized the importance
of shading, there have been few studies of how the human visual system actually extracts and uses this information. Since the time when Leonardo da Vinci first
We thank the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant 89-0(14)
and the Office of Naval Research (Grant NOOOI409lJ-1735) for funding
this research, and H. Pashler, D. Plummer, D. Rogers-Ramachandran,
A. Yonas, and T. Sejnowski for stimulating discussions. Requests for
reprints and other correspondence should be sent to V. S. Ramachandran, Psychology Department 0109, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093-0109.
Copyright 1992 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
thought about this problem, there have been only a small
handful of systematic psychological studies on it .
We began our investigations by creating a set of simple computer-generated displays (Figure 1). The impression of depth perceived in these displays is based exclusively on subtle variations in shading that we made sure
were devoid of any complex objects and patterns. Our
purpose, of course, was to isolate the brain mechanisms
that process shading information from other mechanisms
that may also contribute to depth perception in real-life
visual processing. So the displays are intended to serve
the same role in the study of shape from shading that
Julesz's stereograms do in the study of
stereopsis.
We have recently used these computer-generated displays to discover a simple set of "rules" or constraints
that the visual system uses in the interpretation of 3-D
shape from shading . For
example, Figure 1 depicts a set of objects that conveys
a strong impression of depth. The sign of perceived depth,
however, is ambiguous, since the visual system has no
way of knowing where the light source is. Consequently,
the display can be perceived as consisting of either convex objects illuminated from the right or concave objects
lit from the left ("eggs" or "egg-erate"). The reader can
generate a depth inversion as though mentally "shifting"
the light source.
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Figure 1. These computer-generated displays convey an impression of depth based exclusively
on subtle variations in luminance. The sign of perceived depth is ambiguous. Each object can be
perceived as either convex and lit from the right or concave and lit from the left, but all of the
objects tend to be viewed with the same sign of perceived depth.
Interestingly, when a depth inversion occurs, it tends
to occur simultaneously for all objects in the display. Is
this propensity for seeing all objects in the display as being simultaneously convex (or concave) based on a tendency to assign identical depth values to all of them, or
is it based on the tacit assumption that there is only one
light source in the image? To find out, we used a mixture
of objects that were mirror images of each other (Figure 2). In this display, when the top row of objects was
seen as convex, the bottom row was always perceived as
concave, and vice versa. It was in fact impossible to see
all the objects as being simultaneouslyconvex or concave.
This observation suggests that when interpreting shape
from shading, the visual system incorporates the tacit assumption that there is only one light source illuminating
the entire visual image . Hence the derivation of shape from shading cannot be a strictly local operation; it must involve
"global" assumptions about light sources.
Note that, as in Figure 2, a row can be seen as either
convex or concave if the other row is excluded. When
both rows are viewed simultaneously, however, seeing
one row as convex forces the other row to be perceived
as concave. Some powerful inhibitory mechanisms must
be involved in the generation of these effects. The singlelight-source assumption is, of course, implicit in many
Figure 2. The single-light-source assumption, demonstrated through the use of a mixture
of shaded objects that are mirror images of each other: Objects in one row can be seen as
either convex or concave if the other row is excluded; but when both rows are viewed simultaneously, seeing one row as convex forces the other row to be perceived as concave.
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
Figure 3. This computer-generated photograph demonstrates that the visual system has a builtin "assumption" that the light source is shining from above. Note that the depth in these displays
is conveyed exclusively through shading, with no other depth cues present. The shaded objects in
the top panel are usually seen as convex, whereas those in the bottom panel are usually seen as
concave. Note, however, that the illusion (l.e., the difference between convex and concave) is not
as pronounced as it is in Figure SA, in which the objects are intermixed.
artificial intelligence models, but Figure 2, as far as we
know, is the first clear-cut demonstration that such a rule
actually exists in human vision for the extraction ofshape
from shading. Bergstrom has pointed out that such
a rule may also be involved in the computation of surface
lightness.
In addition to the single-light-source constraint described above, there appears also to be a built-in assumption that the light is shining from above, a principle first
suggested by Sir David Brewster (1847). This would explain why, in Figure 3, objects in the top panel are usually
seen as convex, whereas those in the bottom panel are
often perceived as "holes" or "cavities." The sign of
depth can be readily reversed by simply turning the figure upside down. The effect is weak, however, since
either panel can be seen as convex if the other is excluded
from view to eliminate the single-light-source constraint.
On the other hand, if a mixture of such objects is presented, it is almost impossible to reverse any of them because of the combined effect of two constraints-the
single-light-source constraint and the "top"-light-source
constraint (Figure SA).
Next, we wondered what would happen to the interpretation of shape from shading if one were to give the visual
system conflicting information about the light source's location. To explore this, we created the display shown in
Figure 4. The central disks are identical in A and B, with
a vertical gradient. The surround in A has a conflicting
horizontal gradient, which could not occur with a single
light source illuminating the display. The figure was
shown to 48 naive subjects, who were asked to examine
the two panels (A and B) carefully and compare the two
central disks. Their task was to judge which of the two
central figures (A or B) appeared more convex. The results were clear-cut; the central disk in panel B almost
always appeared to be more convex than did the central
disk in panel A (72 out of 96 trials). In fact, many subjects spontaneously reported that the disk in panel A
almost appeared flat. We may conclude, therefore, that
the magnitude of depth perceived from shading is enhanced considerably if objects in the surround have the
opposite polarity, a spatial contrast effect that is vaguely
reminiscent of the center-surround effects that have been
reported for other stimulus dimensions such as motion
 and color . Another way of saying this
would be that the perception ofshape from shading is enhanced considerably ifthe information in the scene is com-
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Figure 4. This display demonstrates "center-surround" interactions in the perception of shape
from shading. The central disk in panel A is usually seen as less convex than the identical one in
panel B. These effects are usually much more pronounced on the CRT than they are in the printed
versions shown here. This effect demonstrates that the magnitude of perceived depth is alsoinfluenced by the single-light-source constraint .
patible with a single light source. When the information
from the majority of objects (e.g., panel A) suggests that
the light source is on the left (or right), the shading on
the central object is perceived as a variation in reflectance
rather than depth .
What if the location of the light source was revealed
by some obvious means? This question was first raised
by Berbaum et al. . They asked subjects to view
a muffin pan illuminated from below while holding a hand
nearby to cast a shadow-thereby revealing the light
source. Berbaum et al. found that many subjects now reported a reversal of relief. Oddly enough, we did not fmd
this to be true for our computer-generated displays. A hollow mask lit from above looks like a "normal" (convex)
face lit from below. But if the eggs and cavities in Figure 5A are placed right next to it, their depth does not
reverse , in spite of the fact that
the face now "reveals" the light to be coming from below. Yet we found that if the eggs and cavities are directly
pasted on the face with their outlines blurred in order to
"blend" them into the face, then their depth does indeed
reverse (i.e., the eggs become cavities, and vice versa).
We may conclude, therefore, that the knowledge about
the new light source location, revealed by the face, does
not generalize to apply to other items in the display unless these items are seen as belonging to the face-that
is, as being parts of the same object. Or, to put it differently, the single-light-source rule is adhered to more
rigidly for different parts of an object than it is for different objects in a scene.
Note that it is also possible to group all the convex
shapes in Figure 5A together mentally to form a cluster
that is clearly segregated from the background of concave shapes. This result is surprising, for it is usually assumed that only certain elementary stimulus features such
as orientation, color, and "terminators" can be grouped
together in this way . Figure 5A shows that even 3-D shapes that
are conveyed by shading can provide tokens for perceptual grouping and segregation . To make sure that the effect was not due to some
more elementary image feature (such as luminance polarity), we produced a control stimulus (Figure 5B), in which
the targets were similar to those in Figure SA in terms
of luminance polarity but did not convey any depth. In
this display, it is difficult to segregate the tokens on the
basis of differences in polarity, suggesting that the effects
observed in Figure 5A must be based on 3-D shapes.
Segregation is also much more pronounced for top-down
differences in illumination than for left-right differences.
For instance, if Figure 5A is rotated by 90
, the degree
ofsegregation is also reduced correspondingly. This further supports the view that the effect depends on the 3-D
shapes of the tokens rather than on luminance polarity
 .
Our purpose in the rest of this communication is to describe some formal experiments that we carried out to confirm and extend our earlier observations .
Our preliminary observations, described in Figure 5A,
suggested that shape from shading can serve as an elementary feature for perceptual grouping; but would the same
results also hold for effortless preattentive search or "popout'"l Consider the case of a single egg displayed against
a background of several cavities. The extent to which reaction times vary with the number of items in a display is
often used as a criterion to decide whether a particular
visual feature is detected "preattentively" or not. Ifsubjects do not have to search for the target-that is, if they
can spot it without inspecting every item on display-
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
Figure 5. (A) 'I1Wi figure contains a random mixture of shaded objectsthat have opposite luminance
polarities. 1be ones that are light on top are usually perceived as spheres that can be mentally grouped
togetber and segregated from tbe background of concave objects. Hence we may conclude that threedimensional shapes dermed by shading can provide tokens for perceptual grouping and segregation. H the figure is rotated 90°, segregation becomes much more difficult. (B) Tokens in this control display have the same luminance polarity as the shaded images do, but they do not convey
depth information. Segregation of the tokens is difficult to achieve.
then the feature in question is, by definition, "elementary. " The reaction time for spotting such a target will
not increase linearly with the number of distractors . We decided to use this criterion to find
out whether or not an egg would appear to pop out against
a background of cavities. Subjects were simply asked to
report the presence or absence of a single egg against a
background consisting of a varying number of distractors
(cavities).
EXPERIMENT 1
Visual Search for 3-D Shape from Shading
Subjects. Five subjects participated: the 2 authors, 1 other researcher in the lab, and 2 undergraduate research assistants.
Display. This display, as well as subsequent ones described in
this paper, were all generated on a CRT driven by an Amiga microcomputer. The targets and distractors are illustrated in Figure 6.
Targets and distractor items subtended 1.0
0 of visual angle and were
placed in random positions without overlap, within a display area
0 high x 6.6
0 wide. On each trial, I, 6, or 12 items were displayed, with half the trials containing one target and the remaining
trials containing no targets. Targets and distractors were constructed
from 16 luminance levels ranging from .057 to 136.1 cd/rn" and
presented on a background of 14.6 cd/rrr'.
Procedure. The subjects were seated .75 m from the screen in
a dark room. Each trial began with a dark screen (.057 cd/m') for
0.8 sec, followed by the presentation of a fixation point on a gray
background (0.76 cd/rn") for 1.8 sec. The experimental stimulus
was then displayed. Two keys on the keyboard were used by the
subjects to indicate whether the target was present or absent in the
display, and the subjects' reaction times were recorded. A response
from the subject ended the trial, and the screen was once again
blacked out. Subjects were given feedback after each trial, consisting of a "+" or " -" on a blank screen, which indicated whether
or not the response was correct. This also served as the fixation
point for the next trial.
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Each block of the experiment consisted of 48 trials presented in
random order, 8 trials from each of6 conditions (1, 6, or 12 total
items, with the target item either present or absent). The subjects
completed four experimental blocks for each target-distractor set.
Prior to the collection of data for each condition, the subjects practiced the experiment with the test stimulus until they felt comfortable
(this was done for at least one block, but for less than four blocks).
The major findings of this study were that subjects' ability to detect targets shaded vertically was significantly different from their ability to detect either horizontal shading or a step change in luminance. These results are shown
in Figure 7. In the first display, with shading from top
to bottom, reaction times were not dependent on the number of items in the display . The slopes from this graph indicate an average
reaction time of 4 msec per item when the target was
present and 5 msec per item when the target was absent.
But for the second display, shaded from left to right, reaction times did increase with the number of items in the
display, to 22 msec per item for the target present condition and 50 msec per item for the target absent condition.
This difference in slopes suggests that a "serial search"
strategy was being used. The third display, a step change
in luminance, gave mixed results. For most subjects, the
reaction times varied with the number ofdistractor items
in the display, but there was substantial variability between
subjects. The average reaction time was 8 msec per item
for the target present condition and 18 msec per item for
the target absent condition.
A statistical comparison was made of the resulting
slopes (reaction time vs. number of items in the display)
from the graphs in Figure 7. A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was performed,
with the line slopes from the graphs as the dependent vari-
Figure 6. Examples of the target-distractor sets used in Experiment 1. (A) An object shaded top
to bottom had to be detected against a field of distractors shaded from bottom to top. (B) An object
shaded from left to right had to be detected against distractors that were shaded right to left. (C) A
step change in luminance in the vertical direction had to be detected against a background of distractors that had the opposite polarity.
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
Target Present
Target Absent
n = 5 subjects
Visual Search Task
Vertical Luminance Gradients
Target Present
Target Absent
n = 5 subjects
Visual Search Task
Horizontal Luminance Gradients
Target Present
Target Absent
n = 5 subjects
Visual Search Task
Step Change in Luminance
Figure 7. Results obtained from the visual search task, in which 5 experienced subjects participated. For vertical shading (A), the reaction time is unaffected by the number of distractors in the display. For horizontal shading (B), however, subjects'reaction times increased
monotonically with the number of items in the display. When the stimulus was a step change in luminance (C), reaction time generally
increased with the number of items in the display, but there was considerable variability between subjects.
able. The main effect for target type was significant at
the .01 level [F(2,16) = 8.129, p < .0038], indicating
that subjects' performance was significantly different in
the three experimental conditions. (The second factor in
the ANOVA, whether the target was present or absent
in each trial, was included in the analysis to account for
variance. This factor, and the interaction between the factors, was not significant here or in the following three
comparisons.) ANOVAs were also used to make a direct
comparison between pairs of experimental conditions. In
a comparison of top/bottom shading with left/right shading, the main effect for target type was significant at the
.05 level [F(1,8) = 10.886, p < .011]. Top/bottom shading against a step change in luminance also produced a
significant main effect for target type at the .05 level
[F(1,8) = 9.058, p < .0168]. The difference between
left/right shading and a step change in luminance, on the
other hand, was not significant.
Discussion
These results suggest that the extraction of shape from
shading can provide a basis for effortless or •'preattentive" visual search, since reaction times do not increase
with the number of distractors. The fact that such popout is seen only for top-bottom differences in shading,
and not for left-right differences, has two important implications. First, it implies that the effect must be based
on the extraction of 3-D shape from shading, not just from
differences in luminance polarity. Second, the process
must incorporate the assumption that the light is shining
from above. Hence certain "scene-based" image characteristics-such as the assumed location of light sourcescan influence visual search , a point that has also been elegantly demonstrated
in the recent experiments of Enns and Rensink .
One anomalous finding is that the target defined by a step
change in luminance also seemed to pop out more than
one would expect from a casual inspection of Figure 5B.
The reason for this might be that even though no depth
is visible in this display, the mere presence of a vertical
luminance gradient (with white on top) is sufficient to
stimulate whatever neural detectors are involved in signaling convexity. The neurons may be excited suboptimally
so that although the signal is strong enough to be detected
in a search task, it is not strong enough to actually evoke
a compelling sense of depth.
EXPERIMENT 2
Asymmetries in Visual Search
Treisman and Gorrnican noted that it is easier
to detect a "closed" circle against a background of Cs
(open circles) than it is to detect a C against a background
of Os. They point out that such search asymmetries exist
for a wide range ofother types of visual features as well.
Prompted by suggestions from A. Treisman and J. T.
Enns, we decided to look for search asymmetries in the
detection of 3-D shape from shading. In some preliminary experiments with experienced subjects, we found no
evidence for an asymmetry, but we decided to repeat the
experiments on naive subjects.
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Subjects. Six subjects from the undergraduate subject pool at the
University of California, San Diego, participated in each of the conditions of the experiment (18 subjects total).
Display. The displays were identical to those in Experiment I,
with the exception that the target and distractor items were distinguished by top versus bottom shading, bottom versus top shading,
and left versus right shading. These are shown in Figure 8.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to that used in Experiment I, except that each set of 6 subjects participated in only one
of the conditions (top vs. bottom shading, bottom vs. top shading,
and left vs. right shading). Comparisons were therefore made across
subjects rather than within subjects.
The results (see Figure 9) showed a striking asymmetry.
Surprisingly, it was much easier to detect a cavity against
a background of eggs than vice versa. t For detecting an
egg, reaction times increased with the number of items
in the display, suggesting serial search. The average reaction time was 26 msec per item when the target was
present and 50 msec per item when the target was absent.
For detecting a cavity, however, reaction times did not
increase with the number of items in the display. Average reaction times were 5 msec per item for both target
present and target absent conditions. For the third display, which consisted of left to right shading, reaction
times were again dependent on the number of items in
the display-25 msec per item when the target was present
and 60 msec per item when the target was absent.
A comparison was made between the resulting graphs
(plotting reaction time vs. number of items in the display).
A two-way ANOVA without repeated measures was performed, with the line slopes from the graphs as the dependent variable. The main effect for target type was significant at the .0001 level [F(2,30) = 15.314,p < .0001],
indicating that the subjects' performance was significantly
different in the three experimental conditions. The second factor, target presence/absence, was included in the
Figure 8. Examples of the target-distractor sets used in Experiment 2: (A) An object shaded
top to bottom had to be detected against a field of distractors shaded from bottom to top. (8) An
object shaded from bottom to top had to be detected against distractors that were shaded top
to bottom. (C) An object shaded from left to right had to be detected against distractors that were
shaded right to left.
Visual Search Task
Detecting a 'cavity'
Target Present
Target Absent
n = 6 5 ubjects
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
Visual Search Task
Detecting an 'egg'
Target Present
Target Absent
n '" 6 subjects
Visual Search Task
Horizontal Luminance Gradients
Target Present
Target Absent
n = 6 subjects
Figure 9. Visual search asymmetries in the extraction of shape from shading. Six naive subjects participated (see text). The reaction time for detecting a "cavity" was unaffected by the number of items in the display. On the other hand, for detecting an "egg,"
reaction time increased with the number of items in the display and the same was true for detecting left/right shading. These results
demonstrate a striking asymmetry in the subjects' ability to detect cavities as opposed to eggs. This effect is seen only in naive subjects. In subjects who have had considerable previous experience with such tasks (as have the authors), the asymmetries do not
exist .
ANOVA to account for variance. The interpretation of
this factor across experimental conditions is ambiguous,
but it is included here for completeness. In the first
ANOVA, this factor was significant at the .05 level
[F(l,30) = 12.649,p < .0013], while the interaction between the two factors was not significant.In order to compare the experimentalconditions directly, ANOVAs were
performed on the data from pairs of experimental conditions. The ANOVA comparing top/bottom shading with
bottom/top shading showed that these experimental conditions were significantly different at the .0001 level
[F(1,20) = 48.325, p < .0001]. The target presentl
absent factor was significant at the .01 level [F(l,20) =
8.368, p < .009]; the interactionwas not significant. The
ANOVA comparing bottom/top shading and left/right
shading was again significant at the .0001 level [F(l,20)
= 22.295, P < .0001]. (Both the target present/absent
factor and the interaction were not significant.) In the
ANOVA comparing top/bottom shading with left/right
shading, the main effect for target type was not significant. The target present/absent factor was significant at
the .01 level [F(l,20) ;
12.173, p < .0023], and the
interaction was not significant.
Discussion
These results imply that naive subjects fmd cavities easier to detect than eggs. This seems surprising and counterintuitive, given the more widespread prevalence of "convexity" in nature , but since virtually nothing is known
about the neural detectors that encode shape from shading, we should perhaps be prepared for such surprises.
Treisman and Gormican argued that search
asymmetries arise because the presence of a feature is easier to detect than its absence. For example, a purple object is easy to detect against a background of red objects,
because the purple has an "extra" feature-blue-in it
and therefore deviates from the "standard" (i.e., red);
but a red object cannot be detected as easily against an
array of purple objects, since its detection requires the
visual system to sense the absence of blue. If we accept
this logic, we should have to argue that convex objects
are the "standard" expected units for the visual system
and that cavities are encoded as the same object, but with
an extra feature (depth reversal?). This would explain why
cavities are easier to detect than eggs.
EXPERIMENT 3
Segregation With Shading
The segregation of figure from ground is another criterion that is sometimes used to decide whether a given
visual feature is "elementary" or not . It is often assumed that the two
criteria pop-out and segregation will necessarily yield the
same results, but this is not always true. In certain instances, for example, a target may pop out in a search
task, yet when several such targets are present, they cannot be grouped and segregated from the background
 . We therefore devised
a method that would allow us to directly probe the visual
system's ability to achieve perceptual grouping by extracting 3-D shape from shading.
Figure lOA depicts one ofthe stimuli. Note that instead
of the stimulus's being randomly arranged as in Figure 5A, the letter 0 is composed ofeggs displayed against
a background of cavities. The subjects' task was to simply report whether they saw a complete 0 or a broken
o on any given trial. The position of the "bite" taken
out of the 0 was also varied randomly from trial to trial
(Figures 10B-1OC).
Pilot experiments suggested that naive subjects often
experience considerable initial difficulty with this task,
just as they do when trying to detect a complex cyclopean shape in one of Julesz's random-dot stereograms. We therefore exposed each subject to a "priming" stimulus, which consisted of the letter X depicted
by larger scale shape-from-shading tokens (Figure 11),
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
before we actually began the forced-choice discrimination experiment.
Subjects. Seven subjects participated. They were drawn from
the undergraduate subject pool at the University of California, San
Diego, and were naive with respect to thepurpose oftheexperiment.
Display. These displays were also generated on a CRT driven
by an Amiga microcomputer. Each stimulus consisted of a circle
made up of target items surrounded by a field of distractor items
as in Figure lOA. The circle was made up of 12 target items, which
were arranged loosely in a circle with a radius subtending 4.1 °,
against a background of 39 distractors. The targets and distractors,
the same pairs that were used in Experiment I, are illustrated in
Figure 6. Each target or distractor item subtended .6°. On half of
the trials, a "broken" circle was constructed by replacing 3 consecutive targets in the circle with distractors. The position of the
break in the circle was selected randomly from the 12 possible positions. Before the test stimulus was presented, the subjects were
shown a preexposure stimulus, which consisted of an X pattern
(shown in Figure II) composed of targets and distractors that were
1.0° across. The targets and distractors, constructed from 16 luminance levels from .057 to 136.1 cd/m', were presented on a background of 14.6 cd/m'.
Procedure. The subjects were seated .75 m from the screen in
a dark room. Each trial began with the presentation ofthe preexposure stimulus for 4.0 sec, followed by a dark screen for .1 sec. The
test stimulus was then presented for 1.1 sec, after which time the
screen went dark. The subjects' task was to determine whether the
circle was complete or broken. The subjects were allowed to respond at any time during or after the stimulus presentation, using
two keys on the keyboard. The subjects' responses and reaction
times were recorded. The subjects were given two training blocks
of 80 randomly mixed trials, followed by the experimental block
(80 trials, randomly mixed).
The percent correct performance from the experiment
is shown in Figure 12. A one-way ANOVA with repeated
measures was performed; all experimental conditions
were included, with percent correct as the dependent variable. The main effect for type of shading was significant
at the .05 level [F(2,12) = 5.69, p < .018]. Thus, the
degree of segregation obtained varied significantly with
the type of shading in the targets and distractors. A separate ANOVA with only two experimental conditionstop shading and side shading-also produced a significant
main effect for type of shading at the .05 level [F(1,6)
= 10.179, p < .019]. A similar comparison oftop shading with a step change in luminance was again significant
at the .05 level [F(l,6) ;
9.66, p < .021]. The difference between side shading and a step change in luminance
was not significant.
Interestingly, the subjects' reaction timesalso varied with
the type of shading, even though the experimental displays
were on for a brief, fixed period of time. The subjects'
responses (see Figure 13) were fastest when they were also
the most accurate. These differences in reaction time were
significantly different at the .01 level [F(2,12) = 7.059,
p < .009]. A separate comparison of the reaction times
for top shading and side shading produced a significant
main effect at the .01 level [F(l,6) = 15.226, P < .008].
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Figure 10. (Opposite page and above). Sample stimulus used to investigate figure and
ground segregation (A). A circle was constructed from the target items (eggs) and presented against a background of distractors (cavities). In half of the trials (B and C), the
circle was incomplete (three consecutive eggs missing), and the subjects' task was to determine whether the circle was complete or incomplete within a fixed presentation time.
The main effect for reaction times when top shading was
compared with a step change in luminance was not significant [F(I,6) = 4.458, p < .079].
Discussion
This experiment shows that the extraction of shape from
shading can provide a basis for perceptual grouping when
the direction of shading is from top to bottom, but not
when the shading is from left to right. The fact that a step
change in luminance (as opposed to a continuous gradient)
is also relatively ineffective supports our contention that
the grouping is based on differences in shading, not on
differences in luminance polarity.
These observations suggest that the visual system acts
as though it assumes that the sun is shining from above.
But how does the visual system know "above" from "below"? Is it the object's orientation in relation to the retina that matters, or its orientation with respect to gravity?
This question was originally raised by Yonas, Kuskowski,
and Sternfels , who performed a series of ingenious
experiments in which they presented ambiguous stimuli
to 3-year-old and 7-year-old children. (They used photographs of real objects rather than computer-generated images.) They found that the responses of the 3-year-olds depended almost exclusively on retinal orientation, whereas
7-year-olds showed roughly equal dependence on both retinal and gravitational frames of reference. These results
suggest that as children grow older, they progressively
shift their responses toward more abstract frames of reference. Curiously, Yonas et al. did not test adults,
but their results imply that if the same trend continues,
adults should show a still higher dependence on gravitational (rather than retinal) "upright."
Ramachandran tested this hypothesis by
presenting stimuli such as Figure 2 to adult subjects and
asking them to rotate their heads by 90°. Instantly, all
the objects that were "top" lit in relation to the retina
were seen as convex, and the others were seen as cavities. The effect was striking; even a head tilt as little as
15°-20° was sufficient to generate the unambiguous percept of eggs and cavities. When the head was tilted by
15° in the opposite direction, the eggs and cavities reversed depth instantly. We recently showed a slide of this
display to a lay audience of several thousand spectators
 , and most of them reported the
perceptual switch. We may conclude from this that the
interpretation of shape from shading depends primarily,
if not exclusively, on retinal rather than gravitational cues.
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
Figure 11. This is an example of the preexposure stimulus presented before each experimental
trial. The subjects viewed a display containing an X shape (composed of target items) for 4.0 sec
before the experimental stimulus was presented.
Segregation Based on Shading
Percent Correct
Top Shading
Side Shading
Ta rget/D i st racto r
Figure 12. Results from the basic segregation task with shading
(Experiment 3). The subjects were much more accurate at determining whether the circle was complete or incomplete with vertical
shading than they were with either horizontal shading or a step
change in luminance.
The implication is that shape is probably extracted from
shading fairly early in visual processing, since it is not
subject to vestibular correction for head tilt. The reason
for the slight discrepancy with the results of Yonas et al.
 is unclear. One possibility is that the verbal reports of7-year-olds are inherently unreliable. A second,
more likely, possibility is that the test we used (perceptual segregation of eggs from cavities) is a more .,objective" -and perhaps more sensitive-measure ofthe extraction of shapefrom shading than is simplyjudging convexity
versus concavity. Finally, the fact that Yonas et al. used
photographsof real objects rather thancomputer-generated
displaysmighthave contributedto thedifferences in results.
To test the retinocentric hypothesis more formally, we
used the segregation task developed for Experiment 2. In
half of the trials, the subjects sat upright in front of the
CRT screen; in half, they lay down on their sides so that
they viewed the CRT screen from a 90° angle.
EXPERIMENT 4
Retinal Versus Gravitational Coordinates
Subjects. The subjects were 11 undergraduates from the subject
pool at the University of California, San Diego.
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Figure 13. The subjects' reaction times for the segregation task
(Experiment 3) varied with the type of shading used to depict the
C or 0 shape, even though total duration of presentation was constant for all displays (1.1 sec).
Display. The displays were identical to those in Experiment I
(see Figure 6), with the exception that the step change in luminance
was not used. The two types of shaded stimuli (top and side) were
compared from two viewing conditions.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to that in Experiment 3,
except that the subjects sat with the head upright during alternate
experimental blocks and lay down directly in front of the screen
with the head at a 90° angle to the screen in the other half. In both
cases, the subjects' eyes were .75 m from the screen.
n = 11 SUbjects
Top Shading
Side Shading
Segregation:
Retinal or
Gravitational Coordinates
Percent Correct
Discussion
These results indicate that the interpretation of shape
from shading depends primarily, if not exclusively, on
retinal rather than gravitational cues. Obviously, since we
often do tilt our heads inadvertently, it would be more
Figure 14. Are shading effects tied to retinal or gravitational coordinates? We explored this by baving subjects view the screen while
they were either sitting up or lying down. The results indicate that
the effect depends primarily, if not exclusively, on retinal rather
than gravitational cues (Experiment 4).
n = 7 subjects
Segregation Based on Shading
Reaction Time
Top Shading
Side Shading
Step Luminance
Target/Distractor
n = 11 subjects
Segregation:
Retinal or
Gravitational Coordinates
Reaction Time
Top Shading
Side Shading
Figure IS. The subjects' reaction times provide evidence that the
effect depends on retinal rather than gravitational cues. The subjects responded more quickly when the direction of shading was vertical in rdinal coordinates, regardless of whether they were sitting
up or prone (Experiment 4).
The results are
shown in Figure 14. A two-way
ANOVA comparing both direction of shading and viewing position was not significant for either term, since the
results are in opposite directions for the two factors. The
interaction was significant at the .01 level [F(1, 10) =
14.492,p < .003]. This means that the direction of shading that produced segregation varied with the subjects'
head position. A one-way ANOVA comparing top shading with side shading for each of the viewing positions
was performed, and both comparisons were significant
at the .05 level [F(1, 10) = 7.612, p < .020, for the upright condition, and F(1,IO) = 8.563, p < .015, when
subjects were lying on their sidesJ.
Once again, subjects' reaction times varied with the type
of shading and the viewing position, even though the experimental displays were on for a fixed period of timeproviding further evidence for the difference in segregation. These data are presented in Figure 15. As with the
segregation data, a two-way ANOV A showed a significant interaction at the .01 level [F(1, 10) = 13.720, p <
.004). A one-way ANOVA comparing top and side shading while the subjects were sitting up was not significant
[F(I,IO) = 1.355, P < .271). A comparison of top and
side shading while subjects were reclining was highly significant at the .001 level [F(1,10) = 27.256,p < .0000J.
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
sensible for the visual system to use world-centered coordinates, but our results suggest that this is not the case.
The curious implication of this is that the mechanisms that
compute shape from shading do not correct for head tilt
and blindly assume that the sun is stuck to the head when
one tilts one's head (or body) by 90°!
Finally, if the extraction of 3-D shape from shading is
carried out fairly early in visual processing, as we have
suggested, one would also expect it to interact with other
"front end" visual mechanisms such as motion perception. Our next experiment was designed to explore this
possibility.
EXPERIMENT 5
Shape From Shading As an Input
to Motion Perception
Can shapes that are conveyed exclusively through differences in shading (e.g., the 0 in Figure lOA) be used
by the visual system to establish motion correspondence?
To find out, we constructed a three-frame apparent motion sequence in which the figure defined by shading was
displaced in either the left or right direction along the
x-axis. The actual positions of all the eggs and cavities
were uncorrelated in successive frames, so that correspon-
Figure 16. Sample stimulus used in tbe motion detection task (Experiment 5). The subjects were sbown three frames of an apparent
motion sequence. Eacb frame portrayed a figure defined exclusively by differences in sbading. The figure was displaced eitber to tbe
left or to tbe right in successive frames. The frames were completely uncorrelated in the luminance domain. The task was to report
the direction of motion Oeft or right).
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING
Discussion
These results show clearly that the extraction of shape
from shading can contribute to motion processing . Again, in order to achieve this,
the visual system must "assume" overhead lighting, since
motion discrimination is reduced considerably for targets
conveyed by left-right gradients. The findings are somewhat surprising, since they imply that even a monocular
depth cue such as shading-which is often regarded as
"cognitive"-can drive the motion system, which is
usually regarded as an early or "front end" visual process. One wonders whether other monocular depth cues
such as perspective can also drive the motion system.
Also, our observation that the interpretation of shape
from shading-based on the "overhead lighting" assumption-can drive both perceptual segregation and motion
perception is inconsistent with the view recently expressed
by Reichel and Todd that this assumption is "only
of marginal significance" in natural vision. Of course,
as Reichel and Todd point out, the assumption can be
overridden by other conflicting cues in the image (such
as "height in field" or occlusion); but then, so can any
other assumption in perception. For example, even stereopsis can be overridden easily in a hollow mask that
is lit from below ; yet one would
not want to conclude from this that stereopsis is only of
marginal significance in natural vision!
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Although the study of shape from shading has attracted
considerable attention from the artificial intelligence community , there have been very few
psychophysical studies of how shading is extracted by the
human visual system.
Taken collectively, our results suggest thatthe extraction
of shape from shading incorporates two assumptions-that
there is only one light source illuminating most ofthe image, and that the light is shining from above. These assumptions seem to affect not only the sign of perceived
depth (i.e., convex vs. concave, as seen in Figures 2 and
5A) but also its magnitude (Figure 4). In addition to these
two constraints, there appears to be a weaker "default"
assumption that objects are more likely to beconvex rather
than concave . This
would explain why naive subjects usually see the objects
The results of the experiment are shown in Figure 17.
The subjects were able to predict the direction of motion
much more accurately when the direction of shading was
vertical (top to bottom) rather than horizontal (left to right
shading). A one-way ANOV A of percent correct as a
function of the target/distractor type was highly significant [at the .001 level; F(1,8) = 32.985, p < .0004].
Side Shading
Top Shading
Ta rgellDistraclor
Subjects. The subjects were 9 undergraduates from the subject
pool at the University of California, San Diego.
Display. These displays were also generated on a CRT driven
by an Amiga microcomputer, and the targets and distractors had
the same size and construction as did those which were used in Experiment 4 to compare vertical shading with horizontal shading.
The stimuli consisted of three frames presented as an apparent motion sequence. Each frame (see Figure 16for an example) consisted
of distractor items presented on a regular grid, 8 rows X to columns,
in a display 6.3
0 high x 8.6
0 wide. The position of each item was
varied by a random distance (±.20) in both the x and y directions,
so that the three frames were uncorrelated. The target pattern consisted of four vertical columns (four eggs per column) at random
positions in the first frame. The position of the target pattern was
moved by one position to the left or right in each of the following
frames to provide the basis for apparent motion. Prior to the presentation of the test stimuli, the subjects were shown thepreexposure
stimulus that had been used in Experiments 3 and 4.
Procedure. The subjects were seated.75 m from the screen in
a dark room. Each trial began with the presentation of the preexposure stimulus for 6.0 sec. Each of the three frames of the experimental stimulus was then presented for .4 sec, after which time the
screen went dark. The subjects' task was to determine whether the
direction of motion was to the left or to the right. The subjects were
allowed to respond at any time during or after the stimulus presentation by using two keys on the keyboard. The responses and reaction times were recorded. The subjects were given instructions but
no training with the experimental stimuli. They participated in three
blocks of 50 trials for each set of targets and distractors.
Motion Discrimination
Based on Shading
dence could not be established on the basis of luminance
cues. The question is, can subjects use the shading information to report the direction of motion correctly?
FJgUre 17. Results from the motion detedion task (Experiment 5).
Subjects were more accurate at determining the direction of motion with vertical shading than they were with either horizontal shading or a step change in luminance.
KLEFFNER AND RAMACHANDRAN
in Figure 1 as convex, and why it takes some effort to
see them as concave.
Furthermore, we find that once these 3-D shapes have
been extracted, they can serve as a basis for pop-out and
for perceptual grouping. Since these effects are observed
only for top-bottom differences in shading, our results
imply that relatively complex "scene-based" image characteristics such as direction of lighting can influencevisual
search and figure-ground segregation .
The conclusion that more complex "whole image"
characteristics can influence perceptual grouping also
receives support from another experiment that we recently carried out to study motion perception . We began with two sparse patterns
(A and B) that were optically superimposed on each other.
Each pattern was composed of randomly arranged small
circles. We then made one of the patterns (A) approach
the observer so that the circles moved radially outward
from the center, while, at the same time, the other was
made to shrink inward (i.e., to "recede" from the observer). The sizes of the circles were randomized, and
we also presented the whole display through a window
so that the outer margins of A and B were invisible. We
found that the subjects had no difficulty in segregating
A from B so that what they saw was a pattern receding
through an approaching plane of circles. Notice that in
each plane (A or B), there were elements that were actually moving in opposite directions in the frontoparallel
plane---corresponding to either expansion or contractionyet the visual system had no difficulty in grouping these
together. We suggest, therefore, that although segregation is usually based on local feature differences, grouping can take advantage of more "global" rules that reflect
higher order invariances. As a control, we used a very
similar display in which all the individual circles of a pattern were made to expand, but there was no global expansion of the pattern as a whole (i.e., the distances between the centers of the circles did not change). The
circles in Pattern B were made to shrink simultaneously.
No grouping or segregation was observed in this display.
Our third experiment showed that the overhead light
assumption is based on retinal rather than phenomenal or
world-centered coordinates. This findingalso suggeststhat
the extraction of shape from shading is unlikely to be very
cognitive and that it is extracted fairly early in visual
processing-certainly earlier than vestibular and cognitive correction for head tilt. This finding is surprising,
since it implies that, at least as far as the extraction of
shading is concerned, the visual system assumes that the
sun moves with the head! If the visual system is indeed
"intelligent" as some have argued, why does it incorporate such a primitive assumption? One possibility is that
even though we do tilt our heads occasionally, statistically speaking we do walk upright most of the time, and
so, the visual system can get away with this primitive assumption. The advantage, of course, is that extraction of
shape from shading can then proceed much more quickly
without the additional computational burden of having to
correct for head tilt-a process that might be very time
consuming. This line of reasoning accords well with our
view that perception often
involves the use of "short-cuts"-heuristics, rather than
sophisticated, optimally designed algorithms.
The importance of overhead lighting as a "natural constraint" is also consistent with the observation that many
plains-dwelling animals (e.g., gazelles, cheetahs, etc.)
have evolved "countershading"; that is, they have pale
bellies that serve to neutralize the shading produced by
the sun shining from above. Our results suggest that countershading may be effective mainly because it reduces the
extent to which an animal's shape pops out from the background. Curiously, there is a species of caterpillar that
displays reverse countershading (i.e., a dark belly instead
of a pale belly)-an observation that does not make sense
unless one realizes that this species habitually hangs upside down from twigs ! And finally, it
has been shown recently that certain
octopuses can actually reverse their shading in a matter
of seconds if deliberately held upside down-a "shading
reflex" that is thought to be vestibular rather than visual
in origin.
Is the segregation in Figure SA due to perceived depth
or is it due to 3-D shape? Note that the front surfaces of
the eggs are, on the whole, nearer than the margins (or
inner surfaces) of the cavities; perhaps this difference in
depth leads to the grouping and segregation observed in
Figure SA. To explore this, we tried presenting the eggs
and cavities in Figure SA in random stereoscopic planes,
so that some of the cavities were actually stereoscopically
nearer than the eggs. When we viewed this display, we
found, to our surprise, that the eggs could still be grouped
effortlessly and segregated from the cavities, even though
they occupied random depth planes. We concluded, therefore, that the segregation observed in these displays is
based on 3-D shape (or perhaps even directly on the shading), rather than on the perceived depth .
Another interesting effect that we have recently observed is that of background luminance on perceptual
grouping and pop-out. We found that segregation was optimal when we used a neutral gray background whose luminance was identical to the mean luminance of the shaded
tokens . When the background was too light or too dark (e.g., see Figure 18),
the degree of segregation was reduced considerably. The
observation suggests that the visual system tends to "assume" that the background has the same reflectance
characteristics as do the objects in the foreground (i.e.,
that it is made of the same material as they are). This may
seem surprising, since the assumptionthat the background
and the objects lying on it share the same material is not
generally true for most objects. It is certainly true for
lumpy terrain, however. Could the shape from shading
system have evolved primarily as a primitive visual mod-
PERCEPTION OF SHAPE FROM SHADING