The Origin of Planetary Impactors in the Inner Solar System
Robert G. Strom1, Renu Malhotra1, Takashi Ito2, Fumi Yoshida2, and David A. Kring1
New insights into the history of the inner solar system are derived from the impact
cratering record of the Moon, Mars, Venus and Mercury, and from the size distributions
of asteroid populations. Old craters from a unique period of heavy bombardment that
ended ∼3.8 billion years ago were made by asteroids that were dynamically ejected from
the main asteroid belt, possibly due to the orbital migration of the giant planets. The
impactors of the past ∼3.8 billion years have a size distribution quite diﬀerent from the
main belt asteroids, but very similar to the population of near-Earth asteroids.
The Moon and all the terrestrial planets were resurfaced during a period of intense impact
cratering that occurred between the time of their accretion, ∼4.5 Ga, and ∼3.85 Ga. The lunar
cratering record and the radiometrically dated Apollo samples have shown that the intense bombardment of the Moon ended at ∼3.85 Ga; the impact ﬂux since that time to the present has been
at least an order of magnitude smaller. The 3.85 Ga epoch might represent the ﬁnal end of an era
of steadily declining large impacts (the tail end of the accretion of the planets). However, it has
also been argued that only a sudden injection of impacting objects into the terrestrial planet zone
accounts for the abrupt end of the intense bombardment; thus, this event has been named the Late
Heavy Bombardment (LHB), or sometimes the Lunar Cataclysm, to distinguish it from the prior
ﬁnal accretion of the planets at 4.5 Ga. Speciﬁcally, the lunar cataclysm hypothesis (1,2) postulates that the intense bombardment of the Moon lasted only a very short period of time, 20–200
My (2–5). Recent results on the impact ages of lunar meteorites (which represent a much broader
region of the lunar surface than the Apollo samples) support this hypothesis (6–8). Furthermore,
the impact-reset ages of meteoritic samples of asteroids (9–10) and the shock-metamorphosing at
3.92 Ga of the only known sample of the heavily cratered highlands of Mars, meteorite Allan Hills
84001 (11), indicate that the LHB aﬀected the entire inner Solar System, not just the Moon.
Identifying the sources of planetary impactors has proven elusive. Dynamical models invoking
both geocentric and heliocentric debris and both asteroidal and cometary reservoirs have been
1Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
2National Astronomical Observatory, Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan.
“This manuscript has been published in Science .
This version pre-dates the ﬁnal editing. Please refer to the complete version of record at This manuscript may not be
reproduced or used in any manner that does not fall within the fair use provisions of the Copyright Act without the
prior, written permission of AAAS.”
Correspondence should be addressed to Renu Malhotra, email: 
proposed (12), but chemical analyses of Apollo samples of impact melts point to a dominantly
asteroid reservoir for the lunar cataclysm (10). In this paper, we provide compelling new evidence
that the source of the LHB impactors was the main asteroid belt, and that the dynamical mechanism
that caused the LHB was unique in the history of the Solar System and distinct from the processes
producing the ﬂux of objects that currently hit planetary surfaces.
We examined the crater size distributions (13) of surface units of various ages on the Moon,
Mars and Mercury, based on published data (14,15) supplemented by new crater counts (S1). Of
the terrestrial planets, only the Moon, Mercury and Mars have heavily cratered surfaces. These
surfaces all have complex size distributions, as seen in Fig. 1a. The curves for Mercury and Mars
are steeper than the lunar curve at diameters less than about 40 km, because plains formation
has obliterated a fraction of the smaller craters (S2). Therefore, the lunar highlands curve best
represents the shape of what we shall call the Population 1 crater size distribution.
In addition to the highlands, the crater curves for Martian old plains east of the Tharsis region,
old plains within the Hellas basin and plains within and surrounding the Caloris basin on Mercury
also have the same shape as the lunar highland curve over the same diameter range, but with a
lower crater density (16). The lower crater densities imply that these older plains probably formed
near the tail end of the LHB, about 3.8 billion years ago.
For the younger surfaces, the crater size distribution curves are ﬂat and distinctly diﬀerent
(Fig. 1b). These include the lightly cratered, hence younger, plains on Mars and the Moon, as
well as fresh craters with well-deﬁned ejecta blankets (Class 1 craters) on the Moon. This crater
population we call Population 2.
The crater density on Venus (Fig. 2) is about an order of magnitude less than on Mars.
Only young craters are present, evidently because older craters have been erased by multiple global
resurfacing events (17). Furthermore, small craters are scarce on Venus because its thick atmosphere
screens out small impactors (18). Part of the Venus crater population consists of clusters of craters
(multiples) that result from fragmentation of the impacting object in the dense atmosphere. These
comprise 16% of all Venus craters (S1). The size distribution of these multiples is also shown in
Fig. 2, where the diameter is derived from the sum of the crater areas in the cluster. The turnover
of the curve for multiple craters does not occur until diameters less than 9 km; at larger diameters
the curve is ﬂat. This, together with the much lower crater density, strongly suggests that the
impacting population on Venus was the same as Population 2 on the Moon and Mars. It is also
evidence that the turnover of the crater curve is indeed due to atmospheric screening.
The two characteristic shapes of the crater curves in the inner Solar System are summarized in
Fig. 3. We conclude that the terrestrial planets have been impacted by two populations of objects
which are distinguishable by their size distributions. Population 1 is responsible for the LHB, and
Population 2 is responsible for the post–LHB period and up to the present time.
A number of studies on the physics of impact cratering on solid bodies have derived projectile–
crater scaling laws. We used the Pi scaling law (19) to derive the projectile size distribution for
Population 1 and Population 2 impactors. We used the lunar highland crater curves as representative of Population 1 and the Martian young plains as representative of Population 2, as these
provide the best statistics. (We did not include crater diameters greater than 500 km, because
of scaling uncertainties.) We assumed projectile parameters appropriate for asteroidal impacts:
density of 3 g cm−3 (similar to basaltic rock), an impact angle of 45◦and impact velocities of 17
km s−1 and 12 km s−1 on the Moon and on Mars, respectively (20). In Fig. 4, we compare these
distributions to recent determinations of the size distributions of the main belt asteroids (MBAs)
(21–23) and Near Earth Asteroids (NEAs) (24). The size distribution of the current MBAs is virtually identical to the Population 1 projectile size distribution, as pointed out in (25). This result
indicates that the objects responsible for the LHB originated from Main Belt asteroids. Unless
comets or Kuiper belt objects have the same size distribution, these objects could not have been
signiﬁcant contributors to the LHB.
The close match between the current MBA size distribution and that of the LHB projectiles
implies that the main asteroid belt has remained unchanged in its size distribution over the past
3.8 Gy. There are two possible interpretations of this result: either collisional processes produced
a steady-state size distribution in the main asteroid belt at least as early as 3.8 Ga, or the collision
frequency in the main asteroid belt was drastically reduced around 3.8 Ga.
The mechanism responsible for ejecting asteroids from the main asteroid belt and into terrestrial planet-crossing orbits during the LHB had to be unique to the early Solar System because
there is no evidence for any subsequent event of similar magnitude in the inner planets’ cratering
history since then. Furthermore, that mechanism had to be one that ejected asteroids from the
main belt in a size–independent manner, preserving the MBA size distribution in the inner planet
impactor population. This precludes size–dependent non–gravitational transport processes, such
as the Yarkovsky eﬀect, and instead implicates a dynamical process, such as sweeping gravitational
resonances, that was largely insensitive to asteroid mass.
A dynamical mechanism consistent with the above constraints that explains the congruence of
the size distributions of the MBAs and the Population 1 projectiles, involves the orbital migration of
the giant planets. Such migration of the outer planets is thought to have occurred on a timescale of
about 107–108 years early in Solar System history (26–29), and it would have caused severe depletion
of the asteroid belt due to orbital instabilities that ensue as strong Jovian mean motion resonances
sweep across this zone (30). This phenomenon would have caused the Moon and terrestrial planets
to be cataclysmically bombarded by asteroids and icy planetesimals (comets) for a period of 10–100
Myr (31). A recently proposed variation on the giant planet migration theory invokes the change
of the eccentricities of Jupiter and Saturn, if and when these planets passed through a 1:2 orbital
resonance during their orbital migration (32). Such resonance passage would have destabilized the
planetesimal disk beyond the orbits of the planets, causing a sudden massive delivery of comets
to the inner Solar System; in this scenario, the asteroid belt is also destabilized due to sweeping
gravitational resonances; together, these cause a signiﬁcant spike in the intensity of cometary as
well as asteroid impacts on the inner planets (33).
In either scenario, the relative intensity of comets versus asteroids in the projectile population
of the LHB is not well determined by the published dynamical simulations.
Since the impact
signature in the crater record in the inner Solar System is asteroidal, we conclude that either
comets played a minor role or their impact record was erased by later–impacting asteroids.
Both of these mechanisms predict a LHB lasting between ∼10 My and ∼150 My. Therefore,
the LHB was a catastrophic event that occurred from about 3.9 Ga to 3.8 Ga. Because of this, it is
not possible to use the crater record to date surfaces older than about 3.9 Gy; the previous crater
record has been obliterated by this event. The heavily cratered highlands of the Moon, Mars and
Mercury that register Population 1 were resurfaced 3.9 billion years old, although older rock relics
may have survived.
The size distribution of Population 2 projectiles (Fig. 4) is the same as the NEAs and quite
diﬀerent from the LHB projectiles. Thus, NEAs are largely responsible for the cratering record after
3.8 Ga. This result is contrary to the ﬁndings in (34) that apparently used biased data containing
observational losses (cf. ref. 24) and whose analysis based on cumulative (rather than diﬀerential)
size distributions was not suﬃciently sensitive to the diﬀerences in the distributions.
A plausible reason that the MBAs and the NEAs have such a diﬀerent size distribution is the
Yarkovsky eﬀect that causes secular changes in orbital energy of an asteroid due to the asymmetric
way a spinning asteroid absorbs and reradiates solar energy (35).
Over a few tens of millions
of years the eﬀect is large enough to transport a signiﬁcant number of sub–20 km size asteroids
into strong Jovian resonances (36) that deliver them into terrestrial planet-crossing orbits. The
magnitude of the eﬀect depends on the size of the asteroid: for diameters greater than about 10 m,
the smaller the asteroid the larger the eﬀect. This explains why the NEAs (Population 2 projectiles)
have relatively more small objects compared to MBAs. Because the younger post-LHB surfaces
have been impacted primarily by NEAs, the ages of these surfaces can be derived from the crater
production rate of NEAs. However, the ages derived from the NEA impacts will be an upper limit
because we do not know the comet crater production rate with any certainty.
Our results further imply that dating surfaces of solid bodies in the outer solar system using the
inner planet cratering record is not valid. Attempts have been made to date outer planet surfaces
on an absolute time scale by assuming that the crater population found in the inner Solar System
is the same throughout the entire Solar System and has the same origin. In light of our results,
this assumption is false. Additional evidence to support this conclusion is found in the cratering
record of the Jovian satellites. Indeed, Callisto has a crater size distribution diﬀerent than both
Population 1 and Population 2 craters (37,38).