A Deep Ensemble Learning Method for Monaural Speech
Separation
Xiao-Lei Zhang [Member, IEEE] and DeLiang Wang [Fellow, IEEE]
Department of Computer Science and Engineering and the Center for Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA, and also with the Center of
Intelligent Acoustics and Immersive Communications, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, China
Monaural speech separation is a fundamental problem in robust speech processing. Recently, deep
neural network (DNN)-based speech separation methods, which predict either clean speech or an
ideal time-frequency mask, have demonstrated remarkable performance improvement. However, a
single DNN with a given window length does not leverage contextual information sufficiently, and
the differences between the two optimization objectives are not well understood. In this paper, we
propose a deep ensemble method, named multicontext networks, to address monaural speech
separation. The first multicontext network averages the outputs of multiple DNNs whose inputs
employ different window lengths. The second multicontext network is a stack of multiple DNNs.
Each DNN in a module of the stack takes the concatenation of original acoustic features and
expansion of the soft output of the lower module as its input, and predicts the ratio mask of the
target speaker; the DNNs in the same module employ different contexts. We have conducted
extensive experiments with three speech corpora. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method. We have also compared the two optimization objectives systematically and
found that predicting the ideal time-frequency mask is more efficient in utilizing clean training
speech, while predicting clean speech is less sensitive to SNR variations.
Deep neural networks; ensemble learning; mapping-based separation; masking-based separation;
monaural speech separation; multicontext networks
I. Introduction
Monaural speech separation aims to separate the speech signal of a target speaker from
background noise or interfering speech from a single-microphone recording. In this paper,
we focus on the problem of separating a target speaker from an interfering speaker. This
problem is challenging because the target and interfering speakers have similar spectral
shapes. A solution is important for a wide range of applications, such as speech
communication, speech coding, speaker recognition, and speech recognition (e.g. , ).
( ; ).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016
December 01.
 
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. 2016 March ; 24(5): 967–977. doi:10.1109/TASLP.
2016.2536478.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
It is theoretically an ill-posed problem with a single microphone, and to solve this problem,
various assumptions have to be made. Recently, supervised (data-driven) speech separation
has received much attention . Based on the definition of the training target, supervised
separation methods can be categorized to (i) masking-based methods and (ii) mapping-based
Masking-based methods learn a mapping function from a mixed signal to a time-frequency
(T-F) mask, and then use the estimated mask to separate the mixed signal. These methods
typically predict the ideal binary mask (IBM) or ideal ratio mask (IRM). For the IBM , a
T-F unit is assigned 1, if the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) within the unit exceeds a local
criterion, indicating target dominance. Otherwise, it is assigned 0, indicating interference
dominance. For the IRM , a T-F unit is assigned some ratio of target energy and mixture
energy. Kim et al. used Gaussian mixture models (GMM) to learn the distribution of
target and interference dominant T-F units and then built a Bayesian classifier to estimate the
IBM. Jin and Wang employed multilayer perceptron with one hidden layer, to estimate
the IBM, and their method demonstrates promising results in reverberant conditions. Han
and Wang used support vector machines (SVM) for mask estimation and produced
more accurate classification than GMM-based classifiers. May and Dau first used
GMM to calculate the posterior probabilities of target dominance in T-F units and then
trained SVM with the new features for IBM estimation. Their method can generalize to a
wide range of SNR variation.
Recently, motivated by the success of deep neural networks (DNN) with more than one
hidden layer, Wang and Wang first introduced DNN to perform binary classification for
speech separation. Their DNN-based method significantly outperforms earlier separation
methods. Subsequently, Wang et al. examined a number of training targets and
suggested that the IRM should be preferred over the IBM in terms of speech quality. Huang
et al. , used DNN and recurrent neural network (RNN) to minimize the
reconstruction loss of the spectra of two premixed speakers by embedding the IRM into the
loss function (later called signal approximation in ). The method demonstrates
significant performance improvement over standard NMF based methods. Weninger et al.
 took signal approximation (SA) as the optimization objective and introduced long shortterm memory (LSTM) structure into RNN which outperforms DNN and NMF based
methods. Erdogan et al. and Weninger et al. further extended the SA to a phasesensitive case and used LSTM for speech denoising. Williamson et al. proposed
complex ratio masking for DNN based monaural speech separation, which learns the real
and imaginary components of complex spectrograms jointly in the Cartesian coordinate
system instead of learning magnitude spectrograms only in the traditional polar coordinate
system. The method improves speech quality significantly.
Mapping-based methods learn a regression function from a mixed signal to clean speech
directly, which differs from masking-based methods in optimization objectives. Xu et al.
 – trained DNN as a regression model to perform speech separation and showed a
significant improvement over conventional speech enhancement methods. Han et al. ,
 used DNN to learn a mapping from reverberant and reverberant-noisy speech to
anechoic speech. Their spectral mapping approach substantially improves SNR and
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
objective speech intelligibility. Du et al. improved the method in with global
variance equailization, dropout training, and noise-aware training strategies. They
demonstrated significant improvement over a GMM-based method and good generalization
to unseen speakers in testing. Tu et al. trained DNN to estimate not only the target
speech but also the interfering speech. They showed that using dual outputs improves the
quality of speech separation.
Speech signal is highly structured, and leveraging temporal context is important for
improving the performance of a speech processing method. Generally, a learning machine
uses the concatenation of neighboring frames instead of a single frame as its input for
predicting the output. A good choice of input expansion is to select a fixed contextual
window that performs the best among several candidate windows. For example, in , the
masking-based method sets the window length to 3; in , the mapping-based method sets
the window length to 7. However, different candidate windows may provide complementary
information that can further improve the performance.
In addition, ensemble learning, which integrates multiple weak learners to create a stronger
one, has not been systematically explored for speech separation. Ensemble learning is a
methodology applicable to various machine learning methods. There are two key elements
for ensemble learning to succeed: (i) weak learners are at least stronger than random guess,
and (ii) strong diversity exists among the weak learners . For the former, DNN is a good
choice; for the latter, there are a number of ways to enlarge the diversity by manipulating
input features, output targets, training data, and hyperparameters of base learners . We
should point out that Le Roux et al. proposed to integrate the outputs of multiple base
learners by majority voting or shallow meta learners, e.g. support vector machines, for
speech denoising.
Motivated by the above considerations as well as the recent success of the multi-resolution
cochleagram feature and the relationship between the feature and its components ,
we investigate DNN-based speech separation by incorporating DNN into the framework of
ensemble learning in this paper. We propose the multi-context networks, where the term
“context” denotes a window of neighboring frames. In addition, we analyze the differences
between the two optimization objectives, i.e. ideal masking and spectral mapping,
systematically. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
Multi-context networks for speech separation. Multi-context networks
are ensembles of DNNs. Each DNN uses the IRM or SA as the training
target. The first multi-context network is multi-context averaging (MCA),
which simply averages the outputs of the DNNs. Each DNN in MCA takes
the expansion of raw features in a contextual window as its input. The
DNNs have different windows. The second multi-context network is multicontext stacking (MCS), which is a stack of DNN ensembles. Each DNN
in a module of the stack first concatenates original acoustic features and
the estimated ratio masks from the lower module as a new acoustic
feature, and then takes the expansion of the new feature in a contextual
window as its input. The DNNs in the same module have different
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
windows. Multi-context networks improve the accuracy of DNN by
ensembling and stacking, and enlarge the diversity between the DNNs
with the multi-context scheme which manipulates the input features of
Comparison of masking and mapping for DNN-based speech separation.
The methods in comparison use the same type of DNN in multi-context
networks. Our systematic comparison leads to the following conclusions.
(i) The masking-based approach is more effective in utilizing the clean
training speech of a target speaker. (ii) The mapping-based method is less
sensitive to the SNR variation of a training corpus. (iii) Given a training
corpus with a fixed mixture SNR and plenty of clean training speech from
the target speaker, the mapping and masking-based methods tend to
perform equally well.
We have conducted extensive experiments on the corpora of speech separation challenge ,
TIMIT , and IEEE , and found that the proposed methods outperform previous
mapping- and masking-based methods in all experiments.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the multi-context networks. In
Section III, we analyze the differences between mapping and masking. In Section IV and
Section V, we present the results. Finally, we conclude in Section VI.
II. Multicontext Networks
In this section, we introduce two multi-context networks, present three optimization
objectives, introduce the DNN model in the multi-context networks, and discuss related
A. Multicontext Averaging
MCA averages the outputs of multiple DNNs whose inputs employ different contexts.
Specifically, in the preprocessing stage of MCA training, given a mixed signal and the
corresponding clean signals of a target speaker and an interfering speaker, we extract the
magnitude spectra of their short time Fourier transform (STFT) features, denoted as
, respectively, where M is the number of frames for the mixed
signal, and subscript a denotes the target speaker and subscript b the interfering speaker. We
further calculate the IRM of the target speaker, denoted as
, from the STFT
features (see Section II-C for the definitions of the IRM and SA).
In the training stage, suppose that MCA contains P DNNs (P > 1). The pth DNN learns a
mapping function IRMm = fp(vm,p) where the input vm,p is an expansion of the raw feature
ym at a half-window length Wp:
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Note that if the SA, which is the squared loss between
and its estimation, is used as the
optimization objective, the pth DNN learns IRMm = fp(vm,p) implicitly, and the output of the
DNN in the test stage is an estimated ratio mask.
In the test stage of MCA, given a mixed signal of two speakers in the time domain, we first
by STFT, where ym and θm represent the magnitude vector
and phase vector of the mth frame respectively. We use the expansions of
inputs of the DNNs and get the estimated ratio masks, denoted as
average the outputs of the DNNs by:
Then, we get the estimated magnitude spectra
Finally, we transform
back to the time-domain signals via the inverse
STFT, where the operator ⊙ denotes the element-wise product. Note that we use the noisy
phase to do resynthesis, and the Hamming window in STFT.
B. Multicontext Stacking
MCS is a stack of ensemble learning machines, as shown in Fig. 1. The learning machines in
a module of the stack have different contextual window lengths; they take the concatenation
of the output predictions of their lower module and the original acoustic features as their
input. MCS can be either mapping-based, masking-based, or a combination of mapping and
masking. In this paper, we instantiate the learning machines by DNN and use the IRM or SA
as the optimization objective. Compared to MCA, MCS fuses the outputs of the base DNNs
in a nonlinear way.
The preprocessing stage of MCS training is the same as that of MCA training. In the training
stage, MCS learns a mapping function IRM = f(y) given a training corpus of mixed signals.
Suppose MCS trains S modules, and the sth module has Ps learning machines, denoted as
, each of which has a unique half-window length
(see Eq. (3) below). The
pth DNN learns the mapping function
where the input
expansion of the feature
at a half-window length
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
defined as:
are the estimated IRMs of yn produced by the (s − 1)th module
is an integer. Note that we usually train only one model
with an empirically optimal window length at the top module, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
In the test stage of MCS, we use the magnitude vectors
as the input of MCS and
get the estimated ratio masks in each module. After getting the estimated ratio masks
from the top module, we first get the estimated magnitude spectra
and then transform
back to the timedomain signals via the inverse STFT.
C. Optimization Objectives
The general training objective of DNN-based speech separation methods is given as follows:
where ℓ(·) measures training loss, dm represents the desired output at frame m, and α is the
parameter set of the speech separation algorithm f(·).
1) Direct Mapping—Mapping-based DNN methods learn a mapping function from the
spectrum of the mixed signal to the spectrum of the clean speech of the target speaker
directly, which can be formulated as the following minimum mean squared error problem:
where ∥ · ∥2 is the squared loss. In the test stage, mapping-based methods transform the
prediction
back to the time-domain signal by inverse STFT.
2) Ratio Masking—Masking-based DNN methods learn a mapping function from the
spectrum of the mixed signal to the ideal time-frequency mask of the clean utterance of the
target speaker:
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
where IRMm is the ideal mask, and the output of fα(ym) is restricted to the range . In
the test stage, we first apply the estimated mask RMm to the spectrum of the mixed signal
and then transform the estimated spectrum
back to the
time-domain signal by inverse STFT.
The ideal ratio mask in MCS is defined as:
at frequency k respectively, ϵ is a very small positive
constant to prevent the denominator from being zero, and K is number of STFT frequency
Wang et al. point out that masking as a form of normalization reduces the dynamic
range of target values, leading to different training efficiency compared to mapping.
3) Signal Approximation—SA-based DNN methods learn a mapping function from the
spectrum of the mixed signal to the IRM, which is the same as IRM-based methods.
However, different from common IRM-based methods which evaluate the squared training
loss between the IRM and the estimated mask, SA-based methods evaluate the squared
training loss between the spectrum of the target speech and the estimated spectrum, which is
the same as the direct mapping. The SA is defined formally as follows:
The output of fα(ym) is restricted to the range and bounded as the IRM.
D. DNN in Multicontext Networks
A DNN model has a number of nonlinear hidden layers plus an output layer. Each layer has
a number of model neurons (or mapping functions). The model can be described as follows:
where l = 1,…,L denotes the lth hidden layer from the bottom, hl(·) denotes nonlinear
activation functions of the lth hidden layer, g(·) activation functions of the output layer, and
y is the input feature vector. Common activation functions for the hidden layers include the
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
sigmoid function
tanh function, and more recently rectified linear
function b = max(0, a) where a is the input and b the output of a neuron. Common activation
functions in the output layer include the linear function b = a, softmax function, and sigmoid
function. Because the rectified linear function is shown to result in faster training and better
learning of local patterns, we use it as the activation function for the hidden layers of DNN.
As the training target is the IRM whose value varies between , we use the sigmoid
function for the output layer.
Traditionally, DNN employs full connections between consecutive layers, which tends to
overfit data and be sensitive to different hyperparameter settings. Dropout , which
randomly deactivates a percentage of neurons, was proposed recently to alleviate the
problem. It has been analyzed that dropout provides as a regularization term for DNN
training. Due to this regularization, we are able to train much larger DNN model. Therefore,
we use dropout for DNN training.
Although early research in deep learning uses pretraining to prevent poor local minima,
recent experience shows that, when data sets are large enough, pretraining does not further
improve the performance of DNN. Therefore, we do not pretrain DNN. In addition, we use
the adaptive stochastic gradient descent algorithm with a momentum term to
accelerate gradient descent and to facilitate parallel computing.
E. Related Work
The MCS described above is different from our preliminary work in which used MCS
for separating speech from non-speech noise, boosted DNN as the base weak learner, the
ideal binary mask as the optimization objective, and multi-resolution cochleagram as the
acoustic feature.
The method in fuses multiple DNNs that have different optimization objectives and
hidden layers. This method is designed for separating speech from nonspeech signals, such
as random noise and music. Note that our work was developed independently at about the
same time (see ).
The proposed method is also different from deep convex networks and tensor deep
stacking networks . Although these two methods take the raw feature and the output of
the lower module as the input to the upper module, each module of these networks is a
single shallow network, while each module of our method is an ensemble of deep networks
that emphasizes the importance of contextual information. Moreover, these methods are
mainly developed for speech recognition.
III. Mapping and Masking
Here, we report two novel differences between mapping- and masking-based methods.
Mapping-based methods are less sensitive to the SNR variation of training data than
masking-based methods. Specifically, the optimization objective min
tends to recover the spectra xa that have large energy and sacrifice those that have small
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
energy, so that the overall loss is minimized. Fig. 2 illustrates such an example, where a
target utterance (Fig. 2a) is mixed with an interfering utterance (Fig. 2b) at multiple SNR
levels (Figs. 2c, 2e, and 2g). For mapping-based methods, no matter how the SNR changes,
the reference xa (Fig. 2a) is unchanged, which means that only the energy of y affects the
optimization. On the contrary, for masking-based methods, the energy of the ideal masks
IRM (Figs. 2d, 2f, and 2h) becomes small with the decrease of the SNR. One can imagine
that when the SNR is low, the estimated ratio mask tends to suffer a larger loss than the
estimated reference
in mapping-based methods. As a result, when the SNR of a training
corpus varies in a wide range, masking-based methods likely perform worse than mappingbased methods at low SNR levels.
Masking-based methods can explore the mutual information between target and interfering
speakers better than mapping-based methods. Specifically, data-driven methods, such as
DNN, need a large number of different patterns to train a good machine. When a target
speaker has a limited number of utterances, we usually create a large training corpus by
mixing each utterance of the target speaker with many utterances of interfering speakers.
Fig. 3 illustrates such a process where one utterance of a target speaker (Fig. 3a) is mixed
with two utterances of an interfering speaker (Figs. 3b and 3c), each at 0 dB, which produces
two spectrograms from the two mixed signals (Figs. 3d and 3e) and two ideal ratio masks
(Figs. 3f and 3g). In the IRM illustrations of Figs. 3f and 3g, white corresponds to 1 and
black to 0. Mapping-based methods learn a mapping function from the spectrograms in Figs.
3d and 3e to the same output pattern in Fig. 3a. On the contrary, masking-based methods
learn a mapping function that projects the spectrogram in Fig. 3d to the ideal ratio mask in
Fig. 3f, and the spectrogram in Fig. 3e to the ideal ratio mask in Fig. 3g, respectively. In
other words, training targets are different depending on interfering utterances (see also ).
Therefore, masking-based methods can potentially utilize the training patterns better than
mapping-based methods, and hence likely achieve better performance. SA-based methods
optimize the IRM implicitly, and evaluate the training loss between the spectrograms of the
clean speech and separated speech – . In a way, SA combines the aforementioned
merits of the IRM and direct mapping.
IV. Results With Speaker-Pair Dependent Training
In this section, we evaluate multi-context networks and compare the optimization objectives
of mapping and masking systematically when target and interfering speakers are the same in
the training and test corpora, i.e. speaker-pair dependent training. We trained hundreds of
DNN models and reported the average results over the 4 possible gender pairs in all
experiments, where the first speaker of a gender pair is the target speaker and the other one
interfering speaker. See Supplementary Material for the detailed results on each gender pair.
As analyzed in Section III, two factors affect the performance of mapping- and maskingbased methods: (i) insufficiency of the clean training utterances and (ii) the variation of SNR
in the training set. The two factors lead to different training scenarios, analyzed in Sections
IV-B to IV-E.
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets—We used the speech separation challenge (SSC) dataset as the separation
corpus. SSC has predefined training and test corpora. The training corpus contains 34
speakers, each of which has 500 clean utterances. Each mixed signal in the test corpus is
also produced from a pair of speakers in the training corpus. Because each pair of speakers
contains at most 2 test mixtures, we did not use the test corpus. Instead, we randomly picked
2 pairs of speakers for each gender pair from the training corpus, which generated 8
separation tasks. See Sections IV-B to IV-E for the description of the training sets of the four
training scenarios. Each task had 7 test SNR levels ranging from {−12, −9, −6, −3, 0, 3, 6}
dB. The test set at each SNR level contained 50 mixed signals. Each component of a mixed
signal was a clean utterance from the last 50 utterances of the corresponding speaker.
We resampled all corpora to 8 kHz, and extracted the STFT features with the frame length
set to 25 ms and the frame shift set to 10 ms.
2) Comparison Methods and Parameter Settings—We compared the DNN-, MCA-
and MCS-based speech separation methods with direct mapping (Map), IRM, or SA as the
objective. The comparison methods, which were denoted in the format of model + objective,
were DNN+Map, DNN+IRM, MCA+IRM, MCS+IRM, DNN+SA, MCA+SA, and MCS
+SA respectively. For all comparison methods, we used DFT to extract acoustic features. For
the MCA-based method, we trained 3 base DNNs with parameters W1, W2, W3 set to 1, 2,
and 3 respectively. For the MCS-based method, we trained two modules (i.e. parameter S =
2). For the bottom module of MCS, we trained 3 DNNs with parameters
set to 1, 2, and 3 respectively. For the top module of MCS, we trained 1 DNN with
We searched for the optimal parameter settings of DNN using a development task, and used
the optimal settings in all evaluation tasks. The development task was constructed from two
male speakers of SSC. Its training set contained 1000 mixtures, and its test set contained 50
mixtures, both of which were at −12 dB.
The selected parameter settings are as follows. DNN was optimized by the minimum mean
square error criterion. Each DNN has 2 hidden layers, each of which consists of 2048
rectified linear neurons. The output neurons of the DNN for the mapping-based method are
the linear neurons. The output neurons of the DNNs for the masking-based methods were
the sigmoid functions. The number of epoches for backpropagation training was set to 50.
The batch size was set to 128. The scaling factor for the adaptive stochastic gradient descent
was set to 0.0015, and the learning rate decreased linearly from 0.08 to 0.001. The
momentum of the first 5 epoches was set to 0.5, and the momentum of other epoches was set
to 0.9. The dropout rate of the hidden neurons was set to 0.2. The half-window length W
(defined in Eq. (3)) was set to 3 for the mapping-based method, and set to 1 for the maskingbased methods.
We normalized data before training. For DNN+Map, we first normalized the training data
to zero mean and unit standard deviation in each dimension, and then used the same
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
normalization factor to normalize both the training references
and the test data.
After getting the predictions in the test stage, we converted the predictions back to the
original scale by the same normalization factor. For the IRM-based methods, we first
normalized
and then used the same normalization factor to normalize the test data.
For the SA-based methods, we did not normalize the input and output of the training data
due to the definition of the SA.
3) Evaluation Metrics—We used the short-time objective intelligibility (STOI) as the
evaluation metric. STOI evaluates the objective speech intelligibility of time-domain signals.
It has been shown empirically that STOI scores are well correlated with human speech
intelligibility scores. The higher the STOI value is, the better the predicted intelligibility is.
STOI is a standard metric for evaluating speech separation performance , , .
B. Comparison With Single-SNR Training and Sufficient Clean Training Data
This scenario aims to evaluate the comparison methods without the complicating factors of
SNR variation and insufficient training data. For each test SNR level of a task, we generated
1000 mixed signals at the same SNR level as the corresponding training set. Each
component of a mixture in the training set was a clean utterance randomly selected from the
first 450 utterances of the corresponding speaker.
We conducted a comparison at each SNR level of each separation task, and report the
average results of the 8 tasks. Table I lists the comparison results. From the table, we
observe that (i) all methods improve STOI scores over the original mixed signals
significantly, particularly at low SNR levels; (ii) the proposed methods slightly outperform
the DNN-based methods; (iii) MCA and MCS perform equally well; (iv) DNN+Map and
DNN+IRM perform equally well; (v) the SA-based methods outperform the Map- and IRMbased methods.
C. Comparison With Single-SNR Training and Insufficient Clean Training Data
This scenario aims to evaluate how insufficient clean training utterances affect the
performance. For each test SNR level of a task, we generated 1000 mixed signals at the same
SNR level as the training set. Different from Section IV-B, the 1000 mixed signals were
generated from only 20 clean training utterances, in which 10 clean training utterances were
randomly selected from the target speaker and the other 10 from the interfering speaker.
Each mixture in the training set was constructed by first randomly selecting 2 clean
utterances, each from the 10 utterances of a speaker, then shifting the interfering utterance
randomly, wrapping the shifted utterance circularly, and finally mixing the two utterances
together. Note that the random shift operation was used to synthesize a large number of
mixtures from a small number of clean utterances.
Table II lists the average comparison results of the 8 tasks. From the table, we observe that
(i) all methods improve the STOI scores at the low SNR levels. (ii) The IRM-based methods
significantly outperform DNN+Map, except for MCS+IRM which is slightly inferior to
DNN+Map at −12dB. (iii) The SA-based methods significantly outperform DNN+Map and
IRM-based methods. (iv) The MCA-based methods outperform DNN-based methods. (v)
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MCS+IRM is inferior to DNN+IRM. (vi) MCS+SA outperforms DNN+SA and is identical
to MCA+SA at low SNR levels. The comparison results between DNN, MCA, and MCS
suggest that, if we do not have sufficient clean training data, we should use MCA to
aggregate the base DNNs.
Moreover, comparing Table I and Table II, we find that DNN+Map works well with
sufficient clean training utterances, while the IRM- and SA-based methods work well on
both corpora, consistent with our analysis in Section III. Not surprisingly, the STOI
improvements are smaller when the dataset has much fewer clean training utterances for
each speaker.
Note that, in this paper, we only used a simple pattern augmentation method—random shift
of interfering utterances— to enlarge the noisy training set. It is worthy further exploring
other pattern augmentation methods, such as noise rate perturbation, vocal tract length
perturbation, and frequency perturbation .
D. Comparison With Multi-SNR Training and Sufficient Clean Training Data
This scenario aims to evaluate how the variation of training SNR affects the performance.
We used the experimental settings in Section IV-A1 and made 8 speech separation tasks,
each of which had 7 test sets. Different from Section IV-B where each task had 7 training
sets, we had only 1 training set for each task encompassing various SNRs. Each training set
of SSC contained 10,000 mixed signals. Each training mixture had a random SNR level
varying between −13 dB and 10 dB with the increment of 1 dB.
For each speech separation task, we tested the model on all 7 test sets at different SNRs.
Then, we report the average results of the 8 tasks. Table III lists the comparison results on
the SSC corpus. From the table, we observe that (i) all methods improve the STOI scores
over the original mixed signals significantly. (ii) The MCS-based methods perform overall
the best across all SNR levels, while the performance of the MCA-based methods is close to
that of the MCS-based methods. (iii) DNN+IRM underperforms DNN+Map at low SNR
levels, while the SA-based methods outperform DNN+Map and the IRM-based methods,
consistent with our analysis in Section III.
E. Comparison With Multi-SNR Training and Insufficient Clean Training Data
We followed the same construction method of the training sets as in Section IV-D and made
8 speech separation tasks, each of which had 1 training set and 7 test sets. Each training set
had 10,000 mixed signals, each of which was generated in the same way and from the same
20 randomly selected utterances as in Section IV-C and had a random SNR level as in
Section IV-D. We trained and evaluated the models in the same way as in Section IV-D.
Table IV lists the comparison results. From the table, we observe a similar performance
profile and that the insufficiency of clean training data has a larger effect on the performance
than the variation of the training SNR, albeit STOI improvements are lower compared to the
results with the full SSC corpus.
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Moreover, comparing Table III with Table I, we find that, when a training set is generated
from a large number of clean utterances (each speaker has 450 clean utterances), enlarging
the size of the training set from 1000 mixed signals in Table I to 10,000 mixed signals in
Table III significantly elevates the performance. On the other hand, we find that, when a
training set is constructed from limited clean utterances (each speaker has only 10
utterances), enlarging the size of the training set from 1000 mixed signals in Table II to
10,000 mixed signals in Table IV does not elevate the performance. This can be seen from
the fact that the results at low SNR levels in Table IV are worse than those in Table II.
V. Results With Target Dependent Training
In this section, we evaluate the generalization ability of the MCA- and MCS-based methods
when interfering speakers in the test set are different from those in the training set, but the
target speakers of the training and test corpora are the same. Also, SNR levels of the test
corpus are different from those of the training corpus.
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets—We used the IEEE corpus as the source of target speakers and TIMIT
 as the source of interfering speakers. We call this the IEEE-TIMIT corpus. The IEEE
corpus has one male speaker and one female speaker. Each speaker utters 720 clean
utterances. TIMIT contains 630 speakers, each of which has 10 clean utterances. We
constructed two tasks, each of which took a speaker in the IEEE corpus as the target speaker
and took the speakers in the TIMIT corpus as the interfering speakers.
Each task had one training set. The training set had 6000 mixed signals with the SNR in dB
varying in the range of [−13, −11, −10, −8, −7, −5, −4, −2, −1, 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The
utterance of a target speaker in a mixed signal was randomly selected from the first 640
utterances of the speaker. The utterance of an interfering speaker in a mixed signal was
randomly selected from the first 8 utterances of the randomly selected 620 speakers (out of
630 speakers) of TIMIT (4960 utterances in total).
Each task had 7 test sets with the SNR levels ranging at −12, −9, −6, −3, 0, 3, and 6 dB.
Each test set had 80 mixed signals. The target component of a mixture was a clean utterance
selected from the last 80 clean utterances of a speaker in the IEEE corpus. The interfering
utterance of a mixture was selected from the first 8 utterances of the remaining 10 speakers
of TIMIT which include 6 male and 4 female speakers.
Note that because the SSC corpus does not have sufficient speakers for training targetdependent models, we used the TIMIT corpus as the source of interfering speakers. Since
TIMIT utterances have durations close to those of IEEE and are much longer than those of
SSC, we used the IEEE corpus as the source of target speakers.
2) Comparison Methods—Besides the 7 comparison methods in Section IV, we further
evaluated the proposed methods with a concatenation of the estimations of both the IRM and
SA. Specifically, we trained 3 IRM-based DNNs and 3 SA-based DNNs in the bottom
module of MCA or MCS as in Section IV. For MCA, we averaged the outputs of the 6
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
DNNs; the method was denoted as MCA+IRM+SA. For MCS, we concatenated the outputs
of the 6 DNNs as part of the input of the upper module, and used the SA as the optimization
objective of the DNN in the upper module; the method was denoted as MCS+IRM+SA. The
parameter settings of all DNN models followed those described in Section IV-A2.
3) Evaluation Metrics—Besides STOI, we used the source to distortion ratio (SDR) ,
a metric similar to SNR for evaluating the quality of separation.
B. Main Results
Tables V and VI list the comparison results on the IEEE-TIMIT corpus in terms of STOI and
SDR respectively. From the tables, we observe the following results. (i) All methods
improve the STOI and SDR scores over the original mixed signals significantly. (ii) The
MCA- and MCS-based methods out-perform the DNN-based methods at all SNR levels. (iii)
MCS outperforms MCA at all SNR levels, particularly when the IRM is used as the
optimization objective. (iv) DNN+IRM outperforms DNN+Map between −6 dB and 6 dB,
whereas DNN+Map outperforms DNN+IRM at −12 dB and −9 dB. The SA-based methods
outperform DNN+Map and the IRM-based methods. The relative performance of DNN
+Map and DNN+IRM is consistent with our analysis in Section III. Note also that the
relative performance profiles are similar in STOI and SDR.
Comparing Table V with Tables I and III, we find that even if the interfering speakers are
unseen during training, target dependent training can still reach similar performance to that
of speaker-pair dependent training. This demonstrates the strong generalization of the DNNbased speech separation methods.
C. MCS Variants
We investigate several MCS variants below. To simplify the discussion, we take the IRM as
the optimization objective.
1) Effects of Number of Modules of MCS—The reported results so far are produced
with only two modules of MCS. In this subsection, we investigate MCS with three modules,
where the parameter setting of the DNN in the top module (i.e. module 3) is the same as that
in the middle module (i.e. module 2) and the bottom module (i.e. module 1). STOI results
are presented in Table VII. From the table, we observe that stacking the third module
improves the performance.
2) Effects of Number of Training Utterances of Target Speaker—We have
observed that when the clean utterances of the target speaker are limited, the performance
improvement of all DNN-based methods is limited. In this subsection, we examine how this
factor affects the separation performance.
We constructed 5 training sets for each target speaker in the same way as described above,
except for the only difference that the 6,000 mixed signals of each training set were
generated from 5, 20, 50, 100, and 640 clean utterances of the target speaker. Fig. 4 shows
the average STOI results on the two separation tasks at various SNR levels. From the
figures, we observe that (i) the MCS-based method outperforms the DNN-based methods,
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
particularly at the low SNR levels; (ii) when the SNR is lower than −3 dB, DNN+Map and
DNN+IRM perform about the same; (iii) when the SNR is higher than −3 dB, DNN+IRM
performs slightly better than DNN+Map; (iv) consistent with our analysis, DNN+IRM
performs better than DNN+Map with fewer target training utterances; (v) the effects of the
number of target training utterances weaken with the decrease of the SNR.
3) Effects of Raw Feature in MCS—We investigate the effects of the raw feature in the
upper modules of MCS by comparing the proposed MCS with an MCS method that does not
take the raw feature as the input of the upper modules. The hyperparameter settings of the
two comparison methods were the same. The data set was the same as in Section V-A1. The
comparison result given in Table VIII shows that taking the raw feature as part of the input
of the upper modules is important.
4) MCS Versus Best Single DNN—In this subsection, we investigate whether the
effectiveness of MCS over a single DNN is simply due to more model parameters in MCS.
The parameter setting of the single DNN was as follows. The number of hidden layers was
set to 2. The number of units per hidden layer was selected from {512, 1024, 2048, 4096,
8192}. All other parameters were the same as in Section IV-A2. The parameter setting of
MCS was as follows. The number of modules was set to 2. As shown in experimental
results, setting the number of units per hidden layer of the DNNs in the first module to 4096
is sufficient in terms of performance. So we set the number of hidden units of the three
DNNs in the bottom module of MCS to 4096 (per layer), while the number of units in each
hidden layer of the DNN in the top module was selected from {512, 1024, 2048, 4096,
We reduced the training set of IEEE-TIMIT to 1000 mixed signals in this comparison. The
STOI results are summarized in Fig. 5. From the figure, we observe that the MCS with 512
hidden units per layer in the top module outperforms the best single DNN (with the halfwindow length W = 1) even when its number of units in each hidden layer is 8192,
particularly at lower input SNRs. Specifically, the DNN model with 8192 units per hidden
layer has 75,514,112 parameters, while the MCS with 512 units per hidden layer in Module
2 has 70, 149, 632 parameters (20, 979, 968 + 23, 077, 120 + 25, 174, 272 parameters for
the three DNNs in Module 1, and 918, 272 parameters for the DNN model in Module 2).
That is to say, the smallest MCS outperforms the best single large DNN model with more
parameters. The experimental results indicate that it is the structure of MCS, not simply
more parameters, that contributes to the performance improvement of MCS over DNN.
Note that the comparison methods do not overfit data, as we can see from Fig. 5 that the
performance of each comparison method does not drop with respect to the increase of the
number of parameters.
5) MCS Versus Best Single-Context Stacking—We investigate the effect of the multicontext scheme by comparing MCS with the best single-context stacking (SCS), which is a
deep ensemble method that concatenates the raw feature and the output of the best single
DNN model in the bottom module as the input of the upper module. We used the same data
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
set as in Section V-A1. The comparison result in Table IX shows that the multi-context
scheme provides some improvements at low SNR levels.
VI. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have proposed a deep ensemble learning method—multi-context networks
—for speech separation. The first multi-context network, named multi-context averaging,
averages the outputs of an ensemble of DNNs that exploits different contextual information
by using different window lengths. The second one, named multi-context stacking, is a stack
of DNN ensembles. Each DNN model in a module of the stack takes the concatenation of
original acoustic features and the estimated masks from its lower module as the input. The
DNN models in the same module explore different contexts. The key idea for exploring
different contexts is to enlarge the diversity between the based DNNs.
Moreover, we have compared the two commonly adopted training objectives for DNN-based
speech separation— masking and mapping—systematically, where the objectives of the
masking-based methods include the IRM and SA. We have found that (i) masking is more
effective than mapping in utilizing clean training utterances of a target speaker, and therefore
masking-based methods are more likely to achieve better performance when a target speaker
has a limited number of training utterances. (ii) Masking is more sensitive to the SNR
variation of a training corpus than mapping, and hence, masking-based methods are more
likely to perform worse at low SNRs in the test stage when the SNR of the training corpus
varies in a wide range. (iii) Signal approximation appears to combine the benefits of both
masking and mapping.
To evaluate the proposed multi-context networks and the differences between mapping and
masking, we trained the DNN-, MCA-, and MCS-based methods with the three optimization
objectives. After testing hundreds of models with speaker-pair dependent training or target
dependent training, we have observed that the multi-context networks outperform the DNNbased methods uniformly, which implies that exploiting deep ensemble learning methods is
a simple and effective way for further improving the performance of DNN-based methods.
We have also observed that the relative performances between the mapping- and maskingbased methods are consistent with our analysis.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Yuxuan Wang for providing his DNN code, Ke Hu for helping with the SSC,
TIMIT, and IEEE corpora, and Jun Du, Yong Xu, and Yanhui Tu for assistance in using their code. The authors
would also like to thank the Ohio Supercomputing Center for providing computing resources.
This work was supported in part by the AFOSR under Grant FA9550-12-1-0130 and in part by the NIDCD under
Grant R01 DC012048. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for
publication was Dr. Hirokazu Kameoka.
Zhang and Wang
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Biographies
Xiao-Lei Zhang (S’08–M’12) received the Ph.D. degree in information and communication
engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2012. He is currently a
Postdoctoral Researcher with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. He was a Visitor of the Perception and
Neurodynamics Laboratory at The Ohio State University, and a Visitor of the Center of
Intelligent Acoustics and Immersive Communications at Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China, since 2013. His research interests include audio signal processing,
machine learning, statistical signal processing, and artificial intelligence. He has published
over 20 peer-reviewed articles in journals and conference proceedings including IEEE
TASLP, IEEE SPL, IEEE TPAMI, IEEE TCYB, IEEE TSMC, ICASSP, and Interspeech. He
has translated one text book in statistics. He is a Member of the ISCA. He was a recipient of
the first-class Beijing Science and Technology Award, the Science and Technology
Achievement awarded by Ministry of Education of China, and the first-class Scholarship of
Tsinghua University.
DeLiang Wang (F’04), photograph and biography not provided at the time of publication.