Springer Texts in
Electrical Engineering
Consulting Editor: John B. Thomas
Springer Texts in Electrical Engineering
Multivariable Feedback Systems
P.M. Callier/C.A. Desoer
Linear Programming
M. Sakarovitch
Introduction to Random Processes
Stochastic Processes in Engineering Systems
E. Wong/B. Hajek
Introduction to Probability
J.B. Thomas
Elements of Detection and Signal Design
C.L. Weber
An Introduction to Communication Theory and Systems
J.B. Thomas
Signal Detection in Non-Gaussian Noise
S.A. Kassam
An Introduction to Signal Detection and Estimation, 2nd Edition
Introduction to Shannon Sampling and Interpolation Theory
RJ. Marks II
Random Point Processes in Time and Space, 2nd Edition
D.L. SnyderlM.I. Miller
Linear System Tl,Jeory
P.M. Callier/CA Desoer
Advanced Topics in Shannon Sampling and Interpolation Theory
RJ. Marks II (ed.)
H. Vincent Poor
An Introduction to
Signal Detection and Estimation
Second Edition
With 48 Illustrations
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg GmbH
H. Vincent Poor
Department of Electrical Engineering
School of Engineering/ Applied Science
Princeton University
Engineering Quadrangle
Princeton, NJ 08544-5263
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Poor, H. Vincent.
An introduction to signal detection and estimation / H. Vincent
Poor. - [2nd ed.J
cm. - (Springer texts in electrical engineering)
"A Dowden & Culver book."
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Signal detection. 2. Signal theory (Telecommunication).
3. Estimation theory. I. Title. II. Series.
TK5102.5.P654 1994
621.382 '2-dc20
© 1994, 1988 by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
Originally published by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York in 1994
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1 st edition 1994
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the
written permission of the copyright holder, except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews
or scholarly analysis. Use in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval,
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known
or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use of general descriptive names, trade names, trademarks, etc., in this publication, even
if the former are not especially identified, is not to be taken as a sign that such names, as
understood by the Trade Marks and Merchandise Marks Act, may accordingly be used freely
by anyone.
Production managed by Hal Henglein; manufacturing supervised by Jacqui Ashri.
Camera-ready copy prepared from the author's LaTeX file.
ISBN 978-1-4419-2837-5
ISBN 978-1-4757-2341-0 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4757-2341-0
To my family
The purpose of this book is to introduce the reader to the basic theory
of signal detection and estimation. It is assumed that the reader has a
working knowledge of applied probability and random processes such as
that taught in a typical first-semester graduate engineering course on these
subjects. This material is covered, for example, in the book by Wong 
in this series. More advanced concepts in these areas are introduced where
needed, primarily in Chapters VI and VII, where continuous-time problems
are treated.
This book is adapted from a one-semester, second-tier graduate course
taught at the University of Illinois and at Princeton University. However,
this material can also be used for a shorter or first-tier course by restricting
coverage to Chapters I through V, which for the most part can be read with
a background of only the basics of applied probability, including random
vectors and conditional expectations. Sufficient background for the latter
option is given for example in the book by Thomas , also in this
This treatment is also suitable for use as a text in other modes. For
example, two smaller courses, one in signal detection (Chapters II, III,
and VI) and one in estimation (Chapters IV, V, and VII), can be taught
from the materials as organized here. Similarly, an introductory-level course
(Chapters I through IV) followed by a more advanced course (Chapters V
through VII) is another possibility.
In preparing this second edition, the suggestions and comments of many
readers have been incorporated. Although these individuals are too numerous to be listed here, the author is grateful for their valuable advice.
Introduction
II Elements of Hypothesis Testing
II.A Introduction..........
Bayesian Hypothesis Testing . .
Minimax Hypothesis Testing . .
Neyman-Pearson Hypothesis Testing
Composite Hypothesis Testing.
Exercises ............. .
III Signal Detection in Discrete Time
lILA Introduction ........... .
III.B Models and Detector Structures .
III.C Performance Evaluation of Signal Detection Procedures.
III.C.1 Direct Performance Computation
III.C.2 Chernoff and Related Bounds .
III.C.3 Asymptotic Relative Efficiency
III.D Sequential Detection ......... .
III.E Nonparametric and Robust Detection.
III.E.1 Nonparametric Detection
III.E.2 Robust Detection
III.F Exercises ............. .
IV Elements of Parameter Estimation
IV.A Introduction ....................... .
IV.B Bayesian Parameter Estimation ............ .
IV.C Nonrandom Parameter Estimation: General Structure
IV.D Maximum-Likelihood Estimation ........... .
IV.E Further Aspects and Extensions of Maximum-Likelihood
Estimation ................ .
IV.E.1 Estimation of Vector Parameters ... .
IV.E.2 Estimation of Signal Parameters ... .
IV.E.3 Robust Estimation of Signal Parameters
IV.E.4 Recursive Parameter Estimation
IV.F Exercises ..................... .
V Elements of Signal Estimation
V.A Introduction ..... .
Kalman-Bucy Filtering ... .
Linear Estimation ...... .
Wiener-Kolmogorov Filtering
Noncausal Wiener-Kolmogorov Filtering
Causal Wiener-Kolmogorov Filtering
Exercises ..................... .
VI Signal Detection in Continuous Time
VI.A Introduction .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI.B Mathematical Preliminaries . . . . .
VI.B.l Densities in Function Spaces.
VI.B.2 Grenander's Theorem and the Karhunen-Loeve
Expansion ..................... .
VI.C The Detection of Deterministic and Partly Determined
Signals in Gaussian Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Coherent Detection .............. .
Detection of Signals with Unknown Parameters.
VI.D The Detection of Random Signals in Gaussian Noise . .
VI.D.l Preliminary Results on Wiener Processes .....
VI.D.2 The Detection of Gaussian Signals in White Noise
VI.D.3 The Estimator-Correlator Representation of
the Likelihood Ratio for Stochastic Signals
VI.E Exercises.......................
VII Signal Estimation in Continuous Time
VII.A Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII.B Estimation of Signal Parameters. .
VII.C Linear/Gaussian Estimation ....
VII.C.1 Estimation in White Noise.
VII.C.2 The Linear Innovations Process
VII.C.3 The Continuous-Time Kalman-Bucy Filter.
VII.C.4 Further Aspects of the Linear/Gaussian Problem
VII.D Nonlinear Filtering .................... .
VII.D.1 Basic Equations of Nonlinear Filtering ..... .
VII.D.2 A Derivation of the Nonlinear Filtering Equations.
VII.D.3 Practical Approximations to Optimum Nonlinear
VII.E Exercises .