Neural Temporal Point Processes: A Review
Oleksandr Shchur1,2 , Ali Caner T¨urkmen2 , Tim Januschowski2 and Stephan G¨unnemann1
1Technical University of Munich, Germany
2Amazon Research
{shchur,guennemann}@in.tum.de, {atturkm,tjnsch}@amazon.com,
Temporal point processes (TPP) are probabilistic
generative models for continuous-time event sequences. Neural TPPs combine the fundamental
ideas from point process literature with deep learning approaches, thus enabling construction of ﬂexible and efﬁcient models. The topic of neural TPPs
has attracted signiﬁcant attention in recent years,
leading to the development of numerous new architectures and applications for this class of models.
In this review paper we aim to consolidate the existing body of knowledge on neural TPPs. Specifically, we focus on important design choices and
general principles for deﬁning neural TPP models.
Next, we provide an overview of application areas
commonly considered in the literature. We conclude this survey with the list of open challenges
and important directions for future work in the ﬁeld
of neural TPPs.
Introduction
Many applications in science and industry are concerned with
collections of events with timestamps.
Earthquake occurrences in seismology, neural spike trains in neuroscience,
trades and orders in a ﬁnancial market, and user activity logs
on the web, can all be represented as sequences of discrete
(instantaneous) events observed in continuous time.
Temporal point processes (TPP) are probabilistic models
for such event data [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2007].
speciﬁcally, TPPs are generative models of variable-length
point sequences observed on the real half-line—here interpreted as arrival times of events. TPPs are built on rich theoretical foundations, with early work dating back to the beginning of the 20th century, where they were used to model the
arrival of insurance claims and telephone trafﬁc [Brockmeyer
et al., 1948; Cram´er, 1969]. The ﬁeld underwent rapid development in the second half of the century, and TPPs were applied to a wide array of domains including seismology, neuroscience, and ﬁnance.
Nevertheless, TPPs entered the mainstream of machine
learning research only very recently. One of the exciting ideas
developed at the intersection of the ﬁelds of point processes
and machine learning were neural TPPs [Du et al., 2016;
Mei and Eisner, 2017]. Classical (non-neural) TPPs can only
capture relatively simple patterns in event occurrences, such
as self-excitation [Hawkes, 1971]. In contrast, neural TPPs
are able to learn complex dependencies, and are often even
computationally more efﬁcient than their classical counterparts. As such, the literature on neural TPPs has witnessed
rapid growth since their introduction.
Scope and structure of the paper. The goal of this survey
is to provide an overview of neural TPPs, with focus on models (Sections 3–5) and their applications (Section 6). Due to
limited space, we do not attempt to describe every existing
approach in full detail, but rather focus on general principles
and building blocks for constructing neural TPP models.
We also discuss the main challenges that the ﬁeld currently
faces and outline some future research directions (Section 7).
For other reviews of TPPs for machine learning, we refer
the reader to the tutorial by [Gomez-Rodriguez and Valera,
2018]; and two recent surveys by [Yan, 2019], who also covers non-neural approaches, and [Enguehard et al., 2020] who
experimentally compare neural TPP architectures in applications to healthcare data. Our work provides a more detailed
overview of neural TPP architectures and their applications
compared to the above papers.
Background and Notation
A TPP [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2007] is a probability distribution over variable-length sequences in some time interval [0, T].
A realization of a marked TPP can be represented as an event sequence X = {(t1, m1), . . . , (tN, mN)},
where N, the number of events, is itself a random variable.
Here, 0 < t1 < · · · < tN ≤T are the arrival times of
events and mi ∈M are the marks. Categorical marks (i.e.,
M = {1, . . . , K}) are most commonly considered in practice, but other choices, such as M = RD, are also possible.
Sometimes, it is convenient to instead work with the interevent times τi = ti −ti−1, where t0 = 0 and tN+1 = T. For
a given X, we denote the history of past events at time t as
Ht = {(tj, mj) : tj < t}.
A distribution of a TPP with K categorical marks can be
characterized by K conditional intensity functions λ∗
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
Represent events
(tj, mj) as feature
vectors yj
Encode history
(y1, . . . , yi−1)
as a vector hi
Obtain conditional distribution
Pi(ti, mi|Hti) = P(ti, mi|hi)
(ti−1, mi−1)
Figure 1: Schematic representation of an autoregressive neural TPP model.
for each mark k) that are deﬁned as
k(t) = lim
Pr(event of type k in [t, t + ∆t)|Ht)
where the ∗symbol is used as a shorthand for conditioning on
the history Ht. Note that the above deﬁnition also applies to
unmarked TPPs if we set K = 1. While the conditional intensity is often mentioned in the literature, it is not the only way
to characterize a TPP—we will consider some alternatives in
the next section.
Autoregressive Neural TPPs
Neural TPPs can be deﬁned as autoregressive models, as done
in the seminal work by [Du et al., 2016]. Such autoregressive
TPPs operate by sequentially predicting the time and mark
of the next event (ti, mi). Usually, we can decompose this
procedure into 3 steps (see Figure 1):
1. Represent each event (tj, mj) as a feature vector yj.
2. Encode the history Hti (represented by a sequence of
feature vectors (y1, . . . , yi−1)) into a ﬁxed-dimensional
history embedding hi.
3. Use the history embedding hi to parametrize the conditional distribution over the next event Pi(ti, mi|Hti).
We will now discuss each of these steps in more detail.
Representing Events as Feature Vectors
First, we need to represent each event (tj, mj) as a feature
vector yj that can then be fed into an encoder neural network
(Section 3.2). We consider the features ytime
based on the
arrival time tj (or inter-event time τj) and ymark
based on the
mark mj. The vector yj is obtained by combining ytime
, e.g., via concatenation.
Time features ytime
. Earlier works used the inter-event time
τj or its logarithm log τj as the time-related feature [Du et
al., 2016; Omi et al., 2019]. Recently, [Zuo et al., 2020] and
[Zhang et al., 2020a] proposed to instead obtain features from
tj using trigonometric functions, which is based on positional
encodings used in transformer language models [Vaswani et
al., 2017].
Mark features ymark
. Categorical marks are usually encoded
with an embedding layer [Du et al., 2016]. Real-valued marks
can be directly used as ymark
. This ability to naturally handle
different mark types is one of the attractive properties of neural TPPs (compared to classical TPP models).
Encoding the History into a Vector
The core idea of autoregressive neural TPP models is that
event history Hti (a variable-sized set) can be represented as a
ﬁxed-dimensional vector hi [Du et al., 2016]. We review the
two main families of approaches for encoding the past events
(y1, . . . , yi−1) into a history embedding hi next.
Recurrent encoders start with an initial hidden state h1.
Then, after each event (ti, mi) they update the hidden state
as hi+1 = Update(hi, yi). The hidden states hi are then
used as the history embedding. The Update function is usually implemented based on the RNN, GRU or LSTM update
equations [Du et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2017b].
The main advantage of recurrent models is that they allow us to compute the history embedding hi for all N events
in the sequence in O(N) time.
This compares favorably
even to classical non-neural TPPs, such as the Hawkes process, where the likelihood computation in general scales as
O(N 2). One downside of recurrent models is their inherently sequential nature.
Because of this, such models are
usually trained via truncated backpropagation through time,
which only provides an approximation to the true gradients
[Sutskever, 2013].
Set aggregation encoders directly encode the feature vectors (y1, . . . , yi−1) into a history embedding hi. Unlike recurrent models, here the encoding is done independently for
each i. The encoding operation can be deﬁned, e.g., using
self-attention [Zuo et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020a]. It is
postulated that such encoders are better at capturing longrange dependencies between events compared to recurrent
encoders. However, more thorough evaluation is needed to
validate this claim (see Section 7). On the one hand, set aggregation encoders can compute hi for each event in parallel, unlike recurrent models. On the other hand, usually the
time of this computation scales as O(N 2) with the sequence
length N, since each hi depends on all the past events (and
the model does not have a Markov property). This problem
can be mitigated by restricting the encoder to only the last L
events (yi−L, . . . , yi−1), thus reducing the time complexity
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
Predicting the Time of the Next Event
For simplicity, we start by considering the unmarked case and
postpone the discussion of marked TPPs until the next section. An autoregressive TPP models the distribution of the
next arrival time ti given the history Hti. This is equivalent to considering the distribution of the next inter-event time
τi given Hti, which we denote as P ∗
i (τi).1 The distribution
i (τi) can be represented by any of the following functions:
1. probability density function f ∗
2. cumulative distribution function F ∗
3. survival function S∗
i (τi) = 1 −F ∗
4. hazard function φ∗
i (τi) = f ∗
5. cumulative hazard function Φ∗
In an autoregressive neural TPP, we pick a parametric form
for one of the above functions and compute its parameters
using the history embedding hi. For example, the conditional
i might be obtained as
i (τi) = f(τi|θi),
θi = σ(W hi + b).
Here f(·|θ) is some parametric density function over [0, ∞)
(e.g., exponential density) and W , b are learnable parameters. A nonlinear function σ(·) can be used to enforce necessary constraints on the parameters, such as non-negativity.
It is important to ensure that the chosen parametrization
deﬁnes a valid probability distribution.
For instance, the
i must be non-negative and satisfy
i (u)du = 1.
This corresponds to the cumulative hazard function Φ∗
strictly increasing, differentiable and satisfying Φ∗
and limτ→∞Φ∗
i (τ) = ∞.
Some parametrizations of P ∗
i (τ) proposed in the literature fail to satisfy the above conditions.
For example,
the hazard function φ∗
i (τ) = exp(wτ + b) [Du et al.,
2016] fails to satisfy limτ→∞Φ∗
i (τ) = ∞if the parameter w is negative.
One more example is the cumulative hazard function deﬁned by a single-hidden-layer neural network with positive weights w, v ∈RD
d=1 vd tanh(wdτ + bd)
[Omi et al., 2019] that
fails to satisfy both Φ∗
i (0) = 0 and limτ→∞Φ∗
i (τ) = ∞.
Since above parametric functions do not deﬁne a valid distribution over the inter-event times, sampling methods have
a non-zero probability of failing or producing invalid event
sequences. Therefore, it’s crucial to pick a valid parametrization when designing a neural TPP model.
Specifying one of the functions (1) – (5) listed above
uniquely identiﬁes the conditional distribution P ∗
i (τi), and
thus the other four functions in the list.
This, however,
does not mean that choosing which function to parametrize is
unimportant. In particular, some choices of the hazard function φ∗
i cannot be integrated analytically, which becomes a
problem when computing the log-likelihood (as we will see
in Section 5). In contrast, it is usually trivial to obtain φ∗
from any parametrization of Φ∗
i , since differentiation is easier than integration [Omi et al., 2019]. More generally, there
are three important aspects that one has to keep in mind when
specifying the distribution P ∗
1We again use ∗to denote conditioning on the history Hti.
• Flexibility: Does the given parametrization of P ∗
allow us to approximate any distribution, e.g., a multimodal one?
• Closed-form likelihood:
Can we compute either the
i or CHF Φ∗
i analytically? These functions are involved in the log-likelihood computation
(Section 5), and therefore should be computed in closed
form for efﬁcient model training. Approximating these
functions with Monte Carlo or numerical quadrature is
slower and less accurate.
• Closed-form sampling:
Can we draw samples from
i (τi) analytically? In the best case, this should be done
with inversion sampling [Rasmussen, 2011], which requires analytically inverting either F ∗
i . Inverting these functions via numerical root-ﬁnding is again
slower and less accurate. Approaches based on thinning
[Ogata, 1981] are also not ideal, since they do not bene-
ﬁt from parallel hardware like GPUs. Moreover, closedform inversion sampling enables the reparametrization
trick [Mohamed et al., 2020], which allows us to train
TPPs using sampling-based losses (Section 5.2).
Existing approaches offer different trade-offs between the
above criteria. For example, a simple unimodal distribution
offers closed-form sampling and likelihood computation, but
lacks ﬂexibility [Du et al., 2016]. One can construct more
expressive distributions by parametrizing the cumulative hazard Φ∗
i either with a mixture of kernels [Okawa et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020b] or a neural network [Omi et al., 2019],
but this will prevent closed-form sampling. Specifying the
i with a mixture distribution [Shchur et al., 2020a] or
i with invertible splines [Shchur et al., 2020b] allows to
deﬁne a ﬂexible model where both sampling and likelihood
computation can be done analytically. Finally, parametrizations that require approximating Φ∗
i via Monte Carlo integration are less efﬁcient and accurate than all of the abovementioned approaches [Omi et al., 2019].
As a side note, a more ﬂexible parametrization might also
be more difﬁcult to train or more prone to overﬁtting. Therefore, the choice of the parametrization is an important modeling decision that depends on the application.
Lastly, we would like to point out that the view of a TPP as
an autoregressive model naturally connects to the traditional
conditional intensity characterization (Equation 1). The conditional intensity λ∗(t) can be deﬁned by stitching together
the hazard functions φ∗
if 0 ≤t ≤t1
if t1 < t ≤t2
N+1(t −tN)
if tN < t ≤T
In the TPP literature, the hazard function φ∗
i is often called
“intensity,” even though the two are, technically, different
mathematical objects.
Modeling the Marks
In a marked autoregressive TPP, one has to parametrize the
conditional distribution P ∗
i (τi, mi) using the history embed-
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
ding hi. We ﬁrst consider categorical marks, as they are most
often used in practice.
Conditionally independent models factorize the distribution
i (τi, mi) into a product of two independent distributions
i (τi) and P ∗
i (mi) that are both parametrized using hi [Du
et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2017b]. The time distribution P ∗
can be parametrized using any of the choices described in
Section 3.3, such as the hazard function φ∗
i (τ). The mark
distribution P ∗
i (mi) is a categorical distribution with probability mass function p∗
i (mi = k). In this case, the conditional
intensity for mark k is computed as
i (mi = k) · φ∗
i (t −ti−1),
where (i−1) is the index of the most recent event before time
t. Note that if we set K = 1, we recover the deﬁnition of the
intensity function from Equation 3.
While conditionally independent models require fewer parameters to specify P ∗
i (τi, mi), recent works suggest that
this simplifying assumption may hurt predictive performance
[Enguehard et al., 2020]. There are two ways to model dependencies between τi and mi that we consider below.
Time conditioned on marks [Zuo et al., 2020; Enguehard
et al., 2020]. In this case, we must specify a separate distribution P ∗
i (τi|mi = k) for each mark k ∈{1, . . . , K}.
Suppose that for each k we represent P ∗
i (τi|mi = k) with a
hazard function φ∗
ik(τ). Then the conditional intensity λ∗
for mark k is computed simply as
ik(t −ti−1).
It is possible to model the dependencies across marks on a
coarser grid in time, which signiﬁcantly improves the scalability in the number of marks [T¨urkmen et al., 2019b].
Marks conditioned on time. Here, the inter-event time is
distributed according to P ∗
i (τi), and for each τ we need to
specify a distribution P ∗(mi|τi = τ). We again assume that
the time distribution P ∗
i (τi) is described by a hazard function
i (τ), and P ∗
i (mi|τi = τ) can be parametrized, e.g., using a
Gaussian process [Biloˇs et al., 2019]. In this case the conditional intensity λ∗
k(t) is computed as
i (mi = k|τi = t −ti−1) · φ∗
i (t −ti−1),
where we used notation analogous to Equation 4. The term
i (t −ti−1) is often referred to as “ground intensity.”
Other mark types. A conditionally independent model can
easily handle any type of marks by specifying an appropriate distribution P ∗
i (mi). Dependencies between continuous
marks and the inter-event time can be incorporated by modeling the joint density f ∗
i (τi, mi) [Zhu et al., 2020].
Continuous-time State Evolution
Another line of research has studied neural TPPs that operate
completely in continuous time. Such models deﬁne a leftcontinuous state h(t) at all times t ∈[0, T]. The state is
initialized to some value h(0). Then, for each event i the
state is updated as
h(ti) = Evolve(h(ti−1), ti−1, ti)
ε→0 h(ti + ε) = Update(h(ti), yi)
The Evolve(h(ti−1), ti−1, ti) procedure evolves the the state
continuously over the time interval , yi)
operation performs an instantaneous update to the state, similarly to the recurrent encoder from last section.
While the above procedure might seem similar to a recurrent model from Section 3.2, the continuous-time model uses
the state h(t) differently from the autoregressive model. In
a continuous-time model, the state h(t) is used to directly
deﬁne the intensity λ∗
k for each mark k as
k(t) = gk(h(t)),
where gk : RH →R>0 is a non-linear function that maps
the hidden state h(t) to the value of the conditional intensity
for mark k at time t. Such function, for example, can be
implemented as gk(h(t)) = softplus(wT
k h(t)) or a multilayer perceptron [Chen et al., 2021b].
To summarize, in a continuous-time state model, the state
h(t) is deﬁned for all t ∈[0, T], and the intensity λ∗
time t depends only on the current state h(t). In contrast, in
an autogressive model, the discrete-time state hi is updated
only after an event occurs.. Hence, the state hi deﬁnes the
entire conditional distribution P ∗
i (τi, mi), and therefore the
intensity λ∗
k(t) in the interval , it is easy to estimate
each attribute at any time t [Rubanova et al., 2019]. These
models are also well-suited for modeling spatio-temporal
point processes (i.e., with marks in M = RD) [Jia and Benson, 2019; Chen et al., 2021b].
However, this ﬂexibility comes at a cost: evaluating both
the state evolution (Equation 7) and the model likelihood
(Equation 9) requires numerically approximating intractable
integrals.
This makes training in continuous-time models
slower than for autoregressive ones. Sampling similarly requires numerical approximations.
Parameter Estimation
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Negative log-likelihood (NLL) is the default training objective for both neural and classical TPP models. NLL for a
single sequence X with categorical marks is computed as
−log p(X) = −
1(mi = k) log λ∗
The log-likelihood can be understood using the following
two facts.
First, the quantity λ∗
k(ti)dt corresponds to the
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
probability of observing an event of type k in the inﬁnitesimal interval [ti, ti + dt) conditioned on the past events Hti.
Second, we can compute the probability of not observing
any events of type k in the rest of the interval [0, T] as
By taking the logarithm, summing
these expressions for all events (ti, mi) and event types k,
and ﬁnally negating, we obtain Equation 9.
Computing the NLL for TPPs can sometimes be challenging due to the presence of the integral in the second
line of Equation 9. One possible solution is to approximate
this integral using Monte Carlo integration [Mei and Eisner, 2017] or numerical quadrature [Rubanova et al., 2019;
Zuo et al., 2020]. However, some autoregressive neural TPP
models allow us to compute the NLL analytically, which is
more accurate and computationally efﬁcient. We demonstrate
this using the following example.
Suppose we model P ∗
i (τi, mi) using the “time conditioned
on marks” approach from Section 3.4. That is, we specify the
distribution P ∗
i (τi|mi = k) for each mark k with a cumulative hazard function Φ∗
ik(τ). By combining Equation 5 and
Equation 9, we can rewrite the expression for the NLL as
−log p(X) = −
1(mi = k) log φ∗
Assuming that our parametrization allows us to compute
ik(τ) analytically, we are now able to compute the NLL in
closed form (without numerical integration). Remember that
the hazard function φ∗
ik can be easily obtained by differentiation as φ∗
ik(τ). Finally, note that the NLL can
also be expressed in terms of, e.g., the conditional PDFs f ∗
or survival functions S∗
ik (Section 3.3).
Evaluating the NLL in Equation 10 can be still computationally expensive when K, the number of marks, is
extremely large.
Several works propose approximations
based on noise-contrastive-estimation that can be used in this
regime [Guo et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2020].
Training. Usually, we are given a training set Dtrain of sequences that are assumed to be sampled i.i.d. from some unknown data-generating process. The TPP parameters (e.g.,
weights of the encoder in Section 3) are learned by minimizing the NLL of the sequences in Dtrain. This is typically done
with some variant of (stochastic) gradient descent. In practice, the NLL loss is often normalized per sequence, e.g., by
the interval length T [Enguehard et al., 2020]. Importantly,
this normalization constant cannot depend on X, so it would
be incorrect to, for example, normalize the NLL by the number of events N in each sequence. Finally, the i.i.d. assumption is not appropriate for all TPP datasets; [Boyd et al., 2020]
show how to overcome this challenge by learning sequence
embeddings.
Alternatives to MLE
TPPs can be trained using objective functions other than the
NLL. Often, these objectives can be expressed as
EX∼p(X) [f(X)] .
Such sampling-based losses have been used by several approaches for learning generative models from the training sequences. These approaches aim to maximize the similarity
between the training sequences in Dtrain and sequences X
generated by the TPP model p(X) using a scoring function
f(X). Examples include procedures based on Wasserstein
distance [Xiao et al., 2017a], adversarial losses [Yan et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2018] and inverse reinforcement learning [Li
et al., 2018].
Sometimes, the objective function of the form (11) arises
naturally based on the application. For instance, in reinforcement learning, a TPP p(X) deﬁnes a stochastic policy and
f(X) is the reward function [Upadhyay et al., 2018]. When
learning with missing data, the missing events X are sampled
from the TPP p(X), and f(X) corresponds to the NLL of
the observed events [Gupta et al., 2021]. Finally, in variational inference, the TPP p(X) deﬁnes an approximate posterior and f(X) is the evidence lower bound (ELBO) [Shchur
et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2021a].
In practice, the gradients of the loss (Equation 11) w.r.t. the
model parameters usually cannot be computed analytically
and therefore are estimated with Monte Carlo. Earlier works
used the score function estimator [Upadhyay et al., 2018], but
modern approaches rely on the more accurate pathwise gradient estimator (also known as the “reparametrization trick”)
[Mohamed et al., 2020]. The latter relies on our ability to
sample with reparametrization from P ∗
i (τi, mi), which again
highlights the importance of the chosen parametrization for
the conditional distribution, as described in Section 3.3.
On a related note, sampling-based losses for TPPs (Equation 11) can be non-differentiable, since N, the number of
events in a sequence, is a discrete random variable. This problem can be solved by deriving a differentiable relaxation to
the loss [Shchur et al., 2020b].
Applications
The literature on neural TPPs mostly considers their applications in web-related domains, e.g., for modeling user activity
on social media. Most existing applications of neural TPPs
fall into one of two categories:
• Prediction tasks, where the goal is to predict the time
and / or type of future events;
• Structure discovery, where the tasks is to learn dependencies between different event types.
We now discuss these in more detail.
Prediction
Prediction is among the key tasks associated with temporal models. In case of a TPP, the goal is usually to predict
the times and marks of future events given the history of
past events. Such queries can be answered using the conditional distribution P ∗
i (τi, mi) deﬁned by the neural TPP
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
model. Nearly all papers mentioned in previous sections feature numerical experiments on such prediction tasks. Some
works combine elements of neural TPP models (Section 3)
with other neural network architectures to solve speciﬁc realworld prediction tasks related to event data. We give some
examples below.
Recommender systems are a recent application area for
TPPs. Here, the goal is to predict the next most likely purchase event, in terms of both the time of purchase and the type
(i.e., item), given a sequence of customer interactions or purchases in the past. Neural TPPs are especially well-suited for
this task, as they can learn embeddings for large item sets using neural networks, similar to other neural recommendation
models. Moreover, representing the temporal dimension of
purchase behavior enables time-sensitive recommendations,
e.g., used to time promotions. For example, [Kumar et al.,
2019] address the next item prediction problem by embedding the event history to a vector, but are concerned only with
predicting the next item type (mark). This approach is extended to a full model of times and events, with a hierarchical
RNN model for intra- and inter-session activity represented
on different levels, in [Vassøy et al., 2019].
Another common application of event sequence prediction
is within the human mobility domain. Here, events are spatiotemporal, featuring coordinates in both time and space, potentially along with other marks. Examples include predicting taxi trajectories in a city , or user check-ins on location-based social media.
[Yang et al., 2018] address this task with a full neural TPP, on
four different mobility data sets. This extends the approach
in DeepMove [Feng et al., 2018], where the authors similarly use an RNNs to compute embeddings of timestamped
sequences, but limit the predictions to the next location alone.
Other applications include clinical event prediction [Enguehard et al., 2020], predicting timestamped sequences of
interactions of patients with the health system; human activity
prediction for assisted living [Shen et al., 2018], and demand
forecasting in sparse time series [T¨urkmen et al., 2019a].
Structure Discovery & Modeling Networks
In prediction tasks we are interested in the conditional distributions learned by the model. In contrast, in structure discovery tasks the parameters learned by the model are of interest.
For example, in latent network discovery applications we
observe event activity generated by K users, each represented
by a categorical mark. The goal is to infer an inﬂuence matrix
A ∈RK×K that encodes the dependencies between different
marks [Linderman and Adams, 2014]. Here, the entries of
A can be interpreted as edge weights in the network. Historically, this task has been addressed using non-neural models such as the Hawkes process [Hawkes, 1971]. The main
advantage of network discovery approaches based on neural
TPPs [Zhang et al., 2021] is their ability to handle more general interaction types.
Learning Granger causality is another task that is closely
related to the network discovery problem.
[Eichler et al.,
2 
2017] and [Achab et al., 2017] have shown that the inﬂuence matrix A of a Hawkes process completely captures the
notion of Granger causality in multivariate event sequences.
Recently, [Zhang et al., 2020b] generalized this understanding to neural TPP models, where they used the method of
integrated gradients to estimate dependencies between event
types, with applications to information diffusion on the web.
Neural TPPs have also been used to model information diffusion and network evolution in social networks [Trivedi et
al., 2019]. The DyRep approach by Trivedi et al. generalizes an earlier non-neural framework, COEVOLVE, by [Farajtabar et al., 2017]. Similarly, Know-Evolve [Trivedi et al.,
2017] models dynamically evolving knowledge graphs with a
neural TPP. A related method, DeepHawkes, was developed
speciﬁcally for modeling item popularity in information cascades [Cao et al., 2017].
Other applications.
Neural TPPs have been featured in
works in other research ﬁelds and application domains. For
instance, [Huang et al., 2019] proposed an RNN-based Poisson process model for speech recognition. [Sharma et al.,
2018] developed a latent-variable neural TPP method for
modeling the behavior of larval zebraﬁsh. Performing inference in the model allowed the authors to detect distinct behavioral patterns in zebraﬁsh activity. Lastly, [Upadhyay et
al., 2018] showed how to automatically choose timing for interventions in an interactive environment by combining a TPP
model with the framework of reinforcement learning.
Open Challenges
We conclude with a discussion of what, in our opinion, are the
main challenges that the ﬁeld of neural TPPs currently faces.
Experimental Setup
Lack of standardized experimental setups and high-quality
benchmark datasets makes a fair comparison of different neural TPP architectures problematic.
Each neural TPP model consists of multiple components,
such as the history encoder and the parametrization of the
conditional distributions (Sections 3 and 4). New architectures often change all these components at once, which makes
it hard to pinpoint the source of empirical gains. Carefullydesigned ablation studies are necessary to identify the important design choices and guide the search for better models.
On a related note, the choice of baselines varies greatly
across papers.
For example, papers proposing autoregressive models (Section 3) rarely compare to continuous-time
state models (Section 4), and vice versa. Considering a wider
range of baselines is necessary to fairly assess the strengths
and weaknesses of different families of approaches.
Finally, it is not clear whether the datasets commonly used
in TPP literature actually allow us to ﬁnd models that will
perform better on real-world prediction tasks. In particular,
Enguehard et al. point out that two popular datasets (MIMIC-
II and StackOverﬂow) can be “solved” by a simple historyindependent baseline. Also, common implicit assumptions,
such as treating the training sequences as i.i.d. (Section 5),
might not be appropriate for existing datasets.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
To conclude, open-sourcing libraries with reference implementations of various baseline methods and collecting large
high-quality benchmark datasets are both critical next steps
for neural TPP researchers. A recently released library with
implementations of some autoregressive models by [Enguehard et al., 2020] takes a step in this direction, but, for instance, doesn’t include continuous-time state models.
Evaluation Metrics
Many of the metrics commonly used to evaluate TPP models are not well suited for quantifying their predictive performance and have subtle failure modes.
For instance, consider the NLL score (Section 5), one of
the most popular metrics for quantifying predictive performance in TPPs. As mentioned in Section 3.4, the NLL consists of a continuous component for the time ti and a discrete
component for the mark mi. Therefore, reporting a single
NLL score obscures information regarding the model’s performance on predicting marks and times separately. For example, the NLL score is affected disproportionately by errors
in marks as the number of marks increase. Moreover, the
NLL can be “fooled” on datasets where the arrival times ti
are measured in discrete units, such as seconds—a ﬂexible
model can produce an arbitrarily low NLL by placing narrow
density “spikes” on these discrete values [Uria et al., 2013].
More importantly, the NLL is mostly irrelevant as a measure of error in real-world applications—it yields very little insight into model performance from a domain expert’s
viewpoint. However, other metrics, such as accuracy for the
mark prediction, and mean absolute error (MAE) or mean
squared error (MSE) for inter-event time prediction are even
less suited for evaluating neural TPPs. These metrics measure
the quality of a single future event prediction, and MAE/MSE
only take a point estimate of τi into account. One doesn’t
need to model the entire distribution over τi (as done by a
TPP) to perform well w.r.t. such metrics. If only single-event
predictions are of interest, one could instead use a simple
baseline that only models P ∗
i (mi) or produces a point estimate τ pred
. This baseline can be trained by directly minimizing absolute or squared error for inter-event times or crossentropy for marks. TPPs are, in contrast, probabilistic models trained with the NLL loss; so comparing them to pointestimate baselines using above metrics is unfair.
The main advantage of neural TPPs compared to simple
“point-estimate” methods is their ability to sample entire trajectories of future events. Such probabilistic forecasts capture
uncertainty in predictions and are able to answer more complex prediction queries (e.g., “How many events of type k1
will happen immediately after an event of type k2?”). Probabilistic forecasts are universally preferred to point estimates
in the neighboring ﬁeld of time series modeling [Gneiting and
Katzfuss, 2014; Alexandrov et al., 2020]. A variety of metrics for evaluating the quality of such probabilistic forecasts
for (regularly-spaced) time series have been proposed [Gneiting et al., 2008], but they haven’t been generalized to marked
continuous-time event sequences. Developing metrics that
are based on entire sampled event sequences can help us unlock the full potential of neural TPPs and allow us to better
compare different models. More generally, we should take
advantage of the fact that TPP models learn an entire distribution over trajectories and rethink how these models are
applied to prediction tasks.
Applications
While most recent works have focused on developing new architectures for better prediction and structure discovery, other
applications of neural TPPs remain largely understudied.
Applications of classical TPPs go beyond the above two
tasks. For example, latent-variable TPP models have been
used for event clustering [Mavroforakis et al., 2017; Xu
and Zha, 2017] and change point detection [Altieri et al.,
2015]. Other applications include anomaly detection [Li et
al., 2017], optimal control [Zarezade et al., 2017; Tabibian
et al., 2019] and ﬁghting the spread of misinformation online
[Kim et al., 2018].
Moreover, most papers on neural TPPs consider datasets
originating from the web and related domains, such as recommender systems and knowledge graphs. Meanwhile, traditional application areas for TPPs, like neuroscience, seismology and ﬁnance, have not received as much attention.
Adapting neural TPPs to these traditional domains requires
answering exciting research questions. To name a few, spike
trains in neuroscience [Aljadeff et al., 2016] are characterized
by both high numbers of marks (i.e., neurons that are being
modeled) and high rates of event occurrence (i.e., ﬁring rates),
which requires efﬁcient and scalable models. Applications
in seismology usually require interpretable models [Bray and
Schoenberg, 2013], and ﬁnancial datasets often contain dependencies between various types of assets that are far more
complex than self-excitation, commonly encountered in social networks [Bacry et al., 2015].
To summarize, considering new tasks and new application
domains for neural TPP models is an important and fruitful
direction for future work.