Monte Carlo Study of Ferromagnetism in (III,Mn)V Semiconductors
John Schliemann,a,b J¨urgen K¨onig,a,b,c and A. H. MacDonalda,b
aDepartment of Physics, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
bDepartment of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405
cInstitut f¨ur Theoretische Festk¨orperphysik, Universit¨at Karlsruhe, 76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
 
We report on Monte Carlo studies of the kinetic exchange
model for (III,Mn)V ferromagnetic semiconductors in which
S = 5/2 local moments, representing Mn2+ ions, are exchange
coupled to band electrons.
We treat the Mn2+ spin orientations as classical degrees of freedom and use the Hybrid
Monte Carlo algorithm to explore thermodynamically important Mn spin conﬁgurations. The critical temperature Tc of
the model is unambiguously signalled in our ﬁnite-size simulations by pronounced peaks in ﬂuctuations of both Mn and
band carrier total spins. The Tc’s we obtain are, over much of
the model’s parameter space, substantially smaller than those
estimated using mean-ﬁeld theory. When mean-ﬁeld theory
fails, short-range magnetic order and ﬁnite local carrier spin
polarisation are present for temperatures substantially larger
than Tc. For the simplest version of the model, which has a
single parabolic band with eﬀective mass m∗, the dependence
of Tc on m∗is sublinear at large masses, in disagreement with
the mean-ﬁeld theory result Tc ∝m∗.
PACS numbers: 75.70.Dd, 75.40.Mg, 75.40.Cx
I. INTRODUCTION
Because their electronic properties are, at low temperatures, extremely sensitive to external magnetic ﬁelds,
diluted magnetic semiconductors have long attracted attention .
The discovery of ferromagnetism at comparatively high temperatures (Tc
100K) in Mndoped (III,V) semiconductors has intensiﬁed interest, partly because of the new technological pathways
that might be opened if room temperature ferromagnetism were achieved in a semiconductor with favorable
materials properties .
The search for materials in
this class with higher ferromagnetic transition temperatures, and the eﬀort to achieve a deeper understanding of
all physical property trends, has stimulated a large body
of experimental and theoretical research.
To date, most theoretical work has been based
on kinetic exchange models of the type used here and detailed below. First principles density-functional-theory
electronic structure calculations are qualitatively
in accord with these phenomenological models, although
more work may be necessary to reliably judge the accuracy of the local-spin-density approximation for these
materials before they can be used to guide model re-
The model’s low-energy degrees of freedom
are S = 5/2 spins representing Mn2+ ions and holes in
the semiconductor valence band that are free to move
through the system. Ferromagnetism is most easily discussed in a Mn continuum version of the model, justiﬁed in part by the small ratio of hole density to Mn ion
density in experimental systems. The constant Mn density model is somewhat analogous to the jellium model
for metals in that it artiﬁcially preserves translational
invariance.
In modelling these materials, the simplest
plausible approximation is one that both represents local moments by a uniform density continuum and ignores
correlations between local moment orientations and the
state of the valence-band-hole gas. In the following we refer to this combination of idealizations as the mean-ﬁeldapproximation. In the mean-ﬁeld-approximation ,
the ground state is always ferromagnetic because the exchange energy gained by polarizing is linear in the holespin density whereas the band and hole-hole interaction
energy cost is quadratic. For the Mn concentrations at
which the highest ferromagnetic transition temperatures
occur, it appears that mean-ﬁeld-theory predictions for
Tc, magnetic anisotropy, optical absorption, and other
properties are at least qualitatively in accord with experiment, although further experimental and theoretical
work is needed to conﬁdently establish where this approach is and is not reliable.
It is well known that mean-ﬁeld theories tend to overestimate the stability of ordered phases, because they fail
to account for thermal and quantum ﬂuctuations that
can destroy long-range order.
In particular, they predict critical temperatures which are systematically too
A step toward a more complete description of
ferromagnetism in diluted magnetic semiconductors was
taken in Ref. , where a theory of collective spin-wave
excitations was developed for the continuum version of
the kinetic-exchange model. Tc estimates based on
this theory of the ferromagnet’s spin stiﬀness establish
that mean-ﬁeld theory becomes less reliable for stronger
exchange coupling and for ﬂatter semiconductor valence
bands; the higher the predicted Tc the lower its reliability. The approximate collective-ﬂuctuation Tc bounds
proposed in Ref. are based on T = 0 spin-wave energies of the continuum version of the kinetic exchange
The considerations of this paper demonstrate
that collective magnetization ﬂuctuations will control the
temperature at which long range magnetic order is lost
in at least a part of the model-parameter range relevant
to ferromagnetic semiconductors. In this work we report
on Monte Carlo simulations, based on a Hybrid Monte
Carlo algorithm , that fully account for thermal ﬂuctuations of Mn spin orientations and shed further light on
the ﬁnite-temperature properties of the kinetic-exchange
Some of the results of these calculations were
described brieﬂy in Ref. .
In this paper we give a
complete description of the calculations, including all important technical details.
In addition, we also present
results obtained using a realistic six-band ⃗k · ⃗p model for
the valence bands of zincblende semiconductors, allowing us to assess the importance for thermal ﬂuctuations
of band structure details. A related Monte Carlo study
by Sakai et al. has the same motivation as ours, but
examines a model of Ising localized spins coupled to band
electrons. This model has gapped collective excitations
and qualitatively diﬀerent thermodynamic properties.
Our simulations are directed toward the regime of
Mn concentration in III1−xMnxV alloys where the highest ferromagnetic transition temperatures have been observed, x ∼
In this regime the heavilydoped semiconductors are strongly disordered threedimensional metals with kF ℓ∼3. (Here kF is a typical
Fermi wavevector and ℓis a mean-free path estimated
from the measured T = 0 resistivity.)
The sources of
disorder in these alloys have not been fully cataloged,
although randomness in the Mn alloy positions and antisite defects (group V elements on group III sites) are
certainly among them.
In our simulations we include
only the former disorder source. In the continuum version of the model this source is absent and the system
is disorder-free. We ﬁnd that disorder has quantitative
but not qualitative importance for the model we study.
Randomness in the Mn ion distribution will be increasingly important at lower Mn concentrations, particularly
on the insulating side of the metal insulator transition
which occurs for x ∼0.02, and has an overriding importance in the models studied in Ref. that are directed
to the dilute Mn concentration limit.
In the extreme dilute limit, all holes are bound to Mn2+
acceptors, forming neutral complexes. For small Mn concentrations, holes may hop from acceptor site to acceptor
site, but it is still useful to regard them as belonging to an
impurity band. On the metallic side of the metal insulator transition, the concept of an impurity band is less useful and the host semiconductor band structure has to be
modelled realistically, as in the present work. In order to
correctly capture the physics of the dilute limit, we would
need to include Coulombic interactions between Mn ions
and valence band spins in addition to exchange interactions. If hole-hole interactions were treated in a mean-
ﬁeld-theory, including Coulomb scattering would add a
self-consistently determined scalar potential to the bandelectron Hamiltonian. There are several obstacles to including this scalar potential in our work at present. The
most fundamental problem is current ignorance about
the distribution of charged defects in these materials.
It is known that the hole density in typical samples is
approximately three times smaller than the Mn density
and suspected that the compensation is due mainly to
the antisite defects present in low-temperature-growth
compound semiconductors . These defects will play
as important a role as the Mn ions in determining the
screened scalar potential. There are also technical obstacles to including Coulomb interactions in our Monte
Carlo calculations. If they were explicitly included, we
would have to self-consistently solve for the valence band
electron screening charges for each Mn spin conﬁguration, or adopt a Car-Parrinello type of scheme. In
the present study we shall therefore ignore Coulomb interactions, partially to enable progress on a reasonable
level of technical diﬃculty warranted by the present status of experimental insight and microscopic theoretical
modelling. This approximation dominates so far the interpretation of experimental results on magnetic properties of Mn-doped III-V semiconductors, and as well the
theoretical discussion.
This paper is organized as follows: In section II we
discuss the kinetic-exchange model of Mn-doped (III,V)
semiconductors. In section III we summarize the main
features of the Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm that are
important for our purposes. Numerical results obtained
by this method as well as a detailed discussion of important technical aspects are presented in section IV.
Our data show very clearly the typical features of ferromagnetic transitions signalled unambiguously by susceptibility peaks. We discuss the critical temperature as a
function of eﬀective mass, carrier density, and exchangecoupling strength. We close with a summary in section
II. THE MODEL
We now describe the kinetic-exchange model we use
for (III,Mn)V diluted magnetic semiconductor ferromagnets in detail. In this material class, the highest critical
temperature of 110K has been obtained for Ga1−xMnxAs
with x ≈0.05 . The manganese ions are assumed to
be Mn2+ with a 3d5, S = 5/2 conﬁguration, and to be
placed at random on group III element sites so that they
are acceptors. The concentration of holes is, however,
allowed to diﬀer from the Mn concentration, since the
system is strongly compensated by anti-site defects, i.e.
group V atoms on group III sites. In practice the hole
concentration is often not accurately known; its determination from Hall eﬀect measurements is complicated by
the extraordinary Hall eﬀect that occurs in all ferromagnetic metals .
Long range magnetic order occurs in this dilute system
of magnetic moments because of an exchange interaction
between the spins of the manganese ions and spins of the
valence band holes. The minimal model to describe this
carrier-induced ferromagnetism is
d3r J(⃗r −⃗RI)⃗s(⃗r ) · ⃗SI .
This Hamiltonian describes noninteracting carriers in a
parabolic band characterized by an eﬀective mass m∗,
whose spin density ⃗s(⃗r ) is coupled to manganese ion spins
⃗SI at locations ⃗RI by an antiferromagnetic exchange coupling. To account for the ﬁnite extent of the manganese
ions, the exchange is modelled by a spatially extended
coupling J(⃗r ) ; we use a Gaussian centered around
the ion position,
Both the strength and range of this interaction are phenomenological parameters to be ﬁxed by comparison with
experiment or, ideally, to be extracted from ﬁrst principles electronic structure calculations.
The exchangecoupling range parameter a0 in Eq. (2) is required in our
calculations to keep exchange-coupling shifts in quasiparticle energies ﬁnite. In the numerical studies to be
presented below we usually choose a0 = 0.1nm, which
appears to be a reasonable value for the d-ion radius in
Ga1−xMnxAs, whose lattice constant is ∼0.60nm .
However, we will see that properties of the system depend only very weakly on a0, as long as this quantity is
not increased to large values.
The exchange parameter Jpd > 0 characterizes the
strength of the exchange interaction between carriers and
manganese ions.
Typical experimental values for this
quantity are of the order of 0.1eVnm3. (The pd subscript
on the coupling constant is a reminder of its presumed
physical origin in the hybridization of valence-band porbitals and Mn-ion d-orbitals.
Since the carrier spin
density ⃗s(⃗r ) has dimension 1/volume and ⃗SI is dimensionless, Jpd has the dimension of energy times volume.)
We emphasize that the interaction in Eq. (1) is of the
isotropic Heisenberg type. In a parabolic band model,
total energies are therefore invariant under global rotations of all Mn spins and slow variations in orientation
have a small energy cost. Even with the realistic band
models discussed below, the energy cost of global Mn spin
rotations is still very small . Models with Ising-like interactions do not capture this essential element of
(III,Mn)V ferromagnet physics, although they are much
more easily studied.
An important reﬁnement of the above model, Eq. (1),
is obtained by replacing the single parabolic band by a
realistic model for the host semiconductor valence bands.
In the materials of interest these derive from atomic porbitals and have a spin-orbit coupling strength that exceeds the Fermi energy. Importantly, eigenstates do not
have deﬁnite angular momentum quantum numbers at
ﬁnite wavevector; at the center of the Brillouin zone,
however, they have deﬁnite total angular momentum
J ∈{3/2, 1/2}. We use these states in a ⃗k · ⃗p scheme,
choosing as basis states 
2⟩= |1, ↑⟩
3| −1, ↑⟩+
2⟩= | −1, ↓⟩
3| −1, ↑⟩.
Near the Brillouin-zone center, the band structure can
be parameterized by a small number of symmetryadapted parameters of the Kohn-Luttinger Hamiltonian
 ). In the above basis this eﬀective kinetic-energy
operator reads
where the entries of this 6×6 matrix for each wavevector
⃗k are given by
(γ1 + γ2)(k2
y) + (γ1 −2γ2)k2
(γ1 −γ2)(k2
y) + (γ1 + 2γ2)k2
γ3kz(kx −iky)
y) −2iγ3kxky
The quantities γ1, γ2, γ3 are called Luttinger parameters, m is the bare electron mass, and ∆so is the spinorbit coupling which splits the six states at the valence
band edge into a doublet and a quartet.
These band
parameters are accurately known for a large number of
(III,V) compound semiconductors . For all numerical calculations we use (γ1, γ2, γ3) = (6.85, 2.1, 2.9) and
∆so = 0.34eV, the band parameter set appropriate for
In the kinetic-exchange model with realistic band
structure, the Hamiltonian (4) replaces the kinetic part of
Eq. (1). The Hilbert space dimension of the one-particle
problem is, thus, enlarged by a factor of three.
Kohn-Luttinger Hamiltonian has already been adopted
in some mean-ﬁeld calculations for the continuum kinetic exchange model .
This realistic description
is essential if important magnetic parameters connected
with magnetocrystalline anisotropy and anisotropic magnetoresistance are to be addressed.
The material Ga1−xMnxAs has a zincblende structure,
in which the cations and anions each form an fcc lattice.
In the alloy manganese ions are located on randomly
chosen cation sites, forming a disordered system of local moments. In an approximation consistent with our
band Hamiltonians we ignore the underlying lattice and
place the ions positions completely at random within periodically continued cubic simulation cells. In the Monte
Carlo calculations described below, we average over different disorder realisations. However, we ﬁnd that the results of diﬀerent realizations typically lie within a range
of a few percent.
In our simulations we treat the S = 5/2 Mn spins as
classical degrees of freedom. This approximation is not
severe even in a mean-ﬁeld theory where it alters the
critical temperature by a factor of 1 + 1/S = 1.4. It is
even less important in the common circumstance where
the most important spin ﬂuctuations are collective. This
classical approximation is, therefore, a less serious source
of uncertainty in our representation of (III,Mn)V ferromagnet thermodynamics than the modelling issues discussed above; in our judgement the substantially greater
complexity of quantum calculations is not warranted at
present. Thus, the state of each ion spin ⃗SI is speciﬁed
by two polar angles ϑI, ϕI. In interpreting results, however, it is important to realize that some low-temperature
power laws will be altered by quantum freeze out.
We are interested in thermal expectation values of the
dϑ sin ϑ Tr
ˆf(ϑ, ϕ)e−βHo
where β is the inverse temperature, Z the partition function, and ϑ, ϕ are shorthand notations for the whole set
of classical spin coordinates. The quantity ˆf(ϑ, ϕ) is a
function of the ion spin angles and an operator with respect to the quantum mechanical carrier degrees of freedom over which the trace is performed. In practice we
replace the fermion trace by a ground state expectation
value, since the temperatures of interest will always be
much smaller than the Fermi energy. For typical carrier
densities n of order 0.1nm−3, the Fermi temperature for
the carriers is >∼1000K, compared to ferromagnetic critical temperatures ∼100K. Therefore, the average over
the carrier system may be approximated by an average
over its T = 0 ground state. Thus,
dϑ sin ϑ ⟨0| ˆf(ϑ, ϕ)|0⟩e−β⟨0|H|0⟩,
where |0⟩denotes the ground state of non-interacting
fermions with the appropriate band Hamiltonian and a
Zeeman-coupling term h whose eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld
Beﬀis due to exchange interactions with the localized
d3r ⃗s(⃗r ) · ⃗Beﬀ(⃗r )
⃗Beﬀ(⃗r ) = −
J(⃗r −⃗RI)S ˆΩI
where ˆΩI = (sin(θI) cos(φI), sin(θI) sin(φI), cos(θI)) is
the direction of the classical spin at ⃗RI. In the following we denote thermal expectation values of quantities
deﬁned in terms of classical spin orientation variables by
⟨·⟩and quantum mechanical expectation values within
the carriers ground state by ⟨0| · |0⟩. The latter quantities will be averaged also thermally according to Eq. (7).
III. THE HYBRID MONTE CARLO ALGORITHM
A standard way to evaluate expectation values of the
form Eq. (7) is to use classical Monte Carlo algorithms
which perform a random walk in the phase space of the
classical variables (ϑ,ϕ). The probabilities governing this
Monte Carlo dynamics are speciﬁed by the dependence of
many-fermion energy on the localized-spin conﬁguration.
The many-fermion ground state is a Slater determinant
whose single-particle orbitals are the lowest energy eigenstates of a single-band or multi-band Hamiltonian of the
form (1). For the case of a parabolic band, the matrix
elements of the corresponding one-particle Hamiltonian
in a plane-wave basis read
⟨⃗k′σ′|H|⃗kσ⟩= ¯h2k2
2m∗δ⃗k,⃗k′δσ,σ′
J(⃗k −⃗k′)ei(⃗k−⃗k′) ⃗RI ˆΩI · ⃗τσ,σ′ , (9)
where ⃗k and σ denote wavevector and spin indices, respectively, J(⃗k ) is the Fourier transform of J(⃗r ), and L
the edge length of the simulation cube. Periodic boundary conditions restrict the admissible values of wavevector components to integer multiples of 2π/L. In Eq. (9)
⃗τ is the vector of Pauli spin matrices.
Since the many-particle groundstate of the carrier system has to be computed at each Monte Carlo step, the
computational eﬀort required for the present calculations
is much larger than in simple classical spin models. In
the usual Metropolis algorithm, a single spin orientation
is altered at each step. If this algorithm were employed
here the time required to diagonalize the single-particle
Hamiltonian each time would severely limit the eﬃciency
of the algorithm.
We therefore use the Hybrid Monte
Carlo algorithm, which was introduced in the mid 1980’s
in the context of lattice ﬁeld theories . In this method
all classical variables are altered in one Monte Carlo step.
This drastically reduces the number of matrix diagonalisations required to explore statistically important magnetic conﬁgurations. The Hybrid algorithm is a powerful
method for Monte Carlo simulations in systems containing coupled classical and quantum mechanical degrees of
freedom. Very recently, a variant of this algorithm has
been applied to a system of classical degrees of freedom
coupled to non-interacting lattice fermions , a problem similar to the one studied here.
The Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm determines average
values deﬁned in terms of a probability distribution P of
P(φ) ∝e−S(φ) .
The “action” S depends on a set of classical variables
summarized by the symbol φ. The basic trick of the algorithm is to introduce a “fake dynamics” for the classical
variables which is governed by the “fake Hamiltonian”
2π2 + S′(φ)
with “fake momenta” π and an action S′ which is not
necessarily identical to S.
In this algorithm one Monte Carlo step is performed
in the following way: (i) Choose a value for each fake
momentum from its Gaussian distribution. (ii) Let the
system evolve in Monte Carlo time τ according to the
Hamilton equations of motion,
∂τπ = −∂H′
which leads to a new conﬁguration of ﬁelds and fake momenta (φ′, π′). (iii) Accept this new conﬁguration with a
probability
min{1, exp[H(φ, π) −H(φ′, π′)]} ,
where H is the “true Hamiltonian”,
2π2 + S(φ) .
This acceptance condition is reminiscent of the Metropolis algorithm. We note that the acceptance probability
is strictly unity for S = S′, and that the acceptance rate
in this Monte Carlo procedure reﬂects the diﬀerence between the two actions S and S′.
Thermodynamic averages are calculated using
⟨0n| ˆf(ϑn, ϕn)|0n⟩,
where n labels the accepted conﬁgurations. As shown in
Ref. this Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm generates a
Markov chain which converges to the distribution (10).
Our calculations adopt this scheme for the set of classical spin angles and the action
S = β⟨0|H|0⟩−
ln | sin ϑI| .
The ﬁrst term is the energy of the carrier system for a
given classical spin conﬁguration and the logarithms arise
from the Jacobi determinant in Eq. (7). Note that this
part is not multiplied by the inverse temperature β.
As pointed out above, the action S′ need not to be
the same as S. In our calculation, we use this freedom to
reduce the computational eﬀort. Our fake action S′ is de-
ﬁned as in Eq. (16) but for an itinerant-carrier state |0⟩i
that is evaluated in the beginning of each Monte Carlo
step and taken to be ﬁxed in the susequent integration
of the fake dynamics (12). In addition, we replace J(⃗r )
by Jpdδ(⃗r ), i.e., we use the a0 →0 limit of the exchange
coupling for the fake dynamics. The force term in the
eﬀective dynamics is then readily evaluated from
∂(i⟨0|H|0⟩i)
i⟨0|⃗s(⃗RI)|0⟩i
In the fake dynamics the localized spins move under the
inﬂuence of the ﬁxed eﬀective magnetic ﬁelds generated
by exchange interactions with the ﬁxed electronic spins of
|0⟩i. With this approach, only one matrix diagonalization
is required to update all Mn spin orientations. However,
since the acceptance probability (13) is determined by the
action S, the sampling is still performed with respect to
the original distribution (10). The choice of S′ being different from S is, therefore, not an approximation as long
as the Hamiltonian fake dynamics is reversible, a feature
which can be incorporated in the numerical integration
using the leapfrog algorithm .
The action (16) becomes singular if one of the polar
angles ϑ is equal to an integer multiple of π. This may
lead, in principle, to diﬃculties in the numerical implementation of our method. But since this singularity is
only logarithmic, and since in the fake dynamics (12) the
ϑ’s are repelled from the singular points, we have never
encountered any practical diﬃculty due to these coordinate singularities.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section we present our numerical results. We
concentrate on the spin polarizations of the manganese
ions and the carriers as a function of temperature and
address the ferromagnetic transition. We start with the
case of parabolic bands described by the Hamiltonian (1).
A. Parabolic bands
In the following we present results in dimensionful units for parameters in the range of interest for
(Ga,Mn)As. It is hoped that ferromagnetism will be realized in other materials described by the same model
but with diﬀerent parameter values.
In this connection, it is useful to observe that band and exchange
interaction terms in our model Hamiltonian both scale
simply with changes in length scale and model parameters.
Results for the parabolic band model have a
non-trivial dependence only on the ratio of the density
n band carriers and the concentration of Mn ions N,
and on the ratio of exchange interaction and band energy scales, ∆/ǫF. Here ∆= JpdNS is the continuum
model mean-ﬁeld-theory band exchange splitting, and
ǫF /kB = TF ≈4230K(m/m∗)(n[nm−3])2/3 is the band
Fermi energy in the paramagnetic state. There is also
a very weak dependence on the dimensionless range of
the exchange interaction a0N 1/3, that does not play an
important role and will usually be ignored.
In the following subsections we ﬁrst show some typical
numerical results for magnetization averages and ﬂuctuations and explain how we extract Tc from them. We
then proceed with some technical considerations that enter into these calculations before summarizing the numerical results we have obtainted to date.
1. Magnetisation curves and ﬂuctuations
Figure 1 shows typical magnetisation data as a function of the temperature.
These results were obtained
for a maganese ion density of N = 1.0nm−3, a carrier
density n = 0.1nm−3 in a cubic simulation volume of
V = 540nm3, i. e. the system contains 540 maganese
ions and 54 carriers.
The eﬀective band mass is half
the bare electron mass, and the exchange parameter is
Jpd = 0.15eVnm3. The main panel shows the average
polarisation of the manganese spins,
NV ⟨|⃗Stot|⟩,
i. e. the thermally averaged modulus of the total ion spin,
along with the carrier magnetisation,
nV ⟨|⟨0|⃗stot|0⟩|⟩,
which is the ensemble average of the modulus of the total
ground-state carrier spin. Both quantities are divided by
the number of particles and are close to their maximum
values at low temperatures. At higher temperatures they
show the expected transition to a paramagnetic phase.
The critical temperature of this ferromagnetic transition
is most readily estimated from numerical results for the
magnetisation ﬂuctuations:
⟨|⃗Stot|2⟩−⟨|⃗Stot|⟩2
 ⟨|⟨0|⃗stot|0⟩|2⟩−⟨|⟨0|⃗stot|0⟩|⟩2
These two ﬂuctuations per particle are plotted in the
insets of Fig. 1.
They both show a pronounced peak
at a temperature T ∼100K, deﬁning the ﬁnite-system
transition temperature for these model parameter values.
In fact, in a region around this transition both datasets
diﬀer just by a factor of approximately 25, which is the
square of the ratio of the two spin lengths entering the
expressions (20) and (21), respectively. This observation
shows explicitly that the correlation length both for the
manganese ions and in the carrier system is the same near
the transition, namely given essentially by the system
In conclusion, our Monte Carlo approach clearly reproduces the expected ferromagnetic transition. The transition temperature Tc can be determined unambiguously
and consistently from the positions of very pronounced
peaks in total magnetisation ﬂuctuations of both the Mn
ions and the carriers.
2. Technical Considerations
(i) Monte Carlo parameters and disorder realisations. The data of Fig. 1 was obtained by averaging over ﬁve diﬀerent realisations of the manganese-ions.
For each Monte Carlo run the system was thermalized
within the ﬁrst 1000 accepted steps, and the subsequent
measurement phase included 10000 accepted steps. The
Hamilton equations of motions (12) are integrated over
an interval of length 1 in each Monte Carlo step. These
simulation parameters were used for all results reported
in this paper. After the ﬁrst 1000 steps the magnetisations for the ﬁve diﬀerent systems diﬀer only by a few
This indicates that the thermalization phase
was long enough. In fact, for not too large density ratios
n/N, the ﬁnal results for the diﬀerent disorder realisations diﬀer only very weakly from each other. This is
illustrated in Fig. 2, where the magnetisation curves underlying the averaged results of Fig. 1 are plotted. Those
ﬁve datasets are hardly distinguishable from each other.
Finally we mention that possible errors bars due to
the statistical uncertainty in the magnetisation data for
individual disorder realisations are by far smaller than
the symbols used in the diagrams.
This follows from
the analysis of the Monte Carlo magnetisation data as a
function of Monte Carlo time which shows that the data
is very well-converged for the algorithm parameters given
above, an observation which is of course consistent with
(and actually a necessary condition for) the very smooth
form of of our data plots as a function of temperature.
(ii) Wavevector cutoﬀ.
Periodic boundary conditions restrict wavevector components for the carriers to
integer multiples of 2π/L, where L = V 1/3 is the edge
length of the simulation cube. In our numerical calculations we include wavevectors ⃗k up to a certain cutoﬀ
For the single-parabolic band model the wavevector cutoﬀcorresponds simply to a kinetic-energy cutoﬀ.
The wavevector cutoﬀhas to be chosen carefully, since
our results are most cleanly interpreted when their cut-
oﬀdependence has been saturated. On the other hand
the dimension of the single-particle Hamiltonian matrices, whose construction limits our numerical calculations,
grows with the third power of the cutoﬀ. Fortunately, our
data converge comparatively quickly with the cutoﬀparameter.
Figure 3 shows magnetization curves for the
same system parameters as in Fig. 1 (but in a smaller
simulation cell of volume V = 140nm3) for two diﬀerent cutoﬀparameters. In the ﬁrst case, kc = 2(2π/L)
and the single-particle Hilbert space for the 14 carriers
has dimension 66 (including the spin degree of freedom),
while in the second case, kc =
6(2π/L) and the dimension increases to 162. The datasets shown in Fig. 3 are
very close to each other over a large temperature range
around the ferromagnetic transition. This demonstrates
that the smaller cutoﬀis already suﬃcient (nevertheless
we used the larger one for Fig. 1). In the simulations of
larger systems with more carriers the cutoﬀparameter is
appropriately adjusted to a value of kc =
(iii) Finite-size eﬀects. The ﬁnite size of the simulation cell implies that the set of fermion energies obtained
for a particular Mn spin orientation conﬁguration is discrete. The gaps between adjacent energy eigenvalues depends on the size of the simulation cube and may lead to
systematic ⃗k-space shell eﬀects in the model’s ﬁnite-size
dependence. These are less important at temperatures
of interest, since the typical orientation conﬁguration is
complex and produces an exchange ﬁeld that removes all
degeneracies and smears the ⃗k-space shells. Shell eﬀects
are therefore more important for weaker exchange coupling, limiting our ability to do reliable calculations in
the weak-coupling limit. As we discuss later, however,
we believe that mean-ﬁeld theory tends to be reliable in
this limit, reducing the motivation for Monte Carlo studies. Nevertheless, ﬁnite-size eﬀects can be observed at all
coupling strengths. Their character is easily understood
by recognizing that Mn spins are coupled by the polarization they produce in the electron system. When a ⃗kspace shell is partially ﬁlled, its degeneracy is lifted by exchange copuling with a Mn spin-conﬁguration. Occupying the lower energy states in the split multiplet produces
a larger electron spin polarization than when the multiplet is full. Of course these eﬀects become less important at larger system sizes when the typical level shift is
much larger than the typical level spacing. The ferromagnetic transition temperature has systematic minima for
the closed-shell ‘magic’ electron numbers at which most
of our simulations are performed. This eﬀect becomes
smaller with increasing system size. Figure 4 shows magnetisation curves for the same densities and system parameters as in Fig. 1 for systems with 14, 38, 54, and 30
carriers. The ﬁrst three carrier numbers correspond to
“closed shell” conﬁgurations in the paramagnetic phase
while the last one lies in between. The comparison of
the data for the three largest carrier numbers shows that
the ﬁnite-size eﬀect has already become weak for carrier
numbers nV >∼30, while the magnetisation curve for the
system of 14 carriers shows slightly larger values at given
temperature. However, the ﬁnite-size critical temperature obtained in the case lies only by about 15K above
the values for the other three system sizes.
(iv) The regularisation parameter a0.
As mentioned above we have chosen the regularisation parameter in the exchange coupling (2) to be a0 = 0.1nm. This
seems to be a reasonable value compared with the lattice constant of GaAs. Figure 5 shows the magnetisation
data for the same system parameters as in Fig. 1 and a
simulation volume of V = 140nm3 for diﬀerent values of
a0. The data for a0 = 0.1nm and a0 = 0.2nm are almost
identical. For larger values of a0 a slight departure sets
in. As a consequence, our results are practically independent of a0 over the (physically motivated) range of
considered values.
In summary, we have demonstrated that our Monte
Carlo results are, in a large vicinity of Tc, stable with
respect to the inﬂuence of the wavevector cutoﬀand the
ﬁnite system size. Moreover, the eﬀect of diﬀerent disorder realisations and the precise value of the regularisation
parameter of the exchange coupling is found to be very
3. Results for Tc
We now turn to the transition temperature Tc for the
parabolic band model (1). Within mean ﬁeld theory 
this quantity is given by
S(S + 1)NJ2
where S = 5/2 is the spin length of the manganese ions,
and g∗is the g-factor of the carriers. Their Pauli susceptibility χP reads
and is via the Fermi energy εF proportional to the eﬀective mass m∗. Our objective here is not to make a quantitative prediction of the critical temperature in particular ferromagnetic semiconductor systems. In our view,
uncertainly in model parameters and the possible importance of elaborations to the current model that account
for example for direct Mn ion interactions, make such
an eﬀort premature. By doing a numerically exact calculation for a model that captures much of the physics,
however, we hope to shed light on the range of validity and the sense and magnitude of likely corrections to
mean-ﬁeld-theory estimates.
The above expression for Tc can be obtained by averaging the ion-spin and carrier polarization over space. The
eﬀective ﬁeld which each manganese spin experiences due
to a ﬁnite carrier polarization is constant in space and
the carrier bands are in turn spin split by ∆= JpdNS
by a spatially homogeneous eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld. (The
limit in which mean-ﬁeld theory is exact can be achieved
in our model by letting a0 →∞in Eq. (2).) In this very
simpliﬁed approach, spatial ﬂuctuations and correlations
between carriers and manganese spins are neglected. As
a result, mean-ﬁeld theory predicts Tc to be quadratic
in the exchange parameter Jpd and linear in the eﬀective
band mass m∗. This mean-ﬁeld theory has been used to
predict values for Tc in various semiconductor host materials . It is, however, expected that due to
the neglect of correlations, Weiss mean-ﬁeld theory can
substantially overestimate the critical temperature.
We therefore investigate the critical temperature Tc
with the help of our Monte Carlo scheme. As seen in
Fig. 1 this quantity can be read oﬀunambiguously from
the magnetic ﬂuctuations of both the Mn ions and the
carriers. To limit computational expense we concentrate
on systems with fourteen carriers. From Fig. 4 we conclude that ﬁnite-size eﬀects will lead to values of Tc which
are only slightly too large (less than 20K). Furthermore,
the qualitative behavior of the Tc data as a function of
system parameters such as the eﬀective mass m∗will not
be aﬀected by the ﬁnite simulation-cell size.
In Fig. 6 we show results for a manganese densities
N = 1.0nm−3 and a mean-ﬁeld band splitting ∆=
JpdNS = 0.5eV. The left panel shows the dependence
of the critical temperature on the carrier eﬀective mass.
This dependence is very important for the search for diluted magnetic semiconductor systems with Tc’s larger
than room temperature. In the mean-ﬁeld approximation, Tc grows linear with increasing mass. The Monte
Carlo results clearly deviate from this prediction suggesting a saturation of Tc at carrier masses close to the bare
electron mass. For even higher masses, we expect the
electrons to behave more classically and localize around
individual Mn spins.
The cost in electronic energy of
changing relative orientations of nearby Mn spins will
get smaller causing Tc to decline and eventually causing
ferromagnetism to disappear. This physics also occurs in
a continuum model where the spin stiﬀness declines as
1/m∗for large band masses , although there are
diﬀerences in detail.
To discuss the critical temperature as a function of
the exchange coupling parameter Jpd we observe that the
Hamiltonian (1) satisﬁes the scaling relation
βH (m∗, Jpd) = β
with q > 0. Therefore the saturation of Tc as a function
of the eﬀective mass at ﬁxed Jpd corresponds to a linear
dependence of Tc on Jpd at ﬁxed m∗. This contrasts with
the mean-ﬁeld prediction T MF
In the right panel of Fig. 6 we show Tc as a function of
the carrier density. Here the Monte Carlo approach also
clearly yields a lower critical temperatures than mean-
ﬁeld theory. For still higher carrier densities the typical
distance between nearby Mn ions will become larger than
the band electron Fermi wavelength, causing the sign of
the typical exchange coupling to oscillate in an RKKY
fashion. We expect the resulting frustration to make the
ferromagnetic state unstable, possibly leading to a regime
of spin-glass order.
As discussed above, diﬀerent disorder realisations with
respect to the ion positions give almost identical critical
temperatures (see also Fig. 2). This does not mean, however, that the presence of disorder is unimportant. Numerical ﬁnite-size studies at T = 0 have shown that in
the limit of strong exchange coupling Jpd the presence of
disorder increases the spin stiﬀness for the regime
of densities and masses covered by our calculations. This,
in turn, enhances the critical temperature since, according to analytical estimates from spin-wave theory, Tc is
approximately proportional to the spin stiﬀness . On
the other hand, our Monte Carlo results show that the
spin stiﬀness enhancement does not depend on the concrete disorder realization.
4. Local vs. global polarisation
In mean-ﬁeld theory, the free carrier band spinsplitting vanishes as the critical temperature is approached.
This is, however, not generally the correct
physical picture. When long-wavelength collective ﬂuctuations , which are neglected by mean-ﬁeld theory,
drive the breakdown of ferromagnetism the local carrier
spin polarization can remain ﬁnite even above Tc. Ferromagnetism and the global spin polarization disappears
only because of the loss of long-range spatial coherence.
The applicability of this picture to the studied parameter
ranges of the kinetic exchange model is conﬁrmed by our
Monte Carlo studies. In Fig. 7 we compare the global
(Eq. (19)) and local carrier spin polarizations,
which is the thermally and spatially averaged ratio of
the modulus of the carrier spin density ⃗s(⃗r ) and the local
carrier density n(⃗r ). The system parameter are the same
as in Fig. 1. While the global spin polarization vanishes
at the critical temperature, the local polarization remains
ﬁnite and saturates at about fourty percent of its T = 0
B. Six-band model
We now turn to the six-band model in which the kinetic
energy part is given by the Kohn-Luttinger Hamiltonian
(4). To model GaAs we use (γ1, γ2, γ3) = (6.85, 2.1, 2.9)
for the Luttinger parameters, and the spin-orbit coupling
energy is ∆so = 0.34eV.
Figure 8 shows typical magnetisation data for a system
with exchange coupling Jpd = 0.15eVnm3, carrier density
is n = 0.1nm−3, and Mn ion density N = 1.0nm−3 in a
volume of V = 280nm3. The wavevector cutoﬀhere is
kc = 2(2π/L) oﬀering 192 single-particle states to the 28
carrier in the system.
As in the case of parabolic bands, a ferromagnetic transition is clearly signalled by pronounced peaks in the
magnetic ﬂuctuations of both Mn ions and carriers. We
ﬁnd that, in contrast to the parabolic two-band model,
the carrier magnetisation is already reduced at temperatures well below Tc. Another diﬀerence compared to the
parabolic-band model concerns the shape of the magnetic
ﬂuctuations for the manganese ions and the carriers as a
function of temperature. Although both curves indicate
the same value for Tc, their shape in the vicinity of Tc is
slightly diﬀerent and the ratio of the their ﬂuctuations is
smaller than 25 (the square of the ratio of spin lengths
involved). These diﬀerences arise because of the more
complicated band structure and the spin-orbit coupling
present in the Kohn-Luttinger Hamiltonian.
As for the two-band model, the data shown in Fig. 8 are
the average over ﬁve diﬀerent disorder realisations. Also
in the present case, the dependence of the data on the
concrete realisation is very weak. Moreover, we again ﬁnd
that the local carrier polarization remains ﬁnite above Tc
while the global magnetization vanishes.
In the right panel Fig. 9 we plot the transition temperature as a function of the exchange coupling Jpd for two
diﬀerent system sizes. Both data sets agree within error
bars and show a linear dependence of Tc on Jpd. This
ﬁnding is the same as for the two-band model and contrasts with mean-ﬁeld theory which predicts Tc ∝J2
The left panel of Fig. 9 shows the transition temperature
as a function of Jpd for the parabolic model for an eﬀective mass m∗= 0.5m. This value is close to the heavyhole mass in the Kohn-Luttinger model for parameters
appropriate for GaAs as given above. The data in the
left panel can be obtained from the left panel of Fig. 6
via the scaling relation (24). Comparing the two panels of Fig. 9 demonstrates that, in the range of carrier
densities studied, a single parabolic band with an eﬀective mass close to that of the heavy-hole Kohn-Luttingermodel band provides a reasonably good approximation to
the behavior of the six-band system.
V. SUMMARY
We have given a detailed report on Monte Carlo studies of a model that captures essential aspects of ferromagnetism in (III,Mn)V ferromagnets.
In the kineticexchange model we study localized magnetic moments
formed by Mn ions are coupled antiferromagnetically to
carriers (holes) in the valence band. In most of our simulations we describe the valence-band carriers by simple
parabolic bands but we have investigated a more realistic
six-band ⃗k·⃗p model as well. We treat the manganese spins
as classical magnetic moments, and take the carriers effectively at zero temperature. Both approximations are
comparatively weak.
Our treatment accounts for spatial ﬂuctuations in the magnetization and for disorder
induced by the randomness of the Mn ion positions, effects which are both eﬀects are neglected in a mean-ﬁeld
description.
We outline the Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm employed and discussed its advantages compared to other
methods. A complete account of important technical details of the computation is given. We have shown that
the eﬀects of diﬀerent disorder realizations, wavevector
cutoﬀ, and ﬁnite-size eﬀects are well under control. Our
results depend weakly on the regularization parameter a0
which describes the spatial range of the exchange mechanism between carriers and ions.
We ﬁnd that due to spatial ﬂuctuations and correlations the total magnetization and therefore also the ferromagnetic transition temperature Tc is considerably reduced in comparison to mean-ﬁeld estimates, increasingly
so as the exchange coupling strength and the band effective mass are increased. In contrast with mean-ﬁeldtheory predictions, Tc is not a linear function of the effective band mass and is not proportional to the square
of the exchange coupling constant. The discrepancy becomes more severe for higher predicted mean-ﬁeld critical
temperatures. It remains an interesting to what extend
these deviations from mean ﬁeld theory are inﬂuenced
by the presence and type of disorder with respect to the
manganese positions.
The importance of spatial ﬂuctuations of the magnetization, neglected in a mean-ﬁeld description, is emphasized by the fact that the local carrier spin polarization
remains ﬁnite even well above the ferromagnetic transition temperature.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Glenn Martyna for bringing the advantages
of the Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm to our attention,
and M. Abolfath, A. Burkov, T. Jungwirth, B. Lee, H. H.
Lin, and Y. Sato for useful discussions. J. S. and J. K.
were supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.
This research was supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research and the Research Foundation of the State University of New York under grant number N000140010951
and by the Indiana 21st Century Fund.
 J. K. Furdyna, J. Kossut, Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors, in Semiconductors and Semimetals, volume 25,
Academic Press ; T. Dietl, Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors, in Handbook of Semiconductors, volume 3B,
North-Holland .
 H. Ohno, A. Shen, F. Matsukura, A. Oiwa, A. Endo, S.
Katsumoto, Y. Iye, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 363 .
 H. Ohno, Science, 281, 951 .
 For a recent review see H. Ohno, F. Matsukura, Solid
State Commun. 117, 179 .
 G. A. Prinz, Science 282, 1660 .
 T. Dietl, A. Haury, Y. M. d’Aubign´e, Phys. Rev. B 55,
R3347 ; T. Dietl, H. Ohno, F. Matsukura, J. Cibert, D. Ferrand, Science 287, 1019 ; T. Dietl, H.
Ohno, F. Matsukura, Phys. Rev. B 63, 195205 .
 M. Abolfath, T. Jungwirth, J. Brum, A. H. MacDonald,
Phys. Rev. B 63, 054418 .
 T. Jungwirth, W. A. Atkinson, B. H. Lee, A. H. Mac-
Donald, Phys. Rev. B 59, 9818 ; B. H. Lee, T.
Jungwirth, A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. B 61, 15606
 ; B.H. Lee, Tomas Jungwirth and A.H. MacDonald, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 46, 509 .
 J. Fernandez-Rossier and L. J. Sham, Bull. Am. Phys.
Soc. 46, 509 .
 S. Sanvito, P. Ordejon, N. A. Hill, Phys. Rev. B 63,
165206 ; S. Sanvito, N. A. Hill, cond-mat/0011372.
 T. C. Schulthess, W. B. Butler, private communication
 J. K¨onig, H. H. Lin, A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 5628 ; to appear in ”Interacting Electrons in
Nanostructures”, edited by R. Haug and H. Schoeller
(Springer), cond-mat/0010471.
 J. Schliemann, J. K¨onig, H. H. Lin, A. H. MacDonald,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1550 .
 S. Duane, A. D. Kennedy, B. J. Pendleton, D. Roweth,
Phys. Lett. B 195, 216 .
 O. Sakai, S. Suzuki, K. Nishizawa, preprint .
 X. Wan, R. N. Bhatt, cond-mat/0009161; R. N. Bhatt,
M. Berciu, cond-mat/0011319.
 T. Omiya, F. Matsukura, T. Dietl, Y. Ohno, T. Sakon,
M. Motokawa, and H. Ohno, Physica E 7, 976 .
 R. Car, M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 ;
G. Galli, M. Parrinello in Computer Simulations in Materials Science, M. Meyer, V. Pontikis (eds.), Kluwer
 ; P. E. Bl¨ochl, M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. B 45,
9413 .
 A. K. Bhattacharjee, C. Benoit `a la Guillaume, Solid
State Comm. 113, 17 .
 W. W. Chow, S. W. Koch, Semiconductor-Laser Fundamentals, Springer .
 J. M. Luttinger, W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 97, 869 .
 For a recent review see I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer, L.
R. Ram-Mohan, Appl. Phys. Rev. (in press).
 J. A. Alonso, L. A. Fernandez, F. Guinea, V. Laliena, V.
Martin-Mayor, Nucl. Phys. B 596 587 .
 J. K¨onig, J. Schliemann, A. H. MacDonald, unpublished.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
FIG. 1. Magnetization curves for manganese ions and carriers. The upper and lower inset show the magnetic ﬂuctuations
for the manganese ions and the carriers, respectively. Both
diﬀer by a factor of approximately 25 reﬂecting the square of
the ratio of spin lengths. The density of manganese ions is
N = 1.0nm−3, the carrier density is n = 0.1nm−3 in a cubic
volume of V = 540nm3. The band mass is half the bare electron mass with an exchange parameter of Jpd = 0.15eVnm3.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
Magnetisation curves for
five different disorder
realisations
FIG. 2. Magnetisation curves for ﬁve diﬀerent realisations
of manganese positions underlying the averaged data of Fig. 1.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
kc=2(2π/L)
Jpd=0.15eVnm
FIG. 3. Magnetisation data for the same system parameters as in Fig. 1 in a cubic volume of V = 140nm3 for two different values of the wavevector cutoﬀ. In a large area around
the ferromagnetic transition both datasets are very close two
each other.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
140 Mn ions
380 Mn ions
540 Mn ions
300 Mn ions
FIG. 4. Magnetisation data for the same densities and
band mass and exchange parameter as in Fig. 1 for diﬀerent system sizes.
The ﬁrst three systems with 14, 38, and
54 carriers correspond to “closed shell” conﬁgurations in the
paramagnetic carrier state, while the last system (30 carriers)
lies in between.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
FIG. 5. Magnetisation data for the same system parameters as in Fig. 1 in a cubic volume of V = 140nm3 for diﬀerent
values of the regularisation parameter a0. At not too large
values for a0 the dependence on this quantity is extremely
Effective Mass m/mel
Critical Temperature Tc [Kelvins]
Carrier Density n [nm
Mean Field
Monte Carlo
Simulation
Mean Field
Monte Carlo
Simulation
FIG. 6. The critical temperature Tc as a function of the
carrier mass (left panel) and the carrier density (right panel).
The exchange parameter is in both cases Jpd = 0.20eVnm3
leading to a zero temperature mean-ﬁeld spin splitting of
∆= JpdNS = 0.5eV. The results of the Monte Carlo runs
are compared with the mean-ﬁeld predictions.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Carrier Spin Polarisation
local polarisation
global polarisation
FIG. 7. Local versus global carrier spin polarisation for the
same system as in Fig. 1 as a function of temperature. The
local carrier polarisation remains ﬁnite above Tc.
Temperature [Kelvins]
Spin Polarisation
Temperature [Kelvins]
Magnetisation curves for Mn ions and carriers in the six-band model for n exchange coupling of
Jpd = 0.15eVnm3.
The carrier density is n = 0.1nm−3
with an Mn ion density of N = 1.0nm−3 in a volume of
V = 280nm3.
As in the case of parabolic bands, the ferromagnetic transition in clearly and consistently signalled by
pronounced peaks in the magnetic ﬂuctuations shown in the
Critical Temperature Tc [Kelvins]
two−band model
FIG. 9. The right panel shows critical temperature Tc as a
function of the exchange parameter Jpd for the same particle
densities as in Fig. 8 and two diﬀerent system sizes. Both data
sets agree within error bars and show a linear dependence
of Tc on Jpd. In the left panel, the corresponding data for
the parabolic two-band model with an eﬀective mass of half
the bare electron mass is plotted.
The latter system is a
reasonable approximation to the six-band case.