Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep Learning in Ophthalmology:
Current Clinical Relevance
Daniel S.W. Ting MD PhD1
Lily Peng MD PhD2
Avinash V Varadarajan MS2
Pearse Keane FRCOphth3
Phil Burlina PhD4,5,6
Michael F. Chiang MD7
Leopold Schmetterer PhD 1,8,9,10
Louis R. Pasquale MD11
Neil M. Bressler MD4
Dale R Webster PhD2
Michael Abramoff MD PhD12
Tien Y. Wong MD PhD1
1. Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye Center, Duke-NUS
Medical School, National University of Singapore
2. Google AI Healthcare, California, USA
3. Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK
4. Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
5. Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
6. Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare, Johns Hopkins University
7. Departments of Ophthalmology & Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology,
Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science University
8. Department of Ophthalmology, Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore
9. Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
10. Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria
11. Department of Ophthalmology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
12. Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa Health
Financial Disclosure: Drs Daniel SW Ting and TY Wong are the co-inventor of a
deep learning system for retinal diseases. Drs L Peng, A Vadarajan and D Webster
are the members of the Google AI Healthcare. Dr. Michael F. Chiang is an unpaid
member of the Scientific Advisory Board for Clarity Medical Systems (Pleasanton,
CA), a Consultant for Novartis (Basel, Switzerland), and an equity owner in
Inteleretina, LLC (Honolulu, HI). Dr P Keane is a consultant for Google DeepMind. Dr
LR Pasquale is a non-paid consultant for Visulytix and consultant for Google Verily.
Dr M.D. Abramoff is the Watzke Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
and CEO and Founder, Equity owner, of IDx, Iowa, USA, and is inventor for US
patents and patent applications on artificial intelligence, imaging and deep learning,
as well as on foreign patents. Drs NM Bressler and P Burlina are the co-inventor and
patent holders for a deep learning system for retinal diseases.
Corresponding author:
Daniel SW Ting MD PhD
Assistant Professor in Ophthalmology, Duke-NUS Medical School
Singapore National Eye Center
11 Third Hospital Avenue,
Singapore 168751
Email address: 
With the advent of computer graphic processing units, improvement in mathematical
models and availability of big data, artificial intelligence (AI) using machine learning
(ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques have achieved robust performance for
potential application across many industries, including social-media, the internet of
things, the automotive industry and healthcare. DL systems provide capability in
image, speech and motion recognition as well as in natural language processing. In
medicine, most of the progress of AI, ML and DL systems has been demonstrated in
image-centric specialties such as radiology, dermatology and pathology. There is
increasing interest in AI in ophthalmology. New studies, including pre-registered
prospective clinical trials, have shown DL systems are effective in detecting diabetic
retinopathy (DR), glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration, retinopathy of
prematurity, refractive error and in identifying cardiovascular risk factors and
diseases, using image based data such as fundus photographs and optical
coherence tomography. Additionally, the application of ML to Humphrey visual fields
may be useful in detecting glaucoma progression. There are fewer studies that
incorporate clinical data in AL algorithms and no prospective studies to demonstrate
that AI algorithms can predict the development of eye disease. This article describes
the current global eye disease burden, clinical unmet needs and selected common
ophthalmic conditions of public health importance for which AI and DL systems may
be applicable. Technical and clinical aspects to build a DL system to address those
gaps, and the potential challenges for clinical adoption are discussed. AI, ML and DL
likely will play a crucial role in clinical ophthalmology practice, with implications for
screening, diagnosis and follow up of the major causes of vision impairment, in the
setting of the ageing population globally.
Introduction
With the advent of graphic processing units (GPUs), advances in mathematical
models, the availability of big datasets and low cost sensors, artificial intelligence (AI)
using machine learning (ML) techniques initially and deep learning (DL) techniques
subsequently, has sparked tremendous interest in many industries.1 These include
application of AI in social-media, the internet of things, finance and banking, the
automotive industry and healthcare. AI systems can be designed not only for
image,2,3 speech4 and motion recognition,5 but also in natural language processing.6
In medicine, the most robust AI algorithms have been demonstrated in image-centric
specialties, including radiology, dermatology, pathology and increasingly so in
ophthalmology. For example, Lakhani et al demonstrated excellent performance in
detecting pulmonary tuberculosis from chest radiographs,7,8 while Esteva et al was
able to differentiate malignant melanoma from benign lesions on skin photographs.9
In ophthalmology, there have been two major areas in which AI and new DL systems
have been applied. First, AI systems have been shown in new studies, including preregistered prospective clinical trials, to accurately detect diabetic retinopathy (DR),10-
13 glaucoma,10,14 age-related macular degeneration (AMD),10,15,16 retinopathy of
prematurity (ROP),17 and refractive error, from digital fundus photographs.18 A range
of cardiovascular risk factors19 have also been accurately predicted from fundus
photographs. Second, several retinal conditions [e.g., neovascular AMD, earlier
stages of AMD, and diabetic macular edema (DME)]20 has also be detected
accurately using optical coherence tomography (OCT).21,22 There are relatively fewer
AI studies using other data, such as studies which show good performance in
detecting glaucoma progression from serial Humphrey visual fields (HVFs).23
However, there are fewer studies that incorporate clinical and imaging data in AL
algorithms, and no prospective studies to demonstrate that AI algorithms can predict
the development of eye diseases over time. Furthermore, the implementation and
adoption of AI into routine clinical care remains extremely challenging. These remain
significant goals of AI research in ophthalmology
This article describes basic concepts of AI, ML and DL and how such systems might
address some of the global burdens created by common eye conditions.
Furthermore, the technical and clinical aspects of developing and validating an AI/DL
system, potential challenges and future directions are also discussed in this article.
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep Learning
AI was conceptualized in 1956, after a workshop at Dartmouth College (Figure 1).10
In the workshop, many AI groups showed promising results in computer learning of
checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra and proving logical theorems.
These tasks involved mostly pattern recognition and computational learning. All AI
systems were designed to execute and maximise its chance of ‘winning’ within a
constructed environment. The term ‘machine learning’ (ML) was subsequently
coined by Arthur Samuel in 1959 and stated that “the computer should have the
ability to learn using various statistical techniques, without being explicitly
programmed”.11 Using ML, the algorithm can learn and make predictions based on
the data that has been fed into the training phase, using either a supervised or unsupervised approach. ML has been widely adopted in applications such as computer
vision and predictive analytics using complex mathematical models. In supervised
learning, the computer is trained with labelled examples, also known as ground truth,
whereas for unsupervised learning, no labelling is required for the algorithm to find
its own structure in the input. The majority of AI application in biomedical research
uses supervised learning.
DL utilizes multiple processing layers to learn representation of data with multiple
levels of abstraction.20 Although some forms of deep neural networks have already
been investigated in the past, the advent of graphic processing units (GPU) with
improved processing power, larger annotated datasets, and other factors, have
recently boosted its diagnostic performance in many domains. Using learning
approaches such as backpropagation,24 a ML or DL system is able to discover
intricate structure in large data sets, then changing its internal parameters that are
used to compute the representation in each layer from the previous one. These
approaches permit the use of regional samples to allow the network to learn to
detect biomarkers; furthermore these approaches use complete images, and
associate the entire image with a diagnostic output, thereby eliminating the use of
“hand-engineered” image features. Given the much improved performance,11,12 DL
has been widely adopted in image recognition, speech recognition and natural
language processing.
General Approach in Building a Robust AI system
This section explains some common terminologies, software framework, network
architectures, datasets selection, assistive vs. autonomous AI system, consideration
factors to ensure the robustness of these algorithms (Table 1).1,25-30 In order to build
a robust DL system, it is important to have 2 main components – the ‘brain’
(technical networks – Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and the ‘dictionary’ (the
datasets).
1. What is a CNN?
A CNN is a deep neural network consisting of a cascade of processing layers that
resemble the biological processes of the animal visual cortex. It transforms the input
volume into an output volume via a differentiable function. Inspired by Hubel and
Weisel,31 each neuron in the visual cortex will respond to the stimulus that is specific
to a region within an image, similar to how the brain neuron would respond to the
visual stimuli, that will activate a particular region of the visual space, known as the
receptive field. These receptive fields are tiled together to cover the entire visual field.
Two classes of cells are found in this region – simple vs complex cells. The simple
cells active when they detect edge-like patterns, while the more complex cells
activate when they have a larger receptive field and are invariant to the position of
the pattern.
Broadly, the CNN can be divided into the input, hidden (also known as featureextraction layers) and output layers (Figure 2A). The hidden layers usually consist of
convolutional, pooling, fully connected and normalization layers, and the number of
hidden layers will differ for different CNNs. The input layer specifies the width, height
and the number of channels (usually 3 channels – red, green and blue). The
convolutional layer is the core building block of a CNN, transforming the input data
by applying a set of filters (also known as kernels) that acts as the feature detectors.
The filter will slide over the input image to produce a feature map (as the output). A
CNN learns the values of these filters weights on its own during the training process,
although the specific parameters such as number of filters, filter size, network
architecture still need to be set prior to that. Additional operations called activations
(for example ReLU or Rectified Linear Unit) are used after every convolution
operation. For pooling, the aim is to reduce the dimensionality of each feature map
and make it somewhat spatially invariant, and retain the most important information.
Pooling can be divided into different types: maximum, average and minimum. In the
case of maximum pooling, the largest element from the rectified feature map will be
taken (Figure 2B). The output from the convolutional and pooling layers represent
the high-level features of the input image. The purpose of the fully connected layer is
to use these high-level features to classify the input image into various classes
based on the training dataset. Following which, backpropagation is conducted to
compute the network weights and uses the gradient descent to update all filters and
parameter values to minimize the output error. This process will be repeated many
times during the training process.
2. Software frameworks: Keras, TensorFlow, PyTorch
Deep neural networks are commonly implemented in several popular software
frameworks (e.g. Caffe, Tensorflow, PyTorch, etc). Early development in these past
10 years was enabled by the availability of frameworks like Caffe74 (originally from
UC Berkeley), Torch13 (built on top of Lua) and Theano75. These frameworks tend to
be less used nowadays, although Caffe2 has been released with both C++ and
Python front ends and has features such as ease of deployment for mobile
application. More recently, Python-based frameworks such as TensorFlow76 (from
Google) and PyTorch13 (an evolution of Torch in Python) have gained in popularity.
High-level application programming interface (APIs) such as Keras12 or Lasagne
have also made it much easier to develop DL systems, and should be considered
the preferred starting point for implementation for new users. In particular, they
simplify the reuse of existing networks architectures and pretrained weights, which is
convenient for the purposes of transfer learning and fine tuning. Two recent
important features of PyTorch are imperative programming (vs. declarative/symbolic
for TensorFlow) and the use of dynamic graphs. These features make PyTorch
easier to debug and inspect compared to other frameworks where graphs are static
(although this feature has also now been made available in TensorFlow).
3. Popular Network Architectures - AlexNet, VGGNet, Inception, ResNet and
AlexNet, first described in 2012 with 5 convolutional layers, has been the most
widely used CNN, after winning the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Competition
Recognition (ILSVCR).32 Following which, more CNNs with deeper layers and
unique features were described subsequently. Each CNN can also have different
versions and layers, for example VGGNet (16 or 19 layers), Inception V1 to V4 (27
layers), ResNet (18, 50, 152 or even up to 1202 layers with stochastic depth) and
DenseNet (40, 100, 121, 169 layers). Compared to AlexNet, the newer networks
have unique features to help improve performance, including the addition of more
layers, smaller convolutional filters, skip connections, repeated modules with more
complex/parallel filters, bottleneck connection and dropout. Although deeper CNNs
(e.g. ResNet and DenseNet) have been reported to achieve improved performance,
older architectures (e.g. VGGNet and Inception) have consistently shown
comparable outcomes in medical imaging analysis. In order to further boost
performance, multiple deep neural networks are commonly trained and ensembled.
Transfer learning with pretrained weights has also been reported to aid training and
performance, especially with smaller datasets.
Rather than training the CNN entirely from scratch (i.e. starting with randomly
initialized values), it has been common practice in retinal image and many other DL
applications to perform transfer learning. Transfer learning is the process of reusing
models developed for other applications (e.g. for performing full image classification
from ImageNet images) and further refining these weights for a different target
domain (e.g. detection of age-related macular degeneration [AMD] on fundus
images). The most popular transfer learning approach has been to use finetuning.10,11,13,17-19,21,67-69 It has been shown that once a network weight is optimized to
solve a certain problem, the weights for the resulting model, and especially those
corresponding to lower-level layers can be largely reused or slightly modified for
solving other tasks. In this approach, called ’fine-tuning’, the original network weights
are used as a starting point and further optimized (fine-tuned) to solve another task
(such as going from an original domain, i.e. common everyday images found in
ImageNet, to retinal imaging). The approach may also involve selectively freezing
some of the network layers’ weights (e.g. early layers usually encode low level
feature computation that are likely to be universally applicable across domains), and
selectively fine-tuning other layers (e.g. mid-level convolutional or higher-level fully
connected layers, which encode more domain-specific features).
4. Dataset splitting and evaluation
As is usually done in ML, data is split into training, validation and testing datasets.
These datasets must not intersect – in other words, an image that is in one of the
datasets, must not appear in any of the other datasets. Ideally, this non-intersection
should extend to patients. The general class distribution for the targeted condition
should be maintained in all these datasets.
Training of deep neural nets is generally done in batches (subsets) randomly
sampled from the training dataset. The training dataset is what is used for optimizing
the network weights via backpropagation. The validation dataset is used for
hyperparameter selection and tuning, and is customarily also used to implement
stopping conditions for training.
Finally, the reported performance should be computed exclusively using the
selected optimized model weights, on the testing datasets. It is also critical to test
the AI system using independent datasets, captured using different devices,
population and clinical settings. This will ensure the generalizability of the system in
the clinical settings.
5. Reporting of the datasets characteristics and diagnostic performance
For any AI study in medical imaging analysis, it is important to demonstrate the
population in which the DL system was developed and tested on. The reporting of
dataset characteristics, including age, gender, ethnic groups, imaging platform, size
of field of view, reference standard, are important, especially now that we know that
DL system can predict additional features that are not discernable to manual
inspection like gender and age.19 These characteristics might be augmented by
including the systemic vascular risk factors (e.g. blood pressure, blood sugar level
and etc.) for vascular conditions such as diabetic retinopathy (DR).
In order to report the diagnostic performance of an AI system, it is important to first
define the gold standard or reference standard (also known as ground truth). In
ophthalmology, the reference standard can be the classifications rendered by a
reading center, ophthalmologists, professional trained graders, or optometrists. In
terms of the performance metrics, the most commonly used one is the area under
the receiver’s operator characteristics curve (AUC), computed using sensitivity and
specificity. In order to ascertain the true performance of an AI system, it is important
to report the AUC of testing datasets (locally and externally), using either a pre-set
sensitivity or specificity. If the operating threshold is not set suitably, an AI system
with good AUC (e.g., >0.90) potentially could have suboptimal sensitivity or
specificity, resulting in adverse events within clinical settings.
Apart from the above-mentioned parameters, investigators could consider reporting
positive predictive value (also known as precision), negative predictive value or
Cohen Kappas. Lastly, many studies utilize accuracy as one of the main
measurement outcomes. Similar to AUC, the reporting of accuracy could be
potentially ‘over-optimistic’ given that it takes into account both true positive and true
negative as the nominator, with true and false positive, and true and false negative
as the denominator. If a dataset contains only a few positive images and the AI
system under-detect them, the reported diagnostic accuracy will be high, although
the sensitivity will be very poor. Thus, the above-mentioned reasons state the
importance of including AUC, sensitivity and specificity as the bare minimum for any
AI study for the literature. Directly comparing AUC, sensitivity and specificity
between different CNNs is, however, misleading of the data do not stem from the
same validation dataset. Usually the AUC is the higher the more severe cases are in
the validation dataset.
6. Methods to explain the diagnosis
DL systems are commonly referred to as a ‘black-box’, and it could be a potential
cause of low adoption of such technology within clinical settings. It is important for
the patients to be informed of their diagnosis, and why the diagnosis was made. At
present, the deep learning community is actively researching ways to rectify this.
Highlighting the image features that add diagnostic value to a medical image could
provide a relatively novel teaching opportunity in medicine. Visualization of the
network workings and activation via saliency maps has allowed the generation of
overlay highlights that show where the network is looking when it renders a
classification. Figure 3 shows the example of the heat map detection for referable
DR and advanced AMD. Visualization may be achieved using multiple methods,
such as occlusion testing, integrated gradients and soft attention. Occlusion testing
is performed by sliding an occluding window across an image and checking the
resulting effect on output classification. Integrated gradients, on the other hand,
perturbs continuously an image from a baseline image to the output image, while
monitoring the activation out of the network to characterize the sensitivity of the
output to each pixel input. Lastly, for soft attention, the saliency map outputs of
convolutional layers are up-scaled via reverse max pooling and passed through
additional convolutional layers. This method was used by Poplin et al to identify the
locations in the fundus image that were predictive of cardiovascular risks or other
information such as gender (Figure 4).19
AI to Solve Clinical Unmet Need in Ophthalmology
Global Eye Health Burden
By 2050, the world’s population aged 60 years and older is estimated to be 2 billion,
up from 900 million in 2015, with 80% of whom living in low- and middle-income
countries.33 People are living longer, and the pace of ageing is much faster than in
the past.34 Because of this, there is a need for longer disease surveillance for many
ocular and systemic conditions like DR, glaucoma, AMD and cardiovascular
conditions (Table 2).35 Population expansion also creates pressure to screen for
important causes of childhood blindness such as retinopathy of prematurity (ROP),
refractive error, and amblyopia.36 In view of these unmet needs, many groups have
published the AI system, using retinal images, OCTs and other imaging modalities
for glaucoma (e.g. HVF).
1. AI for Diabetic Retinopathy
1.1 Clinical Unmet Need
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is one of the world’s fastest growing chronic diseases and a
leading cause of acquired vision loss.37,38 According to the World Health
Organization, it is estimated that the total number of people with diabetes will double
from 171 million in 2000 to 422 million by 2040 (Table 2).39 DR, a specific
microvascular complication of DM, remains the leading cause of acquired vision loss
worldwide in middle-aged and therefore economically active people.37,40,41 With the
increasing number of people with DM, the number of DR and vision-threatening DR
(VTDR), which includes severe non-proliferative DR, proliferative DR (PDR) and
diabetic macular edema (DME), has been estimated to rise to 191.0 million and 56.3
million respectively by 2030.42 It is estimated that DR accounts for 4.8% of the
number of cases of blindness (37 million) worldwide.43 A pooled analysis of 22,896
people with DM from 35 population-based studies in the U.S., Australia, Europe and
Asia showed that the overall prevalence of any DR was 34.6%
(95%CI 34.5-34.8), with 7% (6.9-7.0) suffering from VTDR.44 Screening for DR,
coupled with timely referral and treatment, is a universally accepted strategy for
blindness prevention. DR screening programs, however, are challenged by issues
related to implementation, availability of human assessors and long-term financial
sustainability. Thus, more novel and economical screening technologies are useful to
screen for DR.
The idea of automated DR detection is not a new one. In fact, the concept of using
software to help with the heavy load of retinal images for DR screening was
introduced 20 years ago.45 Prior to DL, many automated systems were built using ML
algorithms operating on hand-crafted “features” to detect DR lesions,45-50 with overall
performance that was lower than manual grading.51-54 Over the past few years, DL
has been shown to greatly improve the performance of automated DR grading
systems.12 In the review of DL papers, there are 3 major areas to consider: (1) What
are the inputs and outputs of the model? (2) What is the reference standard? and (3)
How well does the algorithm generalize?
1.2 Algorithm Design
Hybrid, or biomarker-based algorithms, use multiple partially dependent detectors for
the biomarkers or lesions characteristic for DR, such as microaneurysms,
hemorrhages and lipoprotein exudates.55 The outputs of these are then fused into a
disease level output, using a separately trained and validated ML algorithm.56 The
detectors themselves, are independently validated, and can be implemented as
multilayer CNNs,57 wavelet filters, or both. 49,58
As mentioned above, multilayer CNN,57 exploiting the spatial coherence that is
characteristic of retinal images, and where all transformation levels are determined
from training data, instead of being designed by experts,59 have been highly
successful,11 and have been substantially outperforming classical image analysis
techniques in many tasks. 57 Their greatest advantage is that their development only
requires a dataset with sufficient quantity and quality of the training data, and not on
a mathematical coding representative of DR lesions lesions.11
1.3 Inputs of the algorithm for DR
In terms of inputs, most of the published studies describe algorithms that have been
trained to take in a single macula-centered or primary field of view 45-degree fundus
image and gives an image-level read (Table 3). The exception to this is the recent
work done by Abramoff et al and Ting et al,10,60 which actually requires 4 images, two
from each eye -- one macula-centered and one disc-centered -- and returns a
patient-level read. In terms of the model outputs, there are two major ways that the
models have been trained to make predictions -- either as a binary or multi-class
classification tasks. While many of the grading scales are usually based on a multiclass clinical grading scale like the International Classification of DR (ICDR) severity
scale, a majority of the studies stratify the prediction on a particular severity
threshold. Most of these models have been trained to detect referable DR defined as
moderate DR or worse and/or DME because it is at this threshold that many
guidelines suggest closer follow up (rather than follow up in a year). For example,
Abramoff et al.60, Gulshan et al.11, and Ting et al.10 all developed DL systems that
were based on detecting referable DR while Gargeya and Leng13 trained a model to
detect any DR.
1.4 Gradeability
One important but often under-appreciated output of the model is gradeability. Since
ungradable images will also result in a referral, it is important that the models can
accurately identify images that are not gradable. The performance metrics reported
by Ting et al10 accounted for gradability issues by default. After accounting for
ungradable images, the model in Gulshan et al11 had roughly the same sensitivity
(97.5% vs 96.7%) but lower specificity (93.4% vs 84.0%) (Table 3). These studies
were not preregistered, and so the datasets did not account for every subject the
system is intended to screen. In a preregistered, prospective, intention to screen trial,
Abramoff et al reported a sensitivity of 87.2% and specificity of 90.7% in detection of
referable DR, with reference to reference standard graded by the Wisconsin Reading
Center based on a 4 wide-field retinal images, twice the image area than the AI
system ‘saw’, as well as optical coherence tomography in detecting diabetic macular
edema. This demonstrates the importance of conducting a real-world clinical trial in
testing an AI system, as this similar AI system also had comparable AUC in
Messidor-2 dataset, achieving an extremely high AUC of 0.98 in the earlier study.12
1.5 Reference standard
These studies have consistently demonstrated that it is possible to train DL
algorithms that recapitulate the reference standard with high performance metrics
(sensitivity, specificity >90% and/or AUCs >0.95) (Table 3). Thus, if an algorithm that
was trained to predict the majority decision of ophthalmologists, it will perform that
task with high fidelity.11 Similarly if it were trained to predict the adjudicated grade
from a panel of retinal specialists, the model will also recapitulate that classification
very well.61 Finally, if it is designed and built to predict the same for the reference
standard that has been used for over 3 decades to evaluate diagnosis and treatment
of DR, the Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Severity Scale, that can be
recapitulated well also.60 Nonetheless, many DR FDA pharmacological trials were
performed using the reference standard from an established reading centers (e.g.
Wisconsin Reading Center) or comprehensive slit lamp examination, using more
fields (>2 fields) or stricter criteria (using OCT as the reference standard to
determine whether this is presence of diabetic macular edema, as compared to a 2field non-stereoscopic fundus photographs). Hence, for reviewing papers about DL, it
is very important to be able to clearly identify how the reference standard was
established, and some performance may not be an apple-to-apple comparison.
Performance numbers from studies with different reference standards may not be
comparable.
For example, Abramoff et al reported 96.8% sensitivity and 87.0% specificity in
detection of referable DR on the Messidor-2 dataset for their DL-based system12
when using three retinal specialist adjudication on a single macula-centered 45
degree fundus image. Subsequently, the same group reported the performance of a
similar algorithm but improved with deep learning based detectors, with a sensitivity
of 96.8% (95% CI: 93.3%–98.8%), and specificity of 87.0% (95% CI: 84.2%–89.4%),
and AUC of 0.980 (95% CI: 0.968–0.992), against 3 retinal specialists.12 Finally, in
their FDA pivotal trial where the reference standard was based on a four widefield
stereoscopic fundus images and OCT (for DME), read by the Wisconsin Reading
Center, the standard for FDA drug trials, sensitivity of 87.2% (95% CI, 81.8–91.2%)
(>85%), specificity of 90.7% (95% CI, 88.3–92.7%) (>82.5%), and imageability rate
of 96.1% (95% CI, 94.6–97.3%) were reported.60 Similarly, the model in Gulshan et
al had a sensitivity of 97.5% and 93.4% on the EyePACS-1 primary validation
dataset where the reference standard was the majority decision of
ophthalmologists.11 Subsequently, Krause et al demonstrated that compared to
adjudication of retinal specialists, the majority decision of ophthalmologists had 83.8%
sensitivity and 98.1% specificity.61 Not surprisingly, when DL was used to train a
model that recapitulates the adjudication of retinal specialists, the new model
performed well, with a sensitivity of 97.1% and specificity of 92.3%. In the study
conducted by Ting et al, the reference standard varied but generally consisted of at
two independent graders, with a 3rd senior grader to adjudicate disagreements.10
1.7 Generalizability of the algorithm
One of the most important considerations in training DL models is generalization --
that is how well do the models perform on new data, especially data that is derived
from populations that are distinct from the population used for model training. Prior to
validation, it is important to pre-set the desired operating threshold on the
development dataset based on desired sensitivity and specificity. Subsequent
validation at these pre-defined operating points will better represent performance in
real-world settings. Validation in the same population as the development set
(perhaps at a different time frame) is often called “primary validation.” Validation in a
different population is often called “secondary validation.” Ting et al developed a
model that was validated on 11 independent datasets.10 On the primary validation
set, the model achieved a 90.5% sensitivity and 91.6% specificity. On the largest
secondary validation dataset of more than 15,000 images, the algorithm had a
sensitivity of 98.7% and specificity of 81.6%. The model also did well on the 9 other
secondary validation datasets with high sensitivity (>90%) and acceptable specificity
1.8 Future Directions
Despite the high performance metrics reported by numerous studies that leverage
DL for DR detection, there is still much work ahead in terms of implementation in
clinical practice. First, it would be important for screening programs considering the
implementation of these systems to understand the steps to capturing the necessary
data for the algorithms to be used. For example, what type of equipment would be
required for the system to work? Is the model compatible with multiple imaging
cameras? What is the recommended procedure to capture fundus images? How
often will dilation be necessary? All of these could have important implications about
whether the adoption of these algorithms is even feasible, especially in resource
constrained settings.
Next, performance verification of a trained model in the population where it is to be
deployed will be required. This is particularly important for models that have been
trained utilizing datasets from relatively homogenous populations, without secondary
validation. Retinal images that could be used for training and inference can often be
quite variable from one screening program to another. Variabilities like field of view,
image magnification, image quality and participant ethnicities are all considerations
that should be accounted for. Diversification of the training dataset would be critical
in addressing this challenge.10
Another consideration in the development of AI models for DR screening is how to
address non-DR findings. It is common practice that if there are non-DR findings
identified during DR screening that these findings are reported back to the clinic.
However, there is still some uncertainty and heterogeneity about when these other
findings should be considered referable. In addition, there can be substantial grader
variability in the manual interpretation of fundus images for other disease. For
example, when to refer a suspicious cup-to-disc ratio could vary from one screening
program to another. Ting et al reported the development of additional models that
also could detect AMD and the glaucoma-like disc.10 There are other publications
(covered later in this review) focused on building models that detect non-DR
diseases separately. Studies looking at both DR and non-DR findings would be an
important area for future development.
In addition to performance, impact on clinical workflow, model explainability may be
an important aspect of the adoption of DL systems. Because DL models do not
utilize explicit feature engineering, attention techniques can help visualize the
regions of the image that is most relevant for the prediction. Large longitudinal
clinical trials with AI systems implemented end-to-end with diverse hardware,
population characteristics, and local environmental will be critical milestones in
evaluating the actual safety and efficacy of AI systems. Furthermore, real-world
deployment of these new systems in multiple settings will be critical in understanding
the full impact of AI on clinical care. For example, increased number of screenings
enabled by automated screening algorithms will increase demand for follow-up and
treatment. Healthcare systems will have to adapt so that they can manage this
additional volume. Moreover, real time feedback from a model might enable followup actions to be initiated at the same visit. If a patient does not need to be referred,
this would also be an opportunity to reinforce and commend the patient on efforts in
managing their disease and emphasize the need for follow-up. If a patient is found to
have referable disease, this allows for timely follow-up appointments to be scheduled
before the patient leaves the office. There is limited information available regarding
the potential success of such management.
Despite the tremendous progress made in the application of DL for DR screening,
there are still many challenges ahead -- from identifying image features that are
critical to image classification to large scale implementation. However, the rapid
progress and excitement in this field make it fairly clear that DL systems will have a
profound impact on DR screening in the coming decades.
2. AI for Glaucoma and Glaucoma Suspect
2.1 Clinical Unmet Need
Apart from DR, many screening programs also screen for the referable glaucoma
suspect. The World Health Organization has declared Glaucoma to be the second
largest cause of blindness worldwide, comprising 15% of the blindness cases
globally, or 5.2 million patients. This number is expected to increase up to 111.8
million by 2040 (Table 2).62 As glaucoma is an optic neuropathy, retinal features for
referable glaucoma suspect include an increased vertical cup-to-disc ratio (CDR),
neuro-retinal rim thinning, presence of optic disc haemorrhages and retinal nerve
fibre layer defects. To date, there is no cost-effective screening strategy for detection
of the high-risk glaucoma suspect, mainly due to the absence of an appropriate
test.63 This sentiment is aligned with the most recent US Preventive Services Task
Force 2013 position statement claiming that current evidence was insufficient to
recommend screening for glaucoma in adults; nonetheless, there was a proviso that
high-risk groups (e.g. positive family history, African American) might benefit from
early screening with their primary care physicians.64,65
The success of AI using DL system in glaucoma in the screening or the clinical
setting is predicated on an agreed-upon structural and functional definition of the
disease. Certainly, glaucoma is a heterogenous condition, especially considering the
various anterior segment features that may be present in the disorder, with the
convergent feature being a characteristic optic nerve appearance that corresponds
to vision loss. One way to characterize this optic neuropathy is to rely on excavation
of the neuroretinal rim that can be quantified with the cup-to-disc-ratio (CDR). Since
disc size and shape can vary among people in a population and these features also
differ across populations, it is problematic to describe a CDR that defines glaucoma.
The International Society for Geographical and Epidemiological Ophthalmology
(ISGEO) proposes using the upper 97.5th percentile of vertical CDR or of CDR
asymmetry as a standard definition of structural glaucomatous damage.66 This
definition is, however, not sufficient for glaucoma diagnosis, because of the large
influence of disc size67 and the issues in patients with abnormal anatomical
configuration of the disc. In addition, measurement of CDR is biased by large gradervariability because of a lack of a solid anatomic basis.68 On OCT retinal nerve fibre
layer thickness and ganglion cell complex measurements are used to discriminate
glaucoma from healthy.69 More recently minimum rim width as measured from
Bruch’s membrane opening has been used as a novel diagnostic tool in glaucoma.70
A proposed reference standard for functional loss from glaucoma is a glaucoma
hemifield test (GHT) outside normal limits and a cluster of 3 contiguous points with
assigned probability of 5% or less on the pattern deviation of a Humphrey visual field
analyzer. These contiguous points should follow a nerve fiber layer distribution.
Comparable functional loss on other visual field (VF) platforms could be considered.
Patients with definite glaucoma would meet both structural and functional criteria
while suspects might meet only the structural criterion. The ISGEO proposes that
patients with disc haemorrhage, IOP at greater than the 97.5Th percentile or subjects
with occludable angles but normal optic nerves, visual fields, IOP and no peripheral
anterior synechiae also be regarded as suspects. While no definition of glaucoma is
ideal, DL systems can potentially be trained to identify these phenotypic attributes.
2.2 Optic Disc Imaging
Using engineered software, researchers have attempted to auto-segment the disc
and cup margin using hard-coded algorithms to ascertain the CDR.71-73 Peripapillary
atrophy and vessel obscuration create major challenges to auto-segment the disc
and cup margins. The problem is actually particularly pronounced in annotating the
normal cup, which is generally small and with high vascular density. Errors in autosegmenting the disc and cup contours create challenges to accurately identify the
glaucoma-like disc as defined by ISGEO criteria. Researchers have successfully
circumvented auto-segmentation problems by training neural networks to recognize
the disc with user-defined threshold features for glaucoma referral.10,14 As shown in
Ting et al and Li et al,10,14 clinicians diagnose glaucoma suspect from the optic disc
images for CDR and glaucomatous changes in a training set and a neural network
can recognize those photos that meet a predefined threshold for cupping associated
with glaucoma with >90% accuracy (Table 4). In this setting disc images do not
require segmentation during an unsupervised assessment of whether or not they are
glaucomatous (Figure 5).
In 2018, the use of DL to detect a glaucoma suspect and glaucoma has moved
beyond the use of optic nerve photos to detect eyes with CDRs above a pre-selected
cutoff. Shibota et al., using 3242 fundus images, was able to train a CNN to detect
the definitively glaucomatous optic nerve with an AUC of 0.965.74 The CNN was
trained to detect focal disc notching, cup excavation, retinal nerve fibre layer atrophy,
disc haemorrhage and peripapillary atrophy, all signs which may occur at CDRs
below pre-selected criteria. Using 1758 Spectral Domain OCT images Asaoka was
able to detect early glaucoma with an AUC of 0.937 (Sensitivity = 82.5% and
Specificity = 93.9%).75 Interestingly ultra-wide scanning laser ophthalmoscopy is
gaining popularity in the detection of DR and fine optic disc details are captured in
these images. Masumoto et al. used 1379 Optomap images to detect glaucoma
overall with 81.3% sensitivity and 80.2% specificity; values were higher for more
severe glaucoma (Table 4).76
2.3 Visual Fields
Relative to optic disc photographs or OCT images, the data contained in visual field
(VF) tests have low dimensionality and high noise. Nonetheless VFs represent an
important endpoint in glaucoma clinical trials and VF findings will likely influence
glaucoma diagnosis and guide clinical care for the foreseeable future. While the
Glaucoma Hemifield Test (GHT) on the Humphrey VF represents a supervised
algorithm that is useful in defining glaucoma, DL systems would be useful to define
and quantify patterns of VF loss so that minimal thresholds for defining glaucoma
could be established. Elze et al. developed an unsupervised algorithm termed
archetype analysis to identify VF loss patterns that include glaucomatous and nonglaucomatous deficits and provide weighting coefficients for these patterns.77 This
algorithm has been validated78 and has proven useful in augmenting the GHT for the
detection of early functional glaucomatous loss.79 Using an entirely different strategy,
Li et al trained a CNN to learn the Pattern Deviation probability plots of normal and
glaucomatous eyes and was able to detect glaucoma with 93.2% sensitivity and 82.6
sensitivity.80 Yousefi et al. used an alternative Gaussian mixture and expectation
maximization method to decompose VFs along different axes to detect VF
progression.23 This approach was as good or superior to current algorithms,
including Glaucoma Progression Analysis, Visual field Index and Mean Deviation
slope, in detecting VF progression.
2.4 Clinical forecasting
Kalman filtering (KF) is a ML technique that filters out noise in serial measures of a
parameter to forecast trends over time. Glaucoma is generally a chronic slowly
progressive disease whose trajectory is influenced by serial IOP, as well as changes
in functional and structural data. Researchers at University of Michigan used
longitudinal data on IOP and VFs to accurately forecast VF progression for
participants in the Collaborative Initial Glaucoma Treatment Study.81 Using a similar
approach on a clinical based sample of Japanese normal tension glaucoma patients,
KF was better able to predict 2-year MD forecast than linear regression of MD.82
2.5 Clinical and technical challenges in translating the technology
Care is needed to implement promising DL algorithms in the clinic setting so as to
empower rather than entangle doctors as well as address patient concerns and
improve their clinical care experience. In the screening environment there will be
concerns about whether DL algorithms will be robust across the various platforms
used to acquire information on glaucoma patients. The role of tonometric data and
how to acquire data about the filtration apparatus in the screening setting could be
important in populations where the prevalence of elevated IOP83 and angle closure is
high.62 Furthermore, as is true in DR screening, there will be concerns about whether
the algorithms will be applicable to the specific patient populations where they are
employed. These challenges seem surmountable if careful planning and beta testing
is employed.
2.6 Future directions
Currently, much work is needed to improve AI glaucoma detection algorithms. In the
area of imaging, OCT technology demonstrates that the disc edge is best defined
based on Bruch’s membrane opening (BMO) and clinicians are not well trained to
find this landmark on fundus photos.84 Thus validation of DL systems to detect the
glaucoma-like disc may require that training sets contain paired OCT images so that
proper ground truth regarding disc margin contour be established. This will help
establish the most accurate standardized assessment of CDR. DL systems should
account for disc color and textural information embedded in pixel-rich fundus images
so that they can detect non-glaucomatous optic nerve disease and leverage the fact
that nerve fibre layer atrophy accompanies optic nerve degeneration. Rather than
detect the disc with arbitrary CDR cutoffs, more work is needed to calibrate DL
systems to detect the disc with manifest VF loss is also needed. Finally, more work
on incorporating OCT data into DL algorithms to detect pathologic optic nerves as
well as progressive structural damage is needed.85 Algorithms that not only ascertain
if there is optic nerve pathology but the regional location of pathology would be
widely accepted.
With respect to VFs, more work is needed on unsupervised approaches to detect VF
progression, which is important in the clinical setting. In addition, glaucoma
forecasting will also be useful in the clinical setting and could be refined by
considering factors other than serial IOP and HVFs, like patient demographics,
family history, past medical history, genetic risk scores as well as other ocular
parameters. Ultimately, we are likely to see hybrid methods that incorporate
structure, function, and non-ophthalmic parameters like genetic risk score into
algorithms that predict diagnosis, guide treat and offer prognosis for glaucoma
3. AI for Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)
3.1 Clinical Unmet Need
AMD is another major cause of vision impairment, accounting for 8.7% of all
blindness worldwide (Table 2).86-89 The age-related eye disease study (AREDS)
classified AMD stages into none, early, intermediate and late AMD. In a systematic
review consisting of ~130,000 individuals from 39 studies, the pooled prevalence of
any, early and late AMD were 8.69% (95% CI 4.26-17.4), 8.01% (3.98-15.5), 0.37%
(0.18-0.77), respectively.88 It is projected that 288 million may have some forms of
AMD by 2040, with approximately 10% having intermediate AMD or worse.88 The
treatment for neovascular AMD patients has been revolutionized with the advent of
anti-vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF),90,91 with many countries, e.g. US,
Australia, reporting a significant drop in incident blindness by >50%. 92,93 With the
ageing population, there is an urgent clinical need to have a robust DL system in
detection of these patients for further evaluation in the tertiary eye care centers.
The intermediate stage of AMD is often asymptomatic, characterized by numerous
medium-sized drusen or at least 1 large druse or geographic atrophy of retina
pigment epithelium that does not involve the fovea. Left untreated, the advanced
choroidal neovascular form of AMD can lead to substantial central vision loss in most
individuals with at least half having fellow eye involvement in the advanced stage
within five years of the first eye involvement. The clinical presentation of AMD
includes drusen, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) abnormalities, geographic atrophy
(GA) or choroidal neovascularization (CNV) with subsequent scarring. The Agerelated Eye Diseases Study (AREDS) classified AMD stages into early, intermediate
and late stages, based on drusen and other characteristics.94 The American
Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) recommends an examination for those with the
intermediate stage of AMD at least every 2 years, as most of these patients are
usually visually asymptomatic, but have a higher risk of developing advanced AMD
than individuals without the intermediate stage. An automated AMD screening
algorithm for detecting cases of AMD that require management, i.e., either the
intermediate stage or advanced stages for which follow-up is therefore desirable.
3.2 AREDS dataset
Many of the AI systems for AMD were built using the AREDS dataset,16,95 while
some utilized other datasets (e.g. Singapore Eye Research Institute).10 The AREDS
was a multi-center double-masked clinical trial, involving 4613 participants, recruited
across 11 clinical centers designed to assess the clinical course, prognosis, and risk
factors for AMD and cataract.94 A total of 66,943 macula-centered images (baseline
and follow-up) were used from this study. Based on the retinal lesions, AREDS
classification proposed 2 classification scales: 1) 4-step - none, early, intermediate
and late AMD; and 2) 9-step severity scale, which was based on outcome data,
provided predictive variables for 4-year risk of developing choroidal
neovascularisation, central geography atrophy or both.96,97 AREDS grade 1 indicates
that fundus images with little or no AMD changes, while AREDS grade 2 through 9
represent changes associated with early or intermediate AMD. AREDS grades 10
through 12 represent late-stage AMD, namely GA, neovascular AMD and images
with both late-stage forms. Of these, 44.6% had referable AMD, defined as
intermediate AMD or worse.
3.3 Fundus images-based DL systems
In the AREDS 1 dataset, Burlina et al reported an AUC between 0.94 and 0.96 with
accuracy between 88.4% and 91.6% in detection of referable AMD, using a 5-fold
cross validation and pre-trained AlexNet and Overfeat CNNs (Table 5). Using the
same dataset, they estimated 5-year risk of AMD progression, with weighted k
scores of 0.77 for 4-step severity scales and overall mean estimation error between
3.5% and 5.3%.95
Similarly, Grassmann et al built a DL system for detection of early and late AMD,
using 6 different CNNs.16 Early AMD was defined as AREDS grade 2 to 9, while late
AMD was defined as AREDS grade 10-12 (GA and neovascular AMD). Using the 9step AREDS severity scale, the authors reported an accuracy of 63.3% in predicting
13 classes in the AREDS test set with a quadratic weighted k of 92% (95% CI: 89%-
92%). This algorithm was validated using the Augsburg dataset, consisting of 5,555
fundus images that were collected as part of the collaborative health research in the
region of Augsburg, Germany. There was a reduction in weighted and unweighted k
values due to the 313 false positive fundus images, that are deemed to have
neovascular AMD (AREDS class 11), but that were actually images from healthy
individuals, with most showing dominant macula reflexes. These patients were
detected as ‘abnormal’ as the inclusion criteria for AREDS datasets were individuals
aged 55 years or older. This, again, shows the importance of selecting the right
screening population for the AMD algorithm in the clinical setting.
Developed using VGGNet and Singaporean population-based cohort, Ting et al
reported an AUC, sensitivity and specificity of 0.931 (0.928-0.935), 93.2% (91.1%-
99.8%) and 88.7% (88.3-89.0), respectively, in detection of referable AMD on the
testing dataset, on a 2-year diabetic cohort recruited from
Singapore National DR Screening Program.10 This algorithm, however, was not
tested on a white population. Vice versa, the former 2 groups also did not validate
their algorithms in Asian populations. In terms of the technical methodologies,
Burlina et al15,95 performed auto-segmentation on the macular region while the latter
2 DL systems analyse the entire retinal image,10,16 although diagnostic performance
were still comparable between the 3 DL systems using the respective testing
datasets. Future research is important to evaluate the generalizability and costeffectiveness of these DL systems in a larger international multi-ethnic cohort.
4. AI for Retinopathy of Prematurity
4.1 Clinical Unmet Need
ROP is a retinal vascular disease affecting premature infants, characterized by
abnormal fibrovascular proliferation at the boundary of the vascularized and
avascular peripheral developing retina. Globally, it is estimated that 15 million babies
are born prematurely each year.98 In US, the incidence of ROP was 19.9% (Table
2).99 ROP accounts for 6 to 18% of childhood blindness,100 causing significant
psycho-social impact on the child and the family.101 According to the Early Treatment
for ROP (ETROP) trial,102 early treatment has shown to be beneficial to improve the
visual acuity of high-risk ROP patients, although 9% still eventually became blind.
Thus, early screening with regular monitoring is crucial.
ROP diagnosis is traditionally performed by indirect ophthalmoscopy at the neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) bedside, and is increasingly being performed by
telemedicine interpretation of wide-angle retinal images.103-105 Clinical diagnosis is
based on parameters defined by the international classification of ROP (ICROP):
zone, stage, clock hour extent, and plus disease. “Plus disease” is defined as
venous dilatation and arteriolar tortuosity in central retinal vessels greater than or
equal to that of a standard published photograph.106-108 The 2005 revised ICROP
defined a newer “pre-plus” category as posterior pole vessels that are not normal but
with less than the required amount of vascular abnormality.108 Based on findings
from the NIH-sponsored multicenter Cryotherapy for ROP (CRYO-ROP) and Early
Treatment for ROP (ETROP) trials, presence of plus disease has been shown to be
the key factor in identifying infants with severe treatment-requiring disease at risk for
blindness.102,106 Figure 6 displays examples of normal vessels, pre-plus disease,
and plus disease. Therefore, it is critical to diagnose plus disease accurately and
reproducibly.
4.2 Challenges in ROP Diagnosis
There are a number of challenges with the current approach to ROP diagnosis. From
a public health perspective, the number of premature infants at risk for ROP is
increasing due to a rising number of preterm births and increased neonatal survival,
particularly in the developing world.109 Meanwhile, the supply of clinicians who
perform ROP management is limited by logistical challenges of coordinating
examination at the NICU bedside, low physician reimbursements, and extensive
medicolegal liability. From an educational perspective, training in ROP diagnosis is
often inadequate, further limiting the workforce of ophthalmologists trained to
manage this disease.110-113
In particular regarding clinical care, there are a number of real-world challenges
regarding plus disease diagnosis: (1) There is often significant variability in
diagnostic classification (plus vs. pre-plus vs. normal), even among experts,114-118
leading to inconsistent application of evidence-based practice.119 This has occurred
even in NIH-funded multicenter trials. For example, in the CRYO-ROP protocol,
confirmation of threshold disease was required by a second unmasked certified
examiner performing dilated ophthalmoscopy. In that setting, the second examiner
disagreed with the first examiner regarding clinical diagnosis of threshold disease in
12% of cases.120 Also, in a multi-center study of telemedicine for ROP diagnosis,
nearly 25% of examinations by certified study graders required adjudication because
the graders disagreed on one of three criteria for clinically-significant ROP.121 (2)
There is significant variability in diagnostic process among experts, who have been
shown in observational studies to consider different retinal vascular features during
assessment of disease severity.122 (3) There is evidence that experts frequently
deviate from the published definition of plus disease when assessing ROP, for
example by considering factors such as venous tortuosity and peripheral retinal
vascular features.122-125 (4) The published standard photograph for plus disease was
from the 1980s, and has a much smaller field of view and larger magnification than
clinicians are accustomed to seeing during standard examination methods using
indirect ophthalmoscopy or wide-angle retinal images. There is evidence that this
causes bias and inconsistency in diagnosis.126 (5) Studies have shown that there is
geographical variation in plus disease diagnosis possibly related to differences in
training,119 and that there may be chronological drift showing a tendency to diagnose
“plus disease” more frequently than in the past.127 (6) The multicenter Supplemental
Therapeutic Oxygen for Prethreshold ROP (STOP-ROP) study defined that plus
disease is present if there is sufficient venous dilation and arterial tortuosity in at
least 2 quadrants, and this definition was incorporated into the 2005 revised
ICROP.108,128 However, there is variability in how this definition is interpreted,115-
117,122 and evidence that this variability may lead to clinically-significant differences in
diagnosis.116,129 (7) The ICROP definition of pre-plus disease108 is somewhat vague.
Studies have found significant levels of variability in diagnosis of pre-plus disease
among experts.114,115 (8) Vascular abnormality in ROP reflects a continuous
spectrum of disease,108,130,131 whereas clinical management is based on a discrete
classification (e.g. “plus disease” vs. “not plus”) from findings of clinical trials, which
requires determining cut-points for abnormality.106,120 Research suggests that
diagnostic discrepancy results from individual clinicians having different cut-points
(e.g. “is this plus or pre-plus disease”), despite having better agreement on relative
disease severity (e.g. “which retina looks worse”).132,133
4.3 Early Approaches to Image Analysis for ROP
Early approaches to computer-based image analysis for plus disease diagnosis were
based on quantification of vascular tortuosity and dilation (RetCam; Natus Medical
Incorporated, Pleasanton, CA).134 Three such systems have been developed and
validated for wide-angle RetCam images: ROPTool, Retinal Image multiScale
Analysis (RISA), and Computer-Assisted Image Analysis of the Retina (CAIAR).135-
137 These systems have been evaluated against expert diagnostic performance, but
have not had real-world application because of limitations such as being semiautomated (e.g. requiring manual identification of optic disc or key vascular
segments), or having limited correlation with two-level expert diagnosis (plus disease
vs. not plus).
More recently, one system (Imaging & Informatics in ROP, i-ROP) was developed
based on machine learning methods, in which a vascular metric termed “acceleration”
was found to have best diagnostic performance in a 6 disc-diameter circular crop of
wide-angle RetCam images considering all retinal vessels combined.138 This system
had 95% accuracy for 3-level plus disease diagnosis (vs. pre-plus or normal) in a
test set of 77 images, compared to a reference standard defined by combining
ophthalmoscopic examination by 1 expert with image-based examination by 3
experts. For the same test set of 77 images, 3 individual experts had accuracy of 92-
96%, and 31 non-experts had mean accuracy of 81%. However, real-world
application of this system has been limited by the requirement for manual
segmentation of images.138
4.4 Deep Learning for ROP
DL has been applied for automated diagnosis of ROP, which could potentially
address barriers to ROP screening on a larger scale.139 Most recently, Brown et al
developed and validated a fully-automated DL system (i-ROP DL) for 3-level plus
disease diagnosis (plus vs. pre-plus vs. normal) with an area under the ROC curve
of 0.98 for plus disease diagnosis compared to a reference standard defined by
combining ophthalmoscopic examination by 1 expert with image-based examination
by 3 experts. When evaluated in an independent test set of 100 wide-angle RetCam
images, the i-ROP DL system achieved 93% sensitivity and 94% specificity for
diagnosis of plus disease, and 100% sensitivity and 94% specificity for diagnosis of
pre-plus or worse disease. When compared to 8 international ROP experts
evaluating the same 100-image test set, the i-ROP DL system agreed with the
consensus diagnosis more frequently than 6 of the 8 experts.17
4.5 Future Directions
AI has potential to create assistive technologies to improve the accuracy and
consistency of ROP diagnosis by clinicians. In the future, this could produce
quantitative ROP severity scores to facilitate objective monitoring of disease
progression and treatment response. Future automated systems might provide initial
readings of images captured by neonatal intensive care unit nurses, thereby
reducing the requirement for traditional ophthalmoscopic examinations in the
majority of infants without clinically-relevant disease. These methods may be
particularly applicable to the developing world, where the availability of
ophthalmology and neonatology expertise may be insufficient to manage the number
of premature infants at risk for ROP.
5. AI for Cardiovascular Disease
5.1 Clinical Unmet Need
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) is the largest cause of non-communicable deaths
worldwide. For 2018, World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 17.9 million
people died of CVD worldwide in 2012, accounting for an estimated 31% of global
mortality (Table 2).140 Of those, ischemic heart disease (IHD) and stroke are the top
cause of mortality, responsible for approximately 85% CVD deaths, with >75%
occurring in low- to middle-income countries.141,142 To prevent heart attacks, strokes,
and other adverse cardiovascular events, it is important to identify the systemic risk
factors, that can be divided into non-modifiable (e.g. age, sex) and modifiable factors
(e.g. smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia). In the routine clinical setting, many
physicians utilized risk calculators, such as the Pooled Cohort equations,143
Framingham144-146 and SCORE,147,148 aiming to perform risk assessment and stratify
individual risk to inform treatment decisions. If existing CVD risk assessment tools
could be improved, more patients can benefit from early treatment, while minimizing
the harms of screening.149
Given the ageing population, the clinical unmet need will continue to rise over the
next few decades. Most screening programs will face shortage of manpower and
infrastructure, especially in the low-to-middle income countries. Thus, there is an
urgent call for action in exploring novel and economical screening technologies for
these conditions. Cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk assessment is a critical first
step in managing and preventing heart attacks, strokes, and other adverse
cardiovascular events. Clinicians often utilize risk calculators, such as the Pooled
Cohort equations,143 Framingham144,145,150 and SCORE,147,151 which is based on
various factors from patient history (e.g. age, self-reported sex, smoking status) and
blood samples (e.g. lipid panels).152 Given that obtaining these values require a
blood draw and fasting prior to the procedure, some of these parameters such as
cholesterol values may be sparsely available153.
5.2 Manual grading for retinal vascular Imaging to predict CVD risks
There have been many efforts to improve risk prediction, particularly in incorporating
phenotypic information to further refine risk prediction such as the addition of
coronary artery calcium154 or retinal imaging. The retina is unique in that it is one of
the only places in the body where vascular tissue can be visualized quickly and
noninvasively. Conditions associated with CVD, such as hypertensive retinopathy
and cholesterol emboli, can often manifest in the eye. Previous studies have shown
that various retinal features may be predictive of cardiovascular events, stroke155 or
chronic kidney disease.156 These features include vessel caliber,157-159 bifurcation or
tortuosity,160 Currently, the assessment of such features requires expert assessors
going through a fairly long and detailed procedure. For example, to measure vessel
diameters, expert assessors must segment vessels, identify specific segments and
adjudicate variations, a fairly time-consuming process to measure just one feature of
the image. While the previous work in this field is promising, the clinical utility of such
features still requires further study.
5. CVD risk prediction using Retinal Imaging and DL
One of the key benefits of DL is the ability to learn the appropriate predictive features
directly from the raw examples, rather than requiring features to be hand-engineered.
In the context of retinal imaging, what this means is that we can provide all the pixel
values from a retinal fundus image with minimal processing as the input to a deep
learning model, and train it to predict the desired label (for example the ICDR DR
Grade) for that image.
In a recent study, Poplin and Varadarjan et al19 used DL to build a model that
predicted cardiovascular risk factors using retinal fundus images (Table 6) from
48,101 patients from the UK Biobank study161 and 236,234 from the EyePACS
population.162 The UK Biobank population was predominantly Caucasian without
diabetes while the EyePACS patients were predominantly Hispanic with diabetes.
These models were then validated using images from 12,026 patients from UK
Biobank, 999 patients from EyePACS, and on an independent cohort of Asian
patients (Table 8).163 The model was fairly accurate for some predictions such as
age, self-reported sex, blood pressure, and smoking status. In addition, the authors
also trained a model to predict the onset of major adverse cardiovascular events
(MACE) within 5 years using the UK Biobank study. For this, MACE was defined as
the presence of billing codes for unstable angina, myocardial infarction, or stroke or
death from cardiovascular causes. Participants that had a MACE prior to the retinal
imaging were excluded. Because the UK Biobank recruited relatively healthy
participants, MACE were rare (631 events occurred within 5 years of retinal imaging-
-105 of which were in the clinical validation set). Despite the limited number of
events the model achieved an AUC of 0.70 (95% CI: 0.65, 0.74) from retinal fundus
images alone (Table 8), comparable to the AUC of 0.72 (0.67, 0.76) for the
European SCORE risk calculator. Because cholesterol levels were not available at
the time of the study, BMI was used as a proxy while calculating the SCORE risk.164-
An explanation technique for DL models called soft-attention was used to identify
relevant anatomical regions that the model may be using to make its predictions.
This generated a heat map showing the most predictive pixels in the image. A
representative example of a single retinal fundus image with accompanying attention
maps167 for a few predictions is shown in Figure 4.
5.4 Future direction
Despite these promising results, efforts to improve the performance and
interpretability of these DL models seems indicated, especially for MACE. First, the
Poplin and Varadarajan et al study did not include blood tests such as lipid panels in
the analysis because it was not available for the study.19 Future work should include
these important clinical factors. A substantially larger dataset or a population with
more cardiovascular events may enable more accurate DL models to be trained and
evaluated with high confidence. Training with larger datasets and more clinical
validation will help determine whether retinal fundus images may be able to augment
or replace some of the other markers, such as lipid panels, to yield more accurate
predictions.
6. AI for refractive error
6.1 Clinical Unmet Need
Uncorrected refractive error is a major cause of visual impairment that affects a large
proportion of the world population.168 Uncorrected refractive error is commonly
defined as visual acuity of less than 6/12 in the better eye with improvement of at
least 0.2 logMAR (equivalent to 2 lines) after refraction. According to the global
burden of disease study, 101.2 million cases of moderate and severe visual
impairment and 6.8 million cases of blindness were due to uncorrected refractive
error (Table 2).169 It is estimated that visual impairment secondary to refractive error
resulted in close to 269 billion international dollars loss on the potential productivity
cost, mainly attributable to lack of awareness and shortage of optometry expertise.
Given its implication, the screening and correction of refractive error is important.
6.2 AI in predicting refractive error
As discussed in the previous examples with cardiovascular disease and retinal
imaging, DL has also shown great promise in discovering new associations from
imaging or quantifying known associations to a high level of accuracy. Another
example of this is the recent work done in applying DL for refractive error. While
physicians would generally have difficulty predicting refractive error from a retinal
fundus image, DL techniques are able to predict this fairly accurately. Varadarajan
and Popin et al170 showed that deep learning can be used to train algorithms with a
mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.56 D (95% CI: 0.55, 0.56), and R2 of 0.90 (95% CI:
0.90, 0.91) using images taken with a 45 degree field of view as the input data
(Table 9). Given this somewhat surprising finding, the authors also went on to
leverage attention maps to determine the parts of an image most relevant for the
prediction. They found that the attention maps consistently highlighted the fovea as a
feature that was important for the prediction (Figure 7). The model also frequently
highlighted retinal vessels and cracks in retinal pigment. The model seemed to
predict only the spherical component of refractive error well (Table 9). The accuracy
of the refractive error prediction seemed to decrease with a smaller field of view,
poorer image quality, and possibly macular lesions.
6.3 Future Directions
The ability to train accurate models without feature engineering combined with
explanation techniques make DL an attractive tool for scientific discovery.
Improvements in and experimentation with other explanation methods for DL models
will help us understand these novel signals. While these heatmaps can serve as
starting points, other techniques can be leveraged to further help explain model
predictions -- such as selectively including or excluding parts of the images during
training to measure the relative importance of each of these regions to the prediction
task. The identification of new features creates new research opportunities for better
understanding of the development and management of disease. For researchers,
instead of first guessing and then testing hypotheses one by one, they could use
neural networks to directly make the prediction of interest and then utilize attention
techniques to generate targeted hypotheses. For clinicians, this work also suggests
that large datasets could be leveraged to fuel the development of new non-invasive
imaging biomarkers for a variety of diseases, from ophthalmological to systemic
7. AI for Optical Coherence Tomography for Retinal Diseases
7.1 Clinical Unmet Need
OCT has established itself as the dominant imaging modality across ophthalmic
disciplines, particularly for the diagnosis and management of retinal disease.171 30
million ophthalmic OCT procedures are now performed every year, a figure
comparable in scale to other medical imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) or computed tomography (CT), and which is more than the sum of all other
ophthalmic imaging modalities combined.172 By allowing personalized therapy for just
one retinal disease – neovascular AMD – it is estimated that OCT imaging has saved
the United States government at least $9 billion.173 OCT imaging is increasingly
being used in other areas of ophthalmology also, with applications for the care of
patients with cataract, corneal disease, uveitis, oculoplastics, and glaucoma. On the
commercial side, by 2016, the estimated revenues from ophthalmic OCT systems
had reached $1 billion per year.173 Although widely adopted first in ophthalmology,
the use of OCT is expanding to other medical specialties, including neurology,
dermatology, cardiology, and gastroenterology, as well as non-medical fields such as
archeology, art conservation, and industrial non-destructive testing. Since 2013,
there has even been an ophthalmic OCT system on the International Space Station
(ISS) as part of the NASA Optical Health Study, investigating the visual impairment
that commonly occurs in those exposed to microgravity for long duration space
flight.174
From an early point in its commercial development OCT imaging has been
innovative in its incorporation of automated medical image analysis techniques.175
Unlike other ophthalmic imaging modalities, which have typically only allowed, at
best, semi-quantitative assessments of disease, OCT provides automated
measurements of retinal thickness for macular disease and of retinal nerve fiber
layer (RNFL) thickness for glaucoma. Ophthalmic clinical trials quickly adopted these
measures as inclusion- and retreatment-criteria, and their application in applied
clinical research has both clarified many aspects of retinal disease pathophysiology
and elucidated many hitherto unrecognized disease characteristics. As our
knowledge of OCT image analysis has grown, however, it has become increasingly
clear that accurate measurements of retinal thickness may fail to predict visual
outcomes.176,177 Much of the focus of recent research has been on the identification
of more novel OCT-derived anatomic biomarkers. The discovery of such biomarkers
may provide valuable information regarding therapeutic mechanisms of action,
pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics for clinical trials.178,179 If such biomarkers
are shown to predict clinical benefit, they could also serve as surrogate endpoints in
these trials, potentially leading to increased accuracy, reduced costs, and shortened
trial duration. DL systems would appear to have the most potential at present as the
tool that can unlock these advances.
While OCT imaging has clearly revolutionized ophthalmology, its widespread usage
also presents challenges and risks for healthcare delivery. In large tertiary referral
hospital eye services, OCT imaging may be performed 1000s of times per week and
the timely review and actioning of scans can be logistically challenging.180 This is
particularly important for diseases such as neovascular AMD where irreversible
visual loss may occur if there are delays in the early initiation of treatment (in the
United Kingdom alone, nearly 200 people develop the severe forms of AMD every
single day; the Royal College of Ophthalmologists recommends that such patients
should be seen and treated within two weeks of their referral to an
ophthalmologist).181,182 These pressures are likely to increase as OCT becomes
used increasingly in the community and – in the future – potentially even in the home.
In May 2017, one of the world’s leading optometry chains, Specsavers, announced
that they would be rolling out OCT imaging devices across all of their branches.183
Given that Specsavers have 740 branches in the UK alone, and perform nine million
eye examinations per year, this may place additional pressure on an already
overstretched healthcare system unless systems can be put in place to appropriately
triage those patients with suspected eye disease. Of course, if such systems can be
established, it will likely have huge benefits for patients as diseases are picked up at
an earlier stage and thus treated promptly. It seems likely that DL systems, along
with the implementation of appropriate referral pathways, will be crucial to these
7.2 Lesion Detection and Segmentation
Much of the initial work in the application of DL to OCT image sets has related to
lesion detection (the process of starting with an unlabelled OCT B-scan or volume
and marking potential abnormalities) and segmentation (the delineation of margins of
any structure, abnormal or otherwise). The term “semantic segmentation” is often
used to describe the analysis of every data-point (pixel/voxel) in an image set and its
assignment to a specific label class. From an early stage in its development,
automated segmentation of OCT images – using classical computer vision
techniques such as thresholding and graph search – has provided objective,
reproducible, and quantitative measurements of central retinal thickness.175
Unfortunately, however, these approaches are prone to error, particularly in cases of
retinal disease where there is severe disruption of the normal retinal morphology,
such as neovascular AMD.184,185 Aside from retinal thickness, the segmentation of
more specific disease features requires expensive, time-consuming, manual
segmentation of OCT scans in dedicated image reading centers, an approach
typically only possible in the context of large-scale clinical trials and not at all in
routine patient care. In recent years, the introduction of DL systems for such tasks
has shown great promise in addressing this issue.
Generic CNN architectures are now commonly customised for medical image
segmentation tasks. One such adaptation, the U-net, has achieved particular
success due to its flexibility in input sizes and dimensionality and its ability to
produce good results even with relatively small amounts of training data.186 A
number of methods are typically used to assess segmentation accuracy. In the
computer vision and machine learning literature, the most common metrics used are
the Dice coefficient, which measures the overlap between automated and “gold
standard” manual segmentation, or the Jaccard index (“intersection over union”),
which measures the similarity between two datasets.187 By contrast, in the clinical
literature, particularly in ophthalmology, the agreement between automated and
manual segmentation is most commonly measured using Bland-Altman plots.188
These approaches assume that a high-quality, ground-truth measurement can be
ascertained. In many cases, segmentation of retinal OCT images is challenging,
even following an adjudication process between the best human experts. This
problem may also be more pronounced when novel biomarkers, without well
establishment grading protocols (e.g., subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM)),
are being evaluated. In such situations, it is important that the variability of manual
segmentation between experts is well defined as a comparator. Finally, it is
important that DL segmentations approaches are externally validated on large,
heterogeneous real-world clinical datasets that will be representative of their ultimate
clinical use case.
7.3 Retinal and choroidal thickness segmentation
Segmentation of the neurosensory retina and its sublayers is not only important for
the assessment of macular diseases but also for patients with glaucoma and other
neuro-ophthalmic diseases. In May 2017, Fang et al. described the combination of a
DL system with a more traditional graph theory approach for the delineation of nine
retinal sublayer boundaries on Spectralis OCT (Heidelberg Engineering, Germany)
images.189 A CNN was used to generate class labels and probability maps for each
of the layer boundaries – the graph search approach was then used to create the
final boundaries. The model segmentation outputs were compared against a semiautomated gold standard (initial automated segmentation using the existing
DOCTRAP software, followed by manual corrections of errors by a human expert).
For all layers, the mean difference (in pixels) between the automated and manual
segmentation outputs was then calculated – although useful for algorithm
development the clinical significance of such a measure is harder to determine. In
July 2017, Venhuizen et al. described an approach which removed the need for an
additional graph search step, and which had been trained on a larger dataset of
patients with more advanced AMD (the authors term their approach “robust” total
retinal thickness segmentation as existing automated segmentation systems have
often been shown to fail in this setting).190 Their system utilises a generalized U-net
architecture to provide automated segmentation of the inner and outer retinal
boundaries and hence allows automated measurements of central macular thickness.
The authors report that their DL system accurately estimated macular thickness with
an error of 14.0 ± 22.1 μm when compared with manual segmentation (versus 42.9 ±
116.0 μm and 27.1 ± 69.3 μm for existing commercial and research algorithms that
provide automated segmentation, respectively).
In July 2018, Hamwood et al. evaluated the effect of retinal image patch size and
network architecture on the performance of a model trained to segment retinal
sublayer thicknesses.191 To address the issue of label imbalances (i.e., the
predominance of non-lesion pixels/voxels in medical images), image “patches” are
commonly used rather than single slices or whole volumes. This has a further
advantage of increasing the amount of data available for training, a fundamental
requirement for DL systems. Hamwood et al., demonstrated how increasing patch
size (65 x 65 versus the 33 x 33 pixel patch described by Fang et al.) can improve
the performance of the segmentation.
Commercially available OCT systems – especially those that provide greater depth
penetration through the use of longer wavelength swept source lasers - have begun
to offer automated segmentation of the choroid, with choroidal thickness maps. Deep
learning-based approaches to choroidal segmentation have recently been reported.
Chen et al., described the use of two CNNs – one to delineate the inner boundary of
the choroid (Bruch membrane) and one to identify the outer boundary (the choroidsclera interface).192 They reported good results (a Dice score of 0.82) in a small
cohort of patients with AMD. Considerable further work will be required to develop
and validate such algorithms for automated choroidal thickness measurement,
particularly in diseases where this parameter is likely to be of most direct clinical
benefit such as posterior uveitis, central serous chorioretinopathy, and polypoidal
choroidal vasculopathy.
7.4 Disease Detection
7.4.1. Macular edema
Segmentation of macular oedema – the accumulation of fluid in the extracellular
space of the retina (intraretinal fluid (IRF)) and between the retina and retinal
pigment epithelium (subretinal fluid (SRF)) - is likely to have greater importance in
retinal diseases such as DME, retinal venous occlusion (RVO), and neovascular
(“wet”) AMD. In July 2017, Lee et al., described the use of DL for segmentation of
IRF in OCT images (Table 10).193 They collected a large cohort of Heidelberg
Spectralis OCT images from eyes most likely to have IRF, including DME, RVO, and
AMD. For OCT volume, they selected a central slice for manual segmentation; for
this, they defined IRF as “an intraretinal hyporeflective space surrounded by
reflective septate”. 934 manually segmented OCT images, divided into 1,919,680
images patches, were then used as a training set on a modified U-net architecture. A
final test set of 30 images were segmented by four independent clinicians. Good
results were then seen, with Dice coefficients for human interrater reliability and the
DL system being 0.750 and 0.729, respectively. Roy et al. have also reported good
results using a U-net architecture for IRF segmentation, albeit using a smaller
dataset of 110 manually segmented OCT B-scans solely from 10 patients with
DME.194 In April 2018, Venhuizen et al. described use of a U-net architecture to
provide automated segmentation of a wide variety of intraretinal cystoid spaces,
ranging from small micro-cysts to larger intraretinal cystoid spaces spanning a wide
area of any given OCT B-scan.190 Importantly, they showed that their system was
capable of being applied with good results to OCT scans from four OCT systems of
four different OCT vendors.
In April 2018, Schlegl et al., reported a DL system capable of providing automated
segmentation of both IRF and SRF, across three different macular diseases
(neovascular AMD, DME, RVO), and imaged with two commonly used systems
(Zeiss Cirrus and Heidelberg Spectralis).195 They trained a separate model for each
OCT system, using 200 cases for the three disease categories, achieving accuracies
in the range of interobserver variability reported for experts in the literature. They
evaluated both the binary detection of fluid (present versus not present) as well as its
quantification. Training cases were selected from clinical trial data at the Vienna
Reading Centre rather than real-world clinic data. A limitation of this work is that only
scans with a clear consensus annotation between Vienna Reading Centre graders
were taken into the sample; furthermore, scans with low image quality were also
7.4.2 Pigment epithelium detachment, subretinal hyperreflective material, and the
retinal pigment epithelium
More recently, some groups have extended their models to perform segmentation of
pigment epithelium detachment (PED), the formation of a potential space between
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and Bruch’s membrane.196,197 Schmidt-Erfurth
et al. have reported the correlation of PED metrics with visual acuity in patients with
neovascular AMD using a DL-based system.198 Detailed description and validation of
this PED segmentation approach has not yet been published but it appears to treat
PED as a single entity rather than a range of specific subtypes. This single PED
entity was not found to significantly affect visual acuity in these cases.
In August 2018, de Fauw et al., reported a DL system which considerable extends
the range of clinically relevant retinal parameters from that previously described.22
Rather than taking as input image patches from single OCT B-scans, this model
utilized nine contiguous slices from the OCT volume. A three-dimensional U-net
architecture was then used to output automated segmentations across 15 different
label classes, and across the three most commonly used OCT platforms (Topcon
3D-OCT, Heidelberg Spectralis, Zeiss Cirrus). These labels encompass a range of
novel OCT biomarkers, including three forms of PED (fibrovascular, serous, and
drusenoid) and subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM), an emerging
morphologic parameter which may be central to the fibrotic process in neovascular
AMD. This model also segments the posterior hyaloid and epiretinal membrane
(ERM), to allow enhanced assessment of vitreomacular interface disorders, as well
as the RPE, allowing for the quantification of retinal degeneration and atrophic
changes (Figure 8). The authors also leverage the intermediate tissue
representation created to perform image classification tasks across a range of OCT
systems from different vendors, described in detail below.
7.4.3 Other Morphologic Parameters and Approaches
A number of other retinal OCT features are in the early stages of exploration using
DL systems. These include retinal hyperreflective foci in patients with AMD,199 a
biomarker that is increasingly recognized as important to the progression of AMD,
and the photoreceptor ellipsoid zone, a biomarker vital to the assessment of patients
with inherited retinal dystrophies and rare conditions such as macular telangiectasia
(MacTel) type 2.200,201 For the photoreceptor ellipsoid zone segmentation, training
labels can be generated from manual segmentation of en face OCT images, a
potentially quicker process than dense segmentation of OCT B-scans.
7.5 Image-based Classification
DL is very well suited to image classification tasks – in a medical imaging application
this can refer to multiple domains, including screening, triage, diagnosis, and
monitoring of disease activity.
The first application of DL for ophthalmic OCT classification was reported by Lee et
al. in 2017.202 They aggregated 10 years of Heidelberg Spectralis macular OCT
scans, acquired during routine clinical practice at their institution, and each
consisting of 61 individual OCT B-scans. They then linked these images to clinical
data from their electronic health record (EHR) in an automated fashion, before
curating a cohort of “normal” and “AMD” scans. A normal patient was defined as
having visual acuity >20/30 in both eyes and no ICD-9 recorded disease diagnosis in
the EHR. An AMD patient was defined as having an ICD-9 diagnosis of AMD by a
retina specialist, at least one intravitreal injection in either eye, and worse than 20/30
vision in the better seeing eye. Of note, patients with other macular pathology by
ICD-9 code were excluded. The central 11 OCT B-scans from each macular OCT set
were selected, labelled en bloc as either normal or as AMD, and then used
independently for development of the classification model. As a result, 48,312
normal OCT B-scans (4392 OCT volumes) and 52,690 AMD B-scans (6364 OCT
volumes) were included. Each image was downsized to 192 x 124 pixels due to
memory limitations. At the level of each individual image, the authors achieved an
87.6% accuracy with a sensitivity of 84.6% and a specificity of 91.5%. The
performance improved when they grouped images from the same OCT volume,
and/or the same patient, and averaged the probabilities from each image. The
authors also performed occlusion testing –systematically covering every location in
the image with a blank 20x20 pixel area and evaluating the effect on model
performance – to try to gain some insights into model decision making. Using this
approach, the resulting saliency maps identified key areas of interest on the OCT
images which corresponded to areas of known pathology.
Several groups have adopted similar methodologies to that pioneered by Lee et al.,
namely the mass extraction of real-world imaging data with automated labelling from
EHRs, and the subsequent training of DL systems on simple, binary classification
tasks. In many cases, they employ transfer learning – the use of neural networks that
have been pre-trained on millions of non-medical images and which only require
training of one additional layer on the medical image classification task. Using this
approach, Treder et al., similarly reported good results for the classification between
neovascular AMD and normal OCT scans.203 Using the publicly-available Duke OCT
dataset, Karri et al., were able to distinguish between OCT scans with AMD, DME, or
with no retinal pathology.204 In 2018, using OCT scans from a larger dataset of 4686
patients, Kermany et al., similarly used transfer learning to classify images as: 1)
normal, 2) CNV, 3) DME, or 4) drusen, as well as making a referral decision.21 A
triage decision could then be made, consisting of: 1) urgent (CNV and DME), 2)
routine (drusen), and 3) observation (normal). Prahs et al. did a similar mass
extraction of ~30,000 OCT image sets (in their case, radial lines scans) from their
EHR and trained a DL system to distinguish between an “injection” and “noninjection” group.205 The former was defined as the delivery of an intravitreal injection,
for any indication, within 21 days of the OCT scan acquisition. They reported good
sensitivity and specificity on this task but correctly caution that it would not be
possible to use this as a treatment recommendation. Finally, Sonobe et al.,
developed a DL model to classify between OCT images with epiretinal membrane
(ERM) and those without.206 These preliminary works represent important first steps,
especially given that they are typically performed using relatively lightweight compute
resources, and – in many cases – by clinicians without extensive DL expertise.
However, in real world settings patients often present with more than one pathology
at any given time so their ultimate clinical use case is less clear.
To allow true real-world clinical applicability on retinal OCT imaging, in our opinion,
DL systems should fulfil a number of criteria. They should be designed with a
specific clinical pathway in mind, be trained on large and heterogeneous image sets
that are representative of this use case. They should also be capable of providing
multi-class classifications to allow for co-existence of multiple retinal pathologies.
Most importantly, they should be able to achieve performance on par with retinal
specialists as well as being able to provide some measure of classification certainty
for challenging and ambiguous cases. In August 2018, Moorfields Eye Hospital and
DeepMind (de Fauw et al.) reported a novel DL framework which utilises one CNN
for retinal OCT segmentation following by another CNN for OCT classification.22 In
this approach, a three-dimensional U-net is first used to segment a range of 15
different retinal morphologic parameters and OCT image acquisition artefacts. The
output of this network is then passed to a classification network which make a
referral triage decision from four categories (urgent, semi-urgent, routine,
observation), and classifies the presence of 10 different OCT pathologies (choroidal
neovascularization (CNV), macular oedema without CNV, drusen, geographic
atrophy, epiretinal membrane (ERM), vitreomacular traction (VMT), full-thickness
macular hole, partial thickness macular hole, central serous retinopathy, and
“normal”. The performance of this system was then evaluated on a retrospective
dataset of 1000 patients newly referred to Moorfields Eye Hospital where a macular
OCT scan was performed. On the central task of referral triage, the DL system
achieved an accuracy rate of 94.5% - a performance on par with experienced retinal
specialists at the institution. The generation of an intermediate tissue representation
by the segmentation network also brings a number of advantages. Firstly, it provides
some element of interpretability to the retinal specialist when he or she reviews the
triage decision and makes the final diagnosis (Figure 9). For example, if the clinician
suspects that the classification network has reached the wrong decision, they may
be able to visualize if this has occurred due to a segmentation error. By providing
instant feedback, such information may also be useful to accelerate the training of
ophthalmologists in OCT image interpretation. Secondly, the segmentation of
numerous retinal morphologic parameters provides objective, quantitative
information for monitoring of response to treatment in routine clinical practice and in
clinical trials. Finally, the generation of an intermediate tissue representation by the
segmentation network means that the framework can be generalized across OCT
systems from multiple different vendors without prohibitive requirements for
retraining (when moving to new system, only the segmentation network requires
retraining). The first application of this system will be in the rapid access “virtual”
clinics widely used for macular disease triage in the UK,207 while the longer-term goal
will be the use of such a system in community settings. Prior to this, further validation
of the system will be required and multi-center prospective clinical trials are planned
to begin recruitment in 2019.
7.6 Prediction
Outside ophthalmology, DL is being applied increasingly to predict events such as
mortality, sepsis, length of stay in hospital and other clinical parameters.208 Such
tasks may be more challenging than straightforward image segmentation or
classification tasks and, therefore, are at a less mature stage in development. This is
particularly the case for real world dataset which are constantly evolving and which
differ significantly between healthcare institutions. Currently to our knowledge, there
are no prospective clinical studies that evaluate DL models in this regard in any field
of medicine. Nevertheless, the capability of DL systems to model high-dimensional
data – such as an OCT scan – has great potential for retinal disease. For example, it
may allow prediction of disease onset or progression in AMD, or provide much better
prognostic information at an individual patient-level. Preliminary work has thus far
used a combination of deep learning for OCT image segmentation with classical
machine learning/statistical techniques for the prediction task.
Schmidt-Erfurth et al., used the HARBOR data to develop ML models to predict
visual acuity in patients receiving ranibizumab for neovascular AMD.198 They began
by selecting 70% of the HARBOR dataset for analysis. They next applied automated
segmentation algorithms (using both graph-based and deep learning approaches) to
the OCT scans, allowing segmentation of total retinal thickness, IRF, SRF, and PED.
This allowed them to generate four morphologic maps and thus a wide range of
quantitative structural variables. They then used classical ML techniques (random
forest regression) to predict visual acuity at baseline and at 12 months. For the latter,
they constructed separate models for the visits at baseline and then for months one
to three. Of note, the ranibizumab dose and treatment regimens were included in the
model as fixed effects. Their study involved 614 eyes. At baseline, the extracted
OCT biomarkers – in particular, the extent of IRF – were found to predict the visual
acuity with an R2 of 21% (i.e., these variables accounted only for 21% of the
variation in baseline visual acuity). As with previous studies, they found that SRF and
PED did not contribute to baseline visual acuity to any meaningful extent. They also
predicted visual acuity at 12 months following initiation of therapy. At baseline, their
model accounted for 36% of the variation of visual acuity. As expected, the
performance of the model improved with each additional month added, so that, by
month three, it accounted for 70% of the variation. In other words, patients with good
visual acuity at baseline, and then at each follow-up for three months, were likely to
have good visual acuity at 12 months.
This work combining DL for partial OCT segmentation, with conventional statistical
techniques for prediction, is an important first step to prognosticate the AMD
treatment outcome. End-to-end approaches using DL are likely to provide additional
insights, particularly if large, well-labelled datasets can be used for training. However,
a potential challenge in this regard will likely be the significant compute resources
that will be required to train such models using a high-resolution three-dimensional
dataset containing OCTs. It will also be important to make sure that the resulting
model is clinically meaningful. For example, it may be possible to predict visual
outcomes to high accuracy after 12 months of treatment, but this will be less useful
for the patient if it involves incorporation of multiple time series data immediately
prior to this. It will also be important to determine what balance of sensitivity and
specificity is likely to be clinically meaningful and thus potentially actionable (for
example, in potential prophylactic treatment of retinal disease prior to onset or
progression). Finally, perhaps even more so than with image classification tasks, it
will be important to prove that any models produced can be generalized for widespread usage, either in clinical trials or in real-world clinical practice.
Implementation of in clinical settings
Given the ageing population and the ever-increasing expenditure for health care
there is a need to innovations. Three main areas are the targets for such solutions:
To improve the general health of a population, to lower the costs of healthcare, and
to improve patient’s perception. AI solutions are among the most promising solutions
to tackle these issues.
Providing healthcare is logistically complex and solutions differ significantly between
different countries. Implementing AI-based solution into such workflow is challenging
and requires sufficient connectivity. A concerted efforts from all stakeholders is
required including regulators, insurances, hospital managers, IT teams, physicians,
and patients. Implementation needs to be easy and straightforward without
administrative hurdles to be accepted. Quick dissemination of results is an important
aspect in this respect.
Another step for AI being implemented into a clinical setting is a realistic business
model that needs to consider the specific interest of the patient, the payer, and the
provider. Main factors to be considered in this respect are reimbursement, efficiency,
and unmet clinical need. The business model also needs to consider the long-term
implications, because continuous connectivity and the capacity to learn is associated
with the ability to improve clinical performance over time.
In the recent years AI solutions were focussed mainly towards cancer, neurology,
and cardiovascular disease (PMID: 29507784). Given the global burden that arises
from these conditions it is that AI solutions are required. In ophthalmology the field is
relatively new. Ophthalmology may, however, in some respects be an optimal field
for implementing deep learning. Major blinding diseases such as DR, AMD and
glaucoma can be treated and the incidence of blindness can be largely reduced
when treatment is initiated early. Moreover, ocular imaging is cheap and fast when
compared to other imaging modalities such as computer tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging. As such cost effectiveness may be reached easier than in other
medical disciplines. Moreover, ocular images may contain significant information on
systemic disease and will as such most likely spread to other sub-specialities in the
next years.
Potential challenges
AI approaches in ocular disease require a large number of images. Data sharing
from different centers is an obvious approach to increase the number of input data
for network training. However, Increasing the number of data elements does not
necessarily enhance the performance of a network. For example, adding large
amounts of data from healthy subjects will most likely not improve the classification
of disease. Moreover, very large datasets for training may increase the likelihood of
making spurious connections.209 For use of retinal images to predict and classify
ocular and systemic disease a clear guideline for the optimal number of cases for
training is needed.
When data are to be shared between different centers regulations and state privacy
rules need to be considered. These may differ between different countries and while
they are aimed to ensure patients’ privacy they sometimes form barriers for effective
research initiatives and patient’s care. Generally, there is agreement that images and
all other patient-related data need to be anonymized and patients’ consent has to be
obtained before sharing is possible. This requires technical solutions including data
storage, management, and analysis. The implementation of such solutions is time
and cost-intensive. It requires hardware and software investments, expertise and is
labor-intensive. Investing on data-sharing is a difficult decision, because the financial
requirements are high and the benefit is not immediate. The decision for data
sharing can sometimes be influenced by the fear that competitors explore novel
results first. This can even occur within an institution and usually it is the weaker
members of a collaborative team that fear about their career opportunities. Indeed,
key performance indicators as defined by funding bodies or universities including
number of publications, impact factor and citation metrics may represent major
hurdles for effective data sharing. On an institutional level the filing of collaboration
agreements with other partners is a long and labor-intensive procedure that slows
down analysis of shared data. Such periods may even be prolonged when IP issues
are to be negotiated. Given that these are usually multiple-institution agreements
time spans of one year or more are common. This is associated with the risk that
other teams are faster and that collaborators loose interest in the topic.
In the training set a large number of images is required that need to be well
phenotyped. The performance of the network will depend on the number of images,
the quality of the images, and how representative the data are for the entire
spectrum of the disease. In addition, the applicability in clinical practice will depend
on the quality of the phenotyping system and the ability of the human graders to
follow this system. In DR, most of the classification systems rely of fundus
photographs except for classification of macular edema. Popular classification
systems include the ETDRS severity scales,210 the Modified Airlie House
Classification211 and the International Clinical Disease Severity Scale for DR212.
Based on these classification systems DL networks usually aim to detect cases with
referable and vision threatening DR, particularly when used in screening situations.
In principle DL may be a good approach to define such novel staging approaches,
but clinical outcome trials are required to validate such strategies.
During the Early Treatment of DR Study it was recognized that some features of DR
such as foveal avascular zone (FAZ), capillary loss, capillary dilatation, arteriolar and
RPE abnormalities as well as fluorescein leakage, fluorescein leakage cystoid
changes could be detected better with fluorescein angiography213. The technique is,
however, time-consuming, has a mortality of 1:230,000 and inclusion of dye-based
angiography into a DR screening program is not feasible. Recently introduced OCT
angiography technology identifies some of these features and is an attractive
alternative due to its non-invasive nature214-216. In addition, OCT angiography may be
able to identify additional features such as deep capillary plexus nonperfusion
associated with macular photoreceptor damage217,218. This is compatible with studies
showing that the long-term recovery of photoreceptor integrity and visual outcome in
DME is dependent on perfusion status of the deep capillary plexus219. OCT
angiography has, however, only recently been commercialized and rapid technology
development and limited experience currently hampers inclusion into deep learning
networks for DR.
Multiple classification systems have been proposed for AMD including the recent
Clinical Classification as worked out by the Beckman Initiative for Macular Research
Classification Committee220 and the Three Continent AMD Consortium Severity
Scale221 developed by harmonizing the grading of three large-scale populationbased studies. Significant differences among these grading systems have been
reported in distinguishing early from intermediate AMD when classifying according to
the defined criteria222. DL-based classification systems have been developed for
referability223, severity characterization and estimation of 5-year risk95 and disease
conversion224. In addition, a severity classification based on fundus photography
was developed16. Again, OCT angiography was not included in classification
systems as yet, although a wide variety of studies indicate that choroidal perfusion
abnormalities are associated with the risk of disease progression225-229.
The issue is most complicated when DL approaches shall be applied to the
classification of glaucoma. This is related to the difficulties in defining and diagnosing
early stages of the disease. A clear diagnosis of early cases is often difficult and
patients that show signs of structural disease without visual field defects are called
glaucoma suspects230. Confirmation of the diagnosis is only possible longitudinally
when the patient is either developing corresponding functional loss as identified with
visual field testing or progression of structural loss that exceeds the age-related loss
of tissue over time. Under these circumstances, it is of course difficult to train a
glaucoma network for early cases of glaucoma detection. On the other hand, this is
also a chance for AI to be implemented into glaucoma care, but strong longitudinal
data are required to train the network for correctly identifying those who will develop
glaucoma. Obviously, predictions of incidence are more difficult than simple
classification or staging. In glaucoma there is an urgent clinical need for such
networks because treatment is possible231 and advanced visual field defect is an
important risk factor for transitioning to functional blind232. Although progression of
glaucoma cannot be halted with current therapeutic interventions slowing down
progression is of utmost importance because it can shift the time to blindness
beyond the life expectancy of a patient.
In patients with more advanced stages of glaucoma the classification may be an
easier task, although the wide inter-individual variability of optic nerve anatomy,
particularly in myopic eyes, needs to be considered233,234. As such the training data
set needs to consist of a large dataset including a wide variety of different anatomical
configurations of the optic nerve head. DL may also have applications in glaucoma
progression analysis that likely needs to include structure and function. If clinical
decision-making is based on artificial network progression analysis the general
acceptance will also depend on the availability of outcome data.
Whereas the number of images that are available for diseases such as glaucoma,
DR and AMD is sufficient to train networks orphan diseases represent a problem
because of the lack of cases. One approach is to create synthetic fundus images
that mimic the disease. This is, however, a difficult task and current approaches
have not proven to be successful235,236. In addition, it is doubtful that competent
authorities would approve an approach where data do not stem from real patients.
Nevertheless, generation of synthetic images is an interesting approach that may
have potential for future applications.
The capabilities of DL should not be construed as competence. What networks can
provide is excellent performance in a well-defined task. Networks are able to classify
DR and detect risk factors for AMD but they are not a substitute for a retina specialist.
As such the inclusion of novel technology into DL systems is difficult, because it will
require again a large number of data with this novel technology. As mentioned above
this is the reason why networks that include OCT angiography have not yet been
realized, although it may potentially increase their performance. Inclusion of novel
technology into network based classification systems is a long and costly effort.
Given that there are many novel imaging approaches on the horizon including
adaptive optics237,238, adaptive optics OCT239,240, polarization-sensitive OCT241,
Doppler OCT242,243, oximetry244,245, measurement of oxygen extraction246,247, and
detection of apoptosing retinal cells248, which may have considerable potential for
diagnosis, classification and progression analysis, this is an important challenge for
the future. For instance, if imaging of single retinal ganglion cells249,250 becomes
clinically available this may prompt a paradigm shift for glaucoma diagnosis.
Generally speaking, a diagnostic tool that as a stand-alone technique provides
excellent sensitivity and specificity does not require a DL approach.
To ensure that AI provides an acceptable patient safety profile, it must be tested in a
relevant clinical context. The patient sample, the operators, the reference standard,
and patient recruitment all need to be primary-care-clinic biased to avoid selection
and spectrum bias.251 Recruitment methods, exclusion criteria, and a statistical
analysis plan must be documented before the recruitment of the first subject, a
design called preregistration. Results must focus on the intent-to-screen population,
in which every recruited subject is important, so that opportunistic exclusion of
subjects and endpoints can be avoided.252 Reference standards, also called ‘truth’,
can be, in order of increasing external validity and decreasing intra- and interobserver variability, created by individual clinicians, aggregated clinician opinion (via
adjudication or voting), or reading centers. 253,254
The reference standard can be derived from the same images- in the case of a
clinician based reference standard -, the same modality - i.e. widefield stereo fundus
images in the case of a reading center), or different or additional modalities, such as
optical coherence tomography.255 . It is worthwhile to note that when, instead of
using the same images, a reference standard derived from the same or different
modality – such as wide-field imaging – but different images, will capture diabetic
retinopathy lesions outside of the field of view or outside the resolution of the images
which the AI uses as input. This will lead to different – typically lower measured
sensitivity and specificity characteristics.
In summary, autonomous AI enables the delivery of real-time, point-of-carediagnosis in primary care clinics. It also diminishes the risk of human interference,
which has proved problematic in hybrid assistive AI-specialist models.256 Strong
diagnostic accuracy, easy access to high quality diagnostics and gains in productivity,
can best be realized by autonomous AI, but requires rigorous patient safety testing
Conclusions
AI using DL system has the potential to revolutionize how we live and practice
medicine. It likely will change the field rapidly in the next few decades, although
several challenges need to be resolved to increase AI adoption in healthcare. Many
techniques have been described in attempt to unravel the ‘black box’ nature of DL
systems, but more need to be done. Furthermore, it is also useful to develop more
predictive algorithms to better stratify patients into different risks groups and
treatment arms, aiming to deliver personalized medicine to the global population.
Acknowledgement
We would also like to acknowledge Dr Stephanie Lynch (Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics), Miss
Xin Qi Lee, Haslina Hamzah (Singapore Eye Research Institute), Dr Gilbert Lim
(National University Singapore School of Computing, Singapore), Dr Liu Yong
(A*STAR Institute of High Performance Center, Singapore) and Dr Yun Liu (Google
AI Health, California) for their contribution onto this article as well.