An invariance property of predictors in kernel
induced hypothesis spaces
Nicola Ancona∗& Sebastiano Stramaglia†‡§
August 29, 2005
We consider kernel based learning methods for regression and analyze what happens
to the risk minimizer when new variables, statistically independent of input and target
variables, are added to the set of input variables; this problem arises, for example, in the
detection of causality relations between two time series. We ﬁnd that the risk minimizer
remains unchanged if we constrain the risk minimization to hypothesis spaces induced
by suitable kernel functions. We show that not all kernel induced hypothesis spaces
enjoy this property. We present suﬃcient conditions ensuring that the risk minimizer
does not change, and show that they hold for inhomogeneous polynomial and Gaussian
∗Institute of Intelligent Systems for Automation - C.N.R. Via Amendola 122/D-I - 70126 Bari
†TIRES-Center of Innovative Technologies for Signal Detection and Processing, University of
Bari, Italy.
‡Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica, University of Bari, Italy.
§Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bari, Italy.
RBF kernels. We also provide examples of kernel induced hypothesis spaces whose risk
minimizer changes if independent variables are added as input.
Introduction
Recent advances in kernel-based learning algorithms have brought the ﬁeld of machine learning
closer to the goal of autonomy, i.e. the goal of providing learning systems that require as little
intervention as possible on the part of a human user . Kernel algorithms work by
embedding data into a Hilbert space, and searching for linear relations in that space. The embedding is performed implicitly, by specifying the inner product between pairs of points. Kernel-based
approaches are generally formulated as convex optimization problems, with a single minimum, and
thus do not require heuristic choices of learning rates, start conﬁguration or other free parameters.
On the other hand, the choice of the kernel and the corresponding feature space are central choices
that generally must be made by a human user. While this provides opportunities to use prior
knowledge about the problem at hand, in practice it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd prior justiﬁcation for the
use of one kernel instead of another . The purpose of this
work is to introduce a novel property enjoyed by some kernel-based learning machines, which is of
particular relevance when a machine learning approach is developed to evaluate causality between
two simultaneously acquired signals: in this paper we deﬁne a learning machine to be invariant
w.r.t. independent variables (property IIV) if it does not change when statistically independent
variables are added to the set of input variables. We show that the risk minimizer constrained to
belong to suitable kernel induced hypothesis spaces is IIV. This property holds true for hypothesis
spaces induced by inhomogeneous polynomial and Gaussian kernel functions. We discuss the case
of quadratic loss function and provide suﬃcient conditions for a kernel machine to be IIV. We also
present examples of kernels which induce spaces where the risk minimizer is not IIV, and they
should not be used to measure causality.
Preliminaries
We focus on the problem of predicting the value of a random variable (r.v.)
s ∈R with a
function f(x) of the r.v. vector x ∈Rd. Given a loss function V and a set of functions called the
hypothesis space H, the best predictor is sought for in H as the minimizer f ∗of the prediction
error or generalization error or risk deﬁned as:
V (s, f(x)) p(x, s)dxds,
where p(x, s) is the joint density function of x and s. Given another r.v. y ∈Rq, let us add y to
the input variables and deﬁne a new vector appending x and y, i.e. z = (x⊤, y⊤)⊤. Let us also
consider the predictor f ′∗(z) of s, based on the knowledge of the r.v. x and y, minimizing the risk:
R′ [f ′] =
V (s, f ′(z)) p(z, s)dzds.
If y is statistically independent of x and s, it is intuitive to require that f ∗(x) and f ′∗(z) coincide
and have the same risk. Indeed in this case y variables do not convey any information on the
problem at hand. The property stated above is important when predictors are used to identify
causal relations among simultaneously acquired signals, an important problem with applications
in many ﬁelds ranging from economy to physiology . The major approach to this problem examines if the prediction of one series could be
improved by incorporating information of the other, as proposed by Granger, 1969. In particular,
if the prediction error of the ﬁrst time series is reduced by including measurements from the second
time series in the regression model, then the second time series is said to have a causal inﬂuence
on the ﬁrst time series. However, not all prediction schemes are suitable to evaluate causality
between two time series; they should be invariant w.r.t. independent variables, so that, at least
asymptotically, they would be able to recognize variables without causality relationship.
In this work we consider as predictor the function minimizing the risk and we show that it
does not always enjoy this property. In particular we show that if we constrain the minimization
of the risk to suitable hypothesis spaces then the risk minimizer is IIV (stable under inclusion of
independent variables). We limit our analysis to the case of quadratic loss function V (s, f(x)) =
(s −f(x))2.
Unconstrained H
If we do not constrain the hypothesis space, then H is the space of measurable functions for which
R is well deﬁned. It is well known that the minimizer of (1) is the regression
sp(s|x)ds.
Note that if y is independent of x and s then p(s|x) = p(s|x, y) and this implies:
sp(s|x, y)ds =
sp(s|x)ds = f ∗(x).
Hence the regression function does not change if y is also used for predicting s; the regression
function is stable under inclusion of independent variables.
Linear hypothesis spaces
Let us consider the case of linear hypothesis spaces:
f|f(x) = w⊤
x x, wx ∈Rd
Here, and in all the hypothesis spaces that we consider in this work, we assume that the mean
value of the predictor and the mean of s coincide:
where E{·} means the expectation value.
This can be easily achieved by adding a constant
component (equal to one) to the x vector. Equation (3) is a suﬃcient condition for property IIV
in the case of linear kernels. Indeed, let us consider the risk associated to an element of H:
2 p(x, s)dxds.
The parameter vector w∗
x, minimizing the risk, is solution of the following linear system:
wx = E {sx} .
Let us consider the hypothesis space of linear functions in the z = (x⊤, y⊤)⊤variable:
f ′|f ′(z) = w⊤
z z, wz ∈Rd+q
Writing wz =
⊤with wy ∈Rq, let us consider the risk associated to an element of H′:
2 p(x, y, s)dxdyds.
If y is independent of x and s then (6) can be written, due to (3), as:
R′ [wz] = R [wx] +
2 p(y)dy.
It follows that the minimum of R′ corresponds to wy = 0. In conclusion, if y is independent
of x and s, the predictors f ∗(x) = w∗
⊤x and f ′∗(z) = w∗
⊤z, which minimize the risks (4) and
(6) respectively, coincide (i.e., f ∗(x) = f ′∗(x, y) for every x and every y). Moreover the weights
associated to the components of the y vector are identically null. So the risk minimizer in linear
hypothesis spaces is a IIV predictor.
Nonlinear hypothesis spaces
Let us now consider nonlinear hypothesis spaces.
An important class of non linear models is
obtained mapping the input space to a higher dimensional feature space and ﬁnding a linear
predictor in this new space. Let φ be a non linear mapping function which associates to x ∈Rd the
vector φ(x) = (φ1(x), φ2(x), ..., φh(x))⊤∈Rh, where φ1, φ2, ..., φh are h ﬁxed real valued functions.
Let us consider linear predictors in the space spanned by the functions φi for i = 1, 2, ..., h. The
hypothesis space is then:
f|f(x) = wx
⊤φ(x), wx ∈Rh
In this space, the best linear predictor of s is the function f ∗∈H minimizing the risk:
2 p(x, s)dxds.
Let us denote w∗
x the minimizer of (8). We ﬁrst restrict to the case of a single additional new
feature: let y be a new real random variable, statistically independent of s and x, and denote
γ′(z), with z = (x⊤, y)⊤, a generic new feature involving the y variable. For predicting the r.v. s
we use the linear model involving the new feature:
f ′(z) = wz
where φ′(z) =
 φ(x)⊤, γ′(z)
⊤and wz =
⊤has to be ﬁxed minimizing:
⊤φ(x) −vγ′(x, y)
2 p(x, s)p(y)dxdyds.
We would like to have v = 0 at the minimum of R′. At this aim let us evaluate:
p(x, s)p(y)dxdyds,
where ∂/∂|0 means that the derivative is evaluated at v = 0 and wx = w∗
x, where w∗
x minimizes
the risk (8). If ∂R′/∂v|0 is not zero, then the predictor is changed after inclusion of feature γ′.
Therefore ∂R′/∂v|0 = 0 is the condition that must be satisﬁed by all the features, involving y, to
constitute a IIV (stable) predictor. It is easy to show that if γ′ does not depend on x, then this
condition holds. More important, it holds if γ′ is the product of a function γ(y) of y alone and of
a component φi of the feature vector φ(x):
γ′(x, y) = γ(y)φi(x)
for some i ∈{1, ..., h}.
Indeed in this case we have:
γ(y)p(y)dy
p(x, s)dxds
because the second integral vanishes as w∗
x minimizes the risk (8) when only x variables are used
to predict s. We observe that the second derivative
(γ′(x, y))2 p(x, s)p(y)dxdyds
is positive; (w∗
x, 0) remains a minimum after inclusion of the y variable. In conclusion, if the
new feature γ′ involving y veriﬁes (10) then the predictor f ′∗(z), which uses both x and y for
predicting s, minimizing (9) and the predictor f ∗(x) minimizing (8) coincide. This shows that the
risk minimizer is unchanged after inclusion of y in the input variables. This preliminary result,
which is used in the next subsection, may be easily seen to hold also for ﬁnite-dimensional vectorial
Kernel induced hypothesis spaces
In this section we analyze if our invariance property holds true in speciﬁc hypothesis spaces which
are relevant for many learning schemes such as Support Vector Machines and
regularization networks , just for citing a few. At this aim in order to
predict s, we map x in a higher dimensional feature space H by using the mapping:
φ(x) = (√α1ψ1(x), √α2ψ2(x), ..., √αhψh(x), ...),
where αi and ψi are the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of an integral operator whose kernel
K(x, x′) is a positive deﬁnite symmetric function with the property K(x, x′) = φ(x)⊤φ(x′) .
Let us now consider in detail two important kernels.
Case K(x, x′) =
 1 + x⊤x′p
Let us consider the hypothesis space induced by this kernel:
f|f(x) = w⊤
x φ(x), wx ∈Rd′o
where the components φi(x) of φ(x) are d′ monomials, up to p −th degree, which enjoy the
following property:
φ(x)⊤φ(x′) = (1 + x⊤x′)p.
Let f ∗(x) be the minimizer of the risk in H.
Moreover, let z = (x⊤, y⊤)⊤and consider the
hypothesis space H′ induced by the mapping φ′(z) such that:
φ′(z)⊤φ′(z′) = (1 + z⊤z′)p.
Let f ′∗(z) be the minimizer of the risk in H′. If y is independent of x and s then f ∗(x) and f ′∗(z)
coincide. In fact the components of φ′(z) are all the monomials, in the variables x and y, up to
the p −th degree: it follows trivially that φ′(z) can be written as:
 φ(x)⊤, γ′(z)⊤⊤,
where each component γ′
i(z) of the vector γ′(z) veriﬁes (10), that is it is given by the product of
a component φj(x) of the vector φ(x) and of a function γi(y) of the variable y only:
i(z) = φj(x)γi(y).
As an example, we show this property for the case of x = (x1, x2)⊤, z = (x1, x2, y)⊤and p = 2.
In this case the mapping functions φ(x) and φ′(z) are:
φ(x) = (1,
φ′(z) = (1,
2x2y, y2)⊤,
where one can easily check that φ(x)⊤φ(x′) = (1 + x⊤x′)2 and φ′(z)⊤φ′(z′) = (1 + z⊤z′)2. In this
case the vector γ′(z) is:
2y, φ2(x)y, φ3(x)y, φ1(x)y2⊤
According to the argument described before, the risk minimizer in this hypothesis space satisﬁes
the invariance property.
Note that, remarkably, the risk minimizer in the hypothesis space induced by the homogeneous polynomial kernel K(x, x′) =
 x⊤x′p does not have the invariance property for a generic
probability density, as one can easily check working out explicitly the p = 2 case.
Translation invariant kernels
In this section we present a formalism which generalizes our discussion to the case of hypothesis
spaces whose features constitute an uncountable set. We show that the IIV property holds for
linear predictors on feature spaces induced by translation invariant kernels. In fact let K(x, x′) =
K(x −x′) be a positive deﬁnite kernel function, with x, x′ ∈Rd. Let ˜K(ωx) be the Fourier
transform of K(x): K(x) ↔˜K(ωx). For the time shifting property we have that: K(x −x′) ↔
˜K(ωx)e−jω⊤
x x′. By deﬁnition of the inverse Fourier transform, neglecting constant factors, we
know that :
K(x −x′) =
˜K(ωx)e−jω⊤
Being K positive deﬁnite we can write:
K(x −x′) =
˜K(ωx)ejω⊤
˜K(ωx)ejω⊤
where ∗indicates conjugate. Then we can write K(x, x′) = ⟨φx, φx′⟩where:
˜K(ωx)ejω⊤
are the generalized eigenfunctions. Note that, in this case, the mapping function φx associates
a function to x, that is φx maps the input vector x in a feature space with an inﬁnite and
uncountable number of features. Let us consider the hypothesis space induced by K:
H = {f|f(x) = ⟨wx, φx⟩, wx ∈Wx} ,
Rd wx(ωx)φ∗
and Wx is the set of complex measurable functions for which (12) is well deﬁned and real1. Note
that wx is now a complex function, it is not a vector anymore. In this space the best linear
predictor is the function ¯f = ⟨¯wx, φx⟩in H minimizing the risk functional:
R [wx] = E
(s −⟨wx, φx⟩)2
1In particular elements of Wx satisfy wx(−ωx) = w∗
It is easy to show that the optimal function ¯wx is solution of the following integral equation:
x(ωx + ξx)dξx,
where ξx is a dummy integration variable and Φx(ωx) = E
is the characteristic function2 of the r.v. x . Let us indicate ˜F(ωx) = wx(ωx)
˜K(ωx) and ˜G(ωx) =
. Then (13) can be written as:
˜G(ωx) = ˜F(ωx) ⋆Φx(ωx),
where ⋆indicates cross-correlation between complex functions. In the spatial domain this implies:
G(x) = F ∗(x)p(−x).
In conclusion, assuming that the density p(x) is strictly positive, the function ¯wx(ωx) minimizing
the risk is unique and it is given by:
¯wx(ωx) = F {G∗(x)/p(−x)} /
Substituting this expression into equation (12) leads to
sp(s|x)ds,
i.e. the risk minimizer coincides with the regression function. In other words, the hypothesis
space H, induced by K, is suﬃciently large to contain the regression function. This proves that
translation invariant kernels are IIV.
It is interesting to work out and explicitly prove the IIV property in the case of translation
invariant and separable kernels. As in the previous section, let y ∈Rq be a r.v. vector independent
2Φx(−ωx) is the Fourier transform of the probability density p(x) of the r.v. x.
of x and s and use the vector z = (x⊤, y⊤)⊤for predicting s. At this aim, let us consider the
following mapping function:
˜K′(ωz)ejω⊤
where ωz = (ωx⊤, ωy⊤)⊤and
= K′(z−z′). Let us consider the hypothesis space induced
f ′|f ′(z) =
The best linear predictor is the function ¯f ′ = ⟨¯wz, φ′
z⟩in H′ minimizing the risk functional:
R′ [wz] = E
where the optimal function ¯wz is solution of the integral equation (see (13)):
Rd+q wz(ξz)
z(ωz + ξz)dξz,
where ωz =
 ωx⊤, ωy⊤⊤. Note that, being x and y independent, the characteristic function of z
factorizes:
Φz(ωz) = Φx(ωx)Φy(ωy).
If K′(z) is separable:
K′(z) = K(x)H(y)
then its Fourier transform takes the form of ˜K′(ωz) = ˜K(ωx) ˜H(ωy). Being E
, (15) becomes:
Rd+q wz(ξz)
x(ωx + ξx)Φ∗
y(ωy + ξy)dξz.
The risk minimizer ¯wz solution of (17) is:
¯wz(ωx, ωy) = ¯wx(ωx) δ(ωy)
This can be checked substituting (18) in (17) and using equation (13). The structure of eq.(18)
guarantees that the predictor is unchanged under inclusion of variables y. This is the case, in
particular, for the Gaussian RBF kernel. Finally note that a property similar to (10) holds true
also in this hypothesis space. In fact, as K′ is separable, (14) implies that:
z(ωz) = φx(ωx)γy(ωy)
where γy(ωy) =
˜H(ωy)ejω⊤
y y with the property: ⟨γy, γy′⟩= H(y −y′). Eq. (19) may be seen
as a continuum version of property (10).
Discussion
In this work we consider, in the frame of kernel methods for regression, the following question:
does the risk minimizer change when statistically independent variables are added to the set of
input variables? We show that this property is guaranteed by not all the hypothesis spaces. We
outline suﬃcient conditions ensuring this property, and show that it holds for inhomogeneous
polynomial and Gaussian RBF kernels. Whilst these results are relevant to construct machine
learning approaches to study causality between time series, in our opinion they might also be
important in the more general task of kernel selection. Our discussion concerns the risk minimizer,
hence it holds only in the asymptotic regime; the analysis of the practical implications of our
results, i.e. when only a ﬁnite data set is available to train the learning machine, is matter for
further research. It is worth noting, however, that our results hold also for a ﬁnite set of data,
if the probability distribution is replaced by the empirical measure. Another interesting question
is how this scenario changes when a regularization constraint is imposed on the risk minimizer
 and loss functions diﬀerent from the quadratic one are considered. Moreover
it would be interesting to analyze the connections between our results and classical problems of
machine learning such as feature selection and sparse representation, that is the determination
of a solution with only a few number of non vanishing components. If we look for the solution
in overcomplete or redundant spaces of vectors or functions, where more than one representation
exists, then it makes sense to impose a sparsity constraint on the solution.
In the case here
considered, the sparsity of w∗emerges as a consequence of the existence of independent input
variables using a quadratic loss function.
The authors thank two anonymous reviewers whose comments were valuable to improve the
presentation of this work.