I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Published Online November 2017 in MECS ( 
DOI: 10.5815/ijmecs.2017.11.07
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A
Systematic Mapping
Sara Ashraf, Shabib Aftab
Department of Computer Science, Virtual University of Pakistan
E-mail: {sara22.ashraf, shabib.aftab}@gmail.com
Received: 29 July 2017; Accepted: 14 August 2017; Published: 08 November 2017
Abstract—Agile mania has revolutionized the software
industry. Scrum, being a widely adopted mainstream
production process, has dominated other Agile family
members. Both industrial and academic researchers
eagerly tailored and adapted the Scrum framework in
quest of software process improvement. Their burning
desire for innovation drive them to integrate other
software development models with it to leverage the forte
of all the models combined and stifle the weaknesses.
This paper aims at providing state-of-the-art insightful
understanding of how practices from different Agile
process models have been plugged into the Scrum
framework to bring about improvements in different
development
productivity, and product quality. To gain the in-depth
perception, a systematic mapping study has been planned.
This study will identify researches on hybrid models of
Scrum within agile family, published between 2011 and
2017. Subsequently, these hybrid models of Scrum will
be examined broadly by classifying and thematically
analyzing the literature, and outcomes will be presented.
This study will contribute a latest coarse-grained
overview that in turn may guide researchers for future
research endeavors.
Index Terms—Agile Scrum, Hybrid Scrum, Systematic
Mapping Study, Agile Practices, Scrum integrations,
I. INTRODUCTION
Agile approaches have turned into a tempting option
for organizations striving to enhance their performance.
They offer a diverse process development ecosystem ,
 embodying Agile manifesto . Scrum , Testdriven
development
Development (FDD) , Extreme Programming (XP)
 , Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM)
 and Crystal methods are all Agile family. By
delivering
satisfaction, and accelerating development process, Agile
methodologies fulfil the practitioners’ needs .
According to , the most popular model among
Agile family is Scrum. Cardozo et al. conducted a
study to prove that Scrum increases productivity. At
Microsoft, the most desired development approach was
found to be Scrum . And, demographically, the most
adopted model is also Scrum . By offering a
comprehensive range of management practices ,
Scrum has established its worth in software industry.
Meanwhile, it doesn’t define the development practices
explicitly, thereby, offering researchers an opportunity to
adopt and/or adapt practices from other models. Same is
the case with other Agile models, that is, exhibiting
strong characteristics in some areas, while, lagging
behind in others.
With the increasing uncertainty, fast-paced changing
technology, and rising customer demands, it is harder for
an organization to strictly adhere or follow a specific
development methodology. Studies , revealed
this fact that using an Agile process model in its ‘pure’
form, doesn’t happen often.
Developing a hybrid approach is not a newly sprouted
idea in the field of software engineering. A ‘Hybrid’
approach refers to a phenomenon of combining two or
more different methodologies for the purpose of creating
a new and better one. Hybrid methodologies for software
development acknowledge the fluidity of project
management as well as take into account a defter and
nuanced way to deal with the development. Researchers
believe that these hybrids are an attempt to address
challenges
development and management, or applying standards by,
meanwhile, retaining maximum flexibility .
The process models under consideration are hybrid
models of Scrum within Agile family. Hybrid models
excluding Agile are beyond the domain of our current
study . Researchers tried different fusions of Scrum
and Agile models in their pursuit of increasing the
productivity, project visibility and control, product
quality, and customer satisfaction, however, pragmatic
adoption of these hybrids is limited.
The paper in hand, presents a comprehensive analysis
of the Agile hybrid models of Scrum, such that Section II
presents some related work, the protocol for Systematic
Mapping Study (SMS) is established in Section III,
Section IV confers the results in detail, and Section V
concludes the paper.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
II. RELATED WORK
In software engineering, Agile software development is
relatively a new domain. Despite the availability of a
huge volume of researches on Agile, scientific studies
with quantitative evidence are merely scarce for
generalizing results . Agile methodologies
are not implemented mostly in their full capacity, rather
selection of a variety of Agile practices make
practitioners achieve their organizational goals . It
has been evident that Agile methods tailoring is a recent
and hottest trend, and has been growing with acceptance
and adoption of Agile in industry .
Various challenges in Scrum adoption were reported
by López-Martínez et al. . Diebold and Dahlem 
investigated different agile practices popular in software
industry under different domains and context. Ashraf and
Aftab explored how Scrum framework has been
tailored and transformed by adopting and adapting
different agile practices. Researchers combined agile
approaches and introduced hybrids to achieve lean and
agile characteristics .
West et al. predicted that hybrid software
development approaches will become the standard. Later,
this claim was confirmed by Theocharis et al. 
through a systematic review. Kuhrmann et al. 
conducted a survey on hybrid approaches for software
development and found that they have become
mainstream, also, their adoption in industry is irrespective
of the organization size and industry sector. Raval and
Rathod inferred through an empirical study that
hybrid models for software development are way better
than traditional models as well as pure Agile models.
Moreover, they claimed that better customer satisfaction,
risk identification, minimum time to market, reduced cost,
and complexity can be achieved by enforcing hybrid
theory. Pragmatism, experience, and learning are the vital
factors that have driven the evolution that ensued hybrid
methodologies for software development .
It can be seen that researchers have shed light on the
phenomenon of hybrid in context of agile and non-agile
paradigm of software development, but no study has
specifically investigated the hybrids of Scrum. This SMS
fills the gap in the hybrid methodologies within the Agile
family, adopted or practiced to improve the Scrum.
III. RESEARCH METHOD
According to , systematic mapping study is
meant for identifying research gaps, collecting evidences
to direct future research, and achieving a comprehensive
overview on a certain area of exploration. A systematic
mapping study is employed mostly in 2 cases:
For the research areas having too little empirical
ii) For the research areas, which are too broad.
A Systematic Mapping Study (SMS) is perceived as an
alternative to SLR, provides a coarse-grained overview of
the pertinent research area .
Considering the principles and guidelines presented by
Petersen et al. for SMS in SE, we outlined a research
protocol to conduct our SMS. The important steps of our
SMS are: i) formulation of research questions QAs, ii)
Query string development by identifying keywords, iii)
establishing inclusion/ exclusion criteria, iv) screening of
articles by applying these selection criteria, v) quality
assessment of selected primary studies, vi) Data
extraction and process of mapping, and finally, vii)
representing the outcome as a systematic map, as shown
in fig. 1.
Fig.1. Steps of SMS
A. Research Questions
The procedure of SMS begins with the formulation of
research objectives. These research objectives actually
drive the whole investigation process. Following are the
Research Questions (RQ) describing the objectives of our
study which are:
RQ1: Which agile models can be integrated with
the Scrum process model?
RQ2: Which practices can be incorporated into
Scrum from other models?
RQ3: How different development methodologies
are combined?
RQ4: What goal/ objectives that have been
achieved through these hybrid models?
Develope a
Query String
Inclusion/
Screening of
Articles by
selection criteria
Assessment
Data Extraction
Presentation
of outcome as
Systematic
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
B. Search Strategy and Query String
The search strategy is meant for the identification of
candidate primary studies. The final set of primary
studies may include or exclude these candidate studies.
The search strategy included both automated search as
well as a manual search to calibrate the search string and
to ensure the process accuracy.
Initially, an ad hoc search was performed that helped
finding relevant keywords. Similarly, the research
questions helped in refining the keywords further. These
keywords were connected using conjunction (AND) and
disjunction (OR) Boolean operators. Following query
string was formed:
(hybrid AND (agile OR scrum) AND (process OR
model OR framework OR method) OR (integrating OR
combining OR blending) AND (scrum AND (XP OR
“extreme programming” OR TDD OR “test driven
development” OR FDD OR feature driven development
OR kanban OR crystal)))
The above query was executed on Google Scholar to
find the most appropriate and most relevant research
C. Selection Criteria
Related literature was extracted through applying all
the inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria. For an article
to be included, all the inclusion criteria should be
satisfied. At least one of the exclusion criteria ought to be
met to get excluded, from final set.
1) Inclusion Criteria (IC):
Following propositions describe the inclusion criteria
specified for selection of material:
IC1: Articles available in workshops, proceedings
of conferences, journals, and conferences.
IC2: Articles published in peer-reviewed journals.
IC3: Articles having clear focus on hybrid models
IC4: Articles or literature published between
2011 and 2017.
2) Exclusion Criteria (EC):
propositions
exclusion criteria:
EC1: Articles not available in English.
EC2: Literature published in non-peer reviewed
publications.
EC3: Informal literature i.e. thesis, dissertations,
book chapters, tutorials, etc.
EC4: Articles under peer review, or unpublished.
EC5: Articles for which full-text can’t be
downloaded.
EC6: Articles on agile hybrid models but Scrum
not included.
recommendations, and/or without appendixes.
EC8: Articles based on tools introduced in hybrid
environment.
EC9: Articles including variants of Scrum without
integrating it with any other process models.
EC10: Articles including SLRs, SMS on hybrid
agile process models.
EC11: Articles including Scrum hybrids but
underlying methodology is not comprehensively
elaborated.
EC12: Articles that include empirical studies of
hybrid Scrum in other disciplines.
A preliminary search based on keywords displayed a
huge amount of papers and other literature i.e. a gross of -
2490. For refining the automated search further, the
above-mentioned selection criteria were applied that
filtered out the literature irrelevant with respect to our
research questions. All the steps of this selection
procedure can be seen in fig. 2. Along with the automated
search, carried out through applying different filters, a
manual search was also performed using backward
snowballing .
Fig.2. Search process
D. Quality Assessment
The entire systematic mapping study relies on the
literature that has been acquired through a sophisticated
search procedure. Therefore, there must be some explicit
criteria to validate the quality of that literature, selected
as candidate articles. Thus, to make the findings more
effective, the quality assessment criteria were established.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
A manual inspection has been carried out for each
selected article by going through its title, abstract, and/or
conclusions. Each article has been assessed against a set
of questions, specified w.r.t. the quality of reporting, the
research design described and used in it. It ensures that
each selected article is of adequate standard. Following
checklist describes the criteria to assess the quality of
primary studies, shown in Table 1.
Item QA1 is taken from the work of , QA2 and
QA5 are based on the work of . QA3 demands the
empirical evidence w.r.t. its rigor and relevance . A
threshold of score 2.0 has been set for the inclusion of an
article, because QA1 for recently published articles, QA3
for proposals, and QA 5 might be assigned a zero score.
Table 1. Criteria for Quality Assessment
Descriptions
Has the article been cited by other researchers?
Cited by 4 or above/ cited by 3 or less? Cited
Is goal /objective of the study clearly stated?
Yes/ Not clearly stated/ Not stated
Do the article has provided with any evidence? i.e. idea is
validated?
By a case-study/ only parts of idea are
validated/ not validated
Is there any personal viewpoint of the author?
Yes/ paper describes a specific context/ Paper
is research-based
Does the article elaborate the idea in detail?
Yes/ needs more detail/ idea is abstract
E. Data Extraction & Mapping
After qualifying the criteria specified for quality
assessment, a final set of primary studies comprising of
18 papers has been derived. Data to be extracted from this
set of studies should be in compliance with the research
questions as formulated in the first step of research
protocol. We recorded the extracted data items as listed in
Table 2 on a spreadsheet.
Table 2. Data Extraction Format
Description
General Information
Bibliographic Details
Author, number of citations,
publication year, source, article type
(journal, conference, workshop)
Extraction of Data
(Quantitative Results of Study)
Quality Score
As calculated through QA criteria
Model title/ name
Research type
(validation, solution proposal,
philosophical, evaluation, opinion, or
experience)
Contribution type
(Tool, model/ framework, process/
method, measurement)
Mapping of Data
(Qualitative Results of Study)
Models integrated
Model names & Description
Practices adopted
For each model that is integrated into
the new model:
Roles/ events / Artifacts/ phases
8. Practices adapted/ excluded
For each model that is included into
the new model:
Roles/ events / Artifacts/ phases
Goal/ Areas addressed
Identification of Areas where
improvements are made.
Limitations/ challenges
Weaknesses of study, if any
IV. RESULTS
By following the research procedure as described in fig.
1, a set of primary studies containing 18 peer-reviewed
articles, published in different journals and conferences
between 2011- 2017, were found (see in Appendix A).
A. Quality Score
The quality score of a literature may identify the
potential limitations of that research . Likewise,
reliability of the findings of SMS and quality of the
selected literature is reflected through their quality scores
The selected articles were evaluated against the criteria
set for quality assessment. The evaluation results are
presented in fig. 3.
Fig.3. Distribution of publications over Quality Score
For QA1, Google Scholar has been consulted to find
number of citations for a paper, 6 papers have 4 or above,
8 papers have between 1 and 4, while 4 have zero citation
which are published in 2016 onwards. For QA2, 17
papers have clearly stated objective/ goal, only 1 paper
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
has vague statement. For QA3, there is only one article
presenting evidence from expert opinions rather than a
case-study, so considered as partial. For QA4, all papers
have detailed description of their frameworks except 1
with a little detail. All the papers obtained less than the
threshold score set for disqualification.
B. Classification of Literature
To comprehend the crucial results from pertinent
studies, the literature under consideration is classified
into different categories based on 5 major dimensions: i)
publication channel type, ii) research type, iii) by year, iv)
contribution type, and v) research focus .
By Publication Channel Type
As far as the type of publication channel is concerned,
our selected literature mainly belongs to scientific
journals, and conference proceedings. Out of 18 articles,
83% (15) articles were published in journals, whereas,
only 17% (3) appeared in conference proceedings.
Distribution of articles by publication channel is
presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Distribution of Articles by Publication Channel Type
Selected Research Works
Researches
[P1] [P2] [P3] [P4] [P5]
[P6] [P7] [P8] [P10] [P11]
[P12] [P13] [P14] [P17]
[P9] [P15] [P16]
J: Journal, C: Conference, W: Workshop,
By Publication Research Type
Research can be classified into 2 major classes: i)
empirical, and ii) non-empirical. These 2 classes are
further divided into 6 categories as described by Wieringa
et al. : i) evaluation research, ii) validation research,
(for empirical) iii) experience papers, iv) opinion papers,
v) conceptual proposals, and vi) solution proposals (for
non-empirical). We followed this classification for our
research as shown in Table 5. Fig. 4 presents the
distribution of publications over research type.
Fig.4. Distribution of publications over Research Type
By Publication Year
Temporal distribution of publications is shown in Fig.
Fig.5. Distribution of publications over Research Type
By Publication Contribution Type
We found 5 categories to classify the selected
publications by contribution type: Metric, Model/
Framework, Tool, Method/ Process, and Open Items. We
included models and methods only, rest of them are
beyond the domain of our research. Table 5 presents the
results for contribution type.
By Publication Focus
Classification scheme established for our SMS
specifies that each article spans 2 major research foci:
By Agile models that are integrated with Scrum
process model.
ii) By practices they adopted in the hybrid model.
Table 4 and Table 6 present the studies by (i) and (ii)
focus respectively. Table 6 is a descriptive representation.
Table 4, 5 and 6 answer the RQ1.
Table 4. Distribution of Articles by Agile Models integrated with Scrum
Scrum Model integrated with
TDD Kanban
[P9] [P10]
[P11] [P12]
2017 [P17] [P18]
An article may include more than one models
combined with Scrum. Fig. 6 presents the number of
articles distributed by the Agile models integrated with
Validation
Evaluation
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Fig.6. Research focus and Distribution by Agile Model Type
C. Mapping
A Systematic map over identified research foci related
to hybrid models of Scrum within agile family,
distributed over type of research, and publication years is
shown in fig. 7. In software development, Kanban has not
been generally acknowledged . It can be seen in fig. 7
that there is no or rare evidence of researches integrating
Scrum with Kanban and Crystal methods.
D. Discussion
To find the answers of RQ2, RQ3, and RQ4, we
explored the chosen studies thoroughly and depicted the
results through diagrams, and also, summarized them by
tabular description (see Table 5 and 6).
Fig.7. Systematic Map for Distribution of Publications on Scrum Hybrids over Research focus, Research type, and publication Year
Jyothi and Rao [S1] proposed an idea of integrating
engineering practices of XP in Scrum and named it as a
collaborative and innovative framework. The proposed
hybrid model aims at increasing productivity and
improving quality and collaboration among team
members. The development starts with planning, and
establishing
procedures.
framework includes Scrum Sprints, and each Sprint
contains various tailored phases of XP i.e. requirements,
analysis, design, evolution and delivery phases. XP
Refactoring,
programming, collective code ownership, and continuous
integration, are executed during these phases. By
introducing traceability practices into the aforementioned
framework,
documentation,
management,
productivity.
The idea of hybrid framework along with suggested
traceability practices needs to be validated at industry.
M. R. J. Qureshi [S2] presented a fine integration of
Scrum and XP to meet the challenges that these models
confront when employed individually. The author named
this integration as eXSCRUM. The model combined the
engineering practices of XP with the project management
paradigm of Scrum. The novelty of this model was that it
didn’t compromise the integrity of both models. A Pre-
Scrum activity Sprint zero was introduced for which
guidelines were presented in detail. The model
eXSCRUM executed all the XP practices within Sprint
cycle of Scrum. A controlled case study was conducted to
validate the model. A Payroll Management System was
developed in four iterations with a team of six members.
At the beginning of project, a comprehensive training of
one week was conducted. The results of this case-study
proved that the proposed model overcome the weaknesses
of both XP and Scrum. Also, improved product quality,
customer involvement and satisfaction.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Though the soul of both models Scrum and XP was
kept alive but executing all the practices of XP in a Sprint
cycle is not a feasible idea. Also, a comparative analysis
of the three models must be there to show that
eXSCRUM is better than these two models when
employed individually.
Bashir and Qureshi [S3] presented a hybrid framework
aimed at increasing the productivity and producing high
quality software for small to medium scale projects. This
framework is a fusion of three process models RUP, XP,
and Scrum. The authors included 3 phases and 6 logical
activities from RUP to establish the structure of
framework. Formal procedures of Scrum were remained
intact and engineering practices from XP were
implemented during different phases and logical activities.
documentation may help the new systems to manage
change efficiently. Similarly, it gives the liberty to choose
the suitable practices from XP and RUP according to the
given size and nature of the project.
The proposed model needs to be validated in controlled
and industrial settings. Although the model gives a formal
structure to the whole development process by specifying
some phases and activities of RUP, yet, there is a chance
of compromising agility due to RUP’s heavy-weight
Mushtaq and Qureshi [S4] proposed an extended
version of Scrum by integrating it with XP. The proposed
hybrid model was intended to deliver high quality
software while satisfying stakeholders. The authors tried
to enrich the Scrum model’s project management with
product engineering practices of XP. Execution of Sprint
Zero is carried out prior to that of Sprint. The
development cycle follows the basic phases of XP i.e.
planning phase, designing phase, coding phase, and
testing phase. During a Sprint cycle, each user story is
implemented,
exclusively.
Continuous integration is employed subsequently. The
working of the proposed model was evaluated through a
case-study conducted under controlled scenario with a
team of 6 members that have no prior experience of Agile
development processes. The team had an introductory
session with the practices of the models involved. The
study revealed that the hybrid model delivered better
software quality, client satisfaction, and productivity.
The proposed hybrid model lacks the guidelines
regarding implementation of XP practices. The model
doesn’t specify any documentation practices. Also, the
model needs to be validated in different scenarios to
generalize the results.
Nisa and Qureshi [S5] introduced a balanced
integration of RUP and XP with Scrum. The authors
named this hybrid model as SPRUP. The model was
designed in a way to achieve high quality by adapting to
changing requirements. The model SPRUP includes 4
phases from RUP (i.e. i) inception ii) Elaboration, iii)
Production & iv) Transition), roles, ceremonies and
artifacts from Scrum with slight alterations. Similarly,
few practices were added from XP. The proposed model
was assessed under controlled situation with a team of 5.
The case-study was based on developing Hotel
Management System, took 4 iterations, and 5 weeks. The
team had a training session before getting into project.
The experimental results revealed that SPRUP improves
the quality, performance, customer satisfaction, and
productivity.
The proposed hybrid model doesn’t specify which XP
practices are included in the model. The RUP model’s
intensive documentation trend may lead to compromise
the agility of the model. Also, the model needs to be
validated in comparison with the other 3 models RUP,
XP, and Scrum.
Another fine blend of XP and Scrum was IXPRUM.
The hybrid model was meant to deliver high quality
product and to increase productivity, presented by Aman
Ullah et al. [S6]]. The model employs Scrum’s practices
within the phases of XP i.e. planning, designing, coding,
and testing. Each Sprint includes the 4 phases of XP. All
the formally described practices of Scrum process model
were included in the IXPRUM except few with little
modifications. The first iteration begins with the planning
of Product backlog. The role of the Scrum Master was
adapted as IXPRUM Master. The Product Owner was
supposed to attend all the IXPRUM’s meetings. To prove
the IXPRUM’s rationality, a controlled case study was
conducted to deliver a library system within 5 weeks. Six
team members were engaged to carry out this project.
The study proved that the model improves team’s
productivity and software quality.
The model doesn’t provide any clear guidelines about
how to integrate XP’s engineering practices. . Literature
is in detail but the model is abstract. The 1st Sprint begins
with the planning of Product backlog that is not cyclic so
shouldn’t be included in the Sprint. Same case study
should be conducted for Scrum and XP in comparison
with IXPRUM.
Malhotra and Chug [S7] proposed a fusion of Scrum
and XP and named it IXSCRUM. The model was
intended to attain customer satisfaction, improved
product quality within time and cost constraints. The
authors have the same motivation of filling the gap
between project management and engineering. To
achieve the best of both dimensions they follow all the
management practices (including roles, ceremonies, and
artifacts) of Scrum strictly, and some roles (i.e. analyst,
developer, and tester) and engineering practices (i.e. Testdriven development, unit testing, simple design, and
constant refactoring) of XP. The IXSCRUM model was
validated through a case study based on a Shopping
application. It was a 3-Sprint project, completed in four
weeks. According to findings of this case study authors
claimed that the product quality was improved and
delivered in minimum time.
The model must be evaluated in different practical
scenarios.
Test-driven
development
complicated
large-scale
Moreover, the results revealed in the given paper were
not complete. Such hybrid models’ performance must be
analyzed in comparison of the models integrated.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Researchers believe that a high-quality product can
only be engineered through following a high-quality
process. Jan and Javed [S8] also tried to improve the
software development process by blending CMMI level 2
and 3’s practices into Scrum and named this effort as
SCXTREME. This hybrid approach merges the 8 Process
Areas PAs (out of 22) of CMMI, Scrum, and XP model.
The selection of Scrum model among other agile models
were because of its wide use in Pakistani industry.
SCXTREME is based on agile i.e. Scrum and XP
practices combined with the CMMI Specific Practices
SPs. Configuration management, track and control
changes, establishing integrity, and risk management are
mostly neglected areas in SCRUM/XP, so SPs of CMMI
are added regarding these areas into the proposed model.
SCXTREME is easy to implement under limited
resources and budget.
The proposed model needs to be validated in small to
medium scale organizations. Not all the SPs of level2 can
be implemented for any small level project.
To improve team’s productivity, code quality, and
maintenance process, Sultana et al. [S9] proposed a blend
of practices from XP, Scrum, and DSDM. The model was
a perfect fusion of project management, product
engineering, and configuration management practices.
Project initiation activities were elaborated in detail. All
the ceremonies, phases, and artifacts were described
clearly. Role of technical writer was a new addition for
documentation related activities. To explore the potential
of hybrid model, a controlled case-study of 6 weeks and 4
iterations, was conducted. It was based on 2 teams each
of 8 members, working on 2 projects, following Scrum
and hybrid in parallel. Results of comparison revealed
improvement in customer satisfaction, quality, and
maintenance support.
The proposed model should be validated for medium to
large-scale projects.
Enhanced Scrum framework is one of those numerous
efforts that have been made by researchers to get the best
out of Scrum-XP fusion. Previous efforts introduced this
combination with a little guide and direction towards
using and applying each of the both models’ practices.
N.R. Darwish [S10] filled that gap by presenting a set of
elaborated guidelines to execute each practice. The author
prepared the model in 4 phases: firstly, he outlined the
Enhanced Scrum Framework, then, planned a list of
guidelines, after that he validated the list of guidelines
through expert opinion, and finally, the guidelines were
revised in the light of those experts’ responses. All the
Scrum ceremonies, roles, and artifacts were kept intact,
while incorporated some XP practices where they were
needed in the Enhanced scrum framework.
The proposed hybrid model must be validated in the
field to prove its potential. The model is only feasible for
small-scale projects.
Fahad et al. [S11] integrated DSDM and XP with
Scrum to achieve the in time and quality product delivery
with minimum cost. They named it as DXPRUM. The
model employs most of the engineering practices of XP
(i.e. user story cards, coding standards, test-driven
development, pair programming, refactoring, 40 hours
per week work, and collective ownership of code)
throughout the seven phases of DSDM model (i.e. preproject,
post-project
feasibility,
development, and functional prototype). Similarly, the
Scrum’s artifacts, ceremonies, and roles are all
incorporated with slight modifications. The DXPRUM
was validated in a controlled setting in six weeks and four
Sprints. The results of the case-study revealed that
DXPRUM provides improved quality for medium-scale
projects, maximum customer satisfaction and in-time
product delivery with reduced cost.
The model needs to be validated in different practical
settings so that the results can be generalized further and
the model can be improved. The model doesn’t provide
any detail about requirements elicitation and analysis
phase. Training and prior experience for the team is not
taken into account. Moreover, the duration of ceremonies
adopted from Scrum is elongated in the model, that may
affect its agility.
The idea of blending agile models Scrum and XP with
non-agile process model RUP was presented by Ahmed
et al. [S12] and called it XSR. The hybrid model was
meant to deliver high quality product on-time, satisfying
business & customer needs, and to improve team’s
productivity. XSR borrows 3 phases of RUP i.e. inception,
construction, and transition, artifacts i.e. vision document,
architectural modeling, and practices like risk assessment,
deployment planning etc. Similarly, the proposed model
executes the engineering practices of XP i.e. User story
cards, coding standards, test-driven development, pair
programming, refactoring, collective ownership of code
within RUP phases. Moreover, certain Scrum practices
are also tailored like Scrum Master role is excluded.
Sprints size remain uniform for all Sprints of a project.
The framework doesn’t clearly mention which Scrum
management practices are included in the model. Despite
the fact, that RUP model’s phases will provide a structure
to the whole development but it seems like RUP
dominates the other two models that might compromise
the agility of XSR. The model has no practical
implications.
US-Scrum, a model proposed by U. Rafi et al. [S13] is
more concerned about providing enhanced usability
security, and correctness to the web applications by
fitting FDD phases into Scrum model. This model
ensures quality from the initial phases of product
development by involving specialized team led by
specialized
Specialized
product backlog and manage traceability of features
(functional, security and usability) using traceability
metrics. Selected features are implemented in parallel by
the specialized teams in a Sprint. A comprehensive
Requirements validation and verification is supported in
two steps i.e. in-sprint and after sprint.
Authors have proposed the model but did not provide any
implementation level details. On one hand, it reduces the
pressure on developers, but at the same time, increases
the number of masters or managers, although the same
could be done by Scrum Master.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
It has been evident that there is a tradeoff between high
quality and on-time delivery for both the Scrum and FDD
frameworks. The solution to this problem was proposed
by Tirumala et al. [S14]. They enriched the Scrum by
incorporating the practices of FDD and called it SCR-
FDD. The proposed hybrid model is intended to provide
high-quality software and timely delivery of the product
simultaneously. It focuses on timely releases of
independent features. Hierarchical monitoring of Sprint
work was introduced. The model SCR-FDD was realized
in comparison with Scrum and FDD, in a practical
situation based on 3 modules of a large-scale project.
There were 3 teams each following Scrum, FDD, and
SCR-FDD respectively. The findings justified the
model’s competence, as it achieved 10% more customer
satisfaction than the Scrum model, better quality, and
delivered on-time.
Though, the SCR-FDD mentioned the practices
included from both the models, yet, it was more abstract.
The proposed model should be validated in on large-scale
so that results can be generalized.
Maria et al. [S15] systematically integrated TDD with
Scrum to get the benefit of improved software quality
based on testing standards along with better project and
management.
frameworks in a synchronized and adaptable manner to
sustain their individuality. They conducted a comparative
analysis comprehensively for both methodologies. While
keeping in view the strengths and weaknesses of both
TDD and Scrum the authors selected 14 essential
characteristics (7 practices, 2 roles, and 5 artifacts) of
these process models. These characteristics are then
incorporated in the hybrid model in a fashion that both
process models can coexist without conflicting each other.
Moreover, maximum benefit can be gained out of their
management and engineering practices. Roles of
Developer and Scrum Master are considered most
important. The product developed using this model will
have minimum defects in code due to continuous testing
and feedback that in turn improves product quality and
reduces cost and time. The management practices will
improve the team’s performance and overall development
process as well.
The proposed model has not been validated in a
practical setting to justify the claimed outcomes.
Selection of coordinated practices that lead to coexistence and synchronization of two agile models is a
difficult task. A tool should be developed to assist in this
H. M. Tri et al. [S16] conducted a survey. Aim of the
appraisal was to collect information regarding Agile
methodologies by comprehensive comparison and
analysis. Management and engineering practice values
were evaluated, and on the basis of the findings, authors
proposed a Universal Dynamic System Development
Method (UDSDM) and a framework. Three Agile
software development methods were combined into it i.e.
Scrum, DSDM, and XP. DSDM (Atern) will serve as a
framework of controls. Any change in business plan gets
immediate response from it. Rest of the practices will be
selected from Scrum and XP on demand of context.
Scrum will provide management practice values and XP
will be responsible for the engineering practice values.
The paper doesn’t provide any practical evidence.
To achieve high quality and team productivity for
large-scale
augmented the most researched Scrum-XP fusion with
RUP model. The hybrid model combined the forte of
these three models in such a way that could overcome
their weaknesses. The integrated framework derives 4
phases of RUP, while, plan, design, code, and test
activities from XP, similarly, Scrum roles, ceremonies,
and artifacts are contained within. Authors claimed that
the proposed framework will improve productivity,
customer satisfaction, documentation, consequently,
flexible to changes.
The proposed integrated framework seems a fine and
balanced blend of Scrum, XP, and RUP. It should be
validated for small and large-scale projects to reveal its
potential.
An evaluation study, based on comparative analysis of
two models, was conducted by Fahad et al. [S18]. One of
these model was Agile DSDM, and the other one was
DXPRUM [S11]. Both models were appraised through
independent case studies in real-project settings, and
proved the claim valid that the hybrid model DXPRUM
yields better quality, within minimum time, and cost. ..
Moreover, increases customer satisfaction by providing
user friendly model.
E. Threats to validity
There are a number of threats to the validity of results
of this SMS:
Coverage of study search: The study search may
literature.
mitigating this threat, we employed both digital
and manual search using snowballing .
Biased study selection: For mitigating this kind of
threat, researchers have established exhaustive
inclusion/ exclusion criteria. Moreover, to assess
rationality of the selected studies, quality
assessment
guidelines of different experts .
Inaccurate data extraction & synthesis: Data
extraction format has been designed inline with
the previous renowned researcher’s work 
 . However, for data synthesis and mapping
there were studies that didn’t provide clear
description, so, we had to infer some information.
F. Limitations of research
Our research work has following limitations:
a) Despite all efforts we made, some relevant articles
may be missed out.
b) A number of anecdotal evidence on hybrid
approaches for software development has been
found, still, scientific studies on applications of
those hybrids are scarce.
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Table 5. Selected Articles on Hybrid models of Scrum
Research Type
Contribution
Models Integrated
Effective Implementation of Agile
Practices Ingenious and Organized
Theoretical Framework
Solution proposal
Empirical Evaluation of the Proposed eXSCRUM
Model: Results of a Case Study
Validation research
[S3] Hybrid Software Development Approach For Small
To Medium Scale Projects: RUP, XP & Scrum
Solution proposal
RUP, XP & Scrum
Novel Hybrid Model: Integrating Scrum and XP
Validation research
Empirical Estimation of Hybrid Model: A
Controlled Case Study
Validation research
Scrum, XP, RUP
IXPRUM—A Novel Agile Model for Software
Development
Validation research
IXSCRUM-A Framework Combining Scrum and
Validation research
SCXTREME Framework: A Customized Approach
of Process Improvements in Agile Blend with
CMMI Practices in Pakistan
Solution proposal
A Hybrid Model by Integrating Agile Practices for
Pakistani Software Industry (IEEE)
Validation research
Scrum, XP, DSDM
[S10] Enhancements In Scrum Framework Using Extreme
Programming Practices
Solution proposal
Software Quality Assurance of Medium Scale
Projects by using DXPRUM Methodology
Validation research
DSDM, XP, Scrum
[S12] XSR: Novel Hybrid Software Development Model
(Integrating XP, Scrum & RUP)
Solution proposal
XP, Scrum & RUP
US-Scrum: A Methodology
for Developing Software with Enhanced
Correctness, Usability and Security
Solution proposal
SCRUM, FDD
A Hybrid Agile model using Scrum and Feature
Driven Development
Validation research ,
Evaluation
Scrum, FDD
A Synchronous Agile Framework Proposal
Combining Scrum and TDD
Solution proposal
Scrum, TDD
Progress of agile movements in Australia: Propose a
Universal Dynamic System Development Method
(UDSDM) and universal framework.
Solution proposal
DSDM, XP, Scrum
[S17] Integrating RUP Approach with Agile Method for
Large Scale Projects
Solution proposal
Scrum, XP, RUP
Comparative analysis of DSDM & DXPRUM
Evaluation research
Scrum, XP, DSDM
Table 6. Summary of Selected Studies
Effective Implementation of Agile Practices Ingenious and Organized Theoretical Framework
All formal ceremonies, artifacts, & roles with
minor modifications
Refactoring, simple design, pair programming,
collective code ownership, continuous integration
High quality software,
productivity, improved
team communication
excluded/modified
Daily Scrum as Planning meeting
Phases of XP are tailored
Empirical Evaluation of the Proposed eXSCRUM Model: Results of a Case Study
Follow all formal ceremonies, artifacts, and roles
All practices of XP run in one Sprint cycle
Improved Customer
satisfaction &
involvement, quality
excluded/modified
Sprint Zero
Phases of XP
Hybrid Software Development Approach for Small to Medium Scale Projects: RUP, XP & Scrum
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
3 phases i) domain analysis & design ii)
Evolution,
iii) Production & validation
6 logical activities are chosen
All ceremonies are
Practices included and/or
excluded as per projects'
requirement
Increased productivity
& high quality
excluded/modified
1 phase and
3 logical activities
practices are included
and/or negated according
to project requirements
Novel Hybrid Model: Integrating Scrum and XP
Follow all formal ceremonies, artifacts, and roles
planning phase, designing phase, coding phase,
and testing phase, practices of XP
Improved software
quality, client
satisfaction, &
improved productivity
excluded/modified
Sprint Zero
Empirical Estimation of Hybrid Model: A Controlled Case Study
4 phases i) inception ii) Elaboration,
iii) Production & iv) Transition
Product & Sprint backlog,
Sprint, Daily Scrum, Sprint
review, PO, development
Pair programming, refactoring,
integration, unit testing
High quality software,
satisfy business &
customer needs, adapt
to changing
requirements
excluded/modified
6 logical activities
Role of Project Manager,
SPRUP Master
Anticipation, crafting, execution,
& assessment
IXPRUM- A novel agile model for software development
All formal Practices of Scrum
4 Phases of XP, continuous integration and
Improved quality,
productivity
excluded/modified
Phases of Scrum, Scrum Master as IXPRUM Master,
Project Manager
Rest of the XP practices
IXSCRUM-A Framework Combining Scrum and XP
Strictly follow all formal ceremonies, artifacts, and
Test-driven development, XP roles (analysts,
developers, testers), unit testing, simple design, &
constant refactoring,
Customer satisfaction,
improved product
quality within time &
cost constraints
excluded/modified
Rest of the XP practices and phases
SCXTREME Framework: A Customized Approach of Process Improvements in Agile Blend with CMMI Practices in Pakistan
All formal ceremonies, artifacts,
Phases of XP
From Level2 [PP, CM, REQM,
PPQA, & PMC]
From Level 3 [RSKM & VER]
organizational
performance, improved
product quality,
customer satisfaction
excluded/modified
Rest of PAs & SPs of level 2 & 3
A Hybrid Model by Integrating Agile Practices for Pakistani Software Industry
Management practices, Roles,
Ceremonies, Artifacts
Almost all the practices of XP,
Phases of XP
Business Case document,
Feasibility report, Project
Charter, Design document, Sprint
document, Review document,
Risk analysis
Effective management,
quality product,
productivity,
International standard
excluded/modified
Role of Technical Writer
DSDM roles
Enhancements in SCRUM Framework using Extreme Programming Practices
All roles, ceremonies, and artifacts are followed
Pair programming, continuous integration,
refactoring, testing, simple design, coding
standards, user stories, & collective code
Quality software, ontime delivery
excluded/modified
Rest of the XP practices and phases
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
Software Quality Assurance of Medium Scale Projects by using DXPRUM Methodology
Most of the ceremonies, roles and
artifacts with slight modifications
User story cards, coding
standards, test-driven
development, pair
programming, refactoring,
40-hours per week work, &
collective ownership of code
Pre-project & post-project
phases, feasibility, design,
functional prototype
Improved software
quality, in-time
product delivery, &
reduced cost
excluded/modified
Scrum Master Role is adapted as
DXPRUM Expert,
duration of meetings is elongated;
team size is 4-7 members
Rest of the XP practices &
phases of XP
DSDM roles
XSR: Novel Hybrid Software Development Model (Integrating XP, Scrum & RUP)
3 Phases of RUP (inception,
construction, transition), artifacts
(vision document, architectural
modeling, risk assessment,
deployment planning)
Roles, few requirement
management Practices e.g.
prioritize items, Sprint
User story cards, coding
standards, test-driven
development, pair programming,
refactoring, collective ownership
High Quality software,
on-time delivery, and
less cost, business &
customer needs
satisfaction, team’s
productivity
excluded/modified
Elaboration phase,
6 logical activities
Sprint zero, No Scrum
Master Role,
All Sprints are of same
duration, & artifacts
Rest of the XP practices & phases
US-Scrum: A Methodology for Developing Software with Enhanced Correctness, Usability and Security
User stories, use scenarios Product Backlog,
Sprint, Sprint Backlog, Scrum meetings,
Identification of Features, Build, User Acceptance
User satisfaction,
team’s productivity,
enhanced quality
excluded/modified
Multiple Scrum Masters for Functional ,Security,
Usability, Multiple Teams, artifacts(abuser stories,
abuser scenarios)
Multiple feature lists: Functional, Security,
Usability feature lists.
A Hybrid Agile model using Scrum and Feature Driven Development
Roles, artifacts, Daily Scrum, Backlog
Reinforcement, code integration, Release, Sprint
Identification of Features, Build, QA, Release,
Inspection
Improved quality
product, timely
delivery, & customer
satisfaction
excluded/modified
Rest of the practices
A Synchronous Agile Framework Proposal Combining Scrum and TDD
Scrum Master, developer, daily Scrum, Sprints,
review and retrospective evaluation
Developer, test and develop, test suits, continuous
feedback, formal tests, code quality, Test cycles
Improved software
quality & project
management, reduced
time and cost
excluded/modified
Rest of practices
Rest of practices
Progress of agile movements in Australia: Propose a Universal Dynamic System Development Method (UDSDM) and universal
Daily Scrum, Sprint planning,
Sprint, Sprint Review, product
Pair programming, continuous
integration, Simple Design, XP
Metaphor, Refactoring, collective
ownership, coding standard, phases
Framework of controls, daily
tracking of progress, team
collaboration
Customer satisfaction,
response to change,
team collaboration
excluded/modified
Management practices &
Engineering practices
Integrating RUP Approach with Agile Method for Large Scale Projects
9 disciplines of RUP, and 4
Phases of RUP (inception,
elaboration, construction,
transition)
Scrum roles, ceremonies, and
Plan, design, code, and test activity of
XP, user stories, 40-hours work week,
coding standard
High quality product,
& improved team
productivity
excluded/modified
6 logical activities
Rest of the XP practices & phases of
Comparative analysis of DSDM & DXPRUM
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
All the practices without any modification
Practices from Scrum, XP, & DSDM as discussed
Improved software
quality, customer
involvement, reduced
time and cost
excluded/modified
V. CONCLUSION
Hybrid methodologies are always a better choice to opt
for, as they offer flexibility to use best practices for any
aspect of a software development endeavor. A Systematic
Mapping Study (SMS) has been conducted to acquire an
overview of existing studies on the integration of Scrum
framework with other Agile models. Eighteen articles,
published during 2011-2017, were identified through
rigorous search. We got a comprehensive insight of the
above-mentioned domain and drawn main conclusions
which are as follows:
1) Most of the researches contributed in this domain
are from academia.
2) 83% of the total studies were found in journals,
rest of the 17% were published in conference
proceedings.
3) Researchers made multiple efforts to integrate XP,
FDD, TDD, DSDM, and RUP with Scrum. No
researches were found for Kanban and Crystal
methods in this context.
4) The number of studies published on integration of
Scrum with other Agile models was maximum in
2012 and 2014, same is expected in 2017.
5) Research focus was found to be more inclined
towards combining XP and Scrum. Hybrids of
Scrum with XP remained prevalent throughout
researches. About 83% of the total studies found
were based on integration of Scrum and XP.
6) The second highest trend was combination of
Scrum and DSDM. It is observed that DSDM has
never been blended with Scrum alone, but, needed
XP to work with.
7) Other Agile models TDD and FDD are now
gaining attention of researchers for making
8) Being iterative, and incremental, the RUP gained
significant attention.
9) About 47% of the total studies found, were
proposals, 42% validations, and 11% were based
on evaluations.
10) The goals achieved by most of the case-studies
were: productivity, Quality, customer satisfaction,
reduction in cost, team motivation, and on-time
11) About 67% of the researches adopted almost all
the artifacts, roles, ceremonies, and practices of
Scrum in hybrid models. Rest of them either
partially adapted and/or excluded practices of
12) About 56% of the studies adopted maximum
engineering practices from XP, 17% adopted
partially, while, rest of 27% mostly adapted/
excluded practices and phases.
13) Practice of training for team members was found
effective in almost all case-studies.
Scarcity of validation and evaluation researches call for
more empirical studies conducted with more pragmatic
evidence on integration of Scrum within Agile family, in
industrial settings to generalize the results. A joint
venture of academia and industry is rigorously needed to
identify more systematic strategies for combining Agile
development approaches within a specific context.
APPENDIX A. SELECTED PRIMARY STUDIES
Implementation of Agile Practices: Ingenious and
Organized Theoretical Framework," In IJACSA)
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science
and Applications, 2011
[S2] M.R.J. Qureshi, " Empirical Evaluation of the
Proposed eXSCRUM Model: Results of a Case
Study," International Journal of Computer Science
Issues IJCSI Vol. 8, Issue 3, No. 2, May 2011.
[S3] M. S. Bashir, and M. R. J. Qureshi, “Hybrid
Software Development Approach for Small to
Medium Scale Projects: RUP, XP & Scrum,” Sci. Int.
(Lahore), Vol.24, No.4, pp. 381-384, 2012.
[S4] Z. Mushtaq, and M. R. J. Qureshi, “Novel Hybrid
Model: Integrating Scrum and XP,” I.J. Information
Technology and Computer Science, No. 6, pp. 39-44,
[S5] S. U. Nisa, and M. R. J. Qureshi, “Empirical
Estimation of Hybrid Model: A Controlled Case
Study,” I.J. Information Technology and Computer
Science, Vol. 4, No. 8, pp. 43-50, 2012.
"IXPRUM-A novel agile model for software
development," AWER
Information
Technology and Computer Science, Vol.1, No.1,
pp.1314-1320, 2012
[S7] Chhavi Malhotra, and Anuradha Chug, “IXSCRUM-
International Journal of Scientific & Engineering
Research, Vol. 4, Issue 7, July-2013.
[S8] Samina Jan, Ali Javed,"SCXTREME Framework: A
Customized Approach of Process Improvements in
Agile Blend with CMMI Practices in Pakistan,"
International Journal of Information Technology and
Computer Science (IJITCS), Vol.5, No.3, pp. 69-78,
[S9] S. Sultana, Y.H. Motla, S. Asghar, M. Jamal, and R.
Azad, "A hybrid model by integrating agile practices
for Pakistani software industry," In Electronics,
Communications and Computers (CONIELECOMP),
Scrum with the Spices of Agile Family: A Systematic Mapping
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 11, 58-72
2014 International Conference on (pp. 256-262).
IEEE, February 2014
"Enhancements
Programming
Practices," International
Intelligent
Computing and Information Sciences (IJICIS), Ain
Shams University, Vol. 14, No.2, pp. 53-67, 2014
M. Fahad, S. Qadri, S.S. Muhammad, and M.
Husnain, "Software Quality Assurance of Medium
Methodology," International Journal of Natural and
Engineering Sciences (IJNES’14).(Turkey), Vol.8,
No.1 , pp. 42-48, 2014
G. Ahmad, T.R. Soomro, and M.N. Brohi,"
XSR: Novel Hybrid Software Development Model
(Integrating XP, Scrum & RUP)," International
Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering
(IJSCE), Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 126-130,2014
U. Rafi, T. Mustafa, N. Iqbal, and W.U.I. Zafar,
"US-Scrum:
Methodology
Developing
Software with Enhanced Correctness, Usability and
Security," International Journal of Scientific &
Engineering Research, Vol. 6, No. 9, p.377, 2015
S.S. Tirumala, S. Ali, B.G. Anjan, “A Hybrid
Agile model using SCRUM and Feature Driven
Development,” International Journal of Computer
Applications Vol. 156 pp. 1-5, 2016.
M.M Savoine, V.F. Rocha, C.A.C. Bezerra,
Synchronous Agile Framework Proposal Combining
Scrum and TDD," ICSEA, p. 350, 2016
H.M. Tri, A. Alsadoon, P.W.C. Prasad, and A.
Elchouemi, "Progress of agile movements in
Australia: Propose a Universal Dynamic System
Development Method (UDSDM) and universal
framework," In Information and Communication
Systems (ICICS), 2016 7th International Conference
on (pp. 282-285). IEEE, April 2016
N.R. Darwish, and A.A.M. Warad, "Integrating
RUP Approach with Agile Method for Large Scale
Projects,"
Engineering
Technology, Vol. 9, No.5, pp. 85-90, 2017
Fahad, M., Qadri, S., Ullah, S., Husnain, M.,
Qaiser, R., Ahmed, S., Qureshi, W.A. and
Muhammad, S.S., 2017. A Comparative Analysis of
DXPRUM and DSDM. IJCSNS, 17(5), p.259.