Approximations to Magic: Finding Unusual Medical Time Series
Jessica Lin Eamonn Keogh
Helga Van Herle
University of California,
The Chinese University David Geffen School of
Riverside of Hong Kong Medicine, UCLA
{jessica , eamonn}@cs.ucr.edu 
In this work we introduce the new problem of finding time series discords. Time series discords are
subsequences of longer time series that are maximally different to all the rest of the time series
subsequences. They thus capture the sense of the most unusual subsequence within a time series.
While the brute force algorithm to discover time series discords is quadratic in the length of the time
series, we show a simple algorithm that is 3 to 4 orders of magnitude faster than brute force, while
guaranteed to produce identical results.
1. Introduction
The previous decade has seen hundreds of papers on time series similarity search, which is the task of
finding a time series that is most similar to a particular query sequence . In this work we pose the
new problem of finding the sequence that is least similar to all other sequences. We call such
sequences time series discords. Figure 1 gives a visual intuition of a time series discord found in a
human electrocardiogram.
Figure 1: The time series discord found in an excerpt of electrocardiogram qtdb/sel102 (marked
in bold line). The location of the discord exactly coincides with a premature ventricular
contraction
As we shall show, time series discords are superlative anomaly detectors, able to detect anomalies in
diverse medical applications.
2. Related work and background
Our review of related work is exceptionally brief because we are considering a new problem. Some
of the notions used throughout this paper are described below.
2.1 Notation
For concreteness, we begin with a definition of our data type of interest, time series:
Definition 1. Time Series: A time series T = t1,…,tm is an ordered set of m real-valued variables.
For data mining purposes we are typically not interested in any of the global properties of a time
series; rather, we are interested in local subsections of the time series, which are called subsequences.
Definition 2. Subsequence: Given a time series T of length m, a subsequence C of T is a sampling
of length n d m of contiguous position from T, that is, C = tp,…,tp+n-1 for 1 d p d m – n + 1.
One can see that the best “matches” to a subsequence (apart from itself) tend to be located one or two
points to the left or the right of the subsequence in question. Such matches have previously been
called trivial matches . It is critical when finding discords to exclude trivial matches;
otherwise almost all real datasets have degenerate and unintuitive solutions. We will therefore take
the time to formally define a non-self match
ECG qtdb/sel102 (excerpt)
ECG qtdb/sel102 (excerpt)
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Definition 3. Non-Self Match: Given a time series T, containing a subsequence C of length n
beginning at position p and a matching subsequence M beginning at q, we say that M is a non-self
match to C at distance of D(M,C) if | p – q| >= n.
We will use the definition of non-self matches to define time series discords:
Definition 4. Time Series Discord: Given a time series T, the subsequence D of length n beginning
at position l is said to be the Discord of T if D has the largest distance to its nearest non-self match.
We will denote the location of the discord as D.l and the distance to the nearest non-self matching
neighbor as D.dist. We have deliberately omitted naming a distance function up to this point for
generality. For concreteness, we will use the ubiquitous Euclidean distance measure throughout the
rest of this paper.
Definition 5. Euclidean Distance: Given two time series Q and C of length n, the Euclidean
distance between them is defined as:
3. Finding time series discords
The brute force algorithm for finding discords is simple and obvious. We simply take each possible
subsequence and find the distance to the nearest non-self match. The subsequence that has the
greatest such value is the discord. This is achieved with nested loops, where the outer loop considers
each possible candidate subsequence, and the inner loop is a linear scan to identify the candidate’s
nearest non-self match. For clarity, the pseudo code is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Brute Force Discord Discovery
Function [dist, loc ]= Brute_Force(T, n)
best_so_far_dist = 0
best_so_far_loc = NaN
For p = 1 to |T | - n + 1 // Begin Outer Loop
nearest_neighbor_dist = infinity
For q = 1 to |T | - n + 1 // Begin Inner Loop
IF | p – q | >= n // non-self match?
IF D(tp,…,tp+n-1, tq,…,tq+n-1) < nearest_neighbor_dist
nearest_neighbor_dist = D(tp,…,tp+n-1, tq,…,tq+n-1)
End // End non-self match test
End // End Inner Loop
IF nearest_neighbor_dist > best_so_far_dist
best_so_far_dist = nearest_neighbor_dist
best_so_far_loc = p
End // End Outer Loop
Return[ best_so_far_dist, best_so_far_loc ]
The algorithm is easy to implement, and produces exact results. However, it has O(m2) time
complexity which is simply untenable for even moderately large datasets. The following two
observations, however, offer hope to improve the algorithm’s running time.
Observation 1: In the inner loop, we don’t actually need to find the true nearest neighbor to the
current candidate. As soon as we find any subsequence that is closer to the current candidate than
the best_so_far_dist, we can abandon that instance of the inner loop, safe in the knowledge that
the current candidate could not be the time series discord.
Observation 2: The utility of the above optimization depends on the order which the outer loop
considers the candidates for the discord, and the order which the inner loop visits the other
subsequences in its attempt to find a sequence that will allow an early abandon of the inner loop.
The pseudo code is shown in Table 2. Note that the input has been augmented by two
heuristics, one to determine the order in which the outer loop visits the subsequences, and
one to determine the order in which the inner loop visits the subsequences. It is important to
note that the heuristic for the outer loop is used once, but the heuristic for the inner loop
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
takes the current candidate into account, and is thus invoked to produce a new ordering for
every iteration of the inner loop.
Table 2 : Heuristic Discord Discovery.
Function [dist, loc ]= Heuristic_Search(T, n, Outer, Inner )
best_so_far_dist = 0
best_so_far_loc = NaN
For Each p in T ordered by heuristic Outer
// Begin Outer Loop
nearest_neighbor_dist = infinity
For Each q in T ordered by heuristic Inner
// Begin Inner Loop
IF |p – q | >= n // non-self match?
IF D(tp,…,tp+n-1, tq,…,tq+n-1) < best_so_far_dist
Break // Break out of Inner Loop
IF D(tp,…,tp+n-1, tq,…,tq+n-1) < nearest_neighbor_dist
nearest_neighbor_dist = D(tp,…,tp+n-1, tq,…,tq+n-1)
End // End non-self match test
End // End Inner Loop
IF nearest_neighbor_dist > best_so_far_dist
best_so_far_dist = nearest_neighbor_dist
best_so_far_loc = p
End // End Outer Loop
Return[ best_so_far_dist, best_so_far_loc ]
We have now reduced the discord discovery problem into a generic framework where all one
needs to do is to specify the heuristics. To gain some intuition into our new algorithm, and to hint at
our eventual solution to this problem, let us consider 3 possible heuristic strategies:
x Random: We could simply have both the Outer and Inner heuristics randomly order the
subsequences to consider. It is difficult to analyze this strategy since its performance is bounded
from below by O(m) and from above by O(m2) (see below for explanation) and depends on the
data. However, empirically it works reasonably well. The conditional test on line 9 of Table 2 is
often true and the inner loop can be abandoned early, considerably speeding up the algorithm.
x Magic: In this hypothetical situation, we imagine that a friendly oracle gives us the best possible
orderings. These are as follows: For Outer, the subsequences are sorted by descending order of the
non-self distance to their nearest neighbor, so that the true discord is the first object examined. For
Inner, the subsequences sorted in ascending order of distance to the current candidate. For the
Magic heuristics, the first invocation of the inner loop will run to completion, thereafter, all
subsequent invocations of the inner loop will abandoned during the very first iteration.
x Perverse: In this hypothetical situation, we imagine that a less than friendly oracle gives us the
worst possible orderings. These are identical to the Magic orderings with ascending/descending
orderings reversed. In this case we are back to the original O(m2) time complexity.
These results are something of a mixed bag for us. On one hand they suggest that a linear time
algorithm is possible, but only with the aid of some very wishful thinking. The following two
observations offer us some hope for a fast algorithm:
x Observation 3: In the outer loop, we don’t actually need to achieve a perfect ordering to achieve
dramatic speedup. All we really require is that among the first few subsequences being examined
we have at least one that has a large distance to its nearest neighbor. This will give the
best_so_far_dist variable a large value early on, which will make the conditional test in line on
line 9 of Table 2 be true more often, thus allowing more early terminations of the inner loop.
x Observation 4: In the inner loop, we also don’t actually need to achieve a perfect ordering to
achieve dramatic speedup. All we really require is that among the first few subsequences being
examined we have at least one that has a distance to the candidate sequence being considered that
is less than the current value of the best_so_far_dist variable. This is a sufficient condition to
allow early termination of the inner loop.
We can imagine a full spectrum of algorithms, which only differ by how well they order
subsequences relative to the Magic ordering. This spectrum spans {Perverse…Random…Magic}.
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Our goal then is to find the best possible approximation to the Magic ordering, which is the topic of
the next section.
4. Approximations to magic
Before we introduce our techniques for approximating the perfect ordering returned by the
hypothetical Magic heuristics, we briefly review the discretization technique: Symbolic Aggregate
ApproXimation (SAX) . While there are least 200 different symbolic approximation of time series
in the literature, SAX is unique in that it is the only one that allows both dimensionality reduction and
lower bounding of Lp norms.
4.1 A brief review of SAX
A time series C of length n can be represented in a w-dimensional space by a vector
ith element of C is calculated by the following equation:
In other words, to transform the time series from n dimensions to w dimensions, the data is divided
into w equal sized “frames”. The mean value of the data falling within a frame is calculated and a
vector of these values becomes the dimensionality-reduced representation. This simple representation
is known as Piecewise Aggregate Approximation (PAA).
Having transformed a time series into the PAA representation we can apply a further
transformation to obtain a discrete representation. It is desirable to have a discretization technique that
will produce symbols with equiprobability . In empirical tests on more than 50 datasets we
noted that normalized subsequences have highly Gaussian distribution , so we can simply
determine the “breakpoints” that will produce equal-sized areas under Gaussian curve. These
breakpoints may be determined by looking them up in a statistical table. Once the breakpoints have
been obtained we can discretize a time series in the following manner. All PAA coefficients that are
below the smallest breakpoint are mapped to the symbol “a”, all coefficients greater than or equal to
the smallest breakpoint and less than the second smallest breakpoint are mapped to the symbol “b”,
Figure 2 illustrates the idea.
Figure 2: A time series (thin black line) is discretized by first obtaining a PAA approximation
(heavy gray line) and then using predetermined breakpoints to map the PAA coefficients into
symbols (bold letters). In the example above, with n = 128, w = 8 and a = 3, the time series is
mapped to the word cbccbaab
4.2 Approximating the magic outer loop
We begin by creating two data structures to support our heuristics. First, we create a SAX
representation of the entire time series, by sliding a window of length n across time series T,
extracting subsequences, converting them to SAX words and placing them in an array where the
index refers back to the original sequence. Figure 3 gives a visual intuition of this, where both a and
w are set to 3.
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Figure 3: The two data structures used to support the Inner and Outer heuristics. (left) An array
of SAX words, where the last column contains a count of how often each word occurs in the
array. (right) An excerpt of an trie with leaves that contain a list of all array indices that map to
that terminal node
Once we have this ordered list of SAX words, we can imbed them into an augmented trie where the
leaf nodes contain a linked list index of all word occurrences that map there. The counts of the
numbers of occurrences of each word can be mapped back to the rightmost column of the array. For
example, in Figure 3 if we are interested in the word caa we visit the trie to discover that it occurs in
locations 1, 3 and 731. If we are interested in the word that occurs at a particular location, lets say (m
– n) - 1, we can visit that index in the array and discover that the word cbb is mapped there.
Furthermore we can see by examining the rightmost column that there are a total of 2 occurrences of
that particular word (including the one we are currently visiting), however, if we want to know the
location of the other occurrence, we must visit the trie.
We can now state our Outer heuristic; we scan the rightmost column of the array to find the
smallest count mincount (its value is virtually always 1). The indices of all SAX words that occur
mincount times are recorded, and are given to the outer loop to search over first. After the outer loop
has exhausted this set of candidates, the rest of the candidates are visited in random order.
The intuition behind our Outer heuristic is simple. Unusual subsequences are very likely to map
to unique or rare SAX words. By considering the candidate sequences that mapped to unique or rare
SAX words early in the outer loop, we have an excellent chance of giving a large value to the
best_so_far_dist variable early on, which (as noted in observation 3) will make the conditional test in
line on line 9 of Table 2 be true more often, thus allowing more early terminations of the inner loop.
4.3 Approximating the magic inner loop
When candidate i is first considered in the outer loop we look up the SAX word that it maps to, by
examining the ith word in the array. We then visit the trie and order the first items in the inner loop in
the order of the elements in the linked list index found at the terminal nodes. For example, imagine
we are working on the problem shown in Figure 3. If we were examining the candidate C731 in the
outer loop, we would visit the array at location 731. Here we would find the SAX word caa. We
could use the SAX values to traverse the trie to discover that subsequences 1, 3, 731 map here. These
3 subsequences are visited first in the inner loop (note that line 8 of Table 2 prevents 731 from being
compared to itself). After this step, the rest of the subsequences are visited in random order.
The intuition behind our Inner heuristic is also simple. Subsequences that have the same SAX
encoding as the candidate subsequence are very likely to be highly similar. As noted in observation 4,
we just need to find one such subsequence that is similar enough (has a distance to the candidate than
the current value of the best_so_far_dist variable) in order to termination the inner loop.
(m – n) -1
Subsequence extracted
Converted to SAX
Inserted into array
Raw time series
Augmented Trie
(m – n) +1
(m – n) -1
(m – n) -1
Subsequence extracted
Converted to SAX
Inserted into array
Raw time series
Augmented Trie
(m – n) -1
(m – n) -1
Subsequence extracted
Converted to SAX
Inserted into array
Raw time series
Augmented Trie
(m – n) +1
(m – n) -1
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
5. Emperical evaualtion
For each example below, we give the speed up factor over brute force search, the only reasonable
5.1 Anomaly detection in electrocardiograms
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) are a time series of the electrical potential between two points on the
surface of the body caused by a beating heart. We have already considered the utility of discords in
one ECG in Figure 1. Figure 4 shows a very complicated signal with remarkable variability.
Figure 4: An ECG that has been annotated by a cardiologist (bottom bar) as containing one
premature ventricular contraction. The discord256 (bold line) exactly coincides with the heart
Surprisingly, this ECG contains only one small anomaly, which is easily discovered by a discord. In
this problem our heuristic search algorithm is 909 times faster than brute force, taking us from an
offline ½ hour to a real time few seconds.
In Figure 5 we consider an ECG which has several different types of anomalies. Here the first 3
discords exactly line up with the cardiologists annotations. Here our algorithm was 779 times faster
than brute force.
Figure 5: An excerpt of an ECG that has been annotated by a cardiologist (bottom bar) as
containing 3 various anomalies. The first 3 discord600 (bold lines) exactly coincides with
the anomalies
6. References
Duchene, F. Garbayl, C. & Rialle, V. . Mining Heterogeneous Multivariate Time-Series for Learning
Meaningful Patterns: Application to Home Health Telecare. Laboratory TIMC-IMAG, Facult'e de
m'edecine de Grenoble, France.
Chiu, B., Keogh, E. & Lonardi, S. . Probabilistic Discovery of Time Series Motifs. In the 9th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. August 24 - 27.
Washington, DC, USA. pp 493-498.
Keogh, E. & Kasetty, S. . On the need for time series data mining benchmarks: A survey and
empirical demonstration. In Proc. of the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. Edmonton, Canada. July 23-26.
Keogh, E., Lonardi, S. and Ratanamahatana, C. . Towards Parameter-Free Data Mining. In
proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. Seattle, WA, Aug 22-25.
Kitaguchi, S. . Extracting Feature based on Motif from a Chronic Hepatitis Dataset. In proceedings of
the 18th Annual Conference of the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence (JSAI). Kanazawa, Japan.
Lin, J., Keogh, E., Lonardi, S. & Chiu, B. . A Symbolic Representation of Time Series, with
Implications for Streaming Algorithms. In proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGMOD Workshop on Research
Issues in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.
B I D M C C o n g e s ti v e H e a r t F a ilu r e D a ta b a s e : R e c o r d 1 5
B I D M C C o n g e s ti v e H e a r t F a ilu r e D a ta b a s e : R e c o r d 1 5
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database: Record 108
1st Discord
2nd Discord
3rd Discord
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database: Record 108
1st Discord
2nd Discord
3rd Discord
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’05)
1063-7125/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE