MegDet: A Large Mini-Batch Object Detector
Chao Peng∗
Tete Xiao1∗
Zeming Li2∗
Yuning Jiang
Xiangyu Zhang
1Peking University, 
2Tsinghua University, 
Megvii Inc. (Face++), {pengchao, jyn, zhangxiangyu, jiakai, yugang, sunjian}@megvii.com
The development of object detection in the era of deep
learning, from R-CNN , Fast/Faster R-CNN to
recent Mask R-CNN and RetinaNet , mainly come
from novel network, new framework, or loss design. However, mini-batch size, a key factor for the training of deep
neural networks, has not been well studied for object detection. In this paper, we propose a Large Mini-Batch Object
Detector (MegDet) to enable the training with a large minibatch size up to 256, so that we can effectively utilize at
most 128 GPUs to signiﬁcantly shorten the training time.
Technically, we suggest a warmup learning rate policy and
Cross-GPU Batch Normalization, which together allow us
to successfully train a large mini-batch detector in much
less time (e.g., from 33 hours to 4 hours), and achieve even
better accuracy. The MegDet is the backbone of our submission (mmAP 52.5%) to COCO 2017 Challenge, where
we won the 1st place of Detection task.
1. Introduction
Tremendous progresses have been made on CNN-based
object detection, since seminal work of R-CNN ,
Fast/Faster R-CNN series , and recent state-of-theart detectors like Mask R-CNN and RetinaNet .
Taking COCO dataset as an example, its performance
has been boosted from 19.7 AP in Fast R-CNN to 39.1
AP in RetinaNet , in just two years. The improvements
are mainly due to better backbone network , new detection framework , novel loss design , improved
pooling method , and so on .
A recent trend on CNN-based image classiﬁcation uses
very large min-batch size to signiﬁcantly speed up the training. For example, the training of ResNet-50 can be accomplished in an hour or even in 31 minutes , using
mini-batch size 8,192 or 16,000, with little or small sacri-
∗Equal contribution. This work is done when Zeming Li and Tete Xiao
are interns at Megvii Research.
Time-Accuracy
Figure 1: Validation accuracy of the same FPN object detector trained on COCO dataset, with mini-batch size 16
(on 8 GPUs) and mini-batch size 256 (on 128 GPUs). The
large mini-batch detector is more accurate and its training
is nearly an order-of-magnitude faster.
ﬁce on the accuracy. In contract, the mini-batch size remains very small (e.g., 2-16) in object detection literatures.
Therefore in this paper, we study the problem of mini-batch
size in object detection and present a technical solution to
successfully train a large mini-batch size object detector.
What is wrong with the small mini-batch size? Originating from the object detector R-CNN series, a mini-batch
involving only 2 images is widely adopted in popular detectors like Faster R-CNN and R-FCN. Though in state-ofthe-art detectors like RetinaNet and Mask R-CNN the minibatch size is increased to 16, which is still quite small compared with the mini-batch size (e.g., 256) used in current image classiﬁcation. There are several potential drawbacks associated with small mini-batch size. First, the training time
is notoriously lengthy. For example, the training of ResNet-
152 on COCO takes 3 days, using the mini-bath size 16 on
a machine with 8 Titian XP GPUs. Second, training with
 
small mini-batch size fails to provide accurate statistics for
batch normalization (BN). In order to obtain a good
batch normalization statistics, the mini-batch size for ImageNet classiﬁcation network is usually set to 256, which is
signiﬁcantly larger than the mini-batch size used in current
object detector setting.
Last but not the least, the number of positive and negative
training examples within a small mini-batch are more likely
imbalanced, which might hurt the ﬁnal accuracy. Figure 2
gives some examples with imbalanced positive and negative
proposals. And Table 1 compares the statistics of two detectors with different mini-batch sizes, at different training
epochs on COCO dataset.
What is the challenge to simply increase the min-batch
As in the image classiﬁcation problem, the main
dilemma we are facing is: the large min-batch size usually
requires a large learning rate to maintain the accuracy, according to “equivalent learning rate rule” . But a
large learning rate in object detection could be very likely
leading to the failure of convergence; if we use a smaller
learning rate to ensure the convergence, an inferior results
are often obtained.
To tackle the above dilemma, we propose a solution as
follows. First, we present a new explanation of linear scaling rule and borrow the “warmup” learning rate policy 
to gradually increase the learning rate at the very early
stage. This ensures the convergence of training. Second,
to address the accuracy and convergence issues, we introduce Cross-GPU Batch Normalization (CGBN) for better
BN statistics. CGBN not only improves the accuracy but
also makes the training much more stable. This is significant because we are able to safely enjoy the rapidly increased computational power from industry.
Our MegDet (ResNet-50 as backbone) can ﬁnish COCO
training in 4 hours on 128 GPUs, reaching even higher accuracy. In contrast, the small mini-batch counterpart takes
33 hours with lower accuracy. This means that we can speed
up the innovation cycle by nearly an order-of-magnitude
with even better performance, as shown in Figure 1. Based
on MegDet, we secured 1st place of COCO 2017 Detection
Challenge.
Our technical contributions can be summarized as:
• We give a new interpretation of linear scaling rule, in
the context of object detection, based on an assumption
of maintaining equivalent loss variance.
• We are the ﬁrst to train BN in the object detection framework. We demonstrate that our Cross-GPU
Batch Normalization not only beneﬁts the accuracy,
but also makes the training easy to converge, especially
for the large mini-batch size.
• We are the ﬁrst to ﬁnish the COCO training (based on
ResNet-50) in 4 hours, using 128 GPUs, and achieving
higher accuracy.
Batch Size
Table 1: Ratio of positive and negative samples in the training (at epoch 1, 6, 12). The larger mini-batch size makes
the ratio more balanced, especially at the early stage.
Figure 2: Example images with positive and negative proposals. (a-b) two examples with imbalanced ratio, (c-d) two
examples with moderate balanced ratio. Note that we subsampled the negative proposals for visualization.
• Our MegDet leads to the winning of COCO 2017 Detection Challenge.
2. Related Work
CNN-based detectors have been the mainstream in current academia and industry. We can roughly divide existing CNN-based detectors into two categories: one-stage detectors like SSD , YOLO and recent Retina-
Net , and two-stage detectors like Faster R-
CNN , R-FCN and Mask-RCNN .
For two-stage detectors, let us start from the R-CNN
family. R-CNN was ﬁrst introduced in 2014. It employs Selective Search to generate a set of region proposals and then classiﬁes the warped patches through a
CNN recognition model. As the computation of the warp
process is intensive, SPPNet improves the R-CNN
by performing classiﬁcation on the pooled feature maps
based on a spatial pyramid pooling rather than classifying
on the resized raw images. Fast-RCNN simpliﬁes the
Spatial Pyramid Pooling (SPP) to ROIPooling. Although
reasonable performance has been obtained based on Fast-
RCNN, it still replies on traditional methods like selective
search to generate proposals. Faster-RCNN replaces
the traditional region proposal method with the Region Proposal Network (RPN), and proposes an end-to-end detection framework. The computational cost of Faster-RCNN
will increase dramatically if the number of proposals is
In R-FCN , position-sensitive pooling is introduced to obtain a speed-accuracy trade-off. Recent works
are more focusing on improving detection performance.
Deformable ConvNets uses the learned offsets to convolve different locations of feature maps, and forces the networks to focus on the objects. FPN introduces the feature pyramid technique and makes signiﬁcant progress on
small object detection. As FPN provides a good trade-off
between accuracy and implementation, we use it as the default detection framework. To address the alignment issue,
Mask R-CNN introduces the ROIAlign and achieves
state-of-the-art results for both object detection and instance
segmentation.
Different from two-stage detectors, which involve a proposal and reﬁning step, one-stage detectors usually run
faster. In YOLO , a convolutional network is followed with a fully connected layer to obtain classiﬁcation
and regression results based on a 7 × 7 grid. SSD 
presents a fully convolutional network with different feature layers targeting different anchor scales. Recently, RetinaNet is introduced in based on the focal loss, which
can signiﬁcantly reduce false positives in one-stage detectors.
Large mini-batch training has been an active research
topic in image classiﬁcation.
In , imagenet training
based on ResNet50 can be ﬁnished in one hour.
presents a training setting which can ﬁnish the ResNet50
training in 31 minutes without losing classiﬁcation accuracy. Besides the training speed, investigates the generalization gap between large mini-batch and small minibatch, and propose the novel model and algorithm to eliminate the gap. However, the topic of large mini-batch training
for object detection is rarely discussed so far.
3. Approach
In this section, we present our Large Mini-Batch Detector (MegDet), to ﬁnish the training in less time while
achieving higher accuracy.
3.1. Problems with Small Mini-Batch Size
The early generation of CNN-based detectors use very
small mini-batch size like 2 in Faster-RCNN and R-FCN.
Even in state-of-the-art detectors like RetinaNet and Mask
R-CNN, the batch size is set as 16. There exist a few problems when training with a small mini-batch size. First, we
have to pay much longer training time if a small mini-batch
size is utilized for training. As shown in Figure 1, the training of a ResNet-50 detector based on a mini-batch size of
16 takes more than 30 hours. With the original mini-batch
size 2, the training time could be more than one week. Second, in the training of detector, we usually ﬁx the statistics
of Batch Normalization and use the pre-computed values on
ImageNet dataset, since the small mini-batch size is not applicable to re-train the BN layers. It is a sub-optimal tradeoff since the two datasets, COCO and ImageNet, are much
different. Last but not the least, the ratio of positive and
negative samples could be very imbalanced. In Table 1, we
provide the statistics for the ratio of positive and negative
training examples. We can see that a small mini-batch size
leads to more imbalanced training examples, especially at
the initial stage. This imbalance may affect the overall detection performance.
As we discussed in the introduction, simply increasing
the mini-batch size has to deal with the tradeoff between
convergence and accuracy. To address this issue, we ﬁrst
discuss the learning rate policy for the large mini-batch.
3.2. Learning Rate for Large Mini-Batch
The learning rate policy is strongly related to the SGD
algorithm. Therefore, we start the discussion by ﬁrst reviewing the structure of loss for object detection network,
L(x, w) = 1
l(xi, w) + λ
= l(x, w) + l(w),
where N is the min-batch size, l(x, w) is the task speciﬁc loss and l(w) is the regularization loss. For Faster R-
CNN framework and its variants , l(xi, w)
consists of RPN prediction loss, RPN bounding-box regression loss, prediction loss, and bounding box regression loss.
According to the deﬁnition of mini-batch SGD, the training system needs to compute the gradients with respect to
weights w, and updates them after every iteration. When
the size of mini-batch changes, such as ˆN ←k · N, we expect that the learning rate r should also be adapted to maintain the efﬁciency of training. Previous works 
use Linear Scaling Rule, which changes the new learning
rate to ˆr ←k · r. Since one step in large mini-batch ˆN
should match the effectiveness of k accumulative steps in
small mini-batch N, the learning rate r should be also multiplied by the same ratio k to counteract the scaling factor
in loss. This is based on a gradient equivalence assumption in the SGD updates. This rule of thumb has been
well-veriﬁed in image classiﬁcation, and we ﬁnd it is still
applicable for object detection. However, the interpretation
is is different for a weaker and better assumption.
In image classiﬁcation, every image has only one annotation and l(x, w) is a simple form of cross-entropy. As for
object detection, every image has different number of box
annotations, resulting in different ground-truth distribution
among images. Considering the differences between two
tasks, the assumption of gradient equivalence between different mini-batch sizes might be less likely to be hold in object detection. So, we introduce another explanation based
on the following variance analysis.
Variance Equivalence. Different from the gradient equivalence assumption, we assume that the variance of gradient
remain the same during k steps. Given the mini-batch size
N, if the gradient of each sample ∇l(xi, w) obeying i.i.d.,
the variance of gradient on l(x, w) is:
Var(∇l(x, wt)) =
Var(∂l(xi, wt)
Similarly, for the large mini-batch ˆN = k · N, we can get
the following expression:
N(x, wt)) =
Instead of expecting equivalence on weight update, here we
want to maintain the variance of one update in large minibatch ˆN equal to k accumulative steps in small mini-batch
N. To achieve this, we have:
N(x, w))) = r2 · k · Var(∇lN(x, w))
≈ˆr2Var(∇l ˆ
Within Equation (2) and (3), the above equality holds if and
only if ˆr = k · r, which gives the same linear scaling rule
Although the ﬁnal scaling rule is the same, our variance
equivalence assumption on Equation (4) is weaker because
we just expect that the large mini-batch training can maintain equivalent statistics on the gradients. We hope the variance analysis here can shed light on deeper understanding
of learning rate in wider applications.
Warmup Strategy. As discussed in , the linear scaling
rule may not be applicable at the initial stage of the training,
because the weights changing are dramatic. To address this
Figure 3: Implementation of Cross-GPU Batch Normalization. The gray ellipse depicts the synchronization over devices, while the rounded boxes represents paralleled computation of multiple devices.
practical issue, we borrow Linear Gradual Warmup in .
That is, we set up the learning rate small enough at the beginning, such as r. Then, we increase the learning rate with
a constant speed after every iteration, until to ˆr.
The warmup strategy can help the convergence. But as
we demonstrated in the experiments later, it is not enough
for larger mini-batch size, e.g., 128 or 256. Next, we introduce the Cross-GPU Batch Normalization, which is the
main workhorse of large mini-batch training.
3.3. Cross-GPU Batch Normalization
Batch Normalization is an important technique for
training a very deep convolutional neural network. Without
batch normalization, training such a deep network will consume much more time or even fail to converge. However,
previous object detection frameworks, such as FPN ,
initialize models with an ImageNet pre-trained model, after which the batch normalization layer is ﬁxed during the
whole ﬁne-tuning procedure. In this work, we make an attempt to perform batch normalization for object detection.
It is worth noting that the input image of classiﬁcation
network is often 224 × 224 or 299 × 299, and a single
NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPU with 12 Gigabytes memory is
enough for 32 or more images. In this way, batch normalization can be computed on each device alone. However,
for object detection, a detector needs to handle objects of
various scales, thus higher resolution images are needed as
its input. In , input of size 800 × 800 is used, signiﬁ-
cantly limiting the number of possible samples on one device. Thus, we have to perform batch normalization crossing multiple GPUs to collect sufﬁcient statistics from more
To implement batch normalization across GPUs, we
need to compute the aggregated mean/variance statistics
over all devices. Most existing deep learning frameworks
utilize the BN implementation in cuDNN that only provides a high-level API without permitting modiﬁcation of
internal statistics. Therefore we need to implement BN in
terms of preliminary mathematical expressions and use an
“AllReduce” operation to aggregate the statistics.
ﬁne-grained expressions usually cause signiﬁcant runtime
overhead and the AllReduce operation is missing in most
frameworks.
Our implementation of Cross-GPU Batch Normalization
is sketched in Figure 3. Given n GPU devices in total, sum
value sk is ﬁrst computed based on the training examples
assigned to the device k. By averaging the sum values from
all devices, we obtain the mean value µB for current minibatch. This step requires an AllReduce operation. Then we
calculate the variance for each device and get σ2
broadcasting σ2
B to each device, we can perform the standard normalization by y = γ x−µB
B+ϵ +β. Algorithm 1 gives
the detailed ﬂow. In our implementation, we use NVIDIA
Collective Communication Library (NCCL) to efﬁciently
perform AllReduce operation for receiving and broadcasting.
Note that we only perform BN across GPUs on the same
machine. So, we can calculate BN statistics on 16 images if
each GPU can hold 2 images. To perform BN on 32 or 64
images, we apply sub-linear memory to save the GPU
memory consumption by slightly compromising the training speed.
In next section, our experimental results will demonstrate the great impacts of CGBN on both accuracy and convergence.
4. Experiments
experiments
Dataset , which is split into train, validation, and
test, containing 80 categories and over 250, 000 images.
We use ResNet-50 pre-trained on ImageNet as
the backbone network and Feature Pyramid Network
(FPN) as the detection framework.
We train the
detectors over 118,000 training images and evaluate on
5000 validation images. We use the SGD optimizer with
momentum 0.9, and adopts the weight decay 0.0001. The
base learning rate for mini-batch size 16 is 0.02. For other
settings, the linear scaling rule described in Section 3.2
is applied. As for large mini-batch, we use the sublinear
memory and distributed training to remedy the GPU
Input: Values of input x on multiple devices
in a minibatch: B = Sn
i=1 Bi, Bi = {xi1...in}
BN parameters: γ, β
Output: y = CGBN(x)
1: for i = 1, . . . , n do
compute the device sum si over set Bi
3: end for
4: reduce the set s1,...,n to minibatch mean µB
5: broadcast µB to each device
6: for i = 1, . . . , n do
compute the device variance sum vi over set Bi
8: end for
9: reduce the set v1,...,n to minibatch variance σ2
10: broadcast σ2
B to each device
11: compute the output: y = γ x−µB
B+ϵ + β over devices
Algorithm 1: Cross-GPU Batch Normalization over a minibatch B.
memory constraints.
We have two training policies in following: 1) normal,
decreasing the learning rate at epoch 8 and 10 by multiplying scale 0.1, and ending at epoch 11; 2) long, decreasing
the learning rate at epoch 11 and 14 by multiplying scale
0.1, halving the learning rate at epoch 17, and ending at
epoch 18. Unless speciﬁed, we use the normal policy.
4.1. Large mini-batch size, no BN
We start our study through the different mini-batch size
settings, without batch normalization. We conduct the experiments with mini-batch size 16, 32, 64, and 128. For
mini-batch sizes 32, we observed that the training has some
chances to fail, even we use the warmup strategy. For minibatch size 64, we are not able to manage the training to
converge even with the warmup.
We have to lower the
learning rate by half to make the training to converge. For
mini-batch size 128, the training failed with both warmup
and half learning rate. The results on COCO validation set
are shown in Table 2. We can observe that: 1) mini-batch
size 32 achieved a nearly linear acceleration, without loss
of accuracy, compared with the baseline using 16; 2) lower
learning rate (in mini-batch size 64) results in noticeable
accuracy loss; 3) the training is harder or even impossible
when the mini-batch size and learning rate are larger, even
with the warmup strategy.
4.2. Large mini-batch size, with CGBN
This part of experiments is trained with batch normalization. Our ﬁrst key observation is that all trainings easily
converge, no matter of the mini-batch size, when we combine the warmup strategy and CGBN. This is remarkable
because we do not have to worry about the possible loss of
Mini-Batch size
64 (half learning rate)
128 (half learning rate)
Table 2: Comparisons of different mini-batch sizes, without
accuracy caused by using smaller learning rate.
Batch size
128 (long)
256 (long)
256 (long)
Table 3: Comparisons of training with different mini-batch
sizes, BN sizes (the number of images used for calculating statistics), GPU numbers, and training policies. “long”
means that we apply the long training policy. When the BN
size ≥32, the sublinear memory is applied and thus slightly
reduces training speed. Overall, the large mini-batch size
with BN not only speeds up the training, but also improves
the accuracy.
The main results are summarized in Table 3. We have the
following observations. First, within the growth of minibatch size, the accuracy almost remains the same level,
which is consistently better than the baseline (16-base). In
the meanwhile, a larger mini-batch size always leads to a
shorter training cycle. For instance, the 256 mini-batch experiment with 128 GPUs ﬁnishes the COCO training only
in 4.1 hours, which means a 8× acceleration compared to
the 33.2 hours baseline.
Second, the best BN size (number of images for BN
statistics) is 32. With too less images, e.g. 2, 4, or 8, the
BN statistics are very inaccurate, thus resulting a worse performance. However, when we increase the size to 64, the
accuracy drops. This demonstrates the mismatch between
image classiﬁcation and object detection tasks.
Epoch-By-Epoch mmAP
Figure 4: Validation accuracy of 16 (long) and 256 (long)
detectors, using the long training policy. The BN sizes are
the same in two detectors. The vertical dashed lines indicate
the moments of learning rate decay.
Third, in the last part of Table 3, we investigate the long
training policy. Longer training time slightly boots the accuracy. For example, “32 (long)” is better that its counterpart (37.8 v.s. 37.3). When the mini-batch size is larger
than 16, the ﬁnal results are very consist, which indicates
the true convergence.
Last, we draw epoch-by-epoch mmAP curves of 16
(long) and 256 (long) in Figure 4. 256 (long) is worse at
early epochs but catches up 16 (long) at the last stage (after
second learning rate decay). This observation is different
from those in image classiﬁcation , where both the
accuracy curves and convergent scores are very close between different mini-batch size settings. We leave the understanding of this phenomenon as the future work.
5. Concluding Remarks
We have presented a large mini-batch size detector,
which achieved better accuracy in much shorter time. This
is remarkable because our research cycle has been greatly
accelerated.
As a result, we have obtained 1st place of
COCO 2017 detection challenge. The details are in Appendix.
Figure 5: Illustrative examples for our MegDet on COCO dataset.
Trimps-Soushen+QINIU
bharat umd
FAIR Mask R-CNN 
MegDet (Ensemble)
Table 4: Result of (enhanced) MegDet on test-dev of COCO
Based on our MegDet, we integrate the techniques including OHEM , atrous convolution , stronger
base models , large kernel , segmentation supervision , diverse network structure ,
contextual modules , ROIAlign and multi-scale
training and testing for COCO 2017 Object Detection Challenge. We obtained 50.5 mmAP on validation set, and 50.6
mmAP on the test-dev. The ensemble of four detectors ﬁnally achieved 52.5. Table 4 summarizes the entries from
the leaderboard of COCO 2017 Challenge. Figure 5 gives
some exemplar results.