Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 95, pp. 781–787, February 1998
Colloquium Paper
This paper was presented at a colloquium entitled ‘‘Neuroimaging of Human Brain Function,’’ organized by Michael
Posner and Marcus E. Raichle, held May 29–31, 1997, sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences at the Arnold
and Mabel Beckman Center in Irvine, CA.
Event-related brain potentials in the study of visual
selective attention
STEVEN A. HILLYARD* AND LOURDES ANLLO-VENTO
Department of Neurosciences, 0608, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0608
Event-related brain potentials (ERPs) provide high-resolution measures of the time course of neuronal
activity patterns associated with perceptual and cognitive
processes. New techniques for ERP source analysis and comparisons with data from blood-flow neuroimaging studies
enable improved localization of cortical activity during visual
selective attention. ERP modulations during spatial attention
point toward a mechanism of gain control over information
flow in extrastriate visual cortical pathways, starting about 80
ms after stimulus onset. Paying attention to nonspatial features such as color, motion, or shape is manifested by qualitatively different ERP patterns in multiple cortical areas that
begin with latencies of 100–150 ms. The processing of nonspatial features seems to be contingent upon the prior selection of location, consistent with early selection theories of
attention and with the hypothesis that spatial attention is
‘‘special.’’
To analyze the neural bases of a cognitive system such as
attention, we must identify not only the participating brain
regions but also the temporal microstructure of information
flow among the regions involved. Although imaging methods
that register changes in cerebral blood flow (positron emission
tomography, PET, and functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI) have proven highly effective for defining the
anatomical areas and networks that are activated during
cognitive operations (1), these methods (for the present at
least) are severely limited in their ability to reveal the temporal
patterns of activation within these networks. Indeed, the
intrinsically sluggish nature of the hemodynamic response to
increased neuronal activity may place a lower limit of the order
of hundreds of milliseconds on the time resolution capability
of blood-flow imaging techniques.
Fine-grained information about the temporal structure of
neural activation patterns can be obtained through noninvasive recordings of the electrical and magnetic fields that are
generated in association with synchronous nerve cell activity.
The electrical field potential changes that are time-locked with
sensory, motor, or cognitive events are termed event-related
potentials (ERPs) and consist of a series of voltage oscillations
that reflect the time course of neuronal activity with a resolution of the order of milliseconds (2). While surface-recorded
ERPs (and the corresponding event-related magnetic fields)
faithfully reflect the temporal patterns of activity within
neuronal populations, their source locations in the brain can
only be estimated and not visualized directly as can be done
with PET or fMRI. This indirect estimation of ERP generator
locations on the basis of surface-recorded voltage distributions
is termed the ‘‘inverse problem.’’ While the inverse problem
cannot be solved uniquely in any given case, the validity of such
indirect source calculations has been enhanced by improved
algorithms for modeling intracranial generators in terms of
multiple dipoles or sheets of densely packed current sources
(e.g., refs. 3 and 4). More recent modeling approaches also
take into account the anatomical organization and biophysical
properties of the cortical mantle and intervening tissues (5, 6).
A promising new approach to the inverse problem is to use the
anatomically precise information from PET or fMRI activations to constrain the calculated source locations of ERPs (7).
Mangun et al. (8) outline the principles for combining ERP and
blood-flow neuroimaging techniques in the same experimental
framework and propose procedures for linking the spatial and
temporal dimensions of event-related neural activity.
The focus of the present paper is on the contributions made
by ERP recordings in revealing the timing and localization of
stimulus selection processes in the brain during visual attention. Similar analyses using ERPs have been undertaken for
other cognitive systems (9). The emphasis here is on recent
experiments in which the anatomical localization of attentionrelated ERP changes was supported by PET data, either in
combined experiments or by comparison across experiments.
The spatio-temporal information in these ERP waveforms has
helped to resolve several major issues that have arisen in
cognitive studies of visual attention, including early versus late
levels of selection, the extent of processing of unattended
stimuli, the uniqueness of spatial attention, and the predominance of spatial over feature-selective attention (10). In
addition, the waveforms of ERPs elicited during attention to
multifeature stimuli provide information about the time
course with which individual features and feature conjunctions
are selected, and the interactions among ERP components can
help to distinguish mechanisms of serial, parallel, and hierarchical feature processing.
Distributed Networks for Control of Visual Attention. Experiments using blood-flow neuroimaging methods have complemented previous studies of brain-lesioned patients in identifying a network of interconnected cortical and subcortical
areas that play a key role in the control of visual attention in
humans (11, 12). These areas include dorsolateral prefrontal
and posterior parietal cortex, the anterior cingulate gyrus, and
the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus. It has been proposed that
this network constitutes the essential control circuitry for
visual attention that determines which stimuli are to be
attended, with the prefrontal cortex initiating and maintaining
the selective sensory bias in working memory and the parietal
cortex directing and shifting attention to specific locations in
© 1998 by The National Academy of Sciences 0027-8424y98y95781-7$2.00y0
PNAS is available online at http:yywww.pnas.org.
Abbreviations: ERP, event-related brain potential; SN, selection negativity; PET, positron emission tomography; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; SP, selection positivity; LPC, late positive
component.
*To whom reprint requests should be addressed. e-mail: shillyard@
extrapersonal space (13–15). This control circuitry in turn
determines which stimuli entering the visual pathways are to be
facilitated or suppressed by virtue of anatomical projections to
the ventral stream of extrastriate visual areas that encode
stimulus features and objects (16, 17) and perhaps to dorsal
stream areas that encode stimulus motion as well. In other
words, this attentional control circuitry provides “bias signals”
that either enhance or suppress sensory representations in the
extrastriate visual pathways according to their momentary
relevance (18, 19). In an alternative formulation, Crick (20) has
proposed that the control circuitry for spatial attention may act
via the reticularyperigeniculate nuclei of the thalamus to
selectively modulate thalamic input to the cortex. If such a
mechanism exerted control over the transmission of visual
signals in the geniculo-striate projection, it would be expected
that short-latency activity in primary visual cortex would be
modulated during appropriate attentional tasks.
Mechanisms of Spatial Attention. ERP data have been very
informative about the time course of visual processing in
humans and its modulation by spatial attention. The visual
ERP consists of several characteristic voltage deflections
beginning about 50 ms after stimulus onset that have been
labeled the C1 (50–90 ms), P1 (80–130 ms), and N1 (140–200
ms) components (Fig. 1). Directing attention to the location of
a stimulus typically results in an amplitude enhancement of the
P1 and multiple N1 components evoked by that stimulus with
little or no change in component latencies or scalp distributions (reviewed in refs. 8, 21, and 22). This suggests that spatial
attention exerts a gain control or selective amplification of
sensory information flow in the visual pathways between 80
and 200 ms after stimulus onset (14, 23). Such an amplification
mechanism would presumably give inputs from attended locations an improved signalynoise ratio so that more information can be extracted from relevant portions of the visual field.
This pattern of P1yN1 amplitude enhancement seems to be
a general characteristic of the spatial focusing of attention
across a variety of task situations. Stimuli at attended locations
elicit larger P1yN1 components than at unattended locations
whether the stimuli are presented continuously in randomized
sequences, as in Fig. 1, or cued on each trial as to the most
probable location of the subsequent target stimulus. In such
trial-by-trial cueing tasks, enhanced P1yN1 amplitudes to
target stimuli at valid (precued) locations have been associated
with speeded reaction times and improved detectability of
target signals (22, 24–26), which lends support to the hypothesis that these ERP amplitude modulations reflect sensory
information that is used for perceptual judgements. Similar
P1yN1 modulations have been found in visual search tasks in
which subjects had to deploy focal attention to identify the
shape of a target defined by its color in an array (27, 28). In
contrast, the earlier C1 component has been found to remain
invariant as a function of spatial attention (29–32).
To investigate the anatomical level(s) of the visual pathways
at which spatial attention affects processing, several studies
have attempted to localize the respective neural generators of
the C1 and P1 components. The C1 has a midline occipitoparietal scalp distribution that is well accounted for by a
dipolar source in primary visual (striate) cortex (32). Moreover, the C1 inverts in polarity as a function of stimulus
elevation in the visual field in a way that is consistent with the
mapping of the retina onto the upper and lower banks of the
calcarine cortex (29, 33). In contrast, the P1 component
reportedly does not invert in polarity with stimulus position,
and dipole modeling of its neural generators has indicated
sources in the ventral–lateral extrastriate cortex of the occipital lobe (30, 32). Thus, spatial attention does not seem to
influence visual processing in the striate cortex itself (indexed
by C1) but rather acts to produce an amplification of stimulusevoked activity in extrastriate cortex beginning at about 80 ms
poststimulus (indexed by P1).
To verify the extrastriate localization of this early spatial
attention effect, several recent studies have combined ERP
recordings with PET obtained during performance of the same
task and with the same subjects. In the first such experiment
by Heinze and colleagues (7), subjects were required to direct
their attention to the right or left half of bilateral symbol arrays
that were flashed in rapid sequence, while maintaining central
fixation (Fig. 2). Separate runs of attend-left, attend-right, and
passive trials were carried out in two separate sessions, the first
with ERP recordings from 30 scalp channels and the second
with PET following intravenous injection of a positron emitting tracer (H2O15). In the ERP recording session, an enlarged
P1 component was observed over the hemisphere contralateral
to the attended visual field (Fig. 2A), in line with previous
studies (34). Dipole modeling of the P1 attention effect was
carried out on the subtracted attend-left minus attend-right
scalp distributions to eliminate any nonspecific arousal or
motivational effects. A pair of dipolar sources in the ventral
extrastriate cortex of the fusiform gyrus provided an excellent
fit to the P1 attention effect, accounting for 98% of the
variance in the scalp voltage distribution within the P1 latency
range (Fig. 2B).
In the PET session, significant blood-flow changes were
observed in the posterior fusiform gyrus at a location that
corresponded closely to that of the calculated P1 dipole (Fig.
2C). To further support the proposal that the enlarged contralateral P1 and the enhanced contralateral blood flow reflected the same pattern of attention-related neural activity, it
was shown that dipolar sources calculated across the ERP
waveform were situated closest to the locus of PET activation
precisely at the peak of the P1 wave (110–130 ms). In addition,
when dipoles were placed (seeded) at the fusiform site of PET
activation, they accounted for over 96% of P1’s scalp voltage
distribution. Thus, the combined ERP and PET evidence was
consistent with the hypothesis that neural activity in the
Grand average visual ERPs over 17 subjects recorded from
four scalp sites in response to small circular checkerboard stimuli in a
spatial attention task. Stimuli were flashed in a rapid, randomized
sequence to the left and right visual fields while subjects attended to
one visual field at a time. ERPs shown are in response to left field
flashes, with waveforms superimposed for attend-left (solid lines) and
attend-right (dotted lines) conditions. Note that attending to the
stimulus location produces an increased amplitude of the P1 components (80–130 ms) over the contra- and ipsilateral occipital scalp, as
well as of multiple N1 components (120–200 ms) over frontal (front),
parietal (par), and occipital (occ) scalp areas. In contrast, the earlier
C1 component (50–90 ms), which was localized to primary visual
cortex, did not change as a function of attention. Abscissa, time base
in milliseconds. Reproduced with permission from Clark and Hillyard
(32) .
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 
posterior fusiform gyrus was modulated by spatial attention
over the latency range 90–130 ms.
A recent study by Mangun and colleagues (35) extended
these findings by comparing ERP and PET activations during
two conditions of lateralized spatial attention, the first identical to the symbol-matching task of Heinze et al. (7) and the
second a simple dot detection task. The ERP recordings
showed the typically enhanced contralateral P1 wave, but in
this study two foci of PET activation were observed in the
hemisphere contralateral to the attended visual field, one in
the posterior fusiform gyrus as in the Heinze et al. study and
a second in ventral–lateral extrastriate cortex of the middle
occipital gyrus. It was found that P1 amplitude variations as a
function of task difficulty covaried more closely with the
fusiform PET activation, further supporting the hypothesis
that this extrastriate region is the principal site of the neural
activity indexed by the P1 attention effect.
Both the Heinze et al. and Mangun et al. studies presented
the stimuli to be attended in the upper visual fields, above the
horizontal meridian. A different pattern of results was found
by Woldorff et al. (36) when bilateral stimuli were presented
to the lower visual fields in a combined ERPyPET study of
spatial attention. In this case, it was found that the principal
locus of PET activation was in more dorsal occipital areas
corresponding to Brodmann’s areas 18y19 of the hemisphere
contralateral to the attended field. A weaker zone of PET
activation was also seen in the fusiform gyrus, but dipole
modeling of the P1 attention effect indicated a neural generator situated in the dorsal occipital area where PET activation
was maximal. Woldorff et al. (36) suggested that the results of
these different studies could be reconciled if spatial attention
primarily affected neural activity in retinotopically organized
visual cortical areas (such as V2, V3yVP, V4) within which the
upper and lower field representations would be situated in
ventral and dorsal occipital cortex, respectively. In this case,
the fusiform gyrus activation that was seen with both upper
and lower field stimuli may represent additional modulation of
higher order areas of the ventral visual-processing stream.
In none of these combined PETyERP studies was there any
evidence for an influence of attention on visual processing in
the primary visual cortex (V1). Further support for this finding
comes from a study by Gratton (37) of spatial attention using
a novel optical imaging technique that reveals localized patterns of cortical neuronal activity by passing near-infrared light
through the head to an array of detectors over the scalp. This
method offers better time resolution than either PET or fMRI
so that the time course of optical input modulation following
each stimulus could be determined in a design where flashed
shapes were presented to the left and right visual fields in
random order. Separate zones of optical signal modulation
were observed in medial and lateral occipital cortex (corresponding to areas 17 and 19, respectively) in the hemisphere
contralateral to stimulus presentation, but only the signals
from extrastriate cortex varied as a function of spatial attention
to the right or left field. The time course of this extrastriate
attention effect corresponded approximately to that of the P1
effect seen in ERP studies (onset before 100 ms), and its
localization in area 19 corresponded closely to that of the P1
dipole modeled by Clark and Hillyard (32).
The reported absence of attentional modulation of neural
activity in area V1 as registered by all these techniques offers
no support for the idea that geniculo-striate transmission may
be under the control of spatial attention (20). However, there
is a preliminary report (38) of increased activation shown by
fMRI in area V1 contralateral to the attended visual field when
a target shape had to be discriminated from surrounding
distractors. If this effect proves reliable, it will be necessary to
verify its timing with ERP or magnetic recordings to determine
whether the initial afferent input into V1 is affected by
attention or whether the observed blood-flow changes are a
consequence of delayed feedback from higher visual areas
projecting back to V1. Recent observations of spatially selective attention effects on single neuron firing rates in monkey
area V1 (39) suggest that further efforts to identify similar
effects in humans would be worthwhile.
Although no clear evidence has yet been presented for early
modulation of V1 activity with attention in humans, the short
latency of the extrastriate P1 effect (onset at 70–80 ms)
suggests that spatial attention first affects visual processing at
a level not far above V1 and perhaps as early as V2 (36). Thus,
the initial stimulus selectionyamplification takes place in pos-
(A) ERP waveforms and associated scalp current distributions of the P1 component (80–130 ms) in a spatial attention task (7)
in which subjects attended to either the right or left halves of flashed
symbol arrays (Top). Spatial attention increased the P1 amplitude over
the occipital scalp contralateral to the attended hemifield in relation
to a neutral (passive) condition. (B) Comparison of PET activation foci
during the same task (in a separate session) with the positions of model
dipoles calculated (using BESA) to best fit the P1 attention effect. To
eliminate any effects of general arousal, difference images were
formed by subtracting the attend-right from the attend-left condition.
The dipoles in the right and left hemispheres have opposite polarities
due to their being calculated from the subtracted (attend-left minus
attend-right) scalp distributions. (C) Anatomical localizations of the
best-fit P1 dipole and center of PET activation (red circle) mapped
onto brain sections from the Talairach and Tournoux (44) atlas. For
simplicity, only right hemisphere data are shown. Dashed circle
surrounding dipole indicates the zone where changes in dipole position
had minimal (,2%) effects on residual model variance. The center of
PET activation in the posterior fusiform gyrus is included within the
range of error of the P1 dipole.
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 
terior extrastriate cortex at a level where only elementary
visual features and patterns are represented and prior to
anterior temporal lobe areas where full recognition occurs (18,
40). These spatio-temporal properties of the P1 attention
effect provide strong evidence in favor of “early selection”
theories of attention, which specify that sensory inputs are
selectively modulated during sensoryyperceptual processing
prior to stimulus identification (e.g., refs. 10 and 41). Further
support for an early selection mechanism comes from observations that P1 amplitudes are enhanced for all stimuli occurring at an attended location, whether those stimuli are the
relevant events being discriminated or task-irrelevant probes
(27, 34). Thus, at the earliest stage, spatial attention seems to
modulate inputs solely according to their location without
regard to their identity.
The N1 component is generally enhanced along with the P1
to attended-location stimuli (see Fig. 1), but much less is
known about its neural origins. The N1 consists of a complex
of at least three separate subcomponents that are associated
with current flows over frontal (peaking at 140 ms), parietal
(150–160 ms), and occipital (170–190) scalp areas (32), but a
detailed analysis of the underlying sources is lacking. Nonetheless, some observed dissociations between the P1 and N1
attention effects suggest that they reflect different aspects of
spatial attention (reviewed in ref. 28). In particular, in a task
where subjects were cued by an arrow or arrows as to the
location(s) where a near-threshold target might occur, the
ERP to a valid (precued) target stimulus showed an enlarged
occipital N1 component relative to a neutral cue condition (all
locations precued), whereas an invalid target elicited a smaller
P1 than did the neutrally cued target (25). In other words, the
“costs” of spatial cueing were associated with a suppression of
inputs from unattended locations at an early (80–130 ms)
stage, whereas the “benefits” of cueing were associated with an
enhancement of signals arising from attended locations at a
later stage (130–180 ms). This ERP evidence thus suggests that
spatial attention involves two qualitatively different mechanisms for suppression and enhancement, respectively, which
act at different levels of the visual pathways.
The Timing of Feature Selections. In marked contrast with
spatial attention, the selection of stimuli on the basis of
nonspatial features such as color or shape is not associated with
a modulation of the evoked P1 and N1 components. Instead,
stimuli having relevant or attended features elicit a broad
negative ERP termed the “selection negativity” (SN), which
begins between 140 and 180 ms poststimulus and persists for
another 200 ms or more (42). The SN is best observed in
difference potentials (e.g., Fig. 3A) in which the ERP elicited
by a stimulus with the unattended feature value (e.g., a blue
stimulus when red is attended) is subtracted from the ERP
elicited by the same stimulus when it has the relevant value of
the attended feature (e.g., a blue stimulus when blue is
attended). The onset of the SN waveform thus provides a
high-resolution measure of the time at which a particular
feature or feature conjunction is discriminated and selectively
processed according to its task relevance. In addition, localizing the neural source(s) of the SN can provide information
about the specific brain areas that participate in attentional
selection of different stimulus features.
In a recent study (43), we attempted to determine the timing
and anatomical sources of the SN and associated ERP components during attention to color. In different experimental
conditions, subjects attended to either red or blue checkerboards that were randomly intermixed in rapidly presented
sequences at fixation. The task was to detect an occasional
slight dimming of the attended-color checkerboards (targets).
ERP components associated with color-selective attention
were isolated in difference waves formed by subtracting the
ERP elicited by a given colored stimulus when it was not
attended from the ERP elicited by the same stimulus when it
was attended (Fig. 3A). The difference waves included a
prominent SN elicited during the interval 160–350 ms after
stimulus onset, which had a scalp distribution narrowly focused
over posterior visual cortex (Fig. 3B). A smaller “selection
positivity” (SP) appeared during this same interval over the
anterior scalp. The earliest ERP elicited during color attention, however, was a small positive deflection that peaked at
130 ms (PD130), with maximum amplitude over occipital–
parietal cortex.
Dipole modeling using the BESA algorithm (3) was used to
identify sources of the successive components in the colorattention difference waves. Symmetrical pairs of dipoles that
provided the best fit to the ERP scalp distributions were
calculated (Fig. 4A) and subsequently coregistered onto corresponding MRI images to evaluate their anatomical origins
(Fig. 4B). The initial PD130 wave was well accounted for by a
generator in dorsal–lateral occipital cortex (dipoles 1 and 2),
whereas the major SN deflection onsetting at 160 ms was
associated with sources in ventral occipital cortex near the
collateral sulcus (dipoles 3 and 4). Subsequent shifts in SN
topography were linked to sources in premotor cortex (dipoles
5 and 6, onsetting at 190 ms) and more anterior occipitotemporal regions of the fusiform gyrus (dipoles 7 and 8,
onsetting at 240 ms). The locations of these dipoles were
transformed into standard coordinates of the Talairach and
Tournoux (44) atlas and were compared with the cortical areas
previously identified in blood-flow neuroimaging studies as
being involved in color-selective processing (Fig. 4C). Each of
(A) Grand average ERP difference waves in a color task
(43) in which red and blue flashed checkerboards were presented in a
rapid, randomized sequence at the center of the screen. Stimulus
durations were 100 ms, and stimulus onset asynchronies ranged from
150 to 450 ms. Either the red or blue checks were attended on separate
runs. Difference waves were formed by subtracting ERPs to the
unattended color from those to the attended color, collapsed over red
and blue stimuli. Attention-related components include a posterior
selection negativity (SN), an anterior selection positivity (SP), and an
early positive difference (PD130). (B) Scalp voltage distributions of
attention-related ERP difference components at different latency
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 
the dipole locations corresponded closely to brain areas that
have been activated during color processing in PET or fMRI
studies, thus providing converging evidence for the validity of
the inverse source calculations.
Taken together, this evidence from ERP and blood-flow
neuroimaging studies indicates that an initial selection for
color takes place in dorsal occipital cortex starting at around
100 ms, followed by a more pronounced selective processing of
the attended-color stimuli in the posterior fusiform gyrusy
collateral sulcus starting at around 160 ms. This cortical region
around the collateral sulcus has shown color-specific activation
in many previous neuroimaging studies (Fig. 4C) and probably
corresponds to area V4 identified in monkey studies as the
major cortical center for coding and analysis of color information (16). Both ERP and blood-flow neuroimaging data
thus indicate that attention to color enhances neuronal activity
in this region (17, 33). Subsequent ERP components seem to
reflect motor preparatory activity in premotor cortex (starting
at 190 ms) and higher level color-selective processing along the
ventral occipito-temporal pathway (starting at 240 ms). Thus,
the juxtaposition of ERP and neuroimaging data makes it
possible to trace the time course of stimulus-selective processing through successive stages of the visual pathways.
A prominent SN is also generated when stimuli are selected
on the basis of other nonspatial features such as spatial
frequency (45, 46), orientation (47, 48), direction of motion
(31), and shape (49). The onset latencies of these SNs vary over
the range of 125–200 ms, depending on the relative discriminability of the attended and unattended features. Differences
in scalp topography have been reported for SNs associated
with different types of feature selections (31, 50), which
indicates that separate cortical areas are engaged in processing
the task-relevant cues.
Multifeature Processing and Selection Hierarchies. Object
identification requires that the various features of a stimulus be
combined into a single percept. The question of how these
features, probably represented in different cortical areas,
become unified in a single representation has been termed the
“binding problem” (51). A vigorously debated issue in the
attentional literature is whether selection for location plays a
special role relative to selection of other stimulus features.
Treisman’s Feature Integration Theory, for example, states
that spatial selection is a prerequisite for the correct binding
of visual features into objects (51–53). An alternative view,
however, suggests that all stimulus properties, including spatial
location, are encoded in parallel across the visual field and
processed to the level of object identification (54, 55).
ERPs can be used to examine the relationship between
spatial and feature selection, as they provide a real-time index
of the selective operations involved in the analysis of an
object’s properties. In a recent experiment by Anllo-Vento and
Hillyard (31), pairs of adjacent colored squares were flashed
sequentially to produce a perception of movement. These pairs
were presented either to the left or right visual field in a rapid
randomized sequence (Fig. 5A). Subjects were asked to attend
selectively to stimuli in one visual field and to detect slower
moving targets that contained the critical value of the attended
feature, be it color or movement direction. Separate runs were
carried out for selection by color (red versus blue) or by
movement direction (horizontal versus vertical). Thus, to
perform the task correctly, subjects needed to discriminate (i)
the location to be attended (left or right visual field), (ii) the
relevant stimulus feature (color or direction of motion), and
(iii) the speed of movement of the occasional targets (fast or
Selection of the attended spatial location was reflected in an
amplitude modulation of the P1 and N1 components, starting
at approximately 80 ms poststimulus (Fig. 5B); this is another
example of the attentional amplification associated with spatial
selection discussed above. In contrast, selection of the relevant
feature (color or direction of motion) was indexed by a broad
SN that extended between 150 and 300 ms, followed by a later
positivity. Significantly, the SN was only elicited by stimuli
having the attended feature at the attended location (thick
tracings) and not at the unattended location (thin tracings). In
other words, the feature (color or movement direction) selection was strongly contingent upon the prior spatial selection.
Finally, the discrimination of the infrequent change in speed
of movement (i.e., the target) requiring a manual response was
associated with an N2 and late positive component (LPC)
beginning between 250 and 300 ms after stimulus onset. It is
important to note that all of these ERP measures of spatial and
feature-selective processing preceded the motor response
times by several hundred milliseconds. The timing and waveform of these ERP indices were very similar whether subjects
(A) Set of dipoles (Right) and source waveforms (Left) in
the best-fit BESA model of the attention-related ERP difference
components shown in Fig. 3. Dipolar sources were constrained to be
mirror-symmetrical in location across the hemispheres (left hemisphere, solid line; right hemisphere, dashed line). Note that dipoles 1
and 2 provided a best fit to the PD130 component, with activity
beginning at 100 ms. The principal SN dipoles (3 and 4) and source
waveforms are shown in red. The remaining dipoles account for
subsequent, overlapping phases of the SN–SP complex, with onset
times as indicated for each dipole pair. (B) Examples of how calculated
dipole locations were coregistered with anatomical MRI sections. In
this instance, dipoles 3 and 4 were localized to the fusiform gyrus of
the occipital cortex. (C) Projections of mean dipole positions in the
coordinate system of the Talairach and Tournoux (44) atlas, superimposed upon coordinates of PET or fMRI activations in previous
studies of color-selective processing [solid squares, Corbetta et al. (17);
outlined squares, Clark et al. (56); solid circles, Gulyas et al. (57); solid
triangles, Martin et al. (58); outlined circles, Zeki et al. (59); outlined
triangles, Sakai et al. (60)]. Activations shown in green lie close to
dipoles 1 and 2; in red, to dipoles 3 and 4; in orange, to dipoles 5 and
6; and, in blue, to dipoles 7 and 8.
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 
were attending to color, a stimulus property mediated by the
ventral visual pathway, or direction of motion, a feature
presumably processed by the dorsal visual pathway. However,
differences in scalp distribution between the SNs associated
with color and motion selection were indicative of separate
cortical origins.
These results suggest that the registration and processing of
an object’s features in both the ventral and dorsal pathways can
be strongly gated by spatial attention. More specifically, the
selective processing of nonspatial features reflected in the SN,
N2, and LPC components is strongly dependent upon the prior
selection for location, reflected in the P1 and N1 components.
This hierarchical relationship supports early selection theories
that propose attentional control over perceptual processing
and seems to conflict with the late selection view that different
stimulus attributes are processed in parallel at all locations (54,
55). Moreover, the different ERP configurations associated
with spatial and nonspatial selections provide strong evidence
that attention to location operates via qualitatively different
mechanisms from attention to other stimulus features. In sum,
it seems that attention to location is indeed “special” (52, 53)
and plays a unique role in feature integration.
CONCLUSION
The studies reviewed above illustrate how ERP and neuroimaging data can be combined to reveal both the spatial and
temporal properties of neural activity during selective attention. As we have noted, such physiological data can supply
converging operations for testing alternative psychological
models of attention derived from behavioral studies (21).
Information about the physiological bases of attention in
humans also provides an essential link with the rapidly expanding literature on animal studies of attention (16, 18, 19).
By comparing the spatio-temporal configurations of neural
activity in homologous brain regions during the performance
of comparable tasks across species, the validity of animal
models of human attentional processes can be properly established. A close interplay between human and animal investigations will be required to learn how stimulus information is
encoded, transformed, and selectively processed by the brain’s
attentional systems.
We thank our current and former colleagues who have made
essential contributions to the work reported here: Vince Clark, Hajo
Heinze, Hermann Hinrichs, Steve Luck, Ron Mangun, Tom Mu¨nte,
and Marty Woldorff. Jon Hansen, Matt Marlow, Carlos Nava, and
Theresa Rubin provided valuable technical assistance. This research
was supported by Office of Naval Research Grant N00014-93-I-0942,
National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH25594, National Institutes of Health Grant NS 17778, and the San Diego McDonnell-Pew
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience.
Fox, P. T. & Woldorff, M. G. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 4,
Picton, T. W., Lins, O. G. & Scherg, M. in Handbook of
Neurophysiology, eds. Boller, F. & Grafman, J. (Elsevier Science,
Amsterdam), Vol. 9, pp. 429–499.
Scherg, M. in Auditory Evoked Magnetic Fields and Potentials. Advanced Audiology, eds. Grandori, F., Hoke, M. &
Romani, G. L. (Karger, Basel), Vol. 6, pp. 40–69.
Gevins, A., Leong, H., Smith, M. E., Le, J. & Du, R. Trends
Neurosci. 18, 429–436.
Dale, A. M. & Sereno, M. I. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 5, 162–176.
Cuffin, B. N. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 43, 299–303.
Heinze, H. J., Mangun, G. R., Burchert, W., Hinrichs, H., Scholz,
M., Mu¨nte, T. F., Goes, A., Scherg, M., Johannes, S., Hundeshagen, H., Gazzaniga, M. S. & Hillyard, S. A. Nature 372,
Mangun, G. R., Hopfinger, J. B. & Heinze, H. J. Behavioral Research Methods Instrumentation and Computers, in press.
Rugg, M. D. & Coles, G. H. Electrophysiology of Mind:
Event-Related Brain Potentials and Cognition (Oxford University
Press, Oxford).
Naatanen, R. Attention and Brain Function (Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ).
Mesulam, M. M. Ann. Neurol. 28, 597–613.
Nobre, A. C., Sebestyen, G. N., Gitelman, D. R., Mesulam,
M. M., Frackowiak, R. S. J. & Frith, C. D. Brain 120,
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F. M., Shulman, G. L. & Petersen, S. E.
 J. Neurosci. 13, 1202–1226.
(A) Sample stimuli from study by Anllo-Vento and Hillyard
(31). Stimuli were presented to the left and the right visual field (LVF
and RVF, respectively) in random order. Each stimulus consisted of
a pair of briefly flashed adjacent squares separated by a short time
interval (50 or 150 ms), which was perceived as a square moving in the
direction of the arrow. Infrequent target pairs (150-ms separation)
seem to move more slowly than standard pairs (50-ms separation).
Stimulus color (red, blue), field of presentation (left, right) and
movement direction (vertical, horizontal) were all randomized. (B)
Subtracted ERP difference waves reflecting the hierarchical selection
of location, feature, and target under attend-color (Left) and attendmotion (Right) conditions. Selection of the relevant visual field
location (Top) was reflected in the difference wave formed by subtracting the ERP to the unattended field from the ERP to the attended
field; difference ERPs shown are from contralateral occipito-temporal
sites and show attentional modulation of the P1 and N1 components
starting at 80 ms. Selection by feature (Middle) was indexed by the SN
component beginning at about 150 ms and was seen in the difference
waves formed by subtracting the ERP to the unattended feature value
from the ERP to the attended feature value for stimuli at the attended
location (thick line), but not at the unattended location (thin line).
Selection of targets (movement speed) was reflected in N2 and LPC
components beginning at 250–300 ms and was apparent in the
difference waves formed by subtracting the ERPs to the nontarget
(fast-moving) stimuli from the target (slow-moving) stimuli presented
at the attended location and having the attended feature value. Mean
motor reaction time (RT) is shown on time base for each condition.
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 
Posner, M. I. & Dehaene, S. Trends Neurosci. 17, 75–79.
LaBerge, D. in The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. Gazzaniga, M. S. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), pp. 649–661.
Desimone, R., Wessinger, M., Thomas, L. & Schneider, W.
 Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 55, 963–971.
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F. M., Dobmeyer, S., Shulman, G. L. &
Petersen, S. E. J. Neurosci. 11, 2383–2402.
Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18,
Luck, S. J., Chelazzi, L., Hillyard, S. A. & Desimone, R. 
J. Neurophysiol. 77, 24–42.
Crick, F. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 4586–4590.
Hillyard, S. A., Mangun, G. R., Woldorff, M. G. & Luck, S. J.
 in The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. Gazzaniga, M. S. (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA), pp. 665–681.
Mangun, G. R. Psychophysiology 32, 4–18.
Hillyard, S. A. & Mangun, G. R. in Current Trends in
Event-Related Potential Research, eds. Johnson, R., Jr., Rohrbaugh, J. W. & Parasuraman, R. (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam),
pp. 61–67.
Mangun, G. R. & Hillyard, S. A. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum.
Percept. Perform. 17, 1057–1074.
Luck, S. J., Hillyard, S. A., Mangun, G. R. & Gazzaniga, M. S.
 J. Cognit. Neurosci. 6, 84–91.
Anllo-Vento, L. Int. J. Neurosci. 80, 353–370.
Luck, S. J., Fan, S. & Hillyard, S. A. J. Cognit. Neurosci.
5, 188–195.
Luck, S. J. & Hillyard, S. A. Int. J. Neurosci. 80, 281–297.
Mangun, G. R., Hillyard, S. A. & Luck, S. J. in Attention
and Performance XIV, eds. Meyer, D. & Kornblum, S. (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA), pp. 219–243.
Gomez, C. M., Clark, V. P., Luck, S. J., Fan, S. & Hillyard, S. A.
 Brain Topogr. 7, 41–51.
Anllo-Vento, L. & Hillyard, S. A. Percept. Psychophys. 58,
Clark, V. P. & Hillyard, S. A. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 8,
Clark, V. P., Fan, S. & Hillyard, S. A. Hum. Brain Mapp.
2, 170–187.
Heinze, H. J., Luck, S. J., Mangun, G. R. & Hillyard, S. A. 
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 75, 511–527.
Mangun, G. R., Hopfinger, J., Kussmaul, C. L., Fletcher, E. &
Heinze, H. J. Hum. Brain Mapp. 5, 273–279.
Woldorff, M. G., Fox, P. T., Matzke, M., Lancaster, J. L.,
Veeraswamy, S., Zamarripa, F., Seabolt, M., Glass, T., Gao, J. H.,
Martin, C. C. & Jerabek, P. Hum. Brain Mapp. 5, 280–286.
Gratton, G. NeuroReport 8, 1749–1753.
Worden, M. & Schneider, W. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 22,
Motter, B. C. J. Neurophysiol. 70, 909–919.
Ungerleider, L. G. & Haxby, J. V. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
4, 157–165.
Reinitz, M. T. Percept. Psychophys. 47, 497–505.
Harter, M. R. & Aine, C. J. in Varieties of Attention, eds.
Parasuraman, R. & Davies, D. R. (Academic Press, London), pp.
Anllo-Vento, L., Luck, S. J. & Hillyard, S. A. Hum. Brain Mapp.,
submitted for publication.
Talairach, J. & Tournoux, P. Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of
the Human Brain (Thieme, New York).
Harter, M. R. & Previc, F. H. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 45, 628–640.
Zani, A. & Proverbio, A. M. J. Psychophysiol. 11, 21–32.
Previc, F. H. & Harter, M. F. Percept. Psychophys. 32,
Kenemans, J. L., Kok, A. & Smulders, F. T. Y. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 88, 51–63.
Smid, H., Mulder, G., Mulder, L. & Brands, G. J. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percep. Perform. 18, 1101–1119.
Martinez, A., Anllo-Vento, L. & Hillyard, S. A. Soc.
Neurosci. Abstr. 23, 1585.
Treisman, A. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 6, 171–178.
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. Cognit. Psychol. 12, 97–136.
Treisman, A. in Attention: Selection, Awareness, and
Control: A Tribute to Donald Broadbent, eds. Baddeley, A. D. &
Weiskrantz, L. (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford), pp. 5–35.
Duncan, J. & Humphreys, G. W. Psychol. Rev. 96,
Duncan, J. & Humphreys, G. W. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum.
Percept. Perform. 18, 578–588.
Clark, V. P., Parasuraman, R., Keil, K., Maisog, J. M., Karni, A.,
Ungerleider, L. G. & Haxby, J. V. Hum. Brain Mapp. 1,
Suppl., 32.
Gulyas, B., Heywood, C. A., Popplewell, D. A., Roland, P. E. &
Cowey, A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 9965–9969.
Martin, A., Haxby, J. V., Lalonde, F. M., Wiggs, C. L. &
Ungerleider, L. G. Science 270, 102–105.
Zeki, S., Watson, J. D. G., Lueck, C. J., Friston, K. J., Kennard,
C. & Frackowiak, R. S. J. J. Neurosci. 11, 641–649.
Sakai, K., Watanabe, E., Onodera, Y., Uchida, I., Kato, H.,
Yamamoto, E., Koizumi, H. & Miyashita, Y. Proc. R. Soc.
London B 261, 89–98.
Colloquium Paper: Hillyard and Anllo-Vento
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95