Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 1747–1759
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Ranking Sentences for Extractive Summarization
with Reinforcement Learning
Shashi Narayan
Shay B. Cohen
Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB
 , {scohen,mlap}@inf.ed.ac.uk
Single document summarization is the task
of producing a shorter version of a document while preserving its principal information content. In this paper we conceptualize
extractive summarization as a sentence ranking task and propose a novel training algorithm
which globally optimizes the ROUGE evaluation metric through a reinforcement learning
objective. We use our algorithm to train a neural summarization model on the CNN and DailyMail datasets and demonstrate experimentally that it outperforms state-of-the-art extractive and abstractive systems when evaluated
automatically and by humans.1
Introduction
Automatic summarization has enjoyed wide popularity in natural language processing due to its potential for various information access applications.
Examples include tools which aid users navigate
and digest web content (e.g., news, social media,
product reviews), question answering, and personalized recommendation engines. Single document
summarization — the task of producing a shorter
version of a document while preserving its information content — is perhaps the most basic of
summarization tasks that have been identiﬁed over
the years .
Modern approaches to single document summarization are data-driven, taking advantage of the
success of neural network architectures and their
ability to learn continuous features without recourse to preprocessing tools or linguistic annotations. Abstractive summarization involves various
text rewriting operations (e.g., substitution, deletion, reordering) and has been recently framed as
a sequence-to-sequence problem . Central in most approaches is an encoder-decoder architecture modeled by recurrent neural networks. The encoder
reads the source sequence into a list of continuousspace representations from which the decoder generates the target sequence. An attention mechanism is often used to locate the region of focus during decoding.
Extractive systems create a summary by identifying (and subsequently concatenating) the most
important sentences in a document.
A few recent approaches conceptualize extractive summarization as a sequence labeling task in which each
label speciﬁes whether each document sentence
should be included in the summary. Existing models rely on recurrent neural networks to derive a
meaning representation of the document which is
then used to label each sentence, taking the previously labeled sentences into account.
models are typically trained using cross-entropy
loss in order to maximize the likelihood of the
ground-truth labels and do not necessarily learn
to rank sentences based on their importance due
to the absence of a ranking-based objective. Another discrepancy comes from the mismatch between the learning objective and the evaluation
criterion, namely ROUGE ,
which takes the entire summary into account.
In this paper we argue that cross-entropy training is not optimal for extractive summarization.
Models trained this way are prone to generating
verbose summaries with unnecessarily long sentences and redundant information. We propose to
overcome these difﬁculties by globally optimizing the ROUGE evaluation metric and learning to
rank sentences for summary generation through a
reinforcement learning objective. Similar to previous work , our neural summarization model consists of a hierarchical docu-
ment encoder and a hierarchical sentence extractor. During training, it combines the maximumlikelihood cross-entropy loss with rewards from
policy gradient reinforcement learning to directly
optimize the evaluation metric relevant for the
summarization task. We show that this global optimization framework renders extractive models
better at discriminating among sentences for the
ﬁnal summary; a sentence is ranked high for selection if it often occurs in high scoring summaries.
We report results on the CNN and DailyMail
news highlights datasets 
which have been recently used as testbeds for the
evaluation of neural summarization systems. Experimental results show that when evaluated automatically (in terms of ROUGE), our model outperforms state-of-the-art extractive and abstractive systems. We also conduct two human evaluations in order to assess (a) which type of summary participants prefer (we compare extractive
and abstractive systems) and (b) how much key
information from the document is preserved in the
summary (we ask participants to answer questions
pertaining to the content in the document by reading system summaries).
Both evaluations overwhelmingly show that human subjects ﬁnd our
summaries more informative and complete.
Our contributions in this work are three-fold: a
novel application of reinforcement learning to sentence ranking for extractive summarization; corroborated by analysis and empirical results showing that cross-entropy training is not well-suited
to the summarization task; and large scale user
studies following two evaluation paradigms which
demonstrate that state-of-the-art abstractive systems lag behind extractive ones when the latter are
globally trained.
Summarization as Sentence Ranking
Given a document D consisting of a sequence of
sentences (s1,s2,...,sn) , an extractive summarizer
aims to produce a summary S by selecting m sentences from D (where m < n). For each sentence
si ∈D, we predict a label yi ∈{0,1} (where 1
means that si should be included in the summary)
and assign a score p(yi|si,D,θ) quantifying si’s
relevance to the summary. The model learns to assign p(1|si,D,θ) > p(1|sj,D,θ) when sentence si
is more relevant than sj. Model parameters are denoted by θ. We estimate p(yi|si,D,θ) using a neural network model and assemble a summary S by
selecting m sentences with top p(1|si,D,θ) scores.
Our architecture resembles those previously
proposed in the literature .
The main components include a sentence encoder,
a document encoder, and a sentence extractor (see
the left block of Figure 1) which we describe in
more detail below.
Sentence Encoder
A core component of our
model is a convolutional sentence encoder which
encodes sentences into continuous representations.
In recent years, CNNs have proven useful for various NLP tasks because of their effectiveness in
identifying salient patterns in the input . In the case of summarization, CNNs can
identify named-entities and events that correlate
with the gold summary.
We use temporal narrow convolution by applying a kernel ﬁlter K of width h to a window of h
words in sentence s to produce a new feature. This
ﬁlter is applied to each possible window of words
in s to produce a feature map f ∈Rk−h+1 where k
is the sentence length. We then apply max-pooling
over time over the feature map f and take the maximum value as the feature corresponding to this
particular ﬁlter K. We use multiple kernels of various sizes and each kernel multiple times to construct the representation of a sentence. In Figure 1,
kernels of size 2 (red) and 4 (blue) are applied
three times each. Max-pooling over time yields
two feature lists f K2 and f K4 ∈R3. The ﬁnal sentence embeddings have six dimensions.
Document Encoder
The document encoder
composes a sequence of sentences to obtain a document representation. We use a recurrent neural
network with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
cells to avoid the vanishing gradient problem when
training long sequences . Given a document D consisting of
a sequence of sentences (s1,s2,...,sn), we follow
common practice and feed sentences in reverse order . This way
we make sure that the network also considers the
top sentences of the document which are particularly important for summarization .
Sentence Extractor
Our sentence extractor sequentially labels each sentence in a document
with 1 (relevant for the summary) or 0 (otherwise).
Update agent
[convolution][max pooling]
Sentence encoder
Document encoder
Sentence extractor
Figure 1: Extractive summarization model with reinforcement learning: a hierarchical encoder-decoder model
ranks sentences for their extract-worthiness and a candidate summary is assembled from the top ranked sentences;
the REWARD generator compares the candidate against the gold summary to give a reward which is used in the
REINFORCE algorithm to update the model.
It is implemented with another RNN with LSTM
cells and a softmax layer.
At time ti, it reads
sentence si and makes a binary prediction, conditioned on the document representation (obtained
from the document encoder) and the previously labeled sentences. This way, the sentence extractor
is able to identify locally and globally important
sentences within the document. We rank the sentences in a document D by p(yi = 1|si,D,θ), the
conﬁdence scores assigned by the softmax layer
of the sentence extractor.
We learn to rank sentences by training our
network in a reinforcement learning framework,
directly optimizing the ﬁnal evaluation metric,
namely ROUGE . Before we
describe our training algorithm, we elaborate on
why the maximum-likelihood cross-entropy objective could be deﬁcient for ranking sentences
for summarization (Section 3). Then, we deﬁne
our reinforcement learning objective in Section 4
and show that our new way of training allows the
model to better discriminate amongst sentences,
i.e., a sentence is ranked higher for selection if it
often occurs in high scoring summaries.
The Pitfalls of Cross-Entropy Loss
Previous work optimizes summarization models
by maximizing p(y|D,θ) = ∏n
i=1 p(yi|si,D,θ),
likelihood
ground-truth
y = (y1,y2,...,yn)
for sentences (s1,s2,...,sn),
given document D and model parameters θ. This
objective can be achieved by minimizing the
cross-entropy loss at each decoding step:
log p(yi|si,D,θ).
Cross-entropy training leads to two kinds of discrepancies in the model.
The ﬁrst discrepancy
comes from the disconnect between the task definition and the training objective.
in Equation (1) aims to maximize the likelihood
of the ground-truth labels, the model is (a) expected to rank sentences to generate a summary
and (b) evaluated using ROUGE at test time.
The second discrepancy comes from the reliance
on ground-truth labels.
Document collections
for training summarization systems do not naturally contain labels indicating which sentences
should be extracted. Instead, they are typically accompanied by abstractive summaries from which
sentence-level labels are extrapolated.
and Lapata follow Woodsend and Lapata
 in adopting a rule-based method which assigns labels to each sentence in the document individually based on their semantic correspondence
with the gold summary (see the fourth column
in Table 1). An alternative method identiﬁes the set of sentences which collectively gives
the highest ROUGE with respect to the gold summary. Sentences in this set are labeled with 1 and
0 otherwise (see the column 5 in Table 1).
Labeling sentences individually often generates
too many positive labels causing the model to
sent. pos.
CNN article
Sent-level
Individual
Collective
Collective
A debilitating, mosquito-borne virus called Chikungunya has made its way to
North Carolina, health ofﬁcials say.
(0,11,13) : 59.3
(0,13) : 57.5
(11,13) : 57.2
(0,1,13) : 57.1
(1,13) : 56.6
(3,11,13) : 55.0
(13) : 54.5
(0,3,13) : 54.2
(3,13) : 53.4
(1,3,13) : 52.9
(1,11,13) : 52.0
(0,9,13) : 51.3
(0,7,13) : 51.3
(0,12,13) : 51.0
(9,11,13) : 50.4
(1,9,13) : 50.1
(12,13) : 49.3
(7,11,13) : 47.8
(0,10,13) : 47.8
(11,12,13):47.7
(7,13) : 47.6
(9,13) : 47.5
(1,7,13) : 46.9
(3,7,13) : 46.0
(3,12,13) : 46.0
(3,9,13) : 45.9
(10,13) : 45.5
(4,11,13) : 45.3
It’s the state’s ﬁrst reported case of the virus.
The patient was likely infected in the Caribbean, according to the Forsyth County
Department of Public Health.
Chikungunya is primarily found in Africa, East Asia and the Caribbean islands,
but the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been watching the virus,+
for fear that it could take hold in the United States – much like West Nile did more
than a decade ago.
The virus, which can cause joint pain and arthritis-like symptoms, has been on
the U.S. public health radar for some time.
About 25 to 28 infected travelers bring it to the United States each year, said
Roger Nasci, chief of the CDC’s Arboviral Disease Branch in the Division of
Vector-Borne Diseases.
”We haven’t had any locally transmitted cases in the U.S. thus far,” Nasci said.
But a major outbreak in the Caribbean this year – with more than 100,000 cases
reported – has health ofﬁcials concerned.
Experts say American tourists are bringing Chikungunya back home, and it’s just
a matter of time before it starts to spread within the United States.
After all, the Caribbean is a popular one with American tourists, and summer is
fast approaching.
”So far this year we’ve recorded eight travel-associated cases, and seven of them
have come from countries in the Caribbean where we know the virus is being
transmitted,” Nasci said.
Other states have also reported cases of Chikungunya.
The Tennessee Department of Health said the state has had multiple cases of the
virus in people who have traveled to the Caribbean.
The virus is not deadly, but it can be painful, with symptoms lasting for weeks.
Those with weak immune systems, such as the elderly, are more likely to suffer
from the virus’ side effects than those who are healthier.
Story Highlights
• North Carolina reports ﬁrst case of mosquito-borne virus called Chikungunya
• Chikungunya is primarily found in
Africa, East Asia and the Caribbean islands
• Virus is not deadly, but it can be painful, with symptoms lasting for weeks
Table 1: An abridged CNN article (only ﬁrst 15 out of 31 sentences are shown) and its “story highlights”. The
latter are typically written by journalists to allow readers to quickly gather information on stories. Highlights are
often used as gold standard abstractive summaries in the summarization literature.
overﬁt the data. For example, the document in Table 1 has 12 positively labeled sentences out of 31
in total (only ﬁrst 10 are shown). Collective labels
present a better alternative since they only pertain to the few sentences deemed most suitable to
form the summary. However, a model trained with
cross-entropy loss on collective labels will under-
ﬁt the data as it will only maximize probabilities
p(1|si,D,θ) for sentences in this set (e.g., sentences {0,11,13} in Table 1) and ignore all other
sentences. We found that there are many candidate
summaries with high ROUGE scores which could
be considered during training.
summaries ranked according to the mean of
ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L F1 scores.
Interestingly, multiple top ranked summaries have
reasonably high ROUGE scores.
For example,
the average ROUGE for the summaries ranked
second (0,13), third (11,13), and fourth (0,1,13)
is 57.5%, 57.2%, and 57.1%, and all top 16 summaries have ROUGE scores more or equal to
50%. A few sentences are indicative of important
content and appear frequently in the summaries:
sentence 13 occurs in all summaries except one,
while sentence 0 appears in several summaries
too. Also note that summaries (11,13) and (1,13)
yield better ROUGE scores compared to longer
summaries, and may be as informative, yet more
concise, alternatives.
These discrepancies render the model less ef-
ﬁcient at ranking sentences for the summarization task. Instead of maximizing the likelihood of
the ground-truth labels, we could train the model
to predict the individual ROUGE score for each
sentence in the document and then select the top
m sentences with highest scores. But sentences
with individual ROUGE scores do not necessarily lead to a high scoring summary, e.g., they may
convey overlapping content and form verbose and
redundant summaries. For example, sentence 3,
despite having a high individual ROUGE score
(35.6%), does not occur in any of the top 5 summaries. We next explain how we address these issues using reinforcement learning.
Sentence Ranking with Reinforcement
Reinforcement learning 
has been proposed as a way of training sequence-
to-sequence generation models in order to directly
optimize the metric used at test time, e.g., BLEU
or ROUGE . We adapt reinforcement learning to our formulation of extractive summarization to rank sentences for summary
generation. We propose an objective function that
combines the maximum-likelihood cross-entropy
loss with rewards from policy gradient reinforcement learning to globally optimize ROUGE. Our
training algorithm allows to explore the space of
possible summaries, making our model more robust to unseen data. As a result, reinforcement
learning helps extractive summarization in two
ways: (a) it directly optimizes the evaluation metric instead of maximizing the likelihood of the
ground-truth labels and (b) it makes our model better at discriminating among sentences; a sentence
is ranked high for selection if it often occurs in
high scoring summaries.
Policy Learning
We cast the neural summarization model introduced in Figure 1 in the Reinforcement Learning
paradigm . Accordingly,
the model can be viewed as an “agent” which interacts with an “environment” consisting of documents. At ﬁrst, the agent is initialized randomly,
it reads document D and predicts a relevance
score for each sentence si ∈D using “policy”
p(yi|si,D,θ), where θ are model parameters. Once
the agent is done reading the document, a summary with labels ˆy is sampled out of the ranked
sentences. The agent is then given a “reward” r
commensurate with how well the extract resembles the gold-standard summary. Speciﬁcally, as
reward function we use mean F1 of ROUGE-1,
ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L. Unigram and bigram
overlap (ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2) are meant to
assess informativeness, whereas the longest common subsequence (ROUGE-L) is meant to assess
We update the agent using the REIN-
FORCE algorithm which aims to
minimize the negative expected reward:
L(θ) = −Eˆy∼pθ[r(ˆy)]
where, pθ stands for p(y|D,θ). REINFORCE is
based on the observation that the expected gradient
of a non-differentiable reward function (ROUGE,
in our case) can be computed as follows:
∇L(θ) = −Eˆy∼pθ[r(ˆy)∇log p(ˆy|D,θ)]
While MLE in Equation (1) aims to maximize
the likelihood of the training data, the objective
in Equation (2) learns to discriminate among sentences with respect to how often they occur in high
scoring summaries.
Training with High Probability Samples
Computing the expectation term in Equation (3) is
prohibitive, since there is a large number of possible extracts. In practice, we approximate the expected gradient using a single sample ˆy from pθ
for each training example in a batch:
∇L(θ) ≈−r(ˆy)∇log p(ˆy|D,θ)
∇log p( ˆyi|si,D,θ)
Presented in its original form, the REINFORCE
algorithm starts learning with a random policy
which can make model training challenging for
complex tasks like ours where a single document
can give rise to a very large number of candidate
summaries. We therefore limit the search space
of ˆy in Equation (4) to the set of largest probability samples ˆY. We approximate ˆY by the k
extracts which receive highest ROUGE scores.
More concretely, we assemble candidate summaries efﬁciently by ﬁrst selecting p sentences
from the document which on their own have high
ROUGE scores.
We then generate all possible
combinations of p sentences subject to maximum
length m and evaluate them against the gold summary. Summaries are ranked according to F1 by
taking the mean of ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and
ROUGE-L. ˆY contains these top k candidate summaries. During training, we sample ˆy from ˆY instead of p(ˆy|D,θ).
Ranzato et al. proposed an alternative to
REINFORCE called MIXER (Mixed Incremental
Cross-Entropy Reinforce) which ﬁrst pretrains the
model with the cross-entropy loss using ground
truth labels and then follows a curriculum learning
strategy to gradually teach
the model to produce stable predictions on its own.
In our experiments MIXER performed worse than
the model of Nallapati et al. just trained on
collective labels. We conjecture that this is due
to the unbounded nature of our ranking problem.
Recall that our model assigns relevance scores to
sentences rather than words. The space of sentential representations is vast and fairly unconstrained
compared to other prediction tasks operating with
ﬁxed vocabularies . Moreover, our
approximation of the gradient allows the model to
converge much faster to an optimal policy. Advantageously, we do not require an online reward estimator, we pre-compute ˆY, which leads to a signiﬁcant speedup during training compared to MIXER
 and related training schemes
 .
Experimental Setup
In this section we present our experimental
setup for assessing the performance of our
model which we call REFRESH as a shorthand
for REinFoRcement Learning-based Extractive
Summarization. We describe our datasets, discuss
implementation details, our evaluation protocol,
and the systems used for comparison.
Summarization Datasets
We evaluated our
models on the CNN and DailyMail news highlights datasets . We used the
standard splits of Hermann et al. for training, validation, and testing (90,266/1,220/1,093
documents for CNN and 196,961/12,148/10,397
for DailyMail). We did not anonymize entities or
lower case tokens. We followed previous studies
 in assuming that the “story highlights” associated with
each article are gold-standard abstractive summaries. During training we use these to generate
high scoring extracts and to estimate rewards for
them, but during testing, they are used as reference
summaries to evaluate our models.
Implementation Details
We generated extracts
by selecting three sentences (m = 3) for CNN articles and four sentences (m = 4) for DailyMail articles. These decisions were informed by the fact
that gold highlights in the CNN/DailyMail validation sets are 2.6/4.2 sentences long. For both
datasets, we estimated high-scoring extracts using 10 document sentences (p = 10) with highest
ROUGE scores. We tuned the initialization parameter k for ˆY on the validation set: we found
that our model performs best with k = 5 for the
CNN dataset and k = 15 for the DailyMail dataset.
We used the One Billion Word Benchmark corpus to train word embeddings
with the skip-gram model 
using context window size 6, negative sampling
size 10, and hierarchical softmax 1. Known words
were initialized with pre-trained embeddings of
size 200. Embeddings for unknown words were
initialized to zero, but estimated during training.
• A SkyWest Airlines ﬂight made an emergency landing
in Buffalo, New York, on Wednesday after a passenger
lost consciousness, ofﬁcials said.
• The passenger received medical attention before being
released, according to Marissa Snow, spokeswoman for
• She said the airliner expects to accommodate the 75
passengers on another aircraft to their original destination
– Hartford, Connecticut – later Wednesday afternoon.
See et al.
• Skywest Airlines ﬂight made an emergency landing in
Buffalo, New York, on Wednesday after a passenger lost
consciousness.
• She said the airliner expects to accommodate the 75
passengers on another aircraft to their original destination
– Hartford, Connecticut.
• A SkyWest Airlines ﬂight made an emergency landing
in Buffalo, New York, on Wednesday after a passenger
lost consciousness, ofﬁcials said.
• The passenger received medical attention before being
released, according to Marissa Snow, spokeswoman for
• The Federal Aviation Administration initially reported
a pressurization problem and said it would investigate.
• FAA backtracks on saying crew reported a pressurization problem
• One passenger lost consciousness
• The plane descended 28,000 feet in three minutes
Who backtracked on saying crew reported a pressurization problem? (FAA)
How many passengers lost consciousness in the incident?
How far did the plane descend in three minutes? and
REFRESH for a CNN (test) article.
GOLD presents
the human-authored summary; the bottom block shows
manually written questions using the gold summary
and their answers in parentheses.
Sentences were padded with zeros to a length
of 100. For the sentence encoder, we used a list
of kernels of widths 1 to 7, each with output channel size of 50 . The sentence
embedding size in our model was 350.
For the recurrent neural network component
in the document encoder and sentence extractor,
we used a single-layered LSTM network with
size 600. All input documents were padded with
zeros to a maximum document length of 120. We
performed minibatch cross-entropy training with a
batch size of 20 documents for 20 training epochs.
It took around 12 hrs on a single GPU to train.
After each epoch, we evaluated our model on
the validation set and chose the best performing
model for the test set. During training we used
the Adam optimizer with
initial learning rate 0.001. Our system is implemented in TensorFlow .
Evaluation
We evaluated summarization quality using F1 ROUGE . We
report unigram and bigram overlap (ROUGE-1
and ROUGE-2) as a means of assessing informativeness and the longest common subsequence
(ROUGE-L) as a means of assessing ﬂuency.2 We
compared REFRESH against a baseline which simply selects the ﬁrst m leading sentences from each
document (LEAD) and two neural models similar
to ours (see left block in Figure 1), both trained
with cross-entropy loss. Cheng and Lapata 
train on individual labels, while Nallapati et al.
 use collective labels. We also compared
our model against the abstractive systems of Chen
et al. , Nallapati et al. , See et al.
 , and Tan and Wan .3
In addition to ROUGE which can be misleading when used as the only means to assess the informativeness of summaries , we
also evaluated system output by eliciting human
judgments in two ways. In our ﬁrst experiment,
participants were presented with a news article
and summaries generated by three systems: the
LEAD baseline, abstracts from See et al. ,
and extracts from REFRESH.
We also included
the human-authored highlights.4 Participants read
the articles and were asked to rank the summaries
from best (1) to worst (4) in order of informativeness (does the summary capture important information in the article?) and ﬂuency (is the summary written in well-formed English?). We did
not allow any ties. We randomly selected 10 articles from the CNN test set and 10 from the DailyMail test set. The study was completed by ﬁve
participants, all native or proﬁcient English speakers. Each participant was presented with the 20
articles. The order of summaries to rank was randomized per article and the order of articles per
participant. Examples of summaries our subjects
ranked are shown in Figure 2.
Our second experiment assessed the degree to
which our model retains key information from the
document following a question-answering (QA)
paradigm which has been previously used to evaluate summary quality and text compression report ROUGE recall scores on
the DailyMail dataset only. We used their code (https://
github.com/cheng6076/NeuralSum) to produce ROUGE
F1 scores on both CNN and DailyMail datasets. For other
systems, all results are taken from their papers.
4We are grateful to Abigail See for providing us with the
output of her system. We did not include output from Nallapati et al. , Chen et al. , Nallapati et al. , or
Tan and Wan in our human evaluation study, as these
models are trained on a named-entity anonymized version of
the CNN and DailyMail datasets, and as result produce summaries which are not comparable to ours. We did not include
extracts from Cheng and Lapata either as they were
signiﬁcantly inferior to LEAD (see Table 2).
ris et al., 1992; Mani et al., 2002; Clarke and Lapata, 2010). We created a set of questions based
on the gold summary under the assumption that it
highlights the most important document content.
We then examined whether participants were able
to answer these questions by reading system summaries alone without access to the article. The
more questions a system can answer, the better it
is at summarizing the document as a whole.
We worked on the same 20 documents used in
our ﬁrst elicitation study. We wrote multiple factbased question-answer pairs for each gold summary without looking at the document. Questions
were formulated so as to not reveal answers to subsequent questions. We created 71 questions in total varying from two to six questions per gold summary. Example questions are given in Figure 2.
Participants read the summary and answered all
associated questions as best they could without access to the original document or the gold summary.
Subjects were shown summaries from three systems: the LEAD baseline, the abstractive system
of See et al. , and REFRESH. Five participants answered questions for each summary. We
used the same scoring mechanism from Clarke and
Lapata , i.e., a correct answer was marked
with a score of one, partially correct answers with
a score of 0.5, and zero otherwise.
score for a system is the average of all its question
Answers were elicited using Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing platform. We uploaded data in batches (one system at a time) on
Mechanical Turk to ensure that same participant
does not evaluate summaries from different systems on the same set of questions.
We report results using automatic metrics in Table 2.
The top part of the table compares RE-
FRESH against related extractive systems. The bottom part reports the performance of abstractive
systems. We present three variants of LEAD, one
is computed by ourselves and the other two are
reported in Nallapati et al. and See et al.
 . Note that they vary slightly due to differences in the preprocessing of the data. We report results on the CNN and DailyMail datasets
and their combination (CNN+DailyMail).
Cross-Entropy
Reinforcement
The results in Table 2 show that REFRESH is superior to our LEAD baseline and extractive systems across datasets and metrics. It outperforms
CNN+DailyMail
LEAD (ours)
LEAD∗ 
LEAD 
Cheng and Lapata 
Nallapati et al. ∗
Chen et al. ∗
Nallapati et al. ∗
See et al. 
Tan and Wan ∗
Table 2: Results on the CNN and DailyMail test sets. We report ROUGE-1 (R1), ROUGE-2 (R2), and ROUGE-L
(RL) F1 scores. Extractive systems are in the ﬁrst block and abstractive systems in the second. Table cells are ﬁlled
with — whenever results are not available. Models marked with ∗are not directly comparable to ours as they are
based on an anonymized version of the dataset.
the extractive system of Cheng and Lapata 
which is trained on individual labels. REFRESH
is not directly comparable with Nallapati et al.
 as they generate anonymized summaries.
Their system lags behind their LEAD baseline on
ROUGE-L on the CNN+DailyMail dataset (35.5%
vs 35.3%). Also note that their model is trained
on collective labels and has a signiﬁcant lead over
Cheng and Lapata . As discussed in Section 3 cross-entropy training on individual labels
tends to overgenerate positive labels leading to
less informative and verbose summaries.
Extractive vs Abstractive Systems
Our automatic evaluation results further demonstrate that
REFRESH is superior to abstractive systems which are all variants of an encoder-decoder architecture . Despite being more faithful to the actual summarization task (hand-written summaries
combine several pieces of information from the
original document), abstractive systems lag behind
the LEAD baseline. Tan and Wan present
a graph-based neural model, which manages to
outperform LEAD on ROUGE-1 but falters when
higher order ROUGE scores are used. Amongst
abstractive systems See et al. perform best.
Interestingly, their system is mostly extractive, exhibiting a small degree of rewriting; it copies more
than 35% of the sentences in the source document, 85% of 4-grams, 90% of 3-grams, 95% of
bigrams, and 99% of unigrams.
Human Evaluation: System Ranking
shows, proportionally, how often participants
ranked each system, 1st, 2nd, and so on.
Perhaps unsurprisingly human-authored summaries
are considered best 
0.14 0.18 0.31 0.36
0.35 0.42 0.16 0.07
0.39 0.19 0.18 0.24
Table 3: System ranking and QA-based evaluations.
Rankings (1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th) are shown as proportions. Rank 1 is the best and Rank 4, the worst. The
column QA shows the percentage of questions that participants answered correctly by reading system summaries.
time). REFRESH is ranked 2nd best followed by
LEAD and See et al. which are mostly
ranked in 3rd and 4th places. We carried out pairwise comparisons between all models in Table 3 to
assess whether system differences are statistically
signiﬁcant. There is no signiﬁcant difference between LEAD and See et al. , and REFRESH
and GOLD (using a one-way ANOVA with posthoc Tukey HSD tests; p < 0.01). All other differences are statistically signiﬁcant.
Human Evaluation: Question Answering
results of our QA evaluation are shown in the last
column of Table 3. Based on summaries generated
by REFRESH, participants can answer 66.34%
of questions correctly. Summaries produced by
LEAD and the abstractive system of See et al.
 provide answers for 36.33% and 28.73% of
the questions, respectively. Differences between
systems are all statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01)
with the exception of LEAD and See et al. .
Although the QA results in Table 3 follow the
same pattern as ROUGE in Table 2, differences
among systems are now greatly ampliﬁed. QAbased evaluation is more focused and a closer re-
ﬂection of users’ information need (i.e., to ﬁnd out
what the article is about), whereas ROUGE simply
captures surface similarity (i.e., n-gram overlap)
between output summaries and their references.
Interestingly, LEAD is considered better than See
et al. in the QA evaluation, whereas we
ﬁnd the opposite when participants are asked to
rank systems. We hypothesize that LEAD is indeed more informative than See et al. but
humans prefer shorter summaries.
The average
length of LEAD summaries is 105.7 words compared to 61.6 for See et al. .
Related Work
Traditional summarization methods manually de-
ﬁne features to rank sentences for their salience
in order to identify the most important sentences
in a document or set of documents .
A vast majority of these
methods learn to score each sentence independently and a summary is
generated by selecting top-scored sentences in a
way that is not incorporated into the learning process. Summary quality can be improved heuristically, , via max-margin methods , or integer-linear programming .
Recent deep learning methods learn continuous features
without any linguistic preprocessing (e.g., named
entities).
Like traditional methods, these approaches also suffer from the mismatch between
the learning objective and the evaluation criterion (e.g., ROUGE) used at the test time.
comparison, our neural model globally optimizes
the ROUGE evaluation metric through a reinforcement learning objective: sentences are highly
ranked if they occur in highly scoring summaries.
Reinforcement learning has been previously
used in the context of traditional multi-document
summarization as a means of selecting a sentence
or a subset of sentences from a document cluster. Ryang and Abekawa cast the sentence
selection task as a search problem. Their agent
observes a state (e.g., a candidate summary), executes an action (a transition operation that produces a new state selecting a not-yet-selected sentence), and then receives a delayed reward based
on tf ∗idf. Follow-on work 
extends this approach by employing ROUGE as
part of the reward function, while Henß et al.
 further experiment with Q-learning. Moll´a-
Aliod has adapt this approach to queryfocused summarization. Our model differs from
these approaches both in application and formulation. We focus solely on extractive summarization, in our case states are documents (not summaries) and actions are relevance scores which
lead to sentence ranking (not sentence-to-sentence
transitions). Rather than employing reinforcement
learning for sentence selection, our algorithm performs sentence ranking using ROUGE as the reward function.
The REINFORCE algorithm 
has been shown to improve encoder-decoder textrewriting systems by allowing to directly optimize a non-differentiable objective or to inject task-speciﬁc constraints .
However, we
are not aware of any attempts to use reinforcement
learning for training a sentence ranker in the context of extractive summarization.
Conclusions
In this work we developed an extractive summarization model which is globally trained by optimizing the ROUGE evaluation metric. Our training algorithm explores the space of candidate summaries while learning to optimize a reward function which is relevant for the task at hand. Experimental results show that reinforcement learning offers a great means to steer our model towards generating informative, ﬂuent, and concise
summaries outperforming state-of-the-art extractive and abstractive systems on the CNN and DailyMail datasets. In the future we would like to focus on smaller discourse units rather than individual sentences, modeling compression and extraction jointly.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge
the support of the European Research Council
(Lapata; award number 681760), the European
Union under the Horizon 2020 SUMMA project
(Narayan, Cohen; grant agreement 688139), and
Huawei Technologies (Cohen).