Abstract—Driver driving style plays an important role in
vehicle energy
management as well as driving safety.
Furthermore, it is key for Advance Driver Assistance Systems
development, towards increasing levels of vehicle automation.
This fact has motivated numerous research and development
efforts on driving style identification and classification. This
article provides a survey on driving style characterization and
recognition revising a variety of algorithms, with particular
emphasis on machine learning approaches based on current and
future trends. Applications of driving style recognition to
intelligent vehicle controls are also briefly discussed, including
experts’ predictions of future development.
Index Terms— Driving style; driving conditions; driver
behavior; driving style recognition; machine learning; intelligent
vehicle control; energy efficiency; driving safety.
I. INTRODUCTION
autonomous
artificial
transportation systems require enhanced understanding of
the human driver behavior. This is not only necessary to
guarantee safe and adequate performance, but also to adjust to
Clara Marina Martinez and Dongpu Cao are with the Centre for
Automotive Engineering, Cranfield University, Cranfield, MK43 0AL United
Kingdom (e-mails: , ).
Mira Heucke is with Bosch Gmbh trainee in the junior managers program
in Leibniz Universität Hannover.
Fei-Yue Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of Management and
Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100190 CHINA (e-mail: ).
Bo Gao is with AVL Powertrain UK Ltd, Essex, SS15 6SR UK (e-mail:
 ).
the drivers’ needs, potentiate their acceptability and ultimately
meet drivers’ preferences in a safe environment. Therefore, it
is essential the recognition of driving style (DS) and driver
intention inference for the integration and development of
these systems – . This statement is supported by the
recently proposed parallel driving framework based on cyberphysical-social systems, where driver behavior and cognition
was one of the key elements – . Furthermore, the
society is becoming more aware of environmental concerns,
which influences decisions made by industry and end users
 . Particularly, in 2004 27% of the global CO2
emissions were caused by the transport sector, being 83%
responsibility of road vehicles . Eco-friendliness, fuel
supply security and CO2 regulations are driving research
towards more efficient powertrains including: conventional,
battery electrical vehicles (BEVs), hybrid electric vehicles
(HEVs), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) between
others .
Besides, industry has taken a further step to influence driver
driving style through active and passive corrective feedback
 towards safer and eco-friendly practises. The firsts can
intervene into the driving task directly by generating haptic
inputs , whilst the second is only advisory and
targets to improve drivers’ awareness through visual or audio
advice . These systems that provide only feedback to
the driver, either haptic or passive, are classified as passive,
whilst active systems can interfere directly in the vehicle
operation by modifying driver’s power demand and
recalibrating the components response to compensate for
deficient driving habits . Although the feedback
suitability and effectiveness can be argued, it has been
observed that the simple fact of being monitored already
encourages drivers to correct their style .
Nevertheless, better understanding of driving style is required
to ensure appropriate and consistent recognition and to
effectively promote safety and eco-driving.
A. Motivation
Fuel efficiency is mainly influenced, although not
exclusively by: vehicle characteristics, road type, traffic
conditions and driving pattern . Albeit it is wellknown that DS strongly affects fuel efficiency, there is still
limited knowledge of the direct relationship . Furthermore
Driving Style Recognition for Intelligent
Vehicle Control and Advanced Driver
Assistance: A Survey
Clara Marina Martinez, Mira Heucke, Fei-Yue Wang, Fellow, IEEE, Bo Gao and Dongpu Cao,
Member, IEEE
NOMENCLATURE
Reference Abbreviation
Advanced Driver Assisted Systems
Battery Electric Vehicle
Driving Style
Fuzzy Logic
Geographical Information System
Gaussian Mixture Model
Global Positioning System
Hybrid Electric Vehicle
k-nearest neighbor
Neural Network
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle
Rule-based
Support Vector Machine
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Volume: 19, Issue: 3, March 2018, pp 666-676
DOI:10.1109/TITS.2017.2706978
©2017 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to reprint/republish this material for advertising or promotional purposes or for creating new collective
works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or to reuse any copyrighted component of this work in other works must be obtained from the IEEE.
fuel consumption could be used to simplify the relationship
between DS and vehicle efficiency , and aid to
characterize drivers . Among the scarce publications that
strive towards this direction, Bolovinou et al. developed an
algorithm able to calculate the remaining range in a BEV. The
authors used route speed and gradient profiles which
inherently included information about traffic and DS .
Recent publications highlighted a margin of potential benefit
of fuel consumption of 20-40% , which agrees with
the 5-40% margin claimed in in simulation environment.
However this gain is strongly related to the road type. Mudgal
et al. registered 33% improvement on fuel consumption when
correcting aggressive driving on highway, but only 5% on
urban roads .
In addition to fuel consumption reduction, road safety has
also motivated progress in safety systems. These, according to
the degree of automation applied, may also be of intrusive
components
calibration
modification or even pedals and steering control takeover. The
complex interaction between these features and drivers has
encouraged investigations on human factors involved in car
accidents . Some of these factors are: demographics,
distraction,
experience,
behaviour tendency and decision making . Aggressive
drivers tend to operate the vehicle in an unsafe manner,
including excessive speed, improper car-following, erratic
lane changing and imprudent turning manoeuvres .
Currently, advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) are a
promising field of research that contributes to safety and
powertrain efficiency improvement . Those features
assist drivers during specific events , but are usually
designed based on the average driver characteristics. Although
the calibration includes a wide majority, it cannot adapt to
specific driver singularities . Hence, the next generation of
ADAS features target driver style recognition to individualize
the systems performance and potentially
improve fuel consumption and safety along with awareness of
external driving conditions .
Motivated by the previous review, a survey of driving style
recognition state-of-the-art and future trends is urged to set the
basis for progress in this direction. This paper gathers a review
to algorithms and applications of driving style recognition into
the current ADAS framework towards increasing levels of
automation and vehicle electrification.
B. Driving Style Related Terms
Driving style is a complex concept influenced by a
burdensome number of factors which complicates its
description. This has caused the emergence of numerous
terms, which usually lack an agreed definition. It is therefore
required a concise description to avoid the reader confusion
when referencing different authors. The relationships between
the terms defined as understood by the authors are illustrated
in Fig. 1 to situate the context of driving style and facilitate the
comprehension of the terms used in the following.
Driving event is generally understood as manoeuvres
occurring during the driving task, such as: acceleration,
deceleration, turning and lane change, which can be used to
identify DS . Henceforth driving pattern is defined in the
remaining as the speed profile. This simplified description
includes all additional information that can be obtained from
the vehicle speed analysis. The previous definition aligns with
the literature which designates it as: trip duration and average
speed , speed profile and calculated power demand ,
both speed and acceleration profile , or even consider a
detailed scrutiny of the vehicle speed including average
number of accelerations and time at constant speed .
The driving pattern is strongly related to road type, weather
conditions, also referred as driving conditions, and driving
style , but does not include that information specifically.
In contrast, driving behaviour solely focuses on driver’
decisions and ignores external factors . These
concepts should not be confused with driving skill, which is
usually defined as the driver’s ability to maintain the vehicle
control and is generally used to differentiate between
experienced and average ordinary drivers .
In contrast to the previous terminology, there is no agreed
definition of driver driving style in the literature. This is
mainly caused by subjective factors associated to it such as:
driver attitude, mood, tiredness, etc. Ishibashi et al. defined it
as the attitude and way of thinking towards the driving task
 . Dörr et al. proposed a pragmatic description, defining it
as the way the driving task is accomplished . The concept
can be then understood as the manner the driver operates the
vehicle: steering wheel, throttle and brake pedal, etc., but with
connotations over the driver, as a differentiating factor against
driving pattern . Some other definitions concentrate on
driver aggression rather than driving style, which is the driver
aggressiveness potential. Aggressive drivers usually develop
abrupt and unpredictable manoeuvring, which generally
results in higher fuel consumption and tends to provoke
dangerous situations . Nonetheless, it can be agreed that
DS is strongly influenced by the driving external conditions,
which cannot be separated from DS evaluation .
Hereby driver driving style is understood as the way the driver
operates the vehicle controls in the context of the driving
scene and external conditions such as time in the day, day of
the week, weather and mood, between other factors. This
definition agrees with previous descriptions and contemplates
Fig. 1: Driving style-related terminology and connections.
detecting more than one style for the same driver. That is to
say that the same driver could exhibit disparate styles under
different conditions, such as: a commuting rote to the work
place and a family trip during the weekend.
II. INPUTS FOR DRIVING STYLE CHARACTERIZATION
The plurality of definitions of driver driving style is caused
by the large number of influencing factors and possible
interpretations of the driver response. Some of these variables
are listed in Fig. 2. It is unreasonable to expect the control of
all factors given the burdensome number and the difficulty to
measure most of them. Hereby we differentiate between
influencing factors and the actual input signals implemented.
These inputs are understood as influencing factors that can be
controlled and are chosen to characterize driving style.
A. Driving Style Influencing Factors
Ericsson conducted a comparative examination of the
relationship between driving patterns and external conditions
such as traffic, street type and other drivers . The author
highlighted the strong influence between these factors and
their interactions, necessary to determine DS in the context of
the vehicle performance . In contrast, Taubman et al.
transferred DS research into a completely different field by
analysing human factors: conscious decision making,
demographic background and character . The study
revealed that new parameters such as driving experience,
training and familiarity with the vehicle and the environment
can also condition DS. The authors specifically addressed the
influence of: gender, age, education and personality by
analysing self-esteem, patience, recklessness, anger and
extraversion . Likewise, driver state was found to be
notably influenced by drugs, fatigue, distraction, etc. in .
These previous factors are inner to the driver, but can also be
triggered by the external stressing situations such as road state
and high congestion level. These, combined with time in the
day and day of the week, may affect differently to drivers .
The previous analysis opens a debate about DS assignment to
each driver. Whilst some researchers allocate a unique style,
the previous influences consider the possibility to detect
changes in driving style as a response to changes in the
external conditions. These results are important from a
research perspective, but the implementation of this
information for DS recognition might not be feasible. Sociodemographic factors require large amount of data that is not
generally available to the recognition algorithm.
A simplified approach for practical DS identification focuses
on its influence over single figures, such as: fuel consumption
 , average speed or range. Nevertheless, these
indicators might be excessively simplistic to evaluate
scenarios with different levels of traffic congestion and fail to
represent the complete driving scenario. Besides, the
influencing factors may differ depending on the road type.
Speed profiles in city routes could become very complex due
to turning manoeuvres and multiple braking events, but they
could be fully defined by speed and acceleration events in
highway roads. The aforementioned highlights the importance
of road type recognition to ensure correct driving style
identification . McCall et al. defined road type and driving
conditions recognition as context awareness, information
required to properly judge drivers’ performance and generate
useful feedback. The study was motivated by the fact that
drivers classified as “excessively calm” should not be
encouraged to drive faster in slippery roads or classified as
aggressive in roads where “aggressive” manoeuvres might be
required . Murphey et al. suggested more complete road
classifications into: freeway, freeway with gradient, arterial
and local roads, with incremental congestion level . Xia et
al. worked on similar ideas, by proposing fuel economic
driving in road segments provided by traffic control
infrastructure with vehicle communication of real-time
congestion and traffic lights. This approach produced a 10-
15% potential benefit in fuel consumption .
B. Role of Sensors
Although the most suitable factors affecting DS recognition
can be argued, they are eventually constraint by the
information available. This is limited by the standalone
devices that are currently installed in the majority of vehicles
in production. A commonly used source of information is the
inertial measurement unit , which
includes: vehicle speed, throttle pedal position, acceleration,
etc. Furthermore, low-cost accelerometers can be installed to
capture additional information . Vehicle localization can
be provided by the Global Position System (GPS), which is
simultaneously an indirect measurement of speed and
acceleration . More advanced vehicles include
devices to detect the driver behaviour under specific
manoeuvres, such as Geographical Information System (GIS)
used for location of roundabouts . In addition, the use of
parameters related to car-following would require the
installation of radar or LiDAR sensors, already available in
vehicles featured with adaptive cruise control .
When the desired signals are not available, smartphones can
be used instead . Due to the increasing
popularity of these devices, it is reasonable to assume their
Fig. 2: Influencing factors on driving style.
availability.
Smartphones
accelerometers, gyroscopes and geomagnetic field sensors
 , GPS and cameras .
Table I summarizes the vehicle sensors introduced. These
approaches for signals capturing and sensor installation
respond to discrepancies in terms of electronics installed in
vehicles currently produced. Given the tendency of further
electrification, it can be presumed that future vehicles will be
provided of an integrated sensor system able to provide all
required information.
C. Driving Style Recognition Input Signals
The initial step for driving style identification consists of
determining the variables necessary to monitor so as to
provide a robust classification. Choosing the correct signals is
crucial since any further processing and results depend
entirely on it. Nevertheless, there is no general agreement of a
recommended set of parameters in the literature .
This disagreement responds to the plurality of applications of
DS for: driver correction, fuel consumption reduction, safety
enhancement, etc. A summary of the solutions proposed by the
reviewed authors is included in Table II.
Ericsson explored a holistic study of independent measures
on DS with respect to emissions and fuel consumption. The
initial set of 62 signals is simplified by discarding unnecessary
information into 26 including: speed mean and standard
deviation, acceleration, deceleration, speed jerkiness in curves
and proportion of time at different speed. This set is further
reduced to 16 independent factors, where only 9 where
directly relevant to fuel consumption. The analysis highlighted
the importance of determining road type and traffic conditions
prior to DS recognition, due to the strong relation between the
parameters and the level of congestion .
Although the previous author performed a significant
reduction of the initial set of parameters, DS algorithms
implementable in-vehicle real applications require further
simplifications to comply with cost and running time limits.
More simplistic approaches take advantage of the relationship
between aggressive drivers and high acceleration , speed
profiles and fuel/energy/power consumption .
Acceleration is generally complemented with other variables
such as braking or velocity statistics , being the
combination
acceleration and deceleration or similar. In contrast, other
variables such as jerk , braking pressure and usage of the
throttle and brake pedals were also widely employed and even
understood as better indicators by many authors . The
combination of both longitudinal and lateral dynamics has
been also highlighted for being able to capture the majority of
the vehicle motions . Nevertheless, these approaches only
provided complete information when the driving situation was
also known, named weather conditions, traffic and road type
 . Furthermore, although DS is apparent for conventional
and BEV, it is particularly critical for HEV and PHEV due to
the combination of at least two power sources . Small
changes over the torque request can trigger the transition into
different hybrid modes and affect the amount of energy
recovered during braking . These studies target fuel
oriented identification implement power, energy or fuel
consumption measures .
Signals selection can be guided by the identification of
specific events , which are tightly related to the vehicle
dynamics and contain information about the driver intention.
The key driving events identified are usually extracted from
the data and include: braking, car-following, distance
keeping , roundabouts , handling, including lane
change and cornering and the reaction delay to
events . This information can be combined with additional
signals and statistics to enhance the classification . The
former encompasses different interpretation of speed and
acceleration profiles according to events or even adjusting the
signal set to specific manoeuvres.
III. DRIVING STYLE CLASSIFICATION
Signal selection for DS is strongly linked to the
classification criteria and recognition algorithms used as
illustrated in Fig. 3. Due to the large number of signal
candidates and applications, there are numerous approaches
for DS classification with different labelling. A survey of the
main criteria and classification options included in the
following is summarized in Table III.
COMMON SENSORS REQUIRE FOR DRIVING STYLE SIGNALS CAPTURING
Inertial Measurement Unit
 
Low-cost accelerometers
Smartphone
 
GPS and Inertial
Radar or LiDAR
 
INPUT LIST FOR DRIVING STYLE RECOGNITION
Power/fuel demand/consumption
 
Speed, acceleration, jerk, congestion, (off-)peak etc.
Acceleration, deceleration and sharp turn
Smartphone accelerometers (plus GPS)
 ( )
Speed, long. and lat. acceleration (over-consumption)
Fuel, vehicle speed, acceleration and throttle
Speed, acceleration and kinetic energy
Lat. /long. jerk/acceleration, time gap lead vehicle
Angular velocity and long. acceleration
Distance-keeping, speed, plus throttle and brake
Throttle, brake, car-following, handling and power
Brake pressure and throttle position
Personality traits
Review paper
Event Related
Curve-handling and traffic conditions
Speed at Roundabouts
Brake, acceleration and turn
Driver reaction delay (braking, steering, acceleration)
Left/right turn/lane change, acceleration, braking
(Aggressive) turn/acceleration/braking/U-turn, swerve
Right/left and excessive speed
Braking, car-following, throttling and handling
Car-following
A. Driving Style Classification into Discrete Classes
The general tendency is to group driving styles into classes
based on the distribution of the selected driving parameters
and extracted features . These classes need to be defined
prior to the classification algorithm design and should account
for all influencing parameters in a multifactor cognition task.
They need to account for the trade-off between classification
finesse and complexity to guarantee the algorithm robustness
and have to be understandable by the end user . Classes
labelling can be inspired from either safety or fuel economy
perspectives. Whilst safety related applications refer to the
level of aggressiveness, fuel oriented classification generally
uses terminology related to efficiency or sportiness. The
plurality of classes labelling further increases when combining
the previous with increasing number of DS groups.
The revision to the literature reveals a prevalence of simple
classification bases using either two or three categories. This
solution provides easily understandable feedback and
facilitates the algorithm calibration. The distinction between
aggressive and nonaggressive was use in 
 , fuel economic vs. performance . Aggressive drivers
often show careless handling behaviour and may result in
higher fuel consumption . They exhibit frequent changes
in the throttle pedal position of large magnitude, whilst calm
drivers only show small amplitudes and low frequency. The
division into three classes includes aggressive, mild and
moderate styles, as defined by Xu et al. , soft, normal and
aggressive by Syed et al. or comfortable, normal and
sporty as described by Dörr et al. . Moderate drivers are
described as an intermediate group that shows properties from
both aggressive and calm, but without conclusive membership
to any of those.
In contrast to the previous, Taubman et al. presented a study
on multidimensional driving style which examined human
factors involved in car accidents and inspired a safety related
classification: reckless and careless driving, anxious driving,
angry and hostile driving and patient and careful driving .
Other authors opted for a more precise classification using
higher amount of grades by identifying the no speed category
 , whilst Constantinescu et al. proposed a five to seven
classes, covering the range from non-aggressive to aggressive
style . Larger number of clusters improves the
classification
complicates
development and the interpretation of the classes themselves.
DS identification is of no use unless the information provided
is clear, statement supported by Table III that situates the
recommended number of cluster below 5.
B. Driving Style Classification through continuous Indexing
The ultimate classification case into a larger number of
clusters consists of considering a continuous index, which
eventually could be used in a threshold-based algorithm to
transform it into finite classes . Augustynowicz
classify DS in a range within (-1,1), being -1, 0 and 1 mild,
normal and aggressive respectively . This index is
generally calculated from the relative fuel consumption or
overall efficiency, instead of driver level of aggressiveness.
Manzoni et al. used an estimation of the fuel consumed along
the trip and compared it to a benchmarked value to calculate
an over-consumption percentage indicative of extra cost .
Fuel consumption was also used by Neubauer et al. to obtain
the vehicle efficiency as indicative of DS . Similarly Corti
et al. assessed driver driving style with an energy-oriented
cost function that estimated the power over-consumption .
IV. DRIVING STYLE RECOGNITION ALGORITHMS
Driving style recognition algorithms are developed on the
basis of the selected classification method and signals
employed. DS recognition algorithms are usually implemented
through a set of rules, via models or using machine learning as
summarized in Fig. 4. Although implemented through a
specific strategy, these algorithms can be developed
combining some of the previous. For instance, rules can be
inspired on data processed through unsupervised machine
learning. Table IV presents a concise summary of the main
algorithms reviewed in this section and respective references.
A. Implemented through Rules
Rule-based
threshold-based
algorithms, are the simplest approach for DS recognition.
Rules are defined based on prefixed thresholds over the
monitored variables that allocate DS into groups. These rules
are usually defined for specific events, as introduced by
Fig. 3: Driving Style Recognition Algorithm Design Process.
IDENTIFICATION BASIS AND CLASSIFICATION DETAILS FOR DRIVING STYLE
Classification Details
 
 
Aggressive/calm (unsafe/safe)
 
Aggressive/moderate/calm
Aggressive/moderate/calm + no
Very bad / bad / good / very good
Calm - aggressive / steady - dynamic
 
(Over) fuel / power consumption
Reckless/anxious/angry/patient
Rank (-1,1)
From most-aggressive to most-mild
Radoslav who implemented a RB algorithm particularized to
six driving events: acceleration, deceleration, left/right turn
and left/right lane change. DS was obtained through a final
score that counts the relative number of aggressive
manoeuvres . Murphey et al. presented a similar approach
based on aggressive manoeuvres counting. The final score was
obtained in percentage basis, distinguishing within: calm
below 50%, aggressive above 100% and normal otherwise
 . Alternatively to driving events classification, DS can be
grouped according to fuel or overall energy consumption as
already included . The use of RB algorithms unifies
simplicity, easy interpretation and implementation, but limits
the amount of parameters that can be managed. The previous
examples are generally based on a single parameter, and
therefore the robustness and accuracy of the results are
considerably limited.
Larger sets of variables generate rules unnecessarily
complex that can be replaced by fuzzy logic (FL) maps. These
are also based on prefixed thresholds but are able to include
more parameters whilst keeping its simplicity, robustness,
easy understanding and low computational order. Dörr et al.
developed a real-time algorithm that also considered other
variables such as road type and gap between vehicles by
implementing FL. This system was verified in simulation
environment in urban and rural road without traffic
disturbances achieving 68% of correct classification rate and
2% of incorrect classification rate . Gilman et al. also
employed a RB and FL based on a total of 17 factors
evaluated through a performance indicator . Syed et al.
proposed a FL algorithm to evaluate optimal pedals operation
in a HEV. This algorithm monitored both throttle and braking
pedals operation and was able to calculate an appropriate
correction and generate haptic feedback to the driver. The
authors claimed a minimum of 3.5% improvement in fuel
consumption for mildest driving in simulation environment,
without compromising the vehicle performance . Won
also used FL to improve HEV fuel consumption using road
type and events detection: start-up, acceleration, cruise,
deceleration and stationary . A similar approach was taken
by Kim et al., who used a FL control with driving mode,
driving style and driving conditions recognition capability.
This was utilized to adapt the control of a HEV and BEV
given pedals operation and external temperature and tune the
state of charge window, battery recharge/depletion and engine
on/off state thresholds. The state of charge membership
functions were hereby adaptive to the driving conditions .
Although RB and FL algorithms unify acceptable results
implementation
simplicity,
classification is strongly related with the selection of the
thresholds. These can be based on the expertise of the
designer, although more strictly should be inspired on real
data. Maximum number of drivers should be involved in the
data collection to gather maximum data variability and
generalizing capacity. These algorithms are also limited in
terms of the amount of variables and data that can process,
reason why they might be compensated with data-driven
algorithms at least at the development stage. The next
generation of algorithms require the capability to account for
larger data sets and influencing factors, characteristics that
escape from RB limits and point to their combination with
machine learning approaches, between others.
B. Implemented through Models
Model-based algorithms consist of the description of driving
style through a set of equations of pre-defined characteristics.
The models selected are adjusted to each DS by tuning their
parameters to fit the data used to inspire them, usually using
data-driven methods. The models complexity is given by the
application requirements and influences the fidelity of driving
style representation. Driving style models respond to the
necessity to reduce data collection and testing, which is time
consuming and involves high costs. Driver models can be used
to reproduce DS in simulation environment, test ADAS
features in more realistic environments and adapt ADAS
performance in real-life applications (driver-in-the-loop).
Furthermore,
classification algorithms allocating real world driving
scenarios simulated into previously established classes.
Nevertheless, driver modelling has as main drawback in the
difficulty to prove the accuracy of the results. Model
validation requires their comparison with real drivers, which
again necessitates extensive data collection .
Fig. 4: Driving style recognition algorithms review in the literature.
ALGORITHM AND DATA SOURCES/INPUTS FOR DRIVING STYLE RECOGNITION
Reference(s)
 
RB (Clustering Analysis)
 
Adaptive- FL
kNN, NN, Decision Tree, Random Forest
kNN Dyn. time wrapping
Hierarchical Bayesian Regr.
Bayes Learning
K-means and SVM
Markov Chain
GMM, k-means, SVM, etc.
Monte Carlo Markov Model
Review Paper
C. Implemented through Learning Algorithms
Threshold definition in RB algorithms conditions the results
robustness and requires extensive data analysis. Data-driven
algorithms are suitable to process large amount of data and
consistently derived the thresholds value or even fully develop
improved algorithms. Furthermore, these have adaptive
capability that can be applied to particularize to specific
drivers. These beneficial characteristics have promoted
research into data-driven approaches and is conditioning
future trend in DS recognition. Proof of that is found in the
extensive literature available and represented in the following
with a predominant coverage with respect to RB and modelbased approaches.
1) Unsupervised Machine Learning Algorithms
Unsupervised algorithms do not require understanding of
the underlying process. The classification is achieved through
statistical analysis of the input signals inherent to the
algorithms. This allows increasing the number of classes and
therefore the finesse of the classification. Constantinescu et al.
proposed two alternative algorithms based on hierarchical
cluster analysis and principal components analysis. The first
one identifies groups of drivers based on similarities in the
driving statistics, whilst the second option studies the
correlation between variables to transform the original data set
into a smaller one, whilst keeping the useful information. Each
algorithm returned a different number of classes, 5 and 7 in
principal components and hierarchical clustering respectively
 . The use of principal components with extensive analysis
of the driving-related extracted features is included in .
Miyajima et al. implemented a Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) based on car-following behaviour and pedals
operation spectral analysis.
model achieved
identification rate of 69% car-following, whilst the pedal
spectral analysis provided a classification rate of 89.6% in
simulation environment and 76.8% in field tests . A
similar application of GMM for pedal operation modelling
was also reviewed by Wang and Lukic in . Johnson and
Trivedi applied dynamic time wrapping to detect aggressive
events with a 97% success in simulation environment .
Driving style statistical characteristics also encourages the
use of Bayesian methods. Mudgal et al. implemented a
hierarchical Bayesian regression model to characterize DS in
roundabouts . Similarly, McCall and Trivedi employed
Bayesian learning to assess critical situations related to
braking assistance. The model was used to assess when a
braking would be required and the probability of the driver
performing this manoeuvre .
Unsupervised algorithms have proved their applicability
and suitability for DS recognition. Nevertheless, the output
needs to be directed in terms of interpretation and number of
clusters. Besides, the classification performance can be worse
compared to supervised algorithms.
2) Supervised Machine Learning Algorithms
Supervised algorithms imply knowledge of the driving style
of the data used for training. One of the simplest supervised
algorithms is k-nearest neighbour (kNN), which is based on
similarity measures rated by the “votes” of the predefined kneighbours. This method was exploited by Vaitkus et al. using
a total of five features extracted from the data, which provided
a 100% classification success using experimental data from
Furthermore,
classification success using only 3 features based on central
statistics. Nevertheless, these results needed to be evaluated
based on the characteristics of the training and testing data
which proceeded from the same route, season and analogous
traffic conditions .
An Elman-type neural network (NN) was applied by
Augustynowicz to identify DS using speed and throttle pedal
position . Another application of NN was proposed by Xu
et al. who developed a distal learning control framework with
two feedforward networks. NN1 concerned the plant inverse
model and NN2 simulated the plant forward model, which was
run in parallel for error detection and self-learning . A
comparison between various supervised learning algorithms
was performed by Karginova et al. who implemented: kNN,
NN, decision tree and random forest. DS recognition using
kNN achieved its best performance within nearest neighbour
inherent limits when clustering for k = 4 or 5. NN optimal
number of hidden nodes was obtained as 20 with two
approaches. The first network was trained with unmodified
data, whilst the second was trained twice with normal training
data to encourage the preference for this style. As expected,
the second NN showed less incorrect classification of normal
DS. Random forest implementation was performed to improve
the poor performance of a single decision tree. The tests
revealed an optimal number of 40 trees, which achieved the
best results in simulation environment. Again the algorithm
performance in normal style classification was high, but
unsatisfactory
aggressive
classification. The algorithms assessment showed applicability
in real-time classification in all cases, but preference for NN
candidates based on the classification performance .
Markov models have also been successfully implemented
for DS recognition. In Markov chains, future states only
depend on the current states, whose transition is generally
described by the so-called transition probability matrix .
The stochastic and random characteristics of driver behaviour
can be captured using Markov models as claimed by
Guardiola et al., who defended the benefits of Markov Models
combined with Monte Carlo application to generate random
patterns based on past data in representation of DS .
Pentland and Liu defended Dynamical Markov Model
suitability to capture DS, supported by the fact that human
actions are best captured as a sequence of control steps .
Similarly, a Hidden Markov Model was used by Nechyba and
Xu to learn human control and validate the results .
3) Combined Unsupervised and Supervised Algorithms
Although supervised and unsupervised learning could be
interpreted as alternative methods, these can be combined in
two-part algorithms to benefit from their advantages and
improve the overall performance. Unsupervised learning
contributes to identify the relevant input signals and the most
efficient classification strategy, whilst supervised learning
generally returns better classification results. Bolovinou et al.
provided a survey of data-driven algorithms combining
supervised and unsupervised methods based on Bayesian
inference, GMM, Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-mean
clustering, Bayesian Network and Markov models. However
no concluding comparison was delivered due to the
incompatibility caused by differences in the input data and DS
definition . Van et al. explored the application of K-means
along with SVM. K-means unsupervised algorithm was used
to explore the relevance of specific manoeuvres and their
combination along with the driver pedals operation, whilst
SVM was used for implementation .
V. INTELLIGENT VEHICLES AND CONTROL APPLICATIONS
DS recognition has several applications such as: driving
style feedback and correction, driver-in-the-loop, ADASs
performance enhancement and energy management in HEV,
PHEV and BEV. These can be gathered in two main groups,
efficiency
alternative
classifications can correlate at times given the fact that
aggressive driving is generally associated to inefficiency, but
do not coincide in all cases. That is, calm drivers do not
necessarily drive efficiently.
A. Driver Advisory Feedback
One of the main applications of DS recognition targets
driver style correction through either online or offline
feedback, which can be passive, active or a combination of
both. Corrective systems can be directly installed in the
vehicle or included in smartphones to make use of the device
sensors and processing capability . An example
of DS recognition and correction using smartphones was
presented by Stoichkov. The application was designed to
display visual feedback to promote DS improvement for both
fuel consumption and risks of accidents reduction . An
alternative approach was proposed by Fazeen et al. who
generated instead audio feedback to encourage DS correction
 , as is similarly used in . Corti et al. designed an
algorithm with three alternative levels of visual information
tested against the no-feedback scenario. All approaches
showed improvement in the vehicle consumption up to 20-
30%, although best results were achieved when providing
enough information in a clearest and most understandable
manner . Doshi and Trivedi went a step further and
analysed the response of drivers to the feedback to adapt the
information facilitated and obtain individual evaluation .
Although passive feedback strategies are easy to implement
and can return satisfactory results, it always exists the
possibility that the driver chooses to ignore the guidance. In
contrast, active feedback systems generate a response that
affects the normal vehicle operation, which cannot be as easily
neglected. Syed et al. provided both visual and haptic
feedback registering up to 3.5% improvement in fuel economy
without reducing the expectations of vehicle performance as
claimed by the authors. Haptic feedback was generated
through the throttle pedal . Nevertheless, haptic
guidance can easily cause the driver annoyance, which could
lead to the system manual deactivation. This issue was
palliated by Syed et al. in and , who analysed drivers’
response acceptance to the feedback and adjusted it to reduce
its intrusiveness to less receptive users. Reichart et al.
described a similar approach, by increasing gradually the
resistance over the throttle pedal when the vehicle operation
diverges from optimal use adaptive to the driver response to
the feedback .
Alternative approaches are especially designed to improve
safety and efficiency in larger vehicles such as busses and
fleet management and even passengers comfort
in public transport . Drivers of these means of transport
could benefit from a personalized driving assistance, “Driving
coach”, as described by Gilma et al., system provided by
context awareness to adapt to specific routes . Rossetti et
al. proposed the use of serious game in transportation as
educational technique to improve driving skills in simulators
by analysing behaviour assimilation, elicitation and persuasion
 . Future trends of driver feedback will probably lean to a
personalized assistance, where the system will be able to
detect the driver preferences and generate consistent feedback
to both encourage style correction and avoid driver annoyance.
Ideally, this guidance should combine haptic and passive
feedback with appropriate amount of information easily to
interpret and follow, based on the driver cognitive capacity
and skills.
B. Enhance of ADAS Performance
As previously mentioned, safety related systems would
benefit from knowledge about DS to predict and anticipate to
drivers’ reactions and adjust to individual users. ADASs
adaptation to drivers may result in safety systems of better
performance . This would be the case of collision
avoidance systems that include driver-in-the-loop, which
would be able to anticipate to drivers’ reactions and actuate
accordingly . Nonetheless, implementing ADASs in
driver-adaptive manner is a complex task that requires further
investigation in the appropriate way of using DS information
in intelligent vehicles . Kurz et al. presented a method to
classify and use DS to improve the vehicle handling based on
an online/offline algorithm updated with historical data. The
authors also propose person-specific implementation for
multiple drivers .
Additional safety-related applications can be found in
cooperative driving frameworks such as tandem and platoon,
as exposed by Rass et al. The system assumed the drivers
were willing to cooperate and provided feedback to encourage
safety and improve the overall fleet efficiency . Similar
ideas were reviewed by Fotouhi et al. to reduce fuel
consumption and emissions . Safe autonomous driving can
be an ultimate application of DS throughout increasing levels
of automation. Urmson et al. proposed an algorithm able to
learn from drivers during manual operation and reproduce
human-like manoeuvres autonomously within pre-established
safety constraints .
C. Control of HEV, PHEV and BEV
Although conventional vehicles are strongly affected by DS,
hybrid and battery electric vehicles are less sensitive to it due
to the higher efficiency of the electric components, idling
reduction and regenerative braking. Lenaers asserted the
influence of DS and road type combinations on consumption
and CO2 emissions in four different powertrains: petrol, diesel,
hybrid and liquefied petroleum gas. The hybrid powertrain
was able to provide lower consumption even under urban
aggressive
particularly
start-stop
regeneration during braking. Furthermore, aggressive driving
styles was found to require up to 68% and 47% more fuel in
respectively
conventional
powertrains, whilst liquid petroleum and most importantly
hybrid powertrains are less sensitive to the different driving
patterns . Neubauer et al. compared the effect of DS on a
conventional vehicle, HEV, PHEV and BEV in terms of
optimal operating conditions. The results showed important
influence of driving style in all vehicle platforms, although
this was affecting differently. HEV presented optimal working
points at low speed, whilst conventional vehicles improved the
overall efficiency at higher speed values. Furthermore, HEVs
were barely affected by braking due to the regenerative
capability, but particularly vulnerable to high acceleration
 . A part from different operating conditions, hybrid modes
selection in HEV and PHEV are strongly related with the
driver torque request and inevitably to DS. Consequently,
slight changes in driving style can cause unnecessary modes
switching and develop sub-optimal performance .
Besides, energy management can be enhanced with prior
knowledge of driving style in HEV and PHEV. The increasing
level of vehicle electrification has motivated research on the
effect of DS and driving events on the energy demand in
PHEVs, being both contributions particularly important for
optimal control . An optimal control strategy can be
obtained with knowledge of the entire driving cycle,
environment and driver behaviour. Thus the information about
driving style can potentially lead to important fuel savings
 . Driving style information was used by Lin et al. to
improve the energy management of a hybrid truck . Yu et
al. used driving pattern and style recognition to better estimate
the remaining range in PHEV assuming static and quasi-static
knowledge of the route . Similarly, Zhang et al. proposed
an adaptive control strategy for a PHEV using driving pattern
recognition .
recognition
information to estimate more accurately the remaining range,
improve range management and potentially extend it . The
effect of DS over the BEV range was highlighted by Bingham
et al., who claimed a possible divergence of 10% between
drivers. This margin was associated to aggressive deceleration
events that triggered friction brakes . Similarly, Bolovinou
et al. developed a strategy able to estimate the remaining
range using route information: speed, gradient profile, traffic
conditions and DS. This study targeted an accurate estimation
of the battery range to reduce the so-called range anxiety that
characterises BEV drivers and is found to be the main
constraint that hinders electric vehicles integration in the
market .
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This article offers a review of the recent research and
development efforts on driving style characterization and
recognition as well as their applications to intelligent vehicle
control. The design process is chronologically followed from
input signals identification and classification policy definition
to the algorithm selection and implementation. All driving
style influencing factors and classification strategies are
presented in relationship to the targeted applications and
implementation constraints. The complexity of driving style is
discussed and the predominant interpretations, safety and fuel
efficiency-related, are analysed through the enumeration of
different algorithms. The gradual increment of ADAS
presence and vehicle autonomous capabilities requires deeper
driving style analysis and the inclusion of drivers in the
systems. This has promoted the use of data-driven algorithms
able to process more data and the implementation of machine
learning algorithms able to adapt to individual drivers. Future
trends will focus on even larger data sets covering a broader
plurality of drivers and will implement the combination of
supervised and unsupervised algorithms to enhance driver
adaptability and cognitive performance. The presented review
positions driving style recognition as a crucial concept for
intelligent vehicle development that will strongly condition the
progress in autonomous vehicles and their integration in the