With an eye to AI and autonomous diagnosis
 1:40 ;
doi:10.1038/
s41746-018-0048-y
In this issue of npj Digital Medicine, Abramoff and colleagues
report the ﬁndings from a prospective study that evaluates the
performance of a diabetic retinopathy diagnostic system (IDx-DR)
in a primary care setting.1 This represents an important clinical
milestone as, in April 2018, these results were used to form the
basis for FDA approval of the system, thus becoming the ﬁrst fully
autonomous AI-based system approved for marketing in the USA.2
Given the potentially transformative potential of AI for healthcare
(in particular a technique referred to as “deep learning”)—but also
its associated hype—this lays an important foundation for future
translation of such technologies to routine clinical practice.
networks—so-called
because of their superﬁcial resemblance to biological neural
networks—as computational models to discover intricate structure in large, high-dimensional datasets.3 Although ﬁrst espoused
in the 1980s, deep learning has come to prominence in recent
years, driven in large part by the power of graphics processing
units (GPUs) originally developed for video gaming, cloud
computing, and the increasing availability of large, carefully
annotated datasets. Since 2012, deep learning has brought
seismic changes to the technology industry, with major breakthroughs in areas as diverse as image and speech recognition,
natural language translation, robotics, and even self-driving cars.
In 2015, Scientiﬁc American listed deep learning as one of their
‘world changing’ ideas for the year.4
Deep learning is particularly well suited to image classiﬁcation
tasks and so has huge potential in medical imaging applications—
scans, slides, skin lesions and the patterns in medical practice that
occur frequently and are associated with screening, triage,
diagnosis, and monitoring. A number of recent research studies
have demonstrated this potential in multiple domains, albeit in
retrospective in silico settings.5 The work reported by Abramoff
et al. is an important milestone as the ﬁrst of its kind to be
performed in a prospective real-world clinical environment, and
using a product that will be commercially available rather than a
research prototype.
The need for external validation studies is well recognized in the
machine learning community; however, there may be less
awareness of the additional speciﬁc value provided by a
prospective clinical study, as well as the time, effort, and
considerable costs that such studies entail. Prospective, noninterventional studies, such as that described by Abramoff and
colleagues, will likely be fundamental to addressing questions
about automated diagnosis efﬁcacy. However, such studies will
not address the issue of clinical effectiveness—do patients directly
beneﬁt from the use of such AI systems? In the case of diabetic
retinopathy, the question might be: do patients ultimately have
good—or at least non-inferior—visual outcomes when this system
is used? This is not a trivial point—computer aided detection
(CAD) systems for mammography were approved by the FDA in
1998, and by 2008 74% of all screening mammograms in the
Medicare population were interpreted using this technology.6
However, nearly 20 years later a large study concluded “CAD does
not improve diagnostic accuracy of mammography and may
result in missed cancers. These results suggest that insurers pay
more for computer-aided detection with no established beneﬁt to
women.”6 To properly address this issue, prospective interventional studies should be required. Of course, such randomized
clinical trials may not be feasible or warranted in every case;
however, it will be incumbent on the clinical community to
engage with this question. A further important point is that,
historically, diagnostic accuracy studies have often been suboptimally or poorly reported. With the likely further clinical
translation of AI systems, it will become increasingly important for
STARD, and other trial reporting guidelines, to be both followed
and regularly updated.7
The clinical research community has also got blind spots. In
particular, there is a lack of awareness of the so-called 'AI Chasm',
that is the gulf between developing a scientiﬁcally sound
algorithm and its use in any meaningful real-world applications.8
It is one thing to develop an algorithm that works well on a small
dataset from a speciﬁc population, it is quite another to develop
one that will generalize to other populations and across different
imaging modalities. There is also a large gulf between the
experimental code produced for a proof-of-concept research
study, and the eventual code to be used in a product with
regulatory approvals. The latter constitutes a medical device and
so must typically be rewritten from the ground up, with a quality
management system in place, and in compliance with Good
Manufacturing Practice. The time, expertise, and expense associated with this can be considerable and likely not possible for
clinicians
signiﬁcant
commercial support.
It is also important to highlight that many aspects of the
regulatory processes for AI are still evolving and that there is
uncertainty about the implications of this, both for planning of
clinical trials and commercial development. Firstly, it is worth
explicitly pointing out a prevalent misconception about AI
diagnostic systems. Although these systems typically learn by
being trained on large amounts of labelled images, at some point
this process is stopped and diagnostic thresholds are set. In the
work by Abramoff and colleagues, the software was locked prior
to the clinical trial—after this point, the software behaves in a
similar fashion to non-AI diagnostic systems. That is to say the
auto-didactic aspect of the algorithm is no longer doing ‘on the
methodologies and regulatory frameworks have evolved to deal
with algorithms capable of learning on a case-by-case basis in a
real-world setting. Secondly, it is worth highlighting that the IDx-
DR was reviewed under the FDA’s De Novo premarket review
pathway.8 This is a regulatory pathway for low- to moderate-risk
devices that are novel and for which there is no legally marketed
device. The bar for subsequent approval of diabetic retinopathy AI
diagnostic systems is likely to be higher.
While this study is undoubtedly a milestone, and an important
benchmark for future research, it is also important to touch on
Received: 7 August 2018 Revised: 8 August 2018 Accepted: 9 August 2018
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
 
some of its shortcomings. Although recruitment occurred from 10
primary care sites, it is still a relatively small study in diagnostic
accuracy terms. Due to low initial numbers of patients with
potentially referable diabetic retinopathy, it was necessary to
institute a pre-speciﬁed enrichment strategy where patients with
poorer control of their diabetes were preferentially recruited. The
low prevalence of disease in screening populations is likely to be a
continued issue for design of prospective AI studies. In part due to
these small numbers, it is not really possible to draw conclusions
about the efﬁcacy of the system for the evaluation of the most
severe, sight-threatening forms of diabetic retinopathy requiring
urgent ophthalmic intervention to prevent irreversible visual loss.
Further clarity would also be required on the study end points.
The prespeciﬁed sensitivity end point agreed with the FDA was
85.0% and this was met with a point estimate of primary
sensitivity of 87.2%. However, the conﬁdence intervals of this
estimate were 81.8–91.2% (that is, spanned the superiority end
point). The study also employed an intention-to-screen protocol;
however, 40 participants successfully enrolled in the study were
excluded from analysis as their images were subsequently found
to be insufﬁcient quality to be graded by the image reading
center. The authors attempt to address this by considering a
worst-case scenario where all such images are incorrectly graded
and repeating the analysis. In this approach the sensitivity would
be 80.7% (76.7–84.2%). They note that this calculation rules out a
pre-speciﬁed inferiority hypothesis of 75%, but do not highlight
that the superiority end point would no longer be met. In larger
scale studies, these discrepancies may be important.
Aside from these methodological questions, there are some
clinical limitations. The reviewers correctly highlight a number of
other pathologies subsequently identiﬁed by the Wisconsin Image
Reading Center, including possible glaucoma and possible agerelated macular degeneration. Although not intended for this
purpose, it is unavoidable that the system will encounter patients
with these and other more serious pathologies (for example,
retinal detachment or choroidal melanoma). In its current version,
the algorithm can only provide classiﬁcation related to diabetic
retinopathy and would not identify these other retinal conditions.
The diagnostic system has also quite narrow inclusion criteria for
usage. It requires images to be acquired with a speciﬁc retinal
fundus camera (Topcon NW400), which costs approximately
$18,000 and is approved by the FDA to detect “more than mild”
diabetic retinopathy; it also excludes many patients with preexisting diabetic retinopathy. The latter stipulation may be a
particular issue for patients with diabetic retinopathy, who often
fail to attend appointments for eye examinations and may not be
aware of any treatments that they have previously had for this
condition. A considerable body of work has highlighted this issue
in the context of the diabetic retinopathy screening in the UK.9
One potential solution in the future is empowering patients to
perform their own retinal eye exam via their smartphone, with
cloud-based, AI interpretation. This would likely require pupillary
dilation or infrared-light, but it would sidestep the expense and
inconvenience of formal eye exams.
There is also the question as to whether the now-approved
device will have signiﬁcant uptake in the clinic. Besides the
expense, it remains to be determined how and where it would be
implemented. Will primary care clinics incorporate retinal screening into their practice? This is not really an ‘autonomous system’
since someone needs to acquire the image—who will perform
Diabetic retinopathy, in particular, and other diseases of the eye,
have been a major focus of AI research in medicine to date. In
large retrospective studies of diabetic retinopathy, the algorithmic
diagnosis was compared with ophthalmologists by either fundus
photographs or optical coherence tomography, and the accuracy
rates were higher (as high as AUC 0.99 in two datasets) than in the
current trial.10,11 This is noteworthy and to be expected since the
results from looking backwards in machine datasets are not likely
to mirror forward clinical assessment.
While it is always easy to be critical of studies that forge new
ground, it is important to applaud the authors for this pivotal
work. Although deep learning will not be a panacea, it has huge
potential in many clinical areas where high dimensional data is
mapped to a simple classiﬁcation and for which datasets are
potentially stable over extended periods. As such, it will be
incumbent on healthcare professionals to become more familiar
with this and other AI technologies in the coming years to ensure
that they are used appropriately. This study represents an
important ﬁrst step in that direction.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to both the drafting and critical revision of the manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: P.A.K. is an external consultant for DeepMind. E.J.T. is an
advisor for Verily Life Science.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Pearse A. Keane1 and Eric J. Topol2,3
1NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Ophthalmology, Moorﬁelds
Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, London, UK; 2Scripps Translational Science Institute,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA and 3Division of
Cardiovascular Disease, Scripps Clinic-Scripps Health, La Jolla, CA,
Correspondence: Pearse A. Keane ( )