Western University
Western University
Scholarship@Western
Scholarship@Western
FIMS Publications
Information & Media Studies (FIMS) Faculty
Why are Websites co-linked? the case of Canadian universities
Why are Websites co-linked? the case of Canadian universities
L. Vaughan
Vaughan, L.; Faculty of Information and Media Studies, University of Western Ontario, London, Ont. N6A
5B7, Canada; email: , 
M.E.I. Kipp
Follow this and additional works at: 
Part of the Library and Information Science Commons
Citation of this paper:
Citation of this paper:
Vaughan, L.; Kipp, M.E.I.; and Gao, Y., "Why are Websites co-linked? the case of Canadian universities"
 . FIMS Publications. 194.
 
Liwen Vaughan, Margaret E.I. Kipp, Yijun Gao
Faculty of Information and Media Studies
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5B7, Canada
Why are Websites Co-linked?
The Case of Canadian Universities
Abstract: A random sample Web pages that linked to a pair of Canadian universities was
retrieved. The content of the page as well as the context of the link were manually examined to
record the following variables: language, country, type of Website, and the reason for co-linking.
Résumé : Un échantillon aléatoire de pages web reliées à une paire d’universités canadiennes a
été repéré. Le contenu de la page, aussi bien que le contexte du lien ont été manuellement
examinés pour enregistrer les variables suivantes : langue, pays, type de site web et raison du colien.
1. Background of the Study
Many Webometrics studies have been conducted to examine the nature of Web
hyperlinks. Among the various types of Websites, academic Websites are most
frequently studied. Several studies have found that the number of hyperlinks (inlinks) to
university Websites correlates with the quality of the university using varying definitions
of quality. For example, in UK studies, quality is measured by the university’s research
performance as shown in UK government’s official research assessment exercise (RAE)
ratings . In the Canadian context, quality is measured by the Maclean’s
ranking of Canadian universities . The reliability of the
quality measurement notwithstanding; the studies have shown that, when links are
aggregated on a macro level, we can find patterns of linking and uncover useful
information.
Vaughan further studied patterns of co-links (If page X and page Y are both
linked to by page Z, then X and Y have a co-link) to Canadian university Websites.
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) was used to analyze and visualize co-link data. MDS
mapping results of the data sets accurately reflected the ways Canadians see the
universities and clearly showed the linguistic and cultural differences within Canadian
society. This shows that co-links are not created at random and that Web co-links can be
a measure of the similarity or relatedness of sites being co-linked.
While these quantitative studies showed us the patterns of the Web links, qualitative
studies are needed to gain a better understanding of the nature of the Web link. Parallel to
the quantitative studies, various qualitative studies have been conducted to find out why
hyperlinks are created, i.e. the reasons or motivations for creation of a Web link. Most of
these studies used a content analysis approach but other approaches, such as personal interviews , have also been used. All these studies examined the motivations for the creation
of inlinks but none analyzed reasons for co-linking. The current study fills this gap. It
builds on the Vaughan study by taking a content analysis approach to find out
why co-links were created. Specifically, are the co-linked sites related and how are they
related? It is hoped that the findings from this study will complement or triangulate
findings from the quantitative study and provide us with a deeper understanding of the
Web co-link phenomenon.
2. Methodology
2.1 Websites in the Study
This study used the same set of universities as that in the Vaughan study. Thus
all universities ranked in the Maclean’s Guide to Canadian Universities 
were candidates for the study. URLs of the university Websites were obtained from the
Maclean’s Guide and the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada .
Among the 47 universities in Maclean’s Guide, five have multiple URLs in the form of
redirect or alias. These URLs cause problems in collecting co-link data and they were
thus excluded from the previous study and consequently the current
study. Among the 42 universities studied, 36 are English, four are French, and two are
bilingual. See Appendix 1 for the list of the universities and related information.
2.2 Search Engines and Query Syntax
Yahoo! was used for collecting co-link data. Other major search engines that were
considered, but eliminated as a choice for data collection, include Google and MSN.
Google’s “link” query term cannot be combined with the “site” query term to search for
external inlinks as is stated in Google’s API documentation “no other query terms can be
specified when using this special query term” . MSN can perform external
inlink search but it can only display the first 250 retrieved items at the time of data
collection while Yahoo! can display the first 1000 items.
Yahoo! has two link search commands: link and linkdomain. The “link” command will
only search for links pointing to the homepage while the “linkdomain” command will
find all links pointing to the site in question including the homepage and all other pages
of the site. The study intends to find co-links both to the homepage and to nonhomepages and to make a comparison of the two types of co-links. Using two imaginary
URLs www.abc.ca and www.xyz.ca as an example, the queries used to search for colinks are show in Table 1.
To search for
Query Used
Co-links to the homepages
(link: –site:abc.ca) AND
(link: –site:xyz.ca)
Co-links to non-homepages
(linkdomain:abc.ca –link: AND
(linkdomain:xyz.ca –link: 
Table 1 – Search Queries
It should be noted that the query used to search for co-links to non-homepages, as shown
in Table 1, does not guarantee that the co-links found are external links, i.e. links coming
from sites other than the two sites in question. For example, a page in site www.abc.ca
could have links to another page in site www.abc.ca and a page in site www.xyz.ca.
These co-links were eliminated when they were encountered and replaced with another
randomly selected co-link page.
2.3 Sampling and Classification Process
We searched for co-links between all pairs of the universities in the study alternating
between searching for co-links to homepages and to non-homepages. One co-link was
randomly selected from each set of search results to be manually classified. Each of these
linking pages (page that initiated the co-links to the pair of universities) was classified in
the following aspects: language, country, type of site, and reasons or motivations for
creating the co-link.
Determining the language of the page is straightforward. Country is determined by the
country of the page owner rather than the country designation in the URL. Consistent
with a previous study , the type of the Website was
manually assigned based on the type of organization responsible for the content of the
page and not based on the domain name (e.g. .com or .org). The following five types of
Websites were identified: commercial, organizational (e.g. non-profit organizations,
associations, conferences), governmental, educational (including universities, colleges,
schools, and professors’ homepages), and personal. The classification of language,
country, and type of Websites was done by only one of us as the coding of these
variables was fairly objective and straightforward.
Both the content of the Webpage as well as the context of the links were examined to
determine the reason or motivation for creating the co-link. As there was no prior study
that classified motivations of co-link creation, we needed to develop the classification
scheme from the ground up. Based on the experience of our previous study that
developed a classification scheme of motivations for linking to commercial Websites
 , we used the following induction process to develop the
classification scheme based on grounded theory . The first author
examined a group of co-linking pages (pages that initiated co-links) and identified six
preliminary categories with brief notes defining each category. Then the second and the
third authors classified a group of co-link pages using the preliminary categories and
revised the categories as needed. They did this exercise together to achieve a consistent
understanding of the categories. They also recorded examples for each category. All
three authors then discussed and finalized a classification scheme of the following five
categories: general, teaching, research, association, and not related. See Appendix 2 for
the definition of categories and the examples that illustrate each category. Only 3.8% of
pages classified fall into the category “association” (the two universities are co-linked
because they have related academic, professional or student associations). In the data
analysis stage, we decided to merge this very small category with the category of
“general” (the two universities are co-linked in a list of universities, university libraries,
university ranking, or education and research facilities) because being related by
“associations” is similar to other types of “general” relationship in that it is not
specifically related to teaching or research. Thus the final categories in the “results”
section of this paper are “general”, “teaching”, “research”, and “not related”, which
provides a clearer picture of if and how co-linked universities are related.
A total of 859 co-linking pages were classified. The second and the third authors
classified the first 41 pages together in the process of developing the classification
scheme. Then they classified the remaining 818 pages independently. The inter-coder
consistency rate in classifying these 818 pages was 98%; this is a very high consistency
rate that assures the validity and reliability of the data. This consistency rate is higher
than that achieved in previous studies of Web page and Web link classification .
3. Results
3.1 Reasons for Co-linking
The reasons or motivations for co-linking to a pair of universities are summarized in
Table 2. In only 5.9% of the cases (the “not related” category), the reason that the two
universities were co-linked was accidental (i.e. they happened to be mentioned on the
same Web page). For the remaining 96.1% cases, the reasons that the two universities
were co-linked were either for their relationship in teaching/research or in other general
ways such as student organizations or libraries. It is worth noting that teaching is a much
more common reason than research for co-linking. This reflects the general observation
that the use of Websites for teaching (e.g. course Websites) is much more common than
use of Websites for research (e.g. report research findings).
Not related
Table 2 - Reasons for Co-linking
3.2 Types of Sites
Canadian university Websites were co-linked by various types of sites as shown in Table
3. Not surprisingly, the most common type of site was educational sites but this type of
site does not constitute a majority (43.3%). What is somewhat surprising is that
commercial sites out numbered government sites by about 10 times. Even personal sites
(7.7%) are much more common than government sites (2.7%).
Educational
Organizational
Governmental Commercial
Table 3 - Types of Sites
3.3 Country
For the purpose of succinct presentation, European and Asian countries were merged by
continent while countries in South America, Australia etc. were merged into a category
called “others” (see Table 4 for the country distribution of co-linking pages). In 8.8% of
the cases we were unable to determine the country from the Web page (“unknown”
category in Table 4).
It is worth noting that the majority of links were from outside Canada; a sign that
Canadian universities were very visible internationally. Links from the U.S.A. out
numbered those from Europe and Asia combined. Geographical vicinity seems to be a
factor in co-linking as is in the case of simple inlinking 
Table 4 - Country of Co-linking page
3.4 Language
The language of the Web pages that initiated co-links to Canadian universities is shown
in Table 5 where “mixed languages” means that two or more languages were present on
the page. The most common type of mix is English and another language (e.g. English
and Chinese) but the mix of English and French did not occur. Among the 42 universities
in the study, 36 (85.7%) are English, 4 (9.5%) are French and 2 (4.8%) are bilingual in
English and French. Given this situation, the dominance of English in Table 5 is not
surprising but the French language seems to be under-represented among the co-linking
Mixed Languages
749(87.2%)
Table 5 - Language of Co-linking page
3.5 Relationship between Reasons for Co-linking and Types of Sites
Table 6 shows the cross tabulation of reasons for co-linking and the types of sites that
initiated the co-links. A chi-square test shows that there is a significant relationship
between the two variables (p<0.01). Comparing the observed frequency vs. the expected
frequency (shown in brackets in each cell of Table 6), we can see co-links from
educational sites are more likely to be created for teaching and research purposes and less
likely to be in the “not related” category. This means that if we can limit data collection
to educational sites, we can get data that better show teaching and research relationships
of co-linked universities. However, implementing this strategy of data collection will be
very difficult without the very time-consuming process of manual filtering as educational
sites in some countries such as Canada do not have clear designation of .edu or .ac in
their URLs.
Types of Sites
Reasons for
Co-linking
Educational
Organizational
Governmental
Commercial
170(209.6)
170(135.2)
147(117.4)
Not Related
372(372.0)
240(240.0)
Table 6 - Relationship between Reasons for Co-linking and the Types of Sites
(Number shown in brackets in each cell is the expected frequency)
4. Conclusions and Discussion
The study found that in over 94% of cases, the two co-linked universities were related
academically. Here academic relationship can be either in general ways (e.g. university
libraries or student organizations) or specifically in teaching or research (38%). This
confirms results from quantitative studies that Web co-links can be a measure of the
similarity or relatedness of sites being co-linked and that Web co-link analysis can thus
be used to study relationships among universities.
The majority of co-links came from sites outside Canada, a sign that Canadian
universities are very visible internationally. Educational sites are the most common type
of site that generated co-links to Canadian universities. Furthermore, co-links from this
type of site have a higher chance (51%) of showing teaching or research relationships. If
co-link data are filtered to be from educational sites only, the data will contain better
information on teaching and research relationships among universities and thus will be
better objects for Web data mining.
Acknowledgement: This study is part of a larger project funded by the Initiative on the
New Economy (INE) Research Grants program of the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada (SSHRC).