SCALING RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK LANGUAGE MODELS
Will Williams, Niranjani Prasad, David Mrva, Tom Ash, Tony Robinson
Cantab Research, Cambridge, UK
{willw,tonyr}@cantabResearch.com
This paper investigates the scaling properties of Recurrent Neural Network Language Models (RNNLMs). We discuss how
to train very large RNNs on GPUs and address the questions
of how RNNLMs scale with respect to model size, training-set
size, computational costs and memory. Our analysis shows that
despite being more costly to train, RNNLMs obtain much lower
perplexities on standard benchmarks than n-gram models. We
train the largest known RNNs and present relative word error
rates gains of 18% on an ASR task. We also present the new
lowest perplexities on the recently released billion word language modelling benchmark, 1 BLEU point gain on machine
translation and a 17% relative hit rate gain in word prediction.
Index Terms— recurrent neural network, language modelling, GPU, speech recognition, RNNLM
1. INTRODUCTION
Statistical language models form a crucial component of many
applications such as automatic speech recognition (ASR), machine translation (MT) and prediction for mobile phone text input. One such class of models, Recurrent Neural Network Language Models (RNNLMs), provide a rich and powerful way to
model sequential language data. Despite an initial ﬂurry of interest in RNNs in the early ’90s for acoustic modelling , the computational cost and memory overheads of training
large RNNs proved prohibitive. Since the earliest days of large
vocabulary speech recognition, n-gram language models have
been the dominant paradigm. However, recent work by Mikolov
 on RNNLMs has shown that modestly sized RNNLMs can
now be trained and have been shown to be competitive with ngrams. Mikolov trained RNNLMs with 800 hidden state units;
Google’s language modelling benchmark subsequently established baseline RNNLM results with 1024 hidden state units.
Many of the most recent ASR evaluations involve RNNLMs,
highlighting their widespread popularity.
Although RNNs have replaced n-grams as state-of-the-art,
the question remains whether these architectures will scale.
Single CPU-based implementations have suffered from computational limitations and have been unable to scale to the large
number of parameters now commonplace in the neural net literature. Concretely, we address the questions of how RNNLMs
scale with respect to model size, training-set size, processing
power and memory. Our primary performance metric here is
This paper summarises the results of SMART award ”Large scale neural
network language models” which ran from March 2013 to August 2014.
perplexity and therefore all discussion on performance will
relate speciﬁcally to the ability to reduce perplexity. The results presented here show the largest reductions in perplexity
reported so far over KN 5-grams.
2. DATA SETS
2.1. Training Data
The main training corpus we use throughout this paper is an internally collated and processed data set. All data predates Nov.
2013 and totals approximately 8bn words, comprising:
1. [880m] Spoken News: Derived from transcripts of radio
and news shows.
2. [1.7bn] Wikipedia: Copy of Wikipedia articles.
3. [6.1bn] Written News: Derived from a web crawl of
many popular news sites.
We used a rolling buffer of minimum size of 140 characters
split on sentences to deduplicate the corpora. We used multiple
hash functions to store past occurrences efﬁciently and excluded
a negligibly small proportion of text due to false positives. We
then put the corpus through a typical ASR normalisation and
tokenisation pipeline - expanding out numbers into digit strings,
removing most punctuation, casting to lower case and inserting
sentence markers.
2.2. Test Data
Unless otherwise stated, all our testing was done on a standard
test benchmark: TED test data IWSLT14.SLT.tst20101.
chose this out-of-domain test set to exclude any possibility of
text overlap between training and test sets, and also because of
the availability of a publicly available KALDI recipe2.
2.3. Entropy Filtering
To ﬁlter our corpus we used cross-entropy difference scoring
 . Typically, sentences are used as the natural choice for
segments in this style of ﬁltering. However, for the composite corpus, we wanted to maintain between-sentence context
for the beneﬁt of the RNNLM training, and so did not want
to ﬁlter our corpus on a sentence by sentence basis. We instead implemented a rolling-buffer solution: a cross-entropy
difference score was calculated across rolling batches of 16 sentences.
If a sentence was ever part of a rolling buffer with
1 
tst2010.en-fr.en.tgz
 
kaldi/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/egs/tedlium/s5/
 
cross-entropy difference below the threshold, it was maintained
in the output corpus. This led to output that was more likely
to be drawn from consecutive sentences, maintaining betweensentence information. The entropy threshold was then set at
empirically determined levels to produce ﬁltered corpora of the
desired size, i.e.
4 etc. of the original corpus size, as determined by word count. For typical in-domain data we used
IWSLT13.ASR.train.en3.
3. SCALING PROPERTIES OF N-GRAMS
n-gram language models have maintained their dominance in
statistical language modelling largely due to their simplicity and
ease of computation. Although n-grams can be modelled and
queried comparatively fast, they exhibit diminishing gains when
built on more data.
Training Words
Perplexity
Fig. 1. Effect of increasing training data size on a randomly
selected (RS) subsets of our training corpus with a 5-gram. The
dashed line is extrapolation.
n-grams can be computed on larger data sets more easily
than RNNLMs but as the extrapolation in Figure 1 indicates,
each order of magnitude increase in the training data above
1012 words gives a reduction in perplexity of less than 6%. The
largest current text corpora such as Google n-grams4 and CommonCrawl are about size 1012. The asymptote of an exponential curve ﬁtted to Figure 1 is approximately perplexity
73; these values represent a hard limit on the performance of
5-grams on this test set. n-grams also scale very poorly with
respect to memory. At 8bn words the KN 5-gram already takes
up 362GB in ARPA format and 69GB in KenLM binary
trie format - already impractically large for current commercial
ASR. In comparison to RNNLMs, n-grams take up massively
more space for modest entropy improvements and therefore do
not scale well with respect to data size.
Additionally, increasing the order of the n-gram model gives
vanishingly small gains for anything above a 5-gram trained on
3 
4 
currently available corpora. The number of parameters of an ngram increases signiﬁcantly with its order, making attempts to
increase the order impractical.
4. RNNLMS ON GPUS
4.1. Background
Recent attempts to train very large networks (on the order of
billions of parameters) have required many CPU cores to work
in concert . High-end Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)
represent a viable alternative, being both affordable and capable
of extremely high computational throughput. GPUs have therefore been one of the key elements in the resurgence of neural
networks over the last decade. RNNLMs are highly amenable
to parallelisation on GPUs due to their predominant reliance on
linear algebra operations (such as matrix multiplies) for which
highly optimised GPU-based libraries are publicly available.
In contrast to n-gram models, which simply count the occurrences of particular combinations of words, RNNs learn a
distributed hidden representation for each context from which a
probability distribution over all words in a given vocabulary can
be obtained.
We use a standard RNN architecture but dispense with
bias units to maximise efﬁciency on the GPU and because, in
our experience, they do not provide any practical beneﬁt. Recent work has improved our understanding of how to effectively train RNNs . However, many of these improvements such as optimisation and regularisation techniques - make large
claims on resources. Very large RNNs with a large number of
hidden state units, nstate, can only be trained efﬁciently on current generation GPU hardware if one simpliﬁes both the architecture and training algorithm as far as possible. We believe our
setup from 2013 in this paper gives better speedups than previously reported elsewhere .
4.2. Implementation
To achieve high throughput and utilisation on GPUs we train a
standard RNN with stochastic gradient descent and rmsprop .
Where possible we use CUDA’s highly optimised linear algebra
library cuBLAS to make SGEMM calls.
Where this wasn’t
possible we wrote and optimised our own custom CUDA kernels. We use ﬂoats everywhere; the precision which doubles
offer is unnecessary to learn good representations. We pack our
input data using a data offset scheme which indexes the input
corpus at a number of different points, denoted noffset. This entails managing noffset by minibatch size different hidden states
throughout training. Typically we use noffset 128, similar to
 . Empirically, we found a minibatch size of ∼8-10 represents a good trade-off between memory usage and perplexity.
It also allows us to marshal a large and very efﬁcient matrix
multiply to perform all the hidden state-to-state and gradient
calculations in one cuBLAS SGEMM operation. We use a very
large rmsprop smoothing constant (0.9995). For the input-tostate and state-to-output matrices we approximate the majority
Training words (bn)
Perplexity
RNN-2048-RS
RNN-2048-EF
Fig. 2. Performance of 5-grams against nstate 2048 RNNs with
increasing training data size. We test on Randomly Selected
(RS) splits and Entropy Filtered (EF) splits of the 8bn corpus.
1024 2048 4096 8192
Perplexity
Fig. 3. Scaling nstate trained on 1bn words of the entropy ﬁltered 8bn corpus. Dashed line is the 5-gram baseline.
of the rmsprop values by averaging over nstate units such that
each word has just one rmsprop value rather than n values. This
almost halves the total memory usage. We train using Noise
Contrastive Estimation . When reporting perplexities we
explicitly normalise the output distribution. When performing
lattice rescoring we ﬁnd empirically that the small amount of
normalisation noise does not signiﬁcantly change the accuracy,
whilst considerably faster than standard class based modelling.
4.3. Analysis
Figure 3 shows that as we scale nstate we observe a near linear reduction in log perplexity with log training words. Given
that n-grams scale very poorly with respect to their order it
is clear that, on a ﬁxed-size data set, RNNs scale much better with model size. For network sizes over nstate 1024, our
[millions]
Training Time
Perplexity
RNN - 1024
RNN - 2048
RNN - 4096
Table 1. Perplexities on shard-0 (’news.en.heldout-00000-of-
00050’) from .
implementations on an Nvidia GeForce GTX Titan give 100x
speedups against the baseline single core Mikolov implementation5 on a 3.4GHz Intel i7 CPU. Despite much improved training times on the GPU, our larger RNNs take on the order of
days to train rather than hours which n-grams require. However, more compute power will favour RNNs since larger nstate
RNNs can leverage the extra computation to scale the model
size with nstate - something which yields a much smaller performance gain for n-grams. With respect to scaling the training
set size, Figure 2 shows that the nstate 2048 saturates (i.e. can
not make good use of more data) on 4bn words when trained on
a randomly chosen splits. We can, however, increase the model
size (i.e. nstate) to mitigate this problem - an approach which,
as already discussed, is impractical for n-grams. With an nstate
8192 RNN from Figure 3 we have already reduced perplexity
to 57.5, which is below the 73 we believe to be the asymptotic minimum for a 5-gram on this task. It therefore seems
unlikely that even a 5-gram with unlimited data and a further
15% reduction from entropy ﬁltering could ever outperform an
RNNLM. In addition, the nstate 8192 RNN corresponds to a
48% reduction over the 5-gram. Despite being so much better
in terms of perplexity on the same amount of data, the RNN uses
only 886M parameters - approximately half the number of the
5-gram. Moreover, we can match the perplexity of the 5-gram
with an nstate 128 RNN which uses under 1% of the parameters. In summary, although training time is much larger for an
RNN and we have to increase nstate when scaling the training
set size, RNNs make much better use of the additional data than
n-grams and use far fewer parameters to do so.
5. RESULTS
5.1. Language Modelling
We present our RNNLM results on the recently released billion
word language modelling benchmark . The vocabulary size
for this task is very large (770K) - we therefore train the RNNs
on a much smaller 64k vocabulary and interpolate them with
a full size 5-gram to ﬁll in rare word probabilities. RNN perplexities in Table 1 are interpolated with the KN 5-gram. The
nstate 4096 RNN is larger in state size than those in and
5 
512 1024 2048 4096 8192
IWSLT-unseg
en-US-unseg
Fig. 4. Rescoring Kaldi Lattices with RNNLMs. ‘n/a’ refers to
rescoring with n-gram only and is the n-gram baseline.
we achieve a better perplexity (42.4) with that one single model
than the combination of interpolated models in whilst also
using only 3% of the total parameters.
We evaluated the RNNLMs by rescoring lattices on three different systems, using the IWSLT14.SLT.tst2010 data both with and
without the supplied segmentation. The ‘IWSLT’ system uses
the Kaldi TEDLIUM recipe for acoustic models and language models built on 6. The nstate 2048 models overtrain on
the small entropy ﬁltered corpus. The ‘en-US’ system uses the
same framework but with the RNNLMs from Figure 3 and internal acoustic models. The ‘SM’ system also uses the RNNLMs
from Figure 3, but within the commercial service available at
speechmatics.com. Lattices were rescored using a highly
efﬁcient internal lattice rescoring tool which operates in considerably less than real time. Over both the ‘en-US’ and ‘SM’ task
we see an average reduction in WER of 18% relative to rescoring with the n-gram alone by using nstate 8192 RNNLMs.
5.3. Machine Translation
In our MT experiments we rescored the WFST lattices from
the WMT13 EN-RU system developed at Cambridge University
Engineering Department . The evaluation measure commonly used in statistical machine translation, BLEU score, was
32.34 with our baseline n-gram model and increased to 33.45
with an nstate 3520 RNNLM (bigger is better for BLEU scores).
The improvement of 1 BLEU point over the baseline demonstrates the utility of RNNLMs in not just ASR but also statistical
MT systems.
6The 12.8% IWSLT result is a competitive baseline that complies with
IWSLT rules, using freely redistributable sources and can be recreated from
the Kaldi TEDLIUM s5 recipe and 
cantab-TEDLIUM.tar.bz2.
LM total size (mb)
Hit-Rate %
Katz 5-grams
KN n-grams
Fig. 5. Hit rates of Katz n-grams with different prune thresholds, RNNs quantised to different numbers of bits per weight
and KN n-grams of increasing order. 7-bit quantisation produces an anomalously high hit-rate - we are unsure what is interacting to product this effect.
5.4. Word prediction
Word prediction involves predicting the next word in a string,
with performance determined by percentage of times the target
word is in the top 3 words predicted (known as ‘hit-rate’). For
this task we train on 100M words from the BNC corpus 
using a vocabulary size of 10K and the RNN using a shortlist
of 100 candidate words generated from a heavily pruned 2 MB
n-gram. For our task of word prediction on mobile phones we
have tight memory restrictions and therefore choose nstate 1024
as an appropriate RNN size. We compress the RNNs by inserting layers with 512 units above and below the hidden state
and then train end-to-end. Additionally, we tie the input-state
and state-output weights as their transpose and quantise all the
weights. At 10 MB the RNN achieves a 17% relative hit-rate
gain over the Katz-5 n-gram, proving the utility of RNNs in
memory constrained settings.
6. CONCLUSION
We have shown that large RNNLMs can be trained efﬁciently
on GPUs by exploiting data parallelism and minimising the
number of extra parameters required during training.
RNNs reduce the perplexity on standard benchmarks by over
40% against 5-grams, whilst using a fraction of the parameters.
We believe RNNs now offer a lower perplexity than 5-grams for
any amount of training data. In addition, we showed that state
of the art ASR systems can be trained with Kaldi and high-end
GPUs by rescoring with an RNNLM. Despite being both compute and GPU memory bound, RNNLMs are comfortably ahead
of n-grams at present. We believe that future developments in
compute power and memory capacity will further favour them.
7. REFERENCES
 Anthony J. Robinson, “An application of recurrent nets
to phone probability estimation,” Neural Networks, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 298–305, 1994.
 Ronald J. Williams, “Complexity of exact gradient computation algorithms for recurrent neural networks,” Tech.
Rep., 1989.
 Mike Schuster and Kuldip K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural networks,” Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681, 1997.
 Tom´aˇs Mikolov,
Statistical language models based on
neural networks, Ph.D. thesis, Brno University of Technology, 2012.
 Ciprian Chelba, Tomas Mikolov, Mike Schuster, Qi Ge,
Thorsten Brants, Phillipp Koehn, and Tony Robinson,
“One Billion Word Benchmark for measuring progress in
statistical language modeling,” .
 Dietrich Klakow,
“Selecting articles from the language
model training corpus,” in Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, 2000. ICASSP’00. Proceedings. 2000 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE, 2000, vol. 3, pp.
1695–1698.
 Robert C. Moore and William Lewis, “Intelligent selection of language model training data,” in Proceedings of
the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2010, pp. 220–224.
 Christian Buck, Kenneth Heaﬁeld, and Bas van Ooyen,
“N-gram counts and language models from the common
crawl,” LREC, 2014.
 Kenneth Heaﬁeld, “KenLM: Faster and smaller language
model queries,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp. 187–197.
 Quoc V Le, Rajat Monga, Matthieu Devin, Kai Chen,
Greg S. Corrado, Jeff Dean, and Andrew Y. Ng, “Building high-level features using large scale unsupervised
learning,”
in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 8595–8598.
 Tom´aˇs Mikolov, Martin Karaﬁ´at, Luk´aˇs Burget, Jan
ˇCernock`y, and Sanjeev Khudanpur, “Recurrent neural network based language model,” in Proceedings of the 11th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH), 2010, pp. 1045–
 Yoshua Bengio, Nicolas Boulanger-Lewandowski, and
Razvan Pascanu, “Advances in optimizing recurrent networks,”
in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 8624–8628.
 Tomas Mikolov, Stefan Kombrink, Anoop Deoras, Lukar
Burget, and J Cernocky, “Rnnlm-recurrent neural network
language modeling toolkit,” .
 Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey E Hinton,
“Generating text with recurrent neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML-11), 2011, pp. 1017–1024.
 Zhiheng Huang, Geoffrey Zweig, Michael Levit, Benoit
Dumoulin, Barlas Oguz, and Shawn Chang, “Accelerating recurrent neural network training via two stage classes
and parallelization,” in Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU), 2013 IEEE Workshop on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 326–331.
 Xie Chen, Yongqiang Wang, Xunying Liu, Mark JF Gales,
and Philip C Woodland, “Efﬁcient GPU-based training of
recurrent neural network language models using spliced
sentence bunch,” Proc. ISCA Interspeech, 2014.
 Boxun Li, Erjin Zhou, Bo Huang, Jiayi Duan, Yu Wang,
Ningyi Xu, Jiaxing Zhang, and Huazhong Yang, “Large
scale recurrent neural network on gpu,” in Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2014 International Joint Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 4062–4069.
 T. Tieleman and G. Hinton, “Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide
the gradient by a running average of its recent magnitude,”
COURSERA: Neural Networks for Machine Learning, vol.
 Andriy Mnih and Koray Kavukcuoglu, “Learning word
embeddings efﬁciently with noise-contrastive estimation,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2013, pp. 2265–2273.
 Anthony Rousseau, Paul Del´eglise, and Yannick Est`eve,
“TED-LIUM: an Automatic Speech Recognition dedicated corpus,” in LREC, 2012, pp. 125–129.
 J. Pino, A. Waite, T. Xiao, A. de Gispert, F. Flego, and
W. Byrne, “The University of Cambridge Russian-English
system at WMT13,” in Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, 2013, pp. 198–
 BNC Consortium et al.,
“The British National Corpus,
version 3 (BNC XML Edition), distributed by Oxford University Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium,” 2007.