Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 979–988
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unpaired Sentiment-to-Sentiment Translation: A Cycled
Reinforcement Learning Approach
Jingjing Xu1∗, Xu Sun1∗, Qi Zeng1, Xuancheng Ren1,
Xiaodong Zhang1, Houfeng Wang1, Wenjie Li2
1MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
2Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{jingjingxu,xusun,pkuzengqi,renxc,zxdcs,wanghf}@pku.edu.cn
 
The goal of sentiment-to-sentiment “translation” is to change the underlying sentiment of a sentence while keeping its content.
The main challenge is the lack of
parallel data. To solve this problem, we
propose a cycled reinforcement learning
method that enables training on unpaired
data by collaboration between a neutralization module and an emotionalization
module. We evaluate our approach on two
review datasets, Yelp and Amazon. Experimental results show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
systems. Especially, the proposed method
substantially improves the content preservation performance. The BLEU score is
improved from 1.64 to 22.46 and from
0.56 to 14.06 on the two datasets, respectively.1
Introduction
Sentiment-to-sentiment “translation” requires the
system to change the underlying sentiment of a
sentence while preserving its non-emotional semantic content as much as possible. It can be regarded as a special style transfer task that is important in Natural Language Processing (NLP) .
It has broad applications, including review sentiment transformation, news rewriting, etc. Yet the
lack of parallel training data poses a great obstacle
to a satisfactory performance.
Recently, several related studies for language
style transfer 
have been proposed.
However, when applied
∗Equal Contribution.
 
to the sentiment-to-sentiment “translation” task,
most existing studies only change the underlying
sentiment and fail in keeping the semantic content. For example, given “The food is delicious”
as the source input, the model generates “What a
bad movie” as the output. Although the sentiment
is successfully transformed from positive to negative, the output text focuses on a different topic.
The reason is that these methods attempt to implicitly separate the emotional information from
the semantic information in the same dense hidden
vector, where all information is mixed together in
an uninterpretable way. Due to the lack of supervised parallel data, it is hard to only modify the
underlying sentiment without any loss of the nonemotional semantic information.
To tackle the problem of lacking parallel data,
we propose a cycled reinforcement learning approach that contains two parts: a neutralization
module and an emotionalization module.
neutralization module is responsible for extracting
non-emotional semantic information by explicitly
ﬁltering out emotional words. The advantage is
that only emotional words are removed, which
does not affect the preservation of non-emotional
words. The emotionalization module is responsible for adding sentiment to the neutralized semantic content for sentiment-to-sentiment translation.
In cycled training, given an emotional sentence
with sentiment s, we ﬁrst neutralize it to the nonemotional semantic content, and then force the
emotionalization module to reconstruct the original sentence by adding the sentiment s. Therefore,
the emotionalization module is taught to add sentiment to the semantic context in a supervised way.
By adding opposite sentiment, we can achieve the
goal of sentiment-to-sentiment translation.
Because of the discrete choice of neutral words, the
gradient is no longer differentiable over the neutralization module. Thus, we use policy gradient,
one of the reinforcement learning methods, to reward the output of the neutralization module based
on the feedback from the emotionalization module. We add different sentiment to the semantic
content and use the quality of the generated text
as reward. The quality is evaluated by two useful
metrics: one for identifying whether the generated
text matches the target sentiment; one for evaluating the content preservation performance. The
reward guides the neutralization module to better
identify non-emotional words. In return, the improved neutralization module further enhances the
emotionalization module.
Our contributions are concluded as follows:
• For sentiment-to-sentiment translation, we
propose a cycled reinforcement learning approach.
It enables training with unpaired
data, in which only reviews and sentiment labels are available.
• Our approach tackles the bottleneck of keeping semantic information by explicitly separating sentiment information from semantic
• Experimental results show that our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
systems, especially in content preservation.
Related Work
Style transfer in computer vision has been studied . The
main idea is to learn the mapping between two image domains by capturing shared representations
or correspondences of higher-level structures.
There have been some studies on unpaired language style transfer recently. Hu et al. propose a new neural generative model that combines
variational auto-encoders (VAEs) and holistic attribute discriminators for effective imposition of
style semantic structures.
Fu et al. propose to use an adversarial network to make sure
that the input content does not have style information. Shen et al. focus on separating the
underlying content from style information. They
learn an encoder that maps the original sentence
to style-independent content and a style-dependent
decoder for rendering.
However, their evaluations only consider the transferred style accuracy.
We argue that content preservation is also an indispensable evaluation metric.
However, when
applied to the sentiment-to-sentiment translation
task, the previously mentioned models share the
same problem. They have the poor preservation of
non-emotional semantic content.
In this paper, we propose a cycled reinforcement learning method to improve sentiment-tosentiment translation in the absence of parallel
data. The key idea is to build supervised training pairs by reconstructing the original sentence.
A related study is “back reconstruction” in machine translation .
They couple two inverse tasks: one is for translating a sentence in language A to a sentence in
language B; the other is for translating a sentence
in language B to a sentence in language A. Different from the previous work, we do not introduce the inverse task, but use collaboration between the neutralization module and the emotionalization module.
Sentiment analysis is also related to our
work . The task usually involves detecting
whether a piece of text expresses positive, negative, or neutral sentiment. The sentiment can be
general or about a speciﬁc topic.
Cycled Reinforcement Learning for
Unpaired Sentiment-to-Sentiment
Translation
In this section, we introduce our proposed method.
An overview is presented in Section 3.1. The details of the neutralization module and the emotionalization module are shown in Section 3.2 and
Section 3.3.
The cycled reinforcement learning
mechanism is introduced in Section 3.4.
The proposed approach contains two modules:
a neutralization module and an emotionalization
module, as shown in Figure 1.
The neutralization module ﬁrst extracts non-emotional semantic content, and then the emotionalization module
attaches sentiment to the semantic content. Two
modules are trained by the proposed cycled reinforcement learning method. The proposed method
requires the two modules to have initial learning
ability. Therefore, we propose a novel pre-training
method, which uses a self-attention based sentiment classiﬁer (SASC). A sketch of cycled reinforcement learning is shown in Algorithm 1. The
Neutralization Module
Emotionalization Module
Classifier
An illustration of the two modules.
Lower: The neutralization module removes emotional words and extracts non-emotional semantic
information. Upper: The emotionalization module adds sentiment to the semantic content. The
proposed self-attention based sentiment classiﬁer
is used to guide the pre-training.
details are introduced as follows.
Neutralization Module
The neutralization module Nθ is used for explicitly ﬁltering out emotional information.
paper, we consider this process as an extraction
problem. The neutralization module ﬁrst identiﬁes
non-emotional words and then feeds them into the
emotionalization module. We use a single Longshort Term Memory Network (LSTM) to generate
the probability of being neutral or being polar for
every word in a sentence. Given an emotional input sequence x = (x1, x2, . . . , xT ) of T words
from Γ, the vocabulary of words, this module is
responsible for producing a neutralized sequence.
Since cycled reinforcement learning requires
the modules with initial learning ability, we propose a novel pre-training method to teach the
neutralization module to identify non-emotional
words. We construct a self-attention based sentiment classiﬁer and use the learned attention
weight as the supervisory signal. The motivation
comes from the fact that, in a well-trained sentiment classiﬁcation model, the attention weight re-
ﬂects the sentiment contribution of each word to
Algorithm 1 The cycled reinforcement learning
method for training the neutralization module Nθ
and the emotionalization module Eφ.
1: Initialize the neutralization module Nθ, the emotionalization module Eφ with random weights θ, φ
2: Pre-train Nθ using MLE based on Eq. 6
3: Pre-train Eφ using MLE based on Eq. 7
4: for each iteration i = 1, 2, ..., M do
Sample a sequence x with sentiment s from X
Generate a neutralized sequence ˆx based on Nθ
Given ˆx and s, generate an output based on Eφ
Compute the gradient of Eφ based on Eq. 8
Compute the reward R1 based on Eq. 11
¯s = the opposite sentiment
Given ˆx and ¯s, generate an output based on Eφ
Compute the reward R2 based on Eq. 11
Compute the combined reward Rc based on Eq. 10
Compute the gradient of Nθ based on Eq. 9
Update model parameters θ, φ
16: end for
some extent. Emotional words tend to get higher
attention weights while neutral words usually get
lower weights. The details of sentiment classiﬁer
are described as follows.
Given an input sequence x, a sentiment label y
is produced as
y = softmax(W · c)
where W is a parameter. The term c is computed
as a weighted sum of hidden vectors:
where αi is the weight of hi. The term hi is the
output of LSTM at the i-th word. The term αi is
computed as
i=0 exp(ei)
where ei = f(hi, hT ) is an alignment model. We
consider the last hidden state hT as the context
vector, which contains all information of an input
sequence. The term ei evaluates the contribution
of each word for sentiment classiﬁcation.
Our experimental results show that the proposed
sentiment classiﬁer achieves the accuracy of 89%
and 90% on two datasets. With high classiﬁcation accuracy, the attention weight produced by
the classiﬁer is considered to adequately capture
the sentiment information of each word.
To extract non-emotional words based on continuous attention weights,
we map attention
weights to discrete values, 0 and 1. Since the discrete method is not the key part is this paper, we
only use the following method for simpliﬁcation.
We ﬁrst calculate the averaged attention value
in a sentence as
where ¯α is used as the threshold to distinguish
non-emotional words from emotional words. The
discrete attention weight is calculated as
1, if αi ≤¯α
0, if αi > ¯α
where ˆαi is treated as the identiﬁer.
For pre-training the neutralization module, we
build the training pair of input text x and a discrete
attention weight sequence ˆα. The cross entropy
loss is computed as
PNθ( ˆαi|xi)
Emotionalization Module
The emotionalization module Eφ is responsible
for adding sentiment to the neutralized semantic
content. In our work, we use a bi-decoder based
encoder-decoder framework, which contains one
encoder and two decoders. One decoder adds the
positive sentiment and the other adds the negative
sentiment. The input sentiment signal determines
which decoder to use.
Speciﬁcally, we use the
seq2seq model
 for implementation. Both the encoder and decoder are
LSTM networks. The encoder learns to compress
the semantic content into a dense vector. The decoder learns to add sentiment based on the dense
vector. Given the neutralized semantic content and
the target sentiment, this module is responsible for
producing an emotional sequence.
For pre-training the emotionalization module,
we ﬁrst generate a neutralized input sequence ˆx by
removing emotional words identiﬁed by the proposed sentiment classiﬁer. Given the training pair
of a neutralized sequence ˆx and an original sentence x with sentiment s, the cross entropy loss is
computed as
PEφ(xi|ˆxi, s)
where a positive example goes through the positive decoder and a negative example goes through
the negative decoder.
We also explore a simpler method for pretraining the emotionalization module, which uses
the product between a continuous vector 1 −α
and a word embedding sequence as the neutralized
content where α represents an attention weight
Experimental results show that this
method achieves much lower results than explicitly removing emotional words based on discrete
attention weights. Thus, we do not choose this
method in our work.
Cycled Reinforcement Learning
Two modules are trained by the proposed cycled
method. The neutralization module ﬁrst neutralizes an emotional input to semantic content and
then the emotionalization module is forced to reconstruct the original sentence based on the source
sentiment and the semantic content.
Therefore,
the emotionalization module is taught to add sentiment to the semantic content in a supervised way.
Because of the discrete choice of neutral words,
the loss is no longer differentiable over the neutralization module. Therefore, we formulate it as
a reinforcement learning problem and use policy
gradient to train the neutralization module. The
detailed training process is shown as follows.
We refer the neutralization module Nθ as the
ﬁrst agent and the emotionalization module Eφ as
the second one. Given a sentence x associated
with sentiment s, the term ˆx represents the middle neutralized context extracted by ˆα, which is
generated by PNθ(ˆα|x).
In cycled training, the original sentence can be
viewed as the supervision for training the second
agent. Thus, the gradient for the second agent is
∇φJ(φ) = ∇φ log(PEφ(x|ˆx, s))
We denote ¯x as the output generated by
PEφ(¯x|ˆx, s). We also denote y as the output generated by PEφ(y|ˆx, ¯s) where ¯s represents the opposite sentiment. Given ¯x and y, we ﬁrst calculate rewards for training the neutralized module,
R1 and R2. The details of calculation process will
be introduced in Section 3.4.1. Then, we optimize
parameters through policy gradient by maximizing the expected reward to train the neutralization
It guides the neutralization module to
identify non-emotional words better. In return, the
improved neutralization module further enhances
the emotionalization module.
theorem , the gradient for the ﬁrst
∇θJ(θ) = E[Rc · ∇θ log(PNθ(ˆα|x))]
where Rc is calculated as
Rc = R1 + R2
Based on Eq. 8 and Eq. 9, we use the sampling
approach to estimate the expected reward. This
cycled process is repeated until converge.
The reward consists of two parts, sentiment con-
ﬁdence and BLEU. Sentiment conﬁdence evaluates whether the generated text matches the target
sentiment. We use a pre-trained classiﬁer to make
the judgment. Specially, we use the proposed selfattention based sentiment classiﬁer for implementation. The BLEU score
is used to measure the content preservation performance. Considering that the reward should encourage the model to improve both metrics, we use
the harmonic mean of sentiment conﬁdence and
BLEU as reward, which is formulated as
R = (1 + β2)
2 · BLEU · Confid
(β2 · BLEU) + Confid
where β is a harmonic weight.
Experiment
In this section, we evaluate our method on two review datasets. We ﬁrst introduce the datasets, the
training details, the baselines, and the evaluation
metrics. Then, we compare our approach with the
state-of-the-art systems. Finally, we show the experimental results and provide the detailed analysis of the key components.
Unpaired Datasets
We conduct experiments on two review datasets
that contain user ratings associated with each review. Following previous work ,
we consider reviews with rating above three as
positive reviews and reviews below three as negative reviews. The positive and negative reviews
are not paired.
Since our approach focuses on
sentence-level sentiment-to-sentiment translation
where sentiment annotations are provided at the
document level, we process the two datasets with
the following steps.
First, following previous
work , we ﬁlter out the reviews
that exceed 20 words. Second, we construct textsentiment pairs by extracting the ﬁrst sentence in
a review associated with its sentiment label, because the ﬁrst sentence usually expresses the core
idea. Finally, we train a sentiment classiﬁer and
ﬁlter out the text-sentiment pairs with the classi-
ﬁer conﬁdence below 0.8. Specially, we use the
proposed self-attention based sentiment classiﬁer
for implementation. The details of the processed
datasets are introduced as follows.
Yelp Review Dataset (Yelp): This dataset is
provided by Yelp Dataset Challenge.2 The processed Yelp dataset contains 400K, 10K, and 3K
pairs for training, validation, and testing, respectively.
Amazon Food Review Dataset (Amazon):
Leskovec . It consists of amounts of food
reviews from Amazon.3
The processed Amazon dataset contains 230K, 10K, and 3K pairs for
training, validation, and testing, respectively.
Training Details
We tune hyper-parameters based on the performance on the validation sets. The self-attention
based sentiment classiﬁer is trained for 10 epochs
on two datasets. We set β for calculating reward
to 0.5, hidden size to 256, embedding size to 128,
vocabulary size to 50K, learning rate to 0.6, and
batch size to 64. We use the Adagrad optimizer. All of the gradients are clipped
when the norm exceeds 2. Before cycled training, the neutralization module and the emotionalization module are pre-trained for 1 and 4 epochs
on the yelp dataset, for 3 and 5 epochs on the Amazon dataset.
We compare our proposed method with the following state-of-the-art systems.
Cross-Alignment
Auto-Encoder
This method is proposed by Shen et al. .
They propose a method that uses reﬁned alignment of latent representations in hidden layers to
2 
3 
perform style transfer. We treat this model as a
baseline and adapt it by using the released code.
Multi-Decoder with Adversarial Learning
(MDAL): This method is proposed by Fu et al.
 . They use a multi-decoder model with adversarial learning to separate style representations
and content representations in hidden layers. We
adapt this model by using the released code.
Evaluation Metrics
We conduct two evaluations in this work, including an automatic evaluation and a human evaluation. The details of evaluation metrics are shown
as follows.
Automatic Evaluation
We quantitatively measure sentiment transformation by evaluating the accuracy of generating designated sentiment.
For a fair comparison, we
do not use the proposed sentiment classiﬁcation
Following previous work , we instead use a stateof-the-art sentiment classiﬁer , called TextCNN, to automatically evaluate the transferred sentiment accuracy. TextCNN
achieves the accuracy of 89% and 88% on two
datasets. Speciﬁcally, we generate sentences given
sentiment s, and use the pre-trained sentiment
classiﬁer to assign sentiment labels to the generated sentences. The accuracy is calculated as the
percentage of the predictions that match the sentiment s.
To evaluate the content preservation performance, we use the BLEU score between the transferred sentence and the
source sentence as an evaluation metric. BLEU
is a widely used metric for text generation tasks,
such as machine translation, summarization, etc.
The metric compares the automatically produced
text with the reference text by computing overlapping lexical n-gram units.
To evaluate the overall performance, we use the
geometric mean of ACC and BLEU as an evaluation metric. The G-score is one of the most commonly used “single number” measures in Information Retrieval, Natural Language Processing, and
Machine Learning.
Human Evaluation
While the quantitative evaluation provides indication of sentiment transfer quality, it can not
evaluate the quality of transferred text accurately.
CAAE 
MDAL 
Proposed Method
CAAE 
MDAL 
Proposed Method
Table 1: Automatic evaluations of the proposed
method and baselines. ACC evaluates sentiment
transformation. BLEU evaluates content preservation. G-score is the geometric mean of ACC and
Therefore, we also perform a human evaluation on
the test set. We randomly choose 200 items for the
human evaluation. Each item contains the transformed sentences generated by different systems
given the same source sentence.
The items are
distributed to annotators who have no knowledge
about which system the sentence is from. They
are asked to score the transformed text in terms of
sentiment and semantic similarity. Sentiment represents whether the sentiment of the source text
is transferred correctly. Semantic similarity evaluates the context preservation performance. The
score ranges from 1 to 10 (1 is very bad and 10 is
very good).
Experimental Results
Automatic evaluation results are shown in Table 1.
ACC evaluates sentiment transformation. BLEU
evaluates semantic content preservation. G-score
represents the geometric mean of ACC and BLEU.
CAAE and MDAL achieve much lower BLEU
scores, 1.17 and 1.64 on the Yelp dataset, 0.56
and 0.27 on the Amazon dataset. The low BLEU
scores indicate the worrying content preservation
performance to some extent. Even with the desired
sentiment, the irrelevant generated text leads to
worse overall performance. In general, these two
systems work more like sentiment-aware language
models that generate text only based on the target
sentiment and neglect the source input. The main
reason is that these two systems attempt to separate emotional information from non-emotional
content in a hidden layer, where all information
is complicatedly mixed together. It is difﬁcult to
only modify emotional information without any
loss of non-emotional semantic content.
In comparison, our proposed method achieves
the best overall performance on the two datasets,
Sentiment Semantic G-score
CAAE 
MDAL 
Proposed Method
Sentiment Semantic G-score
CAAE 
MDAL 
Proposed Method
Human evaluations of the proposed
method and baselines. Sentiment evaluates sentiment transformation. Semantic evaluates content
preservation.
demonstrating the ability of learning knowledge
from unpaired data.
This result is attributed to
the improved BLEU score. The BLEU score is
largely improved from 1.64 to 22.46 and from 0.56
to 14.06 on the two datasets. The score improvements mainly come from the fact that we separate
emotional information from semantic content by
explicitly ﬁltering out emotional words. The extracted content is preserved and fed into the emotionalization module. Given the overall quality of
transferred text as the reward, the neutralization
module is taught to extract non-emotional semantic content better.
Table 2 shows the human evaluation results. It
can be clearly seen that the proposed method obviously improves semantic preservation. The semantic score is increased from 3.87 to 5.08 on the
Yelp dataset, and from 3.22 to 4.67 on the Amazon
dataset. In general, our proposed model achieves
the best overall performance. Furthermore, it also
needs to be noticed that with the large improvement in content preservation, the sentiment accuracy of the proposed method is lower than that of
CAAE on the two datasets. It shows that simultaneously promoting sentiment transformation and
content preservation remains to be studied further.
By comparing two evaluation results, we ﬁnd
that there is an agreement between the human
evaluation and the automatic evaluation. It indicates the usefulness of automatic evaluation metrics. However, we also notice that the human evaluation has a smaller performance gap between the
baselines and the proposed method than the automatic evaluation. It shows the limitation of automatic metrics for giving accurate results. For evaluating sentiment transformation, even with a high
accuracy, the sentiment classiﬁer sometimes generates noisy results, especially for those neutral
sentences (e.g., “I ate a cheese sandwich”). For
evaluating content preservation, the BLEU score
Input: I would strongly advise against using this company.
CAAE: I love this place for a great experience here.
MDAL: I have been a great place was great.
Proposed Method: I would love using this company.
Input: The service was nearly non-existent and extremely rude.
CAAE: The best place in the best area in vegas.
MDAL: The food is very friendly and very good.
Proposed Method: The service was served and completely fresh.
Input: Asked for the roast beef and mushroom sub,
only received roast beef.
CAAE: We had a great experience with.
MDAL: This place for a great place for a great food
Proposed Method: Thanks for the beef and spring
Input: Worst cleaning job ever!
CAAE: Great food and great service!
MDAL: Great food, food!
Proposed Method: Excellent outstanding job ever!
Input: Most boring show I’ve ever been.
CAAE: Great place is the best place in town.
MDAL: Great place I’ve ever ever had.
Proposed Method:
Most amazing show I’ve ever
Input: Place is very clean and the food is delicious.
CAAE: Don’t go to this place.
MDAL: This place wasn’t worth the worst place is horrible.
Proposed Method: Place is very small and the food is
Input: Really satisﬁed with experience buying clothes.
CAAE: Don’t go to this place.
MDAL: Do not impressed with this place.
Proposed Method: Really bad experience.
Table 3: Examples generated by the proposed approach and baselines on the Yelp dataset. The two
baselines change not only the polarity of examples, but also the semantic content. In comparison,
our approach changes the sentiment of sentences
with higher semantic similarity.
is computed based on the percentage of overlapping n-grams between the generated text and the
reference text. However, the overlapping n-grams
contain not only content words but also function
words, bringing the noisy results. In general, accurate automatic evaluation metrics are expected
in future work.
Table 3 presents the examples generated by
different systems on the Yelp dataset.
baselines change not only the polarity of examples, but also the semantic content. In comparison, our method precisely changes the sentiment
of sentences (and paraphrases slightly to ensure
ﬂuency), while keeping the semantic content unchanged.
ACC BLEU G-score
Emotionalization Module
41.84 25.66
+ NM + Cycled RL
85.71 1.08
+ NM + Pre-training
70.61 17.02
+ NM + Cycled RL + Pre-training 80.00 22.46
ACC BLEU G-score
Emotionalization Module
57.28 12.22
+ NM + Cycled RL
64.16 8.03
+ NM + Pre-training
69.61 11.16
+ NM + Cycled RL + Pre-training 70.37 14.06
Table 4: Performance of key components in the
proposed approach. “NM” denotes the neutralization module. “Cycled RL” represents cycled reinforcement learning.
Incremental Analysis
In this section, we conduct a series of experiments
to evaluate the contributions of our key components. The results are shown in Table 4.
We treat the emotionalization module as a baseline where the input is the original emotional sentence. The emotionalization module achieves the
highest BLEU score but with much lower sentiment transformation accuracy. The encoding of
the original sentiment leads to the emotional hidden vector that inﬂuences the decoding process
and results in worse sentiment transformation performance.
It can be seen that the method with all components achieves the best performance. First, we ﬁnd
that the method that only uses cycled reinforcement learning performs badly because it is hard to
guide two randomly initialized modules to teach
each other. Second, the pre-training method brings
a slight improvement in overall performance. The
G-score is improved from 32.77 to 34.66 and from
26.46 to 27.87 on the two datasets. The bottleneck of this method is the noisy attention weight
because of the limited sentiment classiﬁcation accuracy. Third, the method that combines cycled
reinforcement learning and pre-training achieves
the better performance than using one of them.
Pre-training gives the two modules initial learning
ability. Cycled training teaches the two modules to
improve each other based on the feedback signals.
Specially, the G-score is improved from 34.66 to
42.38 and from 27.87 to 31.45 on the two datasets.
Finally, by comparing the methods with and without the neutralization module, we ﬁnd that the neutralization mechanism improves a lot in sentiment
transformation with a slight reduction on content
preservation. It proves the effectiveness of explic-
Michael is absolutely wonderful.
I would strongly advise against using this company.
Horrible experience!
Worst cleaning job ever!
Most boring show i ’ve ever been.
Hainan chicken was really good.
I really don’t understand all the negative reviews for this
Smells so weird in there.
The service was nearly non-existent and extremely rude.
Table 5: Analysis of the neutralization module.
Words in red are removed by the neutralization
itly separating sentiment information from semantic content.
Furthermore, to analyze the neutralization ability in the proposed method, we randomly sample
several examples, as shown in Table 5. It can be
clearly seen that emotional words are removed accurately almost without loss of non-emotional information.
Error Analysis
Although the proposed method outperforms the
state-of-the-art systems, we also observe several failure cases, such as sentiment-conﬂicted
sentences (e.g., “Outstanding and bad service”),
neutral sentences (e.g., “Our ﬁrst time here”).
Sentiment-conﬂicted sentences indicate that the
original sentiment is not removed completely.
This problem occurs when the input contains emotional words that are unseen in the training data,
or the sentiment is implicitly expressed.
Handling complex sentiment expressions is an important problem for future work. Neutral sentences
demonstrate that the decoder sometimes fails in
adding the target sentiment and only generates text
based on the semantic content. A better sentimentaware decoder is expected to be explored in future
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we focus on unpaired sentimentto-sentiment translation and propose a cycled reinforcement learning approach that enables training in the absence of parallel training data. We
conduct experiments on two review datasets. Experimental results show that our method substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art systems, especially in terms of semantic preservation. For future work, we would like to explore a ﬁne-grained
version of sentiment-to-sentiment translation that
not only reverses sentiment, but also changes the
strength of sentiment.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61673028),
National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program, No.
2015AA015404),
and the National Thousand
Young Talents Program.
Xu Sun is the corresponding author of this paper.