SCIENA.yCE.
Pasteurized, it is possible to produce only a
mild butter. In order to procure the more pronounced flavor as desired here, the cream is
allowed to ripen and a 'starter' removed for
the followring day. In this way butter having a
characteristic flavor may be produced without
the use of a pure culture.
Professor Corn believed that the ripening of cream takes place
in two stages; the first being the rapid growth
of certaini albumen-destroying bacteria; and
the second, the rapid growth of lactic-acidproducing bacteria.
In completely ripened
cream the latter only are present and constitute the pure Danish cultures which give mild
The former seem to be the cause of
the stronger flavor desired in America.
do not affect the flavor of the Danish butter,
as they are
all destroyed in the process of
Pasteurization.
It is interesting to note that
pure cultures are used in this country to a
greater extent by the producers of oleoinargarine and 'process' butter than by the dairymen.
The second paper of the evening was read
by Mir. S. C. Prescott, of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, who gave ani interesting review of 'The Nature of Enzyime Reactions.'
HENRY FAY,
Secreta-ry.
ONIOND'DAGA ACADEMIY OF SCIENCE.
THE 54th regular meeting of the Acadenmy
,"as held in the Ihfistorical Rooms, iMarch 21,
Charles W.
Migrations
emphasizing
the remarkable exactness in time with which
time, manner anid causes of migrations were
fully discussed.
In speaking of the 'Food
Habits' of birds, Dr. Hargitt pleaded for a
fair balancing
of the results found in the
analyses of the stomach contents, as a single
berry vs. the harmful insects destroyed, anid
accentuated the importance of avoidinig prejudices.
Professor G. A. Bailey spoke of the 'Traits
of Birds,' mentioning the cowbird as a case
of degeneration.
It was gradually giving up
nest-building
and becoming more
as was also true for the American cuckoo.
also spoke of the difference in the shape of
eggs and suggested that
it was due
largely to differences in the kind of nests.
P. F. SCHNEIDER.
SYRACUSE, N. Y.
THE NEW YORK ASSOCIATION OF BIOLOGY
THE second regular meeting of the Association for 1902 was held in the Board of Education building,
on Friday evening, April
Thlere was a general discussion on the subject
of 'Field Work,' introduced by Miss Kate Burnett Hixon and Miss Mary D. Womack.
G. W. HUNTER, JR.,
Secretary.
DISCUOSSION AND CORRESPONDENCE.
AN AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICS.
I AM not aware whether any discussion has
been published, but it must have been keenly
felt by everybody associated with the physical
sciences, at least, that one of the important
issues in the near future is the systenmatization and
consolidation
American science.
It seems to me that what
we nieed is a clearing house or, better, a trust
of American research literature, and the pooling in the present instance will be all the more
justifiable as it will be nearly pure altruism.
Few of the higher order of journals-I mean
those which offer non-popular scientific articles-really pay.
Mfany of them are conducted
at a loss.
Perhaps for this very reason somne
plan of amalgamation may be feasible.
In physics the conditionsx
are in every way
deplorable.
MAouch, perhaps nmost, of our best
work goes out of the country, with the resuLlt
that American journals, being in a sense superflLous
to the foreigner,
little read
I have no statistics; what I state are
merely the convictions of more or less desultory observations; but I am afraid they are
even regarded with just a little superciliousness at homne.
effect mnight be
geological
naturally slhrink from it.
APRIL 18, 1902.]
There is some reason for this state- of things.
If we were brutally frank we might agree that
a man with us is hardly eininent until he has
been acknowledged as an intellectual commodity
in some foreign market.
From some points of
view this self-distrust and lack of independent
judgment is laudable; but there is also a habtt
acquired in such things that is pernicious.
so long ago that the Germans went
tuft-hunting in France, a custom from which
they awoke one day in consternationi.
have not gone there since.
The question to
consider is whether it is not now high time for
us, in turn, to awake to a spirit of scientific
patriotism.
One does not have to read many
books to learn with what enthusiasm an Englishman, a Frenchman or a German refers to
the real intellectual accomplishments of his
countrymen.
Is there such pride among us?
I doubt it.
There is rather a tendency to exhaust all other bibliography first.
Somebody has wisely said that for the English-speaking race there is but one aristocracy,
and that it has taken the vigor of England to
Certainly the daughters of our millionaires offer much convincing
if not eloquent testimony. In a somewhat similar sense,
it seems to me that the aristocracy of Anierican scientists also resides in England, though
one cannot deny that the continent has somne
fascination.
Our efficient scientific men are
apt to outgrow the American Association first,
then they outgrow the iNTational Academy, and
finally the country itself is altogether too small
Their voices reach us in this final
stage, harmoniously blended, from across the
It is all very nice as a well-devised
scheme of gradation, but where is the spirit
of patriotism in all this? Can we ever hope to
reach intellectual maturity in the eyes of the
world if we belittle the dignity of our own
institutions? Self-confessed incompetency may
be a virtue, but one should at least first be
sure that the incompetency really exists.
Europe were to close its gates systematically
to American scientific research, I believe that
no greater blessing could befall us.
enough good work done here, that if it were
only properly
centralized and presented
bulk, it would command the attention of the
[N. S. VOL. XV. No. 381.
world. We should then have on our own, shores
what we now so frequently run for abroad.
The urgent desirability of an attempt at
centralization is precisely the point which I
want to accentuate.
In physics we now have
two prominent journals, one of them old and
widely distributed, but covering a scope much
beyond physics.
Its contributors are naturally
the older conservative physicists of the country.
Recently the desirability of a journal
devoted to physics alone was responded to, and
a thrivinig magazine now exists among
contributors
eiiergetic
physicists
Between the two journals, I fear, there
will be an inevitable breach, for no man who
has materially contributed to the older journal
will be willing to see that magazine go down,
and with it the accessibility of the buLk of his
I mention this now, since with the advent
the Carnegie
Institution there
almost unavoidably, another center of vigorous
publication in physics.
I say unavoidably at a
venture, for I am quite ignorant as to any
plans in that direction.
There would then be
further divergence, and oh, the pity of it! If,
however, it should be in some way possible to
unite the two existing journals* with the consent of all interested and at their instigation,
a single Ameriican Journal of Physics,
under the auspices of the institution, I believe
that the greatest good would thereby accrue to
the country.
It is the national, apart from the
sectional, spirit which I am anxious to see
I do not know how the editors of
these journals may look on such a scheme.
They are my friends, though they may be shaking their fists at me now; but I am innocent
If through the Carnegie Institution
we could get an American Journal of Physics,
continuous
American Journal of Science and of the Physical Review, definitely established, and if every
* It do not refer, of course, to journals with a
unique purpose like ScIENCE, or the Astrophysical
Terrestrial Magnetism, or the Circulars of universities, etc.
It is the overlapping
of journals of the same kind that I have wholly
Americani physicist, including those who are
either ashamed of their birthright, or of so
vast a stature and cast in such an heroic mould
that they must seek their compeers abroadif all American physicists were to unite to publish in a national journal only, I believe the
result would mark an epoch in the history of
the importance of American contributions to
CARL BARUS.
BROWN UNIVERSITY,
PROVIDENCE, R. I.
GI \ILLER.
ON the 10th of October, 1802, I-hugh MIiller
was born at Cromarty, Scotland.
The folk of that picturesque town, whose
surroundings were the inispiration
ililler's remarkable achievements in science,
literature and philosophy, and the
people generally, have proposed to commemorate this one-hundredth anniversary of the
birth of their distinguLished countryman by
erecting in the town of his birth a permanent
memorial of his work and worth.
It is now hoped that this proposition will
ineet a response sufficiently cordial and generous to justify the foundation of a Hugh
Miller Inistitute which will serve, not alone
as a resting place for the personal relics of the
man, but the home of scientific collections and
a library.
The anniversary day, October 10,
1902, will also be commemorated by special
ceremonies.
The local committee to carry into effect the
centenary project
a circular
which the foregoing propositions are set forth,
and which also contains this statement:
"The proposal has the support of the following:
"Lord Balfour of Burleigh, Secretary for Scotland;
Sir Archibald Geikie, F.R.S., LL.D.;
Professor Masson, LL.D.;
Sir Walter Foster, M.P.;
Sir John Long, M.P.; C. J. Guthrie, K.C., Sheriff
of Ross and Cromarty;
WV. C. Smith, LL.B.; W.
Nicoll, LL.D.;
Arthur Bignold,
Principal Rainy, D.D.; Alexander Whyte,
Provost and Magistrates of Cromarty; AMIr. James
Barron, Inverness Couricir."l
No American geologist of the generation
now in the full swing of its activity can have
failed to comne, in -his early days, under the
inispiration of this unique man.
Wlien textbooks of geology were few and dull, MN:iller
portrayed in most delightful tints the beauties
of the science and the charm of its philosophy.
intelligent
English-speaking
peoples he unfolded the science in a new light;
in diction his writings are a model still unattained and seldom
approached by his suceessors; in vigor,
relentless sequence, charm of
anecdote and remniniscence they will never lose
attractiveeness- and influence.
The undersigned has been asked by Mir. J.
the Hugh Miller
Centenary Committee, to act as its agent in
soliciting and- receiving subscriptions in the
States for the end stated.
Remittances will therefore be gladly received by the
undersigned and acknowledgment of the same
will be made by the lion. Secretary.
or other orders may be made payable to
JOHN M. CLARKE,
For the Committee.
STATE HALL, ALBANY, N. Y.
TIIE AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION
FOR THE ADAANCE-
MENT OF SCIENCE.
SECTION B, PHrSICS.
ATTENTION is called to the coming meeting
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in Pittsburg, Pa., June 28
accessibility
of Pittsburg
from all parts of the country and the interest
which attaches
to the great manufacturing
industries
located there,
already favorable prospects for a large and
important meetinig.
The proposed meeting
of the American Physical Society in affiliation
with the American Association offers an additional attraction to physicists.
It is hoped that a full and interesting programimay be secured in Section B and to this
end you are requested to send titles and abstracts of papers, available for this purpose,
to the Secretary of the Section.
Titles should
be sent in time to appear in the preliminary
program which will be issued several weeks
prior to the m-eeting.
E. F. NiCHOLS. Secretary,
Hanover, N. H.
W. S. FRANKLIN, Vice-President,
South Bethlehem, Pa.
APRIL 18, 1902. ]