A Cheat-Proof Game Theoretic Demand Response
Scheme for Smart Grids
Yan Chen, W. Sabrina Lin, Feng Han, Yu-Han Yang, Zoltan Safar, and K. J. Ray Liu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
E-mail:{yan, wylin, hanf, yhyang, zsafar, and kjrliu}@umd.edu
Abstract—While demand response has achieved promising
results on making the power grid more efﬁcient and reliable, the
additional dynamics and ﬂexibility brought by demand response
also increase the uncertainty and complexity of the centralized
load forecast. In this paper, we propose a game theoretic demand
response scheme that can transform the traditional centralized
load prediction structure into a distributed load prediction system
by the participation of customers. Moreover, since customers are
generally rational and thus naturally selﬁsh, they may cheat if
cheating can improve their payoff. Therefore, enforcing truthtelling is crucial. We prove analytically and demonstrate with
simulations that the proposed game theoretic scheme is cheatproof, i.e., all customers are motivated to report and consume
their true optimal demands and any deviation will lead to a
utility loss. We also prove theoretically that the proposed demand
response scheme can lead to the solution that maximizes social
welfare and is proportionally fair in terms of utility function.
Moreover, we propose a simple dynamic pricing algorithm for
the power substation to control the total demand of all customers
to meet the target demand curve. Finally, simulations are shown
to demonstrate the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the proposed
game theoretic algorithm.
Index Terms—Smart grid, demand response, game theory,
cheat-proof.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, traditional power grids are facing many challenges including load schedule uncertainties, low load factor
and the incorporation of renewable energy systems. On the
other hand, consumers are demanding better power quality
and reliability, and the demand is arising due to the increase
of new types of appliances. It is evidently needed to transform
traditional electric network by using various smart devices,
algorithms, and designs into a highly efﬁcient and reliable
power grid. A “Smart Grid” is a future electricity delivery
system based on new technologies, such as communication
and market design. The goals are to enhance the reliability
and quality of power supply, improve the efﬁciency of the
power grid, and lower total energy consumption.
Demand response, one important feature of smart grid, is
a mechanism that can motivate end-use customers to change
their electricity usage from normal consumption patterns in
response to the changes in the price of electricity over time .
Generally, there are mainly two different categories of demand
response algorithms : incentive-based demand response
and pricing-based demand response. In the incentive-based
demand response, customers are given the incentive payments
to reduce their consumptions in case of emergencies or when
system reliability is jeopardized. For example, Chen et.al. 
proposed to match the supply when the electricity supply is
deﬁcit based on supply function bidding. By shedding the
load, customers can receive some revenue that is determined
by the customers’ supply functions. In pricing-based demand
response, due to the use of dynamic pricing, customers will
dynamically adjust their consumption according to the timevarying price to maximize their payoffs. In , the authors
proposed a real-time pricing algorithm by maximizing the
aggregate utility of all customers. With the presence of a realtime pricing tariff, Mohsenian-Rad and Leon-Garcia proposed
a residential energy consumption scheduling algorithm by
considering the trade-off between the electricity payment and
the waiting time for the operation of each appliance .
The importance of demand response can go far beyond
reducing the electricity bills of customers. It facilitates the
demand management from the operational perspective through
real-time pricing to balance the demand and supply in the electric power market . However, the additional dynamics
and ﬂexibility brought by demand response also increase the
uncertainty and complexity of the centralized load forecast.
This uncertainty will pose new challenges and make the
difﬁcult centralized load forecast problem even harder. In
such a case, the forecast total demand from customers may
not accurately reﬂect the future load. As a consequence,
the power plant either over-generates or under-generates the
power, which leads to low system efﬁciency and high risk of
outage, respectively.
To overcome these challenges, we propose to use game
theory to formulate the demand response problem. In this
game, the players are the power substation and the customers,
where the objective of the power substation is to dynamically
adjust the total demand to meet a target demand curve and the
objective of the customers is to maximize own their utilities.
The main contributions are summarized as follows.
1) We propose a game theoretic demand response scheme
that can transform the traditional centralized load prediction structure into a distributed load prediction system
by the participation of customers. Such a transformation
would revolutionize the difﬁcult and complex centralized
forecasting into easy demand report collection.
2) Since the proposed scheme is distributed and customers
are naturally selﬁsh, enforcing truth-telling is crucial. We
prove that the proposed game theoretic scheme is cheatproof, i.e., all customers are motivated to report and
consume their true optimal demands and any deviation
will lead to a utility loss.
IEEE ICC 2012 - Selected Areas in Communications Symposium
978-1-4577-2053-6/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE
3) We prove that the proposed demand response scheme
can lead to the solution that is social welfare maximizing
and proportionally fair in terms of the utility function.
4) To encourage participation, the demand response scheme
should be simple since customers may not be willing to
join the response scheme if the mechanism is complicated. The proposed demand response scheme is very
simple. What customers need to do is to compute their
own optimal demand for any given price and report the
optimal demand to the power substation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the system model and gain function. In Section III,
we describe in details the proposed cheat-proof mechanism
and the dynamic pricing of the power substation. Then, we
show the simulation results to verify the proposed algorithm
in Section IV. Finally, we draw conclusions in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND GAIN FUNCTION
A. System Model
We consider a smart grid with N customers that are served
by one power substation. We assume that the power substation
has a target total demand curve. The objective of the power
substation is to control the total demand to meet the target
demand curve by dynamically adjusting the price of the power.
On the other hand, customers are intelligent and can make
optimal decision based on the price of the power. The problem
is to determine how the power substation should use dynamic
pricing to control the total demand.
One possible approach is the centralized approach where
the power substation predicts the total demand by estimating
the behavior of the customers using power consumption history. However, this kind of centralized approach has several
drawbacks. Firstly, the computational complexity at the power
substation is very high since the power substation needs to
estimate the behaviors of all customers and predict their power
consumption. Secondly, the prediction accuracy of the total
demand consumption may not be high due to the complex
behavior of customers. Thirdly, due to the inaccurate prediction, the power substation may over-generate or under-generate
power which leads to power inefﬁciency or power outage.
To overcome these drawbacks, we propose to use game theory to formulate the demand response problem. In this game,
the players are the power substation and the N customers,
where the objective of the power substation is to use realtime pricing to dynamically adjust the total demand to meet
a certain target demand and the objective of the customers
is to dynamically choose the optimal demand to maximize
their own utilities. With such a game theoretic formulation,
we do not require the power substation to centrally estimate
the power consumption of each customer. Instead, we ask the
customers to report their demands to the power substation.
Since customers are rational and thus naturally selﬁsh, they
tend to over-claim what they may need and will not truly report
their optimal demand if cheating can improve their payoffs.
To enforce customers to report their true optimal demands, we
propose a cheat-proof mechanism by carefully designing the
penalty function for deviation.
The illustration of the gain function.
B. Gain function of the Customer
Generally, by consuming a certain amount of power, a
customer experiences a certain gain which reﬂects the level of
satisfaction. For example, when reading under a bad lighting
condition, a customer will feel happy by turning on a light,
and such a happiness can be characterized by a certain gain.
We assume that each customer i has a minimal power demand
to operate some essential appliances such as refrigerator
and air conditioner. If the demand is smaller than dmin
the customer will feel very uncomfortable, so the gain is
zero. Once the power demand reaches dmin
, the customer
experiences a gain gi. After satisfying the minimal demand
constraint, the gain will increase by a certain value if an additional appliance is turned on. Since customers are intelligent
and rational, they will always ﬁrst turn on the appliance that
can bring the largest increase of their level of satisfaction. For
example, a customer in a dark room will turn on the light ﬁrst
while the customer who feels hot will turn on the fan ﬁrst. With
such an intuition, the gain function should be an increasing
step function with the step size decreasing over the demand for
all demand that is larger than the minimal demand constraint,
e.g. the red dot curve in Figure 1. Since the gain function
characterizes the level of satisfaction of the customer, it can
be different under different climate conditions and different
moods of the customer. For example, the pink dash curve and
blue dot-dash curve in Figure 1 can be the gain functions under
two different conditions. To better understand the behavior of
the customers, we assume that the gain function measures the
average level of satisfaction under different conditions such as
climate and mood conditions.
From the above discussion, we can see that the gain
should be zero for any demand smaller than the minimal
demand constraint. For the demand larger than the minimal
demand constraint, the gain function should be a monotonically increasing concave function with the level of satisfaction
gradually saturating. After the demand reaching the maximal
demand constraint which can be the total power demand
for operating all appliances, the gain function should remain
constant. There are many possible gain functions. In this paper,
we use a modiﬁed quadratic gain function Gi(d) deﬁned in
(1) and illustrated as the cyan curve in Figure 1. A similar
gain function was used in .
if 0 ≤d < dmin
+wi(d−dmin
)+gi, elseif d≤wi
where dmin
is the minimal power demand, gi is the gain of
the minimal power demand, αi is the parameter controlling the
speed of increase of the quadratic function which can be timevarying, and wi is the declivity of the parabola at d = dmin
which is ﬁxed over time.
III. DEMAND RESPONSE GAMES
To motivate customers to report their true optimal demands
to power substation, we propose a cheat-proof demand response scheme as follows. At the beginning of time slot t,
the power substation announces a reference price pr to all
customers. After receiving the reference price, each customer
computes the optimal demand d⋆
i by maximizing the intermediate utility function as follows,
i = arg max
λGi(d) −prd
if (λwi−pr)2
+ λgi ≥prdmin
and wi ≥pr/λ,
if wi < pr/λ and λgi ≥prdmin
where λ is a parameter balancing gain Gi(d) and cost prd.
Due to selﬁsh nature, customers may not report their true
optimal demand d⋆
i . Let us assume that customer i reports ˆdi
to the power substation. After receiving all the demands from
customers, the power substation announces to each customer
i the price pi and the cost function Ci(pi, di, ˆdi) as follows
pi = pr + m
Ci(pi, di, ˆdi)=
if di ≤ˆdi;
pi ˆdi + λΔ(di −ˆdi) + λρ, if di > ˆdi.
where m is a constant which can be treated as the maintenance
fee, Δ ≥max{w1, ..., wN} and ρ ≥max{g1, ..., gN} are
two ﬁxed parameters. From (4), we can see that customers
are punished for both over-reporting and under-reporting.
For over-reporting, customers will be charged for what they
reported. For under-reporting, customers will receive a penalty
that is linear in the deviation di −ˆdi.
Finally, according to the price pi, each customer consumes
power di and pays Ci(pi, di, ˆdi), and the utility function of
customer i can be computed as
Ui(di, ˆdi) = λGi(di) −Ci(pi, di, ˆdi).
A. Cheat-Proof Property
In this subsection, we prove that the proposed mechanism
is cheat-proof, which means that all customers are motivated
to report and consume the optimal demands, i.e., their utility
is maximized when di = ˆdi = d⋆
i , and any deviation will lead
to a utility loss.
Lemma 1: After reporting ˆdi, the best strategy of customer
i at the consumption stage is to consume ˆdi, i.e., Ui(di, ˆdi) ≤
Ui( ˆdi, ˆdi), ∀di, with equality if and only if di = ˆdi.
Proof: Due to page limitation, we show the proof in the
supplementary information .
Theorem 1: The proposed mechanism is cheat-proof.
Proof: To prove Theorem 1, we need to show that the
utility of the customer is maximized at di = ˆdi = d⋆
According to (2), (3), (4), (5) and Lemma 1, we have
Ui(di, ˆdi)
Ui( ˆdi, ˆdi) = λGi( ˆdi) −Ci(pi, ˆdi, ˆdi)
λGi( ˆdi) −pi ˆdi = λGi( ˆdi) −pr ˆdi −m
The equality in (6) holds if and only if di = ˆdi = d⋆
Therefore, all customers will report and consume the optimal
demand, and any deviation will lead to a utility loss, i.e., the
proposed mechanism is cheat-proof.
B. Maximizing Social Welfare
In this subsection, we prove that the proposed mechanism
leads to an equilibrium that maximizes the social welfare,
which is the sum of the customers’ utilities and the revenue
of the substation.
Theorem 2: The proposed mechanism maximizes the social
welfare, i.e., (d⋆
2, ..., d⋆
N) is the solution to the following
optimization problem
Gi(di) s.t.
di ≤dtotal
with dtotal = N
Proof: Due to page limitation, we show the proof in the
supplementary information .
C. Proportionally Fair Solution
In this subsection, we prove that the proposed mechanism
leads to the solution that is proportionally fair in utility.
Theorem 3: The proposed mechanism leads to the solution
that is proportionally fair in utility, i.e., (d⋆
2, ..., d⋆
solution to the following optimization problem
(Gi(di) −prdi) .
Proof: Due to page limitation, we show the proof in the
supplementary information .
D. Dynamic Pricing of the Power Substation
From the above discussion, we can see that the proposed
mechanism is cheat-proof, due to which all rational customers
are motivated to report and consume the optimal demand.
According to (2), the average power consumption of the
customers at time slot t can be computed as follows
Daverage(t) = 1
wi −pr(t)/λ
Here, we exclude the inactive customers whose optimal
demand is zero and simply assume N is the total number
of active customers. Moreover, we assume that the parameters
wi and dmin
are time-invariant parameters while the parameter
αi(t) is a time-variant parameter.
As discussed in Section II-B, αi(t) is the parameter controlling the speed of increase of the quadratic gain function.
According to (9), if
αi(t) is modeled as a Gaussian distribution
with mean μα(t) and constant variance σ2
α, then, with the
law of large numbers, the average power consumption of all
customers can be approximated as
Daverage(t) ≈μα(t)
wi −pr(t)/λ
μα(t) (W −pr(t)/λ) + Q,
where W = 1
i=1 wi and Q = 1
From (10), we can see that there is a direct relationship
between pr(t) and Daverage(t). Therefore, by dynamically adjusting pr(t), we can control the average demand Daverage(t)
to meet the target average demand Dtarget(t) as follows
W −Dtarget(t) −Q
Since W and Q are two constants, we assume they are
known or can be well estimated by the power substation.
The μα(t) is the mean of the parameter
αi(t) controlling the
increasing speed of the gain function, which means that μα(t)
should be reasonably smooth over t. Therefore, we use Auto-
Regressive (AR) process to model μα(t), i.e., μα(t) can be
represented as a linear combination of μα(t −1), ..., μα(t −l)
with an additive white Gaussian noise,
μα(t) = γ1μα(t −1) + ... + γmμα(t −l) + nμα(t).
According to the discussions above, the dynamic pricing
algorithm of the power substation can be summarized as
follows. At time slot t, the power substation announces a
reference price pr(t). Based on pr(t), all customers report their
optimal demand. After receiving all demands from customers,
the power substation computes μα(t) using
μα(t) = Daverage(t) −Q
W −pr(t)/λ
and estimates μα(t + 1) using
ˆμα(t + 1) = γ1μα(t) + ... + γlμα(t −l + 1).
Finally, based on the estimated μα(t + 1), the power
substation computes pr(t + 1) using
pr(t + 1) = λ
W −Dtarget(t + 1) −Q
ˆμα(t + 1)
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we show with simulations that our proposed
game theoretic scheme is cheat-proof and can effectively
control the power consumption. We consider a system with
one power substation and N = 1000 customers. The variables
in the gain function (1), 1/αi, wi, and dmin
, are assumed to
be Gaussian, i.e., 1/αi(t) ∼N(μα(t), σμ), wi ∼N(μw, σw),
∼N(μd, σd). The parameters used in our model
The demand controlling performance of the proposed scheme: (a)
constant target demand; (b) time-varying target demand.
are set as: μw = 150, σw = 25, μd = 5, σd = 1, σμ = 0.2,
λ = 0.02, gi = 1000 and m = 5. We use AR(2) process to
model μα(t) with AR coefﬁcients γ1 = 0.6 and γ2 = 0.4.
In the ﬁrst simulation, we verify the cheat-proof performance of the proposed scheme. Figure 2 (a) shows the utility
versus the real power consumption di by assuming the reported
demand is equal to the real consumption, i.e., di = ˆdi. We can
see that the maximal utility is achieved when di = ˆdi = d⋆
73, which means that if the customer will consume the same
amount of power as what he reported, the best strategy for the
customer is to report the optimal demand ˆdi = d⋆
i . In Figure
2 (b), we show the utility versus di by assuming ˆdi = d⋆
can see that the utility is maximized when di = ˆdi = d⋆
Therefore, after reporting ˆdi, customer has no incentive to
consume di ̸= ˆdi due to the punishment for both consuming
more and less power in (4). Then, in Figure 2 (c), we shown
the utility versus ˆdi by assuming di = d⋆
i . We can again see
that only when ˆdi = di = d⋆
i , the utility is maximized, which
means that customers will report the true optimal demand to
achieve maximal utility. The customer’s utility versus ( ˆdi, di)
is shown in Figure 2 (d). We can see that any ( ˆdi, di) other
i ) leads to a loss of utility. Hence, customers have
no incentive report or consume other than d⋆
i , and our proposed
game theoretic scheme is cheat-proof.
From the above discussions, we can see that the proposed
scheme is cheat-proof. Such a cheat-proof property is mainly
because of the use of the punishment term in (4). Without
the punishment, customers may not report and consume the
optimal demand. In Figure 3, we show the customer’s utility
versus ( ˆdi, di) by assuming no punishment term in the utility
function, i.e., the cost function is deﬁned as prdi. As shown
in Figure 3, we can see that for any given ˆdi, the utility is
maximized when di = d⋆
i . However, the utility function is
independent from ˆdi, i.e., the utility function is constant in
terms of ˆdi. In such a case, customers have no incentive to
report true optimal demand. Therefore, it is very important for
us to involve the punishment term in the cost function.
We then evaluate the performance of the proposed dynamic
pricing algorithm in Figure 4. We can see from Figure 4 (a)
that with the proposed dynamic pricing algorithm, the total
demand from customers quickly converges to the target total
demand with the difference between the total demand and the
target demand less than 2% of the target demand. From Figure
4 (b), we can see that the proposed algorithm can quickly
Actual Consumption di = ˆdi
Actual Consumption di
Reported Consumption ˆdi
The cheat-proof performance of the proposed scheme when the optimal demand d⋆
i = 73 and the reference price pr = 1.7: (a) the utility versus the
di when ˆdi = di; (b) the utility versus di when ˆdi = d⋆
i = 73; (c) the utility versus ˆdi when ˆdi = d⋆
i = 73; (d) the utility versus ˆdi and di.
Actual Consumption di = ˆdi
Actual Consumption di
Reported Consumption ˆdi
The non-cheat-proof performance of the scheme without punishment in the utility function: (a) the utility versus di when ˆdi = di; (b) the utility
versus di when ˆdi = d⋆
i = 80; (c) the utility versus ˆdi when ˆdi = d⋆
i = 80; (d) the utility versus ˆdi and di.
(a) The robustness performance against real consumption deviation
constant target demand; (b) zoom-in ﬁgure of (a).
respond to the change of target demand through adjusting the
price accordingly, which fully demonstrate the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of the proposed dynamic pricing algorithm.
In Figure 5, we evaluate the effect of customers’ deviation
on the total demand. We assume that there is a portion of
customers deviating from their reported demands. The customer who deviates will consume (1+ϵ) times of the reported
demand, i.e., di = (1 + ϵ) ˆdi, where ϵ satisﬁes Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and 0.2 variance. From Figure
5, we can see that even with 25% of customers deviating
from the reported demands, the actual total consumption is
still close to the aggregate reported demand. Therefore, the
proposed scheme is very robust to the customers’ deviation.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed a game theoretic demand
response scheme that can transform the difﬁcult and complex
centralized demand forecasting problem into an easy demand
reporting mechanism. Such a game theoretic scheme is shown
to be cheat-proof which can enforce selﬁsh customers to report
and consume their optimal demands. Moreover, the proposed
scheme leads to the desired solution from both system designer’s and customers’ perspective since the solution is not
only social welfare maximizing but also proportionally fair
in utility. Furthermore, we have proposed a simple dynamic
pricing algorithm to effectively control the total demand to
meet a target demand curve. With the proposed algorithm, the
power substation can obtain an accurate estimate of the real
consumption ahead of time and generate the corresponding
amount of power, and thus greatly improve the system efﬁciency and reduce the risk of outage.