Stock Price Prediction Using the ARIMA Model
1Ayodele A. Adebiyi., 2Aderemi O. Adewumi
1,2School of Mathematic, Statistics & Computer Science
University of KwaZulu-Natal
Durban, South Africa
email: {adebiyi, adewumia}@ukzn.ac.za
3Charles K. Ayo
3Department of Computer & Information Sciences
Covenant University
Ota, Nigeria
email: 
Abstract— Stock price prediction is an important topic in
finance and economics which has spurred the interest of
researchers over the years to develop better predictive models.
The autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA)
models have been explored in literature for time series
prediction. This paper presents extensive process of building
stock price predictive model using the ARIMA model.
Published stock data obtained from New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) and Nigeria Stock Exchange (NSE) are used with stock
price predictive model developed. Results obtained revealed
that the ARIMA model has a strong potential for short-term
prediction and can compete favourably with existing
techniques for stock price prediction.
Keywords- ARIMA model, Stock Price prediction, Stock
market, Short-term prediction.
INTRODUCTION
Prediction will continue to be an interesting area of
research making researchers in the domain field always
desiring to improve existing predictive models. The reason
is that institutions and individuals are empowered to make
investment decisions and ability to plan and develop
effective strategy about their daily and future endevours.
Stock price prediction is regarded as one of most difficult
task to accomplish in financial forecasting due to complex
nature of stock market . The desire of many
investors is to lay hold of any forecasting method that could
guarantee easy profiting and minimize investment risk from
the stock market. This remains a motivating factor for
researchers to evolve and develop new predictive models
In the past years several models and techniques had been
developed to stock price prediction. Among them are
artificial neural networks (ANNs) model which are very
popular due to its ability to learn patterns from data and
infer solution from unknown data. Few related works that
engaged ANNs model to stock price prediction are .
In recent time, hybrid approaches has also been engaged to
improve stock price predictive models by exploiting the
unique strength of each of them . ANNs is from artificial
intelligence perspectives.
ARIMA models are from statistical models perspectives.
Generally, it is reported in literature that prediction can be
done from two perspectives: statistical and artificial
intelligence techniques . ARIMA models are known to be
robust and efficient in financial time series forecasting
especially short-term prediction than even the most popular
ANNs techniques ( . It has been extensively used in
field of economics and finance. Other statistics models are
regression method, exponential smoothing, generalized
autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH).
Few related works that has engaged ARIMA model for
forecasting includes .
In this paper extensive process of building ARIMA
models for short-term stock price prediction is presented.
The results obtained from real-life data demonstrated the
potential strength of ARIMA models to provide investors
short-term prediction that could aid investment decision
making process.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents brief overview of ARIMA model. Section 3
describes the methodology used while section 4 discusses
the experimental results obtained. The paper is concluded in
section 5.
ARIMA MODEL
Box and Jenkins in 1970 introduced the ARIMA model.
It also referred to as Box-Jenkins methodology composed of
set of activities for identifying, estimating and diagnosing
ARIMA models with time series data. The model is most
prominent methods in financial forecasting .
ARIMA models have shown efficient capability to generate
short-term forecasts. It constantly outperformed complex
structural models in short-term prediction . In ARIMA
model, the future value of a variable is a linear combination
of past values and past errors, expressed as follows:
tY is the actual value and
tε is the random error at t,
θ are the coefficients, p and q are integers that are often
referred to as autoregressive and moving average,
respectively.
2014 UKSim-AMSS 16th International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation
978-1-4799-4923-6/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/UKSim.2014.67
The steps in building ARIMA predictive model consist of
model identification, parameter estimation and diagnostic
checking .
METHODOLOGY
The method used in this study to develop ARIMA model
for stock price forecasting is explained in detail in
subsections below. The tool used for implementation is
Eviews software version 5. Stock data used in this research
work are historical daily stock prices obtained from two
countries stock exchanged. The data composed of four
elements, namely: open price, low price, high price and
close price respectively. In this research the closing price is
chosen to represent the price of the index to be predicted.
Closing price is chosen because it reflects all the activities
of the index in a trading day.
To determine the best ARIMA model among several
experiments performed, the following criteria are used in
this study for each stock index.
Relatively small of BIC (Bayesian or Schwarz
Information Criterion)
Relatively small standard error of regression (S.E.
of regression)
Relatively high of adjusted R2
Q-statistics and correlogram show that there is no
significant pattern left in the autocorrelation
functions (ACFs) and partial autocorrelation
functions (PACFs) of the residuals, it means the
residual of the selected model are white noise.
The subsections below described the processes of
ARIMA model-development.
A. ARIMA (p, d, q) Model for Nokia Stock Index
Nokia stock data used in this study covers the period
from 25th April, 1995 to 25th February, 2011 having a total
number of 3990 observations. Figure 1 depicts the original
pattern of the series to have general overview whether the
time series is stationary or not. From the graph below the
time series have random walk pattern.
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the Nokia stock closing price index
Figure 2 is the correlogram of Nokia time series. From the
graph, the ACF dies down extremely slowly which simply
means that the time series is nonstationary. If the series is
not stationary, it is converted to a stationary series by
differencing.
difference,
“DCLOSE” of Nokia stock index becomes stationary as
shown in figure 3 and figure 4 of the line graph and
correlogram respectively.
Figure 2: The correlogram of Nokia stock price index
Figure 3: Graphical representation of the Nokia stock price index after
differencing.
Figure 4: The correlogram of Nokia stock price index after first
differencing
In figure 5 the model checking was done with
Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) unit root test on
“DCLOSE” of Nokia stock index. The result confirms that
the series becomes stationary after the first-difference of the
Figure 5: ADF unit root test for DCLOSE of Nokia stock index.
Table 1 shows the different parameters of autoregressive
(p) and moving average (q) among the several ARIMA
model experimented upon . ARIMA (2, 1, 0) is considered
the best for Nokia stock index as shown in figure 6. The
model returned the smallest Bayesian or Schwarz
information criterion of 5.3927 and relatively smallest
standard error of regression of 3.5808 as shown in figure 6.
Figure 6: ARIMA (2, 1, 0) estimation output with DCLOSE of Nokia
Figure 7 is the residual of the series. If the model is
good, the residuals (difference between actual and predicted
values) of the model are series of random errors. Since there
are no significant spikes of ACFs and PACFs, it means that
the residual of the selected ARIMA model are white noise,
no other significant patterns left in the time series.
Therefore, there is no need to consider any AR(p) and
MA(q) further.
Figure 7: Correlogram of residuals of the Nokia stock index.
In forecasting form, the best model selected can be
expressed as follows:
(i.e., the difference between the
actual value of the series and the forecast value)
TABLE I: STATISTICAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT ARIMA
PARAMETERS FOR NOKIA STOCK INDEX
Adjusted R2
Regression
The bold row represent the best ARIMA model among the several
experiments.
B. ARIMA (p, d, q) Model for Zenith Bank Index
The stock data of Zenith bank used in this study covered
the period from 3rd January, 2006 to 25th February, 2011 with
total of 1296 observations. Figure 8 is the original pattern of
the series. From the graph there was upward movement of
the index from 2006 and downward movement is observed
from 2008 possibly because of world financial crisis
experienced at that time.
Figure 8: Graphical representation of the Zenith Bank stock index closing
Figure 9 is the correlogram of the time series of Zenith
bank stock index. From the graph of the correlogram, the
ACF dies down extremely slowly which simply means that
the time series is nonstationary. If the series is not
stationary, there is need to convert to stationary series by
differencing.
difference,
“DCLOSE” of Zenith bank stock index becomes stationary
as shown in figure 10 and figure 11 of the line graph and
correlogram of the series after first differencing.
Figure 9: The correlogram of Zenith Bank stock price index
Figure 10: Graphical representation of the Zenith bank stock index first
differencing
Figure 11: The correlogram of Zenith bank stock price index after first
differencing.
Figure 12 is the ADF unit root test on “DCLOSE” of the
series which also indicates the first difference of the series
becomes stationary.
Figure 12: ADF unit root test for DCLOSE of Zenith bank stock index.
Table 2 shows the different parameters of autoregressive
(p) and moveing average (q) of the ARIMA model in order
to get the best fitted model. ARIMA (1, 0, 1) is relatively
the best model as indicated in figure 13. The model returned
the smallest Bayesian or Schwarz information criterion of
2.3736 and relatively smallest standard error of regression
of 0.7872 as shown in figure 13.
Figure 13: ARIMA (1, 0, 1) estimation output with DCLOSE of Zenith
bank index.
Figure 14 is the correlogram of residual of the seies. From
the figure it is obvious there is no significant spike of ACFs
and PACFs. This means that the residual of this selected
ARIMA model are white noise. There is no other significant
patterns left in the time series and there is no need for
further consideration of another AR(p) and MA(q).
Figure 14: Correlogram of residuals of the Zenith bank stock index.
In forecasting form, the best model selected can be
expressed as follows:
(i.e., the difference between the actual
value of the series and the forecast value)
TABLE II: STATISTICAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT ARIMA
PARAMETERS FOR ZENITH BANK STOCK INDEX
Regression
The bold row represent the best ARIMA model among the several
experiments
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The experimental results of each of stock index are
discussed in the subsection below.
A. Result of ARIMA Model for Nokia Stock Price
Prediction
Table 3 is the result of the predicted values of ARIMA
(2, 1, 0) considered the best model for Nokia stock index.
Figure 15 gives graphical illustration of the level accuracy
of the predicted price against actual stock price to see the
performance of the ARIMA model selected. From the
graph, is obvious that the performance is satisfactory.
TABLE III: SAMPLE OF EMPIRICAL RESULTS OF ARIMA (2,1,0) OF
NOKIA STOCK INDEX.
Sample Period
Actual Values
Predicted Values
Figure 15: Graph of Actual Stock Price vs Predicted values of
Nokia Stock Index
B. Result of ARIMA Model for Zenith Bank Stock Price
Prediction
In this case, ARIMA (1, 0, 1) was selected as the best
model for Zenith bank stock index after several adjustment
of the autoregressive (p) and moving average (q) parameters
in Eviews software used. Table 4 contained the predicted
values of the model selected and figure 16 is the graph of
predicted price against actual stock price to demonstrate the
correlation of accuracy. From the graph, the performance of
the ARIMA model selected is quite impressive as there are
some instances of closely related of actual and predicted
TABLE IV: SAMPLE OF EMPIRICAL RESULTS OF ARIMA (1,0,1) OF
ZENITH BANK INDEX
Sample Period
Actual Values
Predicted Values
Figure 16: Graph of Actual Stock Price vs Predicted values of Zenith Bank
Stock Index
CONCLUSION
This paper presents extensive process of building
ARIMA model for stock price prediction. The experimental
results obtained with best ARIMA model demonstrated the
potential of ARIMA models to predict stock prices
satisfactory on short-term basis. This could guide investors
in stock market to make profitable investment decisions.
With the results obtained ARIMA models can compete
reasonably well with emerging forecasting techniques in
short-term prediction.