Meta-Prod2Vec - Product Embeddings Using
Side-Information for Recommendation
Flavian Vasile
 
Elena Smirnova
 
Alexis Conneau ∗
Facebook AI Research
 
We propose Meta-Prod2vec, a novel method to compute
item similarities for recommendation that leverages existing
item metadata. Such scenarios are frequently encountered in
applications such as content recommendation, ad targeting
and web search. Our method leverages past user interactions
with items and their attributes to compute low-dimensional
embeddings of items. Speciﬁcally, the item metadata is injected into the model as side information to regularize the
item embeddings. We show that the new item representations lead to better performance on recommendation tasks
on an open music dataset.
Recommender systems; Embeddings; Neural Networks
INTRODUCTION
In the recent years, online commerce outpaced the growth
of traditional commerce, with a rate of growth of 15% in 2015
and accounting for $1.5 trillion spend in 2014. The research
work on recommender systems has consequently grown signiﬁcantly during the last couples of years. As shown by key
players in the online e-commerce space, such as Amazon,
Netﬂix and Alibaba, the product recommendation functionality is now a key driver of demand, accounting in the case
of Amazon for roughly 35% of the overall sales.
As of now, the state-of-the-art recommendation methods include matrix factorization techniques of the item-item
and user-item matrices that diﬀer in the choice of weighting
schemes of the matrix entries, the reconstruction loss functions and their choice with regards to the use of additional
item content information. The real-world recommender systems have additional constraints that inform their architecture. Some of these major constraints include: scaling
the recommender systems such that they can handle a huge
amount of user interaction information, supporting real-time
∗Alexis Conneau did this work while interning at Criteo.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
RecSys ’16, September 15-19, 2016, Boston , MA, USA
c⃝2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4035-9/16/09...$15.00
DOI: 
changes in recommendation and handling the cold-start
problem .
In the last couple of years, a promising new class of neural
probabilistic models that can generate user and product embeddings has emerged and has shown promising results. The
new methods can scale to millions of items and show good
improvements on the cold-start problem. In the context of
product recommendation, they were successfully applied to
ad recommendations in Yahoo! Mail , for Restaurant recommendations by OpenTable and in the 1st prize winners
in the 2015 RecSys Challenge .
In this paper, we present an extension of the Prod2Vec
algorithm initially proposed in . The Prod2Vec algorithm
only uses the local product co-occurrence information established by the product sequences to create distributed representations of products, but does not leverage their metadata.
The authors have proposed an extension of the algorithm
that takes into account the textual content information together with the sequential structure, but the approach is
speciﬁc to textual metadata and the resulting architecture
is hierarchical, therefore missing some of the side information terms by comparison with our method. In this work,
we make the connection with the work on recommendation
using side information and propose Meta-Prod2Vec, which is
a general approach for adding categorical side-information
to the Prod2Vec model in a simple and eﬃcient way. The
usage of additional item information as side informationonly, e.g. available only at training time, is motivated by
real-world constraints on the number of feature values a recommender system can keep in memory for real-time scoring. In this case, using the metadata only at training time
keeps the memory footprint constant (assuming an existing
recommendation system that uses item embeddings) while
improving the online performance.
We show that our approach signiﬁcantly improves recommendation performance on a subset of the 30Music listening
and playlists dataset with a low implementation and
integration cost.
In Section 2 we cover previous related work and the relationship with our method.
In Section 3 we present the
Meta-Prod2Vec approach. In Section 4 we present the experimental setup and the results on the 30Music dataset.
In Section 5 we summarize our ﬁndings and conclude with
future directions of research.
RELATED WORK
Existing methods for recommender systems can roughly
be categorized into collaborative ﬁltering (CF) based metharXiv:1607.07326v1 [cs.IR] 25 Jul 2016
ods, content-based (CB) methods and hybrid methods. CFbased methods are based on user’s interaction with
items, such as clicks, and don’t require domain knowledge.
Content-based methods make use of the user or product content proﬁles.
In practice, CF methods are more popular
because they can discover interesting associations between
products without requiring the heavy knowledge collection
needed by the content-based methods. However, CF methods suﬀer from cold-start problem in which no or few interaction are available with niche or new items in the system.
In recent years, more sophisticated methods, namely latent
factor models, have been developed to address the data sparsity problem of CF methods which we will discuss in Section
2.1. To further help overcoming cold-start problem, recent
works focused on developing hybrid methods by combining
latent factor models with content information which we will
cover in Section 2.2.
Latent factor models
Matrix factorization (MF) methods became popular after their success in the Netﬂix competition. These
methods learn low-rank decompositions of a sparse user-item
interaction matrix by minimizing the square loss over the reconstruction error. The dot product between the resulting
user and item latent vectors is then used to perform recommendation.
Several modiﬁcations have been proposed to better align
MF methods with the recommendation objective, for instance, Bayesian Personalized Ranking and Logistic MF
 . The former learns user and item latent vectors through
pairwise ranking loss to emphasize the relevance-based ranking of items. The latter models the probability that a user
would interact with an item by replacing the square loss in
MF method with the logistic loss .
One of the ﬁrst methods that learns user and item latent representations through neural network was proposed
in . The authors utilized Restricted Boltzmann Machines
to explain user-item interaction and perform recommendations. Recently, shallow neural networks has been gaining
attention thanks to the success of word embeddings in various NLP tasks, the focus being on Word2Vec model . An
application of Word2Vec to the recommendation task was
proposed in , called Prod2Vec model. It generates product embeddings from sequences of purchases and performs
recommendation based on most similar products in the embedding space. Our work is an extension of Prod2Vec and
we will present its details in Section 3.1.
Latent factor models with content information
Many techniques have been used recently to create uniﬁed
representations from latent factors and content information.
One way to integrate user and item content information is
to use it to estimate user and item latent factors through
regression . Another approach is to learn latent factors
for both CF and content features, known as Factorization
Machines .
Tensor factorization have been suggested as a generalization of MF for considering additional information .
In this approach, user-item-content matrix is factorized in
a common latent space.
The authors in propose cofactorization approach where the latent user and item factors are shared between factorizations of user-item matrix
and user and item content matrices. Similar to , they
also assigned weights to negative examples based on useritem content-based dissimilarity.
Graph-based models have also been used to create uniﬁed
representations. In particular, in user-item interactions
and side information are modeled jointly through user and
item latent factors. User factors are shared by the user-item
interaction component and the side information component.
Gunawardana et al. leans the interaction weights between user actions and various features such as user and
item metadata. The authors use a uniﬁed Boltzmann Machines to make a prediction.
PROPOSED APPROACH
In their Prod2Vec paper , Grbovic et al. proposed the
use of the Word2Vec algorithm on sequences of product receipts coming from emails. More formally, given a set S of
sequences of products s = (p1, p2, ..., pM), s ∈S, the objective is to ﬁnd a D-dimensional real-value representation
vp ∈RD such that similar products are close in the resulting
vector space.
The source algorithm - Word2Vec is originally a highly
scalable predictive model for learning word embeddings from
text and belongs to the larger class of Neural Net Language
Models . Most of the work in this area is based on the
Distributional Hypothesis , which states that words that
appear in the same contexts have close if not identical meanings.
A similar hypothesis can be applied in larger contexts
such as online shopping, music and media consumption and
has been the basis of CF methods. In the CF setup, the
users of the services are used as the distributed context in
which products co-occur, leading to the classical item cooccurrence approaches in CF. A further similarity between
co-count based recommendation methods and Word2Vec has
been established by Omer et al. in ; the authors show
that the objective of the embedding method is closely related to the decomposition of the matrix containing as entries the Shifted Positive PMI of the locally co-occurring
items (words), where PMI is the Point-Wise Mutual Information:
PMIij = log
Xij · |D|
SPMIij = PMI(i, j) −log k
where Xi and Xj are items frequencies, Xij is the number
of times i and j co-occur, D is the size of the dataset and k
is the ratio of negatives to positives.
Prod2Vec Objective.
In the authors show that the Word2Vec objective (and
similarly Prod2Vec’s) can be re-written as the optimization
problem of minimizing the weighted cross entropy between
the empirical and the modeled conditional distributions of
context products given the target product (more precisely,
this represents the Word2Vec-SkipGram model, which usually does better on large datasets). Furthermore, the prediction of the conditional distribution is modeled as a softmax
over the inner product between the target product and context product vectors:
log qj|i(θ) −(Xi −XPOS
) log(1 −qj|i(θ))
Xi(−pj|i log qj|i(θ) −p¬j|i log q¬j|i(θ))
XiH(p·|i, q·|i(θ)).
Here, H(p·|i, q·|i(θ)) is the cross-entropy of the empirical
probability p·|i of seeing any product in the output space J
conditioned on the input product i ∈I and the predicted
conditional probability q·|i:
j′∈(VJ−j) exp(wT
where Xi is the input frequency of product i and XPOS
number of times the pair of products (i, j) has been observed
in the training data.
The resulting architecture for Prod2Vec is shown in Figure
1, where the input space of all products situated in center
window is trained to predict the values of the surrounding
products by using a Neural Network with a single hidden
layer and a softmax output layer.
However, the product embeddings generated by Prod2Vec
only take into account the information of the user purchase
sequence, that is the local co-occurrence information. Though
richer than the global co-occurrence frequency used in Collaborative Filtering, it does not take into account other types
of item information that are available (the items’ metadata).
For example, assuming that the inputs are sequences of
categorized products, the standard Prod2Vec embedding does
not model the following interactions:
• given the current visit of the product p with category
c, it is more likely that the next visited product p′ will
belong to the same category c
• given the current category c, it is more likely that the
next category is c or one of the related categories c′
(e.g. after a swimwear sale, it is likely to observe a
sunscreen sale, which belongs to an entirely diﬀerent
product category)
• given the current product p, the next category is more
likely to be c or a related category c′
• given the current category c, the more likely current
products visited are p or p′
As mentioned in the introduction, the same authors extended the Prod2Vec algorithm in such that to take into
account both product sequence and product text in the same
time. If applying the extended method to non-textual metadata, the algorithm models, additionally to the product sequence information, the dependency between the product
metadata and the product id, but does not link the sequence
of metadata and the sequence of product ids together.
Figure 1: Prod2Vec Neural Net Architecture.
Figure 2: Meta-Prod2Vec Neural Net Architecture.
Meta-Prod2Vec
As shown in the Related Work section, there has been extensive work on using side information for recommendation,
especially in the context of hybrid methods that combine
CF methods and Content-based (CB) methods. In the case
of embeddings, the closest work is the Doc2Vec model
where the words and the paragraph are trained jointly, but
only the paragraph embedding is used for the ﬁnal task.
We propose a similar architecture that incorporates the
side information in both the input and output space of the
Neural Net and parametrizes separately each one of the interactions between the items to be embedded and the metadata, as shown in Figure 2.
Meta-Prod2Vec Objective.
The Meta-Prod2Vec loss extends the Prod2Vec loss by taking into account four additional interaction terms involving
the items’ metadata:
LMP 2V = LJ|I + λ × (LM|I + LJ|M + LM|M + LI|M)
Figure 3: MetaProd2vec as matrix factorization of
the items and metadata extended matrix.
where: M is the metadata space (for example, artist ids
in the case of the 30Music dataset), λ is the regularization
parameter. We list the new interaction terms below:
LI|M is the weighted cross-entropy between the observed
conditional probability of input product ids given their metadata and the predicted conditional probability. This sideinformation is slightly diﬀerent from the next three types
because it models the item as a function of its own metadata (same index in the sequence). This is because, in most
cases, the item’s metadata is more general than the id and
can partially explain the observation of the speciﬁc id.
LJ|M is the weighted cross-entropy between the observed
conditional probability of surrounding product ids given the
input products’ metadata and the predicted conditional probability. An architecture where the normal Word2Vec loss is
augmented with only this interaction term is very close to
the Doc2Vec model proposed in where we replace the
document id information with a more general type of item
LM|I is the weighted cross-entropy between the observed
conditional probability of surrounding products’ metadata
values given input products and the predicted conditional
probability.
LM|M is the weighted cross-entropy between the observed
conditional probability of surrounding products’ metadata
values given input products metadata and the predicted conditional probability. This models the sequence of observed
metadata and in itself represents the Word2Vec-like embedding of the metadata.
To summarize, LJ|I and LM|M encode the loss terms coming from modeling the likelihood of the sequences of items
and metadata separately, LI|M represents the conditional
likelihood of the item id given its metadata and LJ|M and
LM|I represent the cross-item interaction terms between the
item ids and the metadata. In Figure 3 we show the relationship between the item matrix factorized by Prod2Vec
and the one factorized by Meta-Prod2Vec.
The more general equation for Meta-Prod2Vec introduces
a separate λ for each of the four types of side-information:
λmi, λjm, λmm and λim.
In Section 4 we will analyze the relative importance of
each type of side-information. Also, in the case when multiple sources of metadata are used, each source will have
its own term in the global loss and its own regularization
parameter.
In terms of the softmax normalization factor, we have the
option of either separate the output spaces of the items and
of their metadata or not.
Similarly with the simplifying
assumption used in Word2Vec, that allows each pair of cooccurring products to be predicted and ﬁtted independently
(therefore adding an implicit mutual exclusivity constraint
on the output products given an input product), we embed
the products and their metadata in the same space, therefore
allowing them to share the normalization constraint.
One of the main attractions of the Word2Vec algorithm is
its scalability, which comes from approximating the original
softmax loss over the space of all possible words with the
Negative Sampling loss , that ﬁts the model only
on the positive co-occurrences together with a small sample
of the negative examples to maximize a modiﬁed likelihood
function LSG−NS(θ):
log qj|i(θ) −(XNEG
log(1 −qj|i(θ))
≈LSG−NS(θ)
LSG−NS(θ) =
−kEcN ∼PD log σ(−wT
where PD probability distribution used to sample negative context examples and k is a hyper parameter specifying
the number of negative examples per positive example. The
side-information loss terms LI|M , LJ|M, LM|I, LM|M are
computed according to the same formula, where the i,j indexes range over the respective input/output spaces.
In the case of Meta-Prod2Vec, the impact of the decision to
co-embed products and their metadata on the LSG−NS(θ)
loss is that the set of potential negative examples for any
positive pair ranges over the union of items’ and metadata
Impact on ﬁnal recommendation system.
Feasibility
and engineering concerns.
Because of the shared embedding space, the training algorithm used for Prod2Vec remains unchanged. The only
diﬀerence is that, in the new version of the generation step
of training pairs, the original pairs of items are supplemented
with additional pairs that involve metadata. In terms of the
online recommendation system, assuming we are augmenting a solution that already involves item embeddings, the
online system does not incur any changes (since the only
time we make use of the metadata is during training) and
there is zero additional impact on the online memory footprint.
EXPERIMENTS
The experimental section is organized as follows. First, we
describe the evaluation setup, namely, the evaluation task,
success metrics and the baselines. Then, we report results
of experiments on the 30Music open dataset.
We evaluate the recommendation methods on the next
event prediction task. We consider time ordered sequences
of user interactions with the items. We split each sequence
into the consequent training, validation and test sets. We
ﬁt the embedding Prod2Vec and Meta-Prod2Vec models on
the ﬁrst (n-2) elements of each user sequence and use the
performance on the (n-1)-th element to bench the hyperparameters and we report our ﬁnal by training on the ﬁrst
(n-1) items of each sequence and predicting the nth item.
We use the last item in the training sequence as the query
item and we recommend the most similar products using
one of the methods described below.
As mentioned in Section 1, due to the technical constraint
of keeping a constant memory footprint, we are interested
in the usefulness of item metadata only at training time.
Therefore we do not compare against methods where the
metadata is used directly at prediction time, such as the supervised content-based embedding models proposed in 
where both the user and item are represented as linear combinations of the item content embeddings and , where
the products are represented by the associated image content embeddings.
We use the following evaluation metrics averaged over all
• Hit ratio at K (HR@K) that is equal to 1/K if the
test product appears in the top K list of recommended
• Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG@K)
favors higher ranks of the test product in the list of
recommended products.
Using the aforementioned metrics, we compare the following methods:
• BestOf : this method retrieves the top products sorted
by their popularity. This simulates the frequently encountered recommendation solution based strictly on
popularity.
• CoCounts: the standard CF method which uses the
cosine similarity of vectors of co-occurrences with other
items. This method is performing particularly well in
cases where the catalog of possible items is small and
does not change a lot over time, therefore avoiding item
cold-start problems.
• Standalone Prod2Vec:
the product recommendation
solution based on cosine similarities of the vectorial
representation of products obtained by using Word2Vec
on product sequences.
Similarly with other embedding and matrix factorization solutions, the goal of the
method is to address the cold-start problem.
• Standalone Meta-Prod2Vec: our proposed method, which
enhances Prod2Vec with item side information and uses
the resulting product embeddings to compute cosine
similarities. As in Prod2Vec, the goal of the method is
to further address cold-start problems.
Pair freq=0
Pair freq<3
Meta-Prod2Vec
Mix(Prod2Vec,CoCounts)
Mix(Meta-Prod2Vec,CoCounts)
Recommendation accuracy (HR@20) in
cold-start regime as a function of training frequency
of the pair (query item, next item).
Side Information
Meta-Prod2Vec with only I|M
Meta-Prod2Vec with only M|I
Meta-Prod2Vec with only J|M
Meta-Prod2Vec without M|M
Table 3: Proportion of the Meta-Prod2Vec lift over
BestOf due to each type of side information.
• Mix(Prod2Vec,CoCounts): an ensemble method which
returns the top items using a linear combination between the Prod2Vec and the CoCount-based item pair
similarities.
The motivation of the ensemble methods that combine embeddings and CF is to leverage
the beneﬁts of the two in cold-start and non cold-start
Mix(Prod2V ec, CoCounts) =
α ∗Prod2V ec + (1 −α) ∗CoCounts
• Mix(Meta-Prod2Vec,CoCounts): an ensemble method
which returns the top items using a linear combination
between the Meta-Prod2Vec and the CoCount-based
item pair similarity.
Mix(MetaProd2V ec, CoCounts) =
α ∗MetaProd2V ec + (1 −α) ∗CoCounts
We perform our evaluation on the publicly available 30Music dataset that represents a collection of listening and
playlists data retrieved from Internet radio stations through
Last.fm API. On this dataset, we evaluate the recommendation methods on the task of next song prediction. For the
Meta-Prod2Vec algorithm we make use of track metadata,
namely the artist information. We run our experiments on a
sample of 100k user sessions of the dataset with the resulting
vocabulary size of 433k songs and 67k artists.
We keep the embedding dimension ﬁxed to 50, window
size to 3, the side information regularization parameter λ
to 1. We bench the blending factor α in Equations 1,2 of
the embedding-based similarity score with the CoCountsbased cosine similarity score and ﬁnd that the best value
In addition, we vary the number of training
epochs and we ﬁnd the best parameter value to be 30 for
Prod2Vec and 10 for Meta-Prod2Vec. As shown in Table 1,
Meta-Prod2Vec has better performance both standalone and
0.0003 (0.0002;0.0003)
0.001 (0.001;0.001)
0.0003 (0.0002;0.0003)
0.002 (0.002;0.002)
0.0248 (0.0245;0.0251)
0.122 (0.121;0.123)
0.0160 (0.0158;0.0161)
0.141 (0.139;0.142)
0.0170 (0.0168;0.0171)
0.105 (0.103;0.106)
0.0101 (0.0100;0.0102)
0.113 (0.112;0.115)
Meta-Prod2Vec
0.0191 (0.0189;0.0194)
0.110 (0.108;0.113)
0.0124 (0.0123;0.0126)
0.125 (0.123;0.126)
Mix(Prod2Vec,CoCounts)
0.0273 (0.027;0.0276)
0.140 (0.139;0.141)
0.0158 (0.0157;0.0160)
0.152 (0.151;0.153)
Mix(Meta-Prod2Vec,CoCounts)
0.0292 (0.0288;0.0297)
0.144 (0.142;0.145)
0.0180 (0.0178;0.0182)
0.161 (0.160;0.162)
Table 1: Comparison of recommendation performance of Meta-Prod2Vec and competing models in terms of
HitRate and NDCG.
Figure 4: Cold-start improvements on the query and
next item pairs.
in the ensemble model with respect to the Prod2Vec model
(results computed at 90% conﬁdence levels).
Improvements on Cold-Start
Most of the gains in performance are coming from the
cold-start traﬃc, where, as shown in Figure 4 and Table 2,
we can see that Standalone Meta-Prod2Vec outperforms by a
large margin all other methods when the true pair of (query
item, next item) have zero co-occurrences in the training set
and that the Mix(Meta-Prod2Vec,CoCounts) has the best
performance in the cases where the true pair has low observed counts. Interestingly, we observe that the diﬀerence
of performance between the ensemble models is bigger than
between the standalone Meta-Prod2Vec and Prod2Vec models. We explain this by the fact Standalone Meta-Prod2Vec
outperforms Standalone Prod2Vec on the cold-start traﬃc
therefore helping the overall performance of the CoCounts,
that by itself performs really well on head traﬃc. Indeed,
CoCounts memorizes frequent pairs of (query, target) product, while Standalone Meta-Prod2Vec helps to generalize on
unseen ones. These results are mirrored by similar ﬁndings
covered in and motivate the newly introduced approach
of Wide and Deep learning.
Relative Importance of each type of Side Information
We posited the relevance of each type of side information,
but we want to conﬁrm experimentally that each of the four
types of side-information brings additional information. We
proceed by introducing each of the types of the side information separately and to compare its performance with the
original Prod2Vec baseline.
The only exception for which we test the value by leaving
it out of the full Meta-Prod2Vec model is the mm type of
side-information; in this case, the input metadata explains
the output metadata and this constraint is not directly valuable in regularizing the product embeddings and needs to
be introduced together with the other types of pairs that
connect the products to the metadata. Therefore its contribution to the model can be computed as (1 - degraded
model performance) and is therefore 39% on HR and 35%
In Table 3, we compute the proportion of lift over the
BestOf baseline obtained by using each type of side information separately and we observe that each one of them
account for at most 50% of the performance of the full Meta-
Prod2Vec, therefore conﬁrming that the additional terms in
our proposed model are relevant.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced Meta-Prod2Vec, a new item
embedding method that enhances the existing Prod2Vec method
with item metadata at training time. This work makes a
novel connection between the recent embedding-based methods and consecrated Matrix Factorization methods by introducing learning with side information in the context of
embeddings. We analyzed separately the relative value of
each type of side information and proved that each one of
the four types is informative. Finally, we have shown that
Meta-Prod2Vec constantly outperforms Prod2Vec on recommendation tasks both globally and in the cold-start regime,
and that, when combined with a standard Collaborative
Filtering approach, outperforms all other tested methods.
These results, together with the reduced implementation
cost and the fact that our method does not aﬀect the online
recommendation architecture, makes this solution attractive
in cases where item embeddings are already in use. Future
work will extend on ways of using item metadata as side information and support of non-categorical information such
as images and continuous variables.