Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2826–2831
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploiting Cross-Sentence Context for Neural Machine Translation
Longyue Wang†
Zhaopeng Tu‡∗
†ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland
{longyue.wang, andy.way, qun.liu}@adaptcentre.ie
‡Tencent AI Lab, China
 
In translation, considering the document
as a whole can help to resolve ambiguities
and inconsistencies. In this paper, we propose a cross-sentence context-aware approach and investigate the inﬂuence of historical contextual information on the performance of neural machine translation
(NMT). First, this history is summarized
in a hierarchical way. We then integrate
the historical representation into NMT in
two strategies:
1) a warm-start of encoder and decoder states, and 2) an auxiliary context source for updating decoder
Experimental results on a large
Chinese-English translation task show that
our approach signiﬁcantly improves upon
a strong attention-based NMT system by
up to +2.1 BLEU points.
Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) has been
rapidly developed in recent years . The encoderdecoder architecture is widely employed, in which
the encoder summarizes the source sentence into
a vector representation, and the decoder generates
the target sentence word by word from the vector
representation. Using the encoder-decoder framework as well as gating and attention techniques,
it has been shown that the performance of NMT
has surpassed the performance of traditional statistical machine translation (SMT) on various language pairs .
The continuous vector representation of a symbol encodes multiple dimensions of similarity,
equivalent to encoding more than one meaning of
∗Corresponding Author: Zhaopeng Tu
Consequently, NMT needs to spend a
substantial amount of its capacity in disambiguating source and target words based on the context
deﬁned by a source sentence .
Consistency is another critical issue in documentlevel translation, where a repeated term should
keep the same translation throughout the whole
document and dialogue modeling .
The leverage of global context for NMT, however, has received relatively little attention from
the research community.1 In this paper, we propose a cross-sentence context-aware NMT model,
which considers the inﬂuence of previous source
sentences in the same document.2
Speciﬁcally, we employ a hierarchy of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to summarize the
cross-sentence context from source-side previous
sentences, which deploys an additional documentlevel RNN on top of the sentence-level RNN encoder . After obtaining the
global context, we design several strategies to integrate it into NMT to translate the current sentence:
• Initialization, that uses the history represen-
1To the best of our knowledge, our work and Jean et al.
 are two independently early attempts to model crosssentence context for NMT.
2In our preliminary experiments, considering target-side
history inversely harms translation performance, since it suffers from serious error propagation problems.
tation as the initial state of the encoder, decoder, or both;
• Auxiliary Context, that uses the history representation as static cross-sentence context,
which works together with the dynamic intrasentence context produced by an attention
model, to good effect.
• Gating Auxiliary Context, that adds a gate to
Auxiliary Context, which decides the amount
of global context used in generating the next
target word at each step of decoding.
Experimental results show that the proposed initialization and auxiliary context (w/ or w/o gating) mechanisms signiﬁcantly improve translation
performance individually, and combining them
achieves further improvement.
Given a source sentence xm to be translated,
we consider its K previous sentences in the
same document as cross-sentence context C =
{xm−K, ..., xm−1}. In this section, we ﬁrst model
C, which is then integrated into NMT.
sentence RNN
document RNN
Figure 1: Summarizing global context with a hierarchical RNN (xk is the k-th source sentence).
Summarizing Global Context
As shown in Figure 1, we summarize the representation of C in a hierarchical way:
Sentence RNN
For a sentence xk in C, the
sentence RNN reads the corresponding words
{x1,k, ..., xn,k, . . . , xN,k} sequentially and updates its hidden state:
hn,k = f(hn−1,k, xn,k)
where f(·) is an activation function, and hn,k is the
hidden state at time n. The last state hN,k stores
order-sensitive information about all the words in
xk, which is used to represent the summary of the
whole sentence, i.e. Sk ≡hN,k. After processing
each sentence in C, we can obtain all sentencelevel representations, which will be fed into document RNN.
Document RNN
It takes as input the sequence of the above sentence-level representations
{S1, ..., Sk, ..., SK} and computes the hidden state
hk = f(hk−1, Sk)
where hk is the recurrent state at time k, which
summarizes the previous sentences that have been
processed to the position k. Similarly, we use the
last hidden state to represent the summary of the
global context, i.e. D ≡hK.
Integrating Global Context into NMT
We propose three strategies to integrate the history
representation D into NMT:
Initialization
We use D to initialize either NMT
encoder, NMT decoder or both. For encoder, we
use D as the initialization state rather than all-zero
states as in the standard NMT (Bahdanau et al.,
For decoder, we rewrite the calculation
of the initial hidden state s0 = tanh(WshN) as
s0 = tanh(WshN + WDD) where hN is the last
hidden state in encoder and {Ws, WD} are the corresponding weight metrices.
Auxiliary Context
In standard NMT, as shown
in Figure 2 (a), the decoder hidden state for time i
is computed by
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci)
where yi−1 is the most recently generated target
word, and ci is the intra-sentence context summarized by NMT encoder for time i. As shown
in Figure 2 (b), Auxiliary Context method adds
the representation of cross-sentence context D to
jointly update the decoding state si:
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci, D)
In this strategy, D serves as an auxiliary information source to better capture the meaning of the
source sentence. Now the gated NMT decoder has
four inputs rather than the original three ones. The
concatenation [ci, D], which embeds both intraand cross-sentence contexts, can be fed to the decoder as a single representation. We only need
to modify the size of the corresponding parameter matrix for least modiﬁcation effort.
(a) standard
(b) decoder with
auxiliary context
(c) decoder with
gating auxiliary context
Figure 2: Architectures of NMT with auxiliary context integrations. act. is the decoder activation function, and σ is a sigmoid function.
Gating Auxiliary Context
The starting point
for this strategy is an observation:
for information from the global context differs
from step to step during generation of the target
words. For example, global context is more in demand when generating target words for ambiguous
source words, while less by others. To this end, we
extend auxiliary context strategy by introducing a
context gate to dynamically control the amount of information ﬂowing from the
auxiliary global context at each decoding step, as
shown in Figure 2 (c).
Intuitively, at each decoding step i, the context
gate looks at decoding environment (i.e., si, yi−1,
and ci), and outputs a number between 0 and 1 for
each element in D, where 1 denotes “completely
transferring this” while 0 denotes “completely ignoring this”. The global context vector D is then
processed with an element-wise multiplication before being fed to the decoder activation layer.
Formally, the context gate consists of a sigmoid
neural network layer and an element-wise multiplication operation. It assigns an element-wise
weight to D, computed by
zi = σ(Uzsi−1 + Wzyi−1 + Czci)
Here σ(·) is a logistic sigmoid function, and
{Wz, Uz, Cz} are the weight matrices, which are
trained to learn when to exploit global context
to maximize the overall translation performance.
Note that zi has the same dimensionality as D, and
thus each element in the global context vector has
its own weight. Accordingly, the decoder hidden
state is updated by
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci, zi ⊗D)
Experiments
We carried out experiments on Chinese–English
translation task. As the document information is
necessary when selecting the previous sentences,
we collect all LDC corpora that contain document
The training corpus consists of 1M
sentence pairs extracted from LDC corpora3 with
25.4M Chinese words and 32.4M English words.
We chose the NIST05 (MT05) as our development
set, and NIST06 (MT06) and NIST08 (MT08) as
test sets. We used case-insensitive BLEU score
 as our evaluation metric,
and sign-test for calculating
statistical signiﬁcance.
We implemented our approach on top of an
open source attention-based NMT model, Nematus4 . We limited the source and target vocabularies to the most frequent 35K words in Chinese and English, covering approximately 97.1%
and 99.4% of the data in the two languages respectively. We trained each model on sentences
of length up to 80 words in the training data with
early stopping. The word embedding dimension
was 600, the hidden layer size was 1000, and the
batch size was 80. All our models considered the
previous three sentences (i.e., K = 3) as crosssentence context.
3The LDC corpora indexes are:
2003E07, 2003E14,
2004T07, 2005E83, 2005T06, 2006E24, 2006E34, 2006E85,
2008E56, 2009E16, 2009E95.
4Available at 
+Initenc+dec
+Gating Auxi
+Initenc+dec+Gating Auxi
Evaluation of translation quality. “Init” denotes Initialization of encoder (“enc”), decoder
(“dec”), or both (“enc+dec”), and “Auxi” denotes Auxiliary Context. “†” indicates statistically signiﬁcant
difference (P < 0.01) from the baseline NEMATUS.
Table 1 shows the translation performance in terms
of BLEU score. Clearly, the proposed approaches
signiﬁcantly outperforms baseline in all cases.
(Rows 1-2) NEMATUS signiﬁcantly
outperforms Moses – a commonly used phrasebased SMT system , by 2.3
BLEU points on average, indicating that it is a
strong NMT baseline system. It is consistent with
the results in (i.e., 26.93 vs.
29.41) on training corpora of similar scale.
Initialization Strategy
(Rows 3-5) Initenc and
Initdec improve translation performance by around
+1.0 and +1.3 BLEU points individually, proving the effectiveness of warm-start with crosssentence context. Combining them achieves a further improvement.
Auxiliary Context Strategies
(Rows 6-7) The
gating auxiliary context strategy achieves a signiﬁcant improvement of around +1.0 BLEU point
over its non-gating counterpart. This shows that,
by acting as a critic, the introduced context gate
learns to distinguish the different needs of the
global context for generating target words.
(Row 8) Finally, we combine the
best variants from the initialization and auxiliary
context strategies, and achieve the best performance, improving upon NEMATUS by +2.1 BLEU
points. This indicates the two types of strategies
are complementary to each other.
We ﬁrst investigate to what extent the mistranslated errors are ﬁxed by the proposed system.
We randomly select 15 documents (about 60 sentences) from the test sets. As shown in Table 2,
we count how many related errors: i) are made by
NMT (Total), and ii) ﬁxed by our method (Fixed);
as well as iii) newly generated (New).
Ambiguity, while we found that 38 words/phrases
were translated into incorrect equivalents, 76% of
them are corrected by our model. Similarly, we
solved 75% of the Inconsistency errors including
lexical, tense and deﬁniteness (deﬁnite or indeﬁnite articles) cases. However, we also observe that
our system brings relative 21% new errors.
Inconsistency
Table 2: Translation error statistics.
这不等于明着提前告诉贪官们
能否遏制和震慑腐官?
Can it inhibit and deter corrupt ofﬁcials?
Can we contain and deter the enemy?
Can it contain and deter the corrupt
Table 3: Example translations. We italicize some
mis-translated errors and highlight the correct
ones in bold.
Case Study
Table 3 shows an example.
word “腐官” (corrupt ofﬁcials) is mis-translated
as “enemy” by the baseline system. With the help
of the similar word “贪官” in the previous sentence, our approach successfully correct this mistake. This demonstrates that cross-sentence context indeed helps resolve certain ambiguities.
Related Work
While our approach is built on top of hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder (HRED) , there are several key differences
which reﬂect how we have generalized from the
original model. Sordoni et al. use HRED to
summarize a single representation from both the
current and previous sentences, which limits itself to (1) it is only applicable to encoder-decoder
framework without attention model, (2) the representation can only be used to initialize decoder.
In contrast, we use HRED to summarize the previous sentences alone, which provides additional
cross-sentence context for NMT. Our approach is
more ﬂexible at (1) it is applicable to any encoderdecoder frameworks (e.g., with attention), (2) the
cross-sentence context can be used to initialize either encoder, decoder or both.
While both our approach and Serban et al.
 use Auxiliary Context mechanism for incorporating cross-sentence context, there are two
main differences: 1) we have separate parameters
to better control the effects of the cross- and intrasentence contexts, while they only have one parameter matrix to manage the single representation that encodes both contexts; 2) based on the
intuition that not every target word generation requires equivalent cross-sentence context, we introduce a context gate to control the
amount of information from it, while they don’t.
At the same time, some researchers propose to
use an additional set of an encoder and attention
to model more information.
For example, Jean
et al. use it to encode and select part of
the previous source sentence for generating each
target word. Calixto et al. utilize global
image features extracted using a pre-trained convolutional neural network and incorporate them in
NMT. As additional attention leads to more computational cost, they can only incorporate limited
information such as single preceding sentence in
Jean et al. . However, our architecture is
free to this limitation, thus we use multiple preceding sentences (e.g. K = 3) in our experiments.
Our work is also related to multi-source and multi-target NMT , which incorporate additional source
or target languages.
They investigate one-tomany or many-to-one languages translation tasks
by integrating additional encoders or decoders
into encoder-decoder framework, and their experiments show promising results.
Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed two complementary approaches to
integrating cross-sentence context: 1) a warmstart of encoder and decoder with global context representation, and 2) cross-sentence context
serves as an auxiliary information source for updating decoder states, in which an introduced context gate plays an important role. We quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrated that the presented model signiﬁcantly outperforms a strong
attention-based NMT baseline system. We release
the code for these experiments at https://
www.github.com/tuzhaopeng/LC-NMT.
Our models beneﬁt from larger contexts, and
would be possibly further enhanced by other document level information, such as discourse relations. We propose to study such models for full
length documents with more linguistic features in
future work.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Science Foundation of Ireland (SFI) ADAPT project (Grant
No.:13/RC/2106). The authors also wish to thank
the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments with special thanks to Henry Elder for his
generous help on proofreading of this manuscript.