Vol.:(0123456789)
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
 
OPINION PAPER
Lessons learned from AI ethics principles for future actions
Merve Hickok1
Received: 29 August 2020 / Accepted: 2 September 2020 / Published online: 6 October 2020
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
As the use of artificial intelligence (AI) systems became significantly more prevalent in recent years, the concerns on how
these systems collect, use and process big data also increased. To address these concerns and advocate for ethical and
responsible development and implementation of AI, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), research centers, private
companies, and governmental agencies published more than 100 AI ethics principles and guidelines. This first wave was
followed by a series of suggested frameworks, tools, and checklists that attempt a technical fix to issues brought up in the
high-level principles. Principles are important to create a common understanding for priorities and are the groundwork for
future governance and opportunities for innovation. However, a review of these documents based on their country of origin
and funding entities shows that private companies from US-West axis dominate the conversation. Several cases surfaced
in the meantime which demonstrate biased algorithms and their impact on individuals and society. The field of AI ethics is
urgently calling for tangible action to move from high-level abstractions and conceptual arguments towards applying ethics
in practice and creating accountability mechanisms. However, lessons must be learned from the shortcomings of AI ethics
principles to ensure the future investments, collaborations, standards, codes or legislation reflect the diversity of voices and
incorporate the experiences of those who are already impacted by the biased algorithms.
Keywords  Artificial intelligence · AI and ethics · Applied ethics · Governance · Social justice · Diversity
1  Introduction
In the last few years advances in the capabilities of AI coupled with big data brought into focus the opportunities and
risks of AI. These developments in response created a spike
in the publication of AI ethics principles and guidelines from
civil society organizations, research centers, private companies and governmental agencies as these parties made their
commitments public, and positioned themselves on what
they think are the most important values to embed in the
development and implementation of AI products.
Principles and guidelines are intentionally provided as
high-level, abstract documents as the application of them is
case, time and context sensitive. They need to be applicable
across multiple areas. These high-profile value statements
in AI contribute to the formation of a moral background
as they make the connection between values, ethics, and
technologies explicit . Principles are also treated as the
guides on how the policymakers and professionals should
prioritize and structure future legislation, standards, governance models, and investment. Soft and hard governance
models, which include principles in former and regulation
in latter, shape the power relations among private companies
and governments and individuals, whether individuals are
consumers or citizens. This makes the debate on principles
crucial. However, their abstract nature also makes the principles less useful for practical purposes and for creating a
common understanding of their meaning.
Algorithmic or automated decision-making systems are
already used in every aspect of our private and public lives,
from credit scoring to recruitment, college admissions to predictive policing, welfare benefit eligibility determinations to
criminal justice decisions, online content personalization to
military applications or border control. Algorithms are increasingly being marketed and adopted to improve efficiency,
reduce costs, and enhance personalization of products and
services. However, despite this ubiquitous state of algorithms
and the high stakes and high impact of these decisions on the
individual and society, the decisions about what is important, what should be priority or how and where these systems
* Merve Hickok
 
AIethicist.org, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
should be deployed are still made by a small number of stakeholders. These decisions reflect and shape the power relations
among those who decide, and between those who decide and
who are impacted. Even the field of AI ethics whose aim is to
surface the ethical issues relevant to AI and suggest solutions
is not immune to the forces of politics and power. The main
criticisms with most of the principles and guidelines are that
(1) they are too abstract to be practical, (2) they reflect mainly
the values of the experts chosen to create them, (3) and they
serve the priorities of the private entities which funded some
of this work.
The main criticism with the technical proposals, such as
tools and checklists, which followed the wave of principles are
that (1) they try to bring technical fixes to structural issues; (2)
they do not reflect on the fundamental social, racial, economical context of these issues; (3) they are not focused on governing the liability and responsibility regarding the impact of AI;
and (4) they divert attention from asking the crucial questions
of business culture and exploitation. As Ruha Benjamin cautions “the road to inequity is paved with technical fixes .”
This work argues that there are two priorities on which the
actors involved in this debate should focus. First is to spotlight the shortcomings of AI ethics principles and make them
explicit. Second is to ensure that future work builds up from
lessons learned and has a truly inclusive and global voice. Tangible actions are urgently required to ensure that AI is ethically and responsibly developed and implemented and that
relevant governance methods are in place. A deeper understanding of the current state concludes a more diverse and
inclusive approach is necessary to counter the issues raised by
AI. Focusing on the lessons learned does not impede the progress of moving principles to practice, in fact it opens future
possibilities. It brings forward different AI cases, the consequences and allows for better responses. Communities shape
the ways they will use AI and own the advanced technologies.
However, this requires inclusion and mechanisms to contest,
redress and reverse technological interventions if necessary.
AI ethics principles so far failed to meaningfully engage with
the people who would be the targets of those systems, cutting
off these groups from ownership, inclusion, and justice as
part of the process.
The article asks the questions of (1) what is the current
state of principles and guidelines in terms of representation?
(2) What needs to change and how? It adds to the calls for an
urgent action to move from principles to practices with a focus
on the context in which AI is deployed and its impact. It also
demands further diversity and inclusivity in the field.
2  Current state of ethical/responsible AI
principles
A few online platforms keep a current inventory of
all AI ethics principles and guidelines published around
the world, and several research papers have completed
meta-analyses of these documents.
A review of these platforms, and published analysis
research tells us that in terms of content, these documents focus on similar values and priorities, however,
with different definitions. In their 2019 meta-analysis of
“global” landscape of AI ethics guidelines, Jobin et al.
 review 84 AI ethics guidelines publicly released. The
findings suggest, although there was no single principle
that was common in every 84 of these documents, over
half of them included the themes of transparency, justice,
non-maleficence, responsibility, and privacy. Additional
themes that repeat in different guidelines include respect
for human autonomy and dignity, explainability, beneficence, and trust. Fjeld et al. 2020 study of a different sample of documents shows, while there are certainly
points of convergence, by no means is there unanimity
across the 36 principle documents reviewed. Fairness and
non-discrimination principles were present in all documents in this review, and the other key themes were privacy, accountability, safety and security, transparency and
explainability, human control of technology, professional
responsibility, and promotion of human values. The convergence on similar principles, but differences in how each
actor defines these same principles creates inconsistency
and confusion in discussions. Similar terms mean different things, hence allowing for a variety of interpretation.
This makes it harder to hold actors accountable to their
commitments. It also allows for the possibility of “digital
ethics shopping” where private and public actors mix and
match ethical principles, guidelines, codes, frameworks
for the kind of ethics that is best retrofitted to justify their
current behaviors, rather than revising their behaviors by
benchmarking them against public, ethical standards .
In terms of geographic distribution, Jobin et al. 
data show a prominent representation of USA (25%) and
the UK (15.5%), EU member states, Canada, Iceland,
and Norway and their institutions (26%). These together
account for 67% all AI ethics principles and show a heavy
influence of US-West values. Japan is represented by
(4.8%), and UAE, India, Singapore, South Korea, and Australia with one document each compromise a total of 6%.
However, African, South and Central American and Central Asian countries (with exception of India) are not represented independently from international or supranational
organizations (like World Economic Forum, G20, OECD,
or UNESCO). China released its principles in 2019.
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
Although one could make an argument that the principles
included in these analyses might have a language bias (for
example in Jobin et al. analysis, only those written in English, German, French, Italian or Greek were selected; and
in Fjeld et al. analysis those that were in English, Chinese,
French, German, and Spanish.), then one needs to also
accept there is then a barrier the field needs to correct and
focus energy to ensure access to work in other language
regions are accessible. The language barrier in accessing
research is not a new obstacle. However, given AI’s impact
on all domains of life and its reach across borders, language remaining a barrier is unacceptable. It can be overcome through global partnerships, virtual connectivity and
increased funding. In the absence of representation from
these regions “more economically developed countries are
shaping this debate more than others, which raises concerns about neglecting local knowledge, cultural pluralism
and the demands of global fairness” . The field needs
to question how principles, guidelines, or practices can
be ‘global’ if they do not include any ethical perspective,
community involvement, or social and historical context
from Africa, Latin America, or Central Asia. Mohamed
et al. view the developments in data and AI practices from
an algorithmic coloniality perspective and warn against
the repeat of history. Practitioners are reminded to critically engage with that inheritance, to avert algorithmic
colonialism and to reveal the relations of power that underlie technology deployment .
A breakdown of the AI principle documents by the entities that funded their creation shows that 23% were produced by private companies, 21% by governmental agencies,
academic and research institutions then intergovernmental
or supranational organizations making up 11% and 10%
respectively, non-profit organizations and professional
associations/scientific societies 8.3% each. The representation of private companies shows slightly similar, but just
as concerning trends in different platforms. AI Ethics Lab
shows that AI principles from private companies make up
34% of the 103 documents that inventoried in the platform
 ; Fjeld et al. research shows private funding as 22%
out of the 36 documents reviewed; and AlgoritmWatch’s AI
Ethics Guidelines Global Inventory shows that private
companies total to 26% of the 160 listed in their selection.
These different reviews show principles from private companies make up for almost as many as those from governmental agencies. Guidelines for the use of artificial intelligence
methods are not created in a vacuum, but are shaped by the
decision-making processes, intentions, and limitations of
the companies and organizations that develop and use them
 . These efforts from private companies are criticized
as their way of lobbying and marketing for self-governance
and thus avoiding stricter regulations. “The word ethics is
under siege in technology policy. Weaponized in support
of deregulation, self-regulation, or hands-off governance,
“ethics” is increasingly identified with technology companies’ self-regulatory efforts and with shallow appearances of
ethical behavior” . Whittaker et al. caution that ethics
guidelines often fall into the category of a “‘trust us’ form
of corporate self-governance” and people should “be wary
of relying on companies to implement ethical practices voluntarily” . Concerns have also been raised that, as large
parts of university AI research are financed by corporate
partners, it might be questionable to what extent the ideal of
freedom of research can be upheld . Time and evidence
will show if the rare call for regulation from these companies
are genuine .
AI ethics principles in general and the technical solutions and checklists that followed mainly focus on how to
improve these algorithmic systems. They rarely question the
business culture, revenue models, or incentive mechanisms
that continuously push these products into the markets. In
their frame review of ethical AI principles, Greene et al.
 confirm that ethical debate is largely limited to appropriate design and implementation and not whether these
systems should be built in the first place. Business models
and the culture of the developer companies are not positioned as needing the same level of scrutiny as design decisions. Rather than asking fundamental ethical and political
questions about whether AI systems should be built, these
documents implicitly frame technological progress as inevitable, calling for better building . They also frame ethical design as a project of expert oversight and draw “a narrow circle of who can or should adjudicate ethical concerns
around AI” on behalf of the rest of us . The decisions
rest within the power structures whether that is the government or the private companies.
When the principles and guidelines are analyzed in terms
of the gender of the authors, the result also shows a skewed
picture in favor of male dominance. Hagendorff’s literature
analysis of authors of 21 major ethics guidelines shows that
the proportion of female authors was only 31% . The
numbers do not get any better when we expand our lens to
diversity in AI academics, contributions to conferences, or
number of AI job applicants or employees. On average, 80%
of professors from UC Berkeley, Stanford, University of Illinois, Carnegie Mellon University, UC London, Oxford, and
ETH Zurich are male . Males made up 88% of contributions accepted to The Conference and Workshop on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), and
The International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
in 2017 .
In 2018, the World Economic Forum identified the gender gap in the talent pool by surveying Linkedln users who
self-identified as possessing AI skills. The results showed
that 22% of them were female . Women employed in the
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
software and IT services industry make up 7.4% of the AI
talent pool . Across the three countries in which AI talent is ranked as most prominent (the United States, India and
Germany), share of female professionals with AI skills show
as 23%, 22% and 16%, respectively . When it comes to
AI job applicants in US, men make up around 71% of the
applicant pool. These analyses and research make a very
strong case for the issue of dominance of one group. Unfortunately, they also assume a binary representation of gender
and, therefore, stay blind to the contributions of non-binary
scholars or employees.
Despite the claim of AI ethics principles and guidelines
to be global and beneficial for all, they are still limited in
their representation of values and perspectives from different
regions, entities, and communities. The concern here is that
if the field does not make any course correction, the same
issues will be replicated in the future legislation, standards,
investment, and education priorities.
3  What needs to change and how?
Principles are the outline of a shared foundation upon
which one can build and use as a benchmark to communicate expectations and evaluate deliverables. Co-design in
AI would be more difficult without this common framework
 . Principles are a valuable part of any applied ethics
and business ethics. They help to condense complex ethical
issues into a few central elements which can allow widespread commitment to a shared set of values. However,
without an understanding of why these issues and categories
have been chosen and not others, it is difficult to be confident
that all the relevant issues have been captured. Without the
inclusion of different regions or members of society, it is
not clear whose values and priorities are being promoted
 . Understanding who sits at the table, what questions
and concerns are sidelined and what power asymmetries
are shaping the terms of debate is crucial . As Sasha
Costanza-Chock cautions “if you are not at the table, you
are on the menu” .
Principles provide an informal means of holding people and organizations accountable and to reassure public
concerns . Although, in and of themselves, principles
are not enough or as strong as regulations, widely accepted
principles allow for citizens and consumers to hold the governments and private companies accountable for what they
publicly announced as their guiding values. They provide the
basis to challenge these entities to stay loyal to these values
and demand action and change if they do not do as they
preach. Different cultures will differ in what values they prioritize; however, understanding the same thing from a stated
principle is crucial. Acceptance of the principles requires
them to be less ambiguous in their definitions. Acceptance
requires a consistency of understanding what they mean and
how it should look like in practice. Finally, it also means that
these principles are not just debated among experts but that
they become a shared language across communities. What
is currently taken for granted can be tested and recalibrated
in the light of alternative and dissenting perspectives .
In expanding upon the lessons of the AI ethics principles
and hence creating the roadmap for the next actions, the
actors in the field, whether that is defined as NGOs, private
companies, governments or research centers, must include
the work from different regions and marginalized communities to be truly global. In doing so, these entities should also
be careful about the possible dominance of technical experts.
Even in public engagement settings, technical experts exert
authority in framing the debate, knowledge production, and
decision-making . Special attention and intention need
to be paid to listen to, amplify, cite, and collaborate with
those who have lived experiences be truly inclusive .
A possible solution and approach to be adopted in future
partnerships can be the outcome-oriented Design Justice
method. This approach, for example, believes that everyone is an expert based on their own lived experiences, and
tries to distribute the benefits and burdens of design fairly,
work towards non-exploitative solutions, and ensure fair and
meaningful participation in decisions . Ethics enables
organizations to identify and leverage new opportunities that
are socially acceptable or preferable. It also enables them
to anticipate and avoid or at least minimize costly mistakes
 . Formal scientific training cannot be the only criterion
by which to decide whose voices should be heard in an inclusive global forum .
To break some of the barriers and reach and engage additional representation, particularly from the Global South,
UN Global Advisory Body on AI in the Secretary General’s
Roadmap on Digital Cooperation works to create an inclusive and informed foundation for its future work. To that
end the roundtable 3C tries to connect any interested party
around the world under consultation calls and encourages as
wide a response as possible. A similar approach can be used
by a company to determine what AI products or services are
adopted in different communities or regions and understand
the priorities and values of these communities. Non-private
entities can use this approach to determine what civil society, research and policy work is taking place by whom. The
entities can then create research or advocacy partnerships
with these groups and invest more in funding these partnerships. Through these interactions, certain barriers to entry
into the global discussions might also be unearthed. Knowing what is happening in a region or community is just as
important understanding what is not happening in that area.
Together this knowledge helps actors in AI design, research
or policy fields to remove barriers and create new spaces to
raise awareness, advocate and include different stakeholders.
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
Just as crucial as a regional inclusivity, cross-disciplinary
and cross-sectoral cooperation is a must to understand the
perspectives and concerns of different actors. Therefore, it
is important that policymakers, professional bodies, private
companies, and universities incentivize financially cooperation and debate concerning the intersections between technology, social issues, legal studies, and ethics .
New academic fellowship opportunities or policy teams
that are intentionally designed to bring multi-disciplinary
researchers, and researchers from un(der)-represented
regions together is crucial. A shift to any of these engagements will create a more inclusive approach for future policies, priorities, and governance methods.
Keeping technology companies and educational institutions accountable to reduce the gap in all its forms is
important to improve workplace diversity. From an AI ethics perspective, this is also crucial to address the bias and
discrimination concerns in future AI systems, research, policies, and standards. Policy interventions to challenge the
toxic organizational cultures and to increase transparency
in hiring, compensation, and performance are needed for
course correction.
4  Call to action to move from principles
to practice
AI ethics and implications of AI-powered products and
services are coming under spotlight. 88% of the principles
in Jobin et al. meta-analysis was released in 2018 and
2019. AI is already ubiquitous in our lives. However, thanks
to a number of AI ethics researchers, scholars and
investigative journalists who provided evidence of biased
and/or unethical algorithms and their implications, we know
now the importance of governance of AI and demand change
and more transparency and accountability. Beginning of
2020, AI ethics field was challenged to “stop treating AI like
magic, and take responsibility for creating, applying, and
regulating it ethically”. It was suggested that “for all the lip
service paid to these issues, many organizations’ AI ethics
guidelines remain vague and hard to implement” . Given
all the high impact cases that surfaced in the news about
facial recognition, AI in health decisions, disinformation on
social media platforms or biased algorithms used in welfare
eligibility or fraud detection to name a few, this call to move
to practice is getting louder. Scholars, activists, ethicists, and
journalists in the field agree that urgent action is necessary
before more damage is done on an individual and societal
level and before the damage erodes public trust of what is
currently understood as AI or algorithms.
Along these lines, the future debate and the move to practices and governance should include a focus on the business
and labor practices of big companies, the company culture
and incentives, the social, racial, economic and environmental impacts of their technologies. The unique manner
in which AI algorithms can quickly ingest, perpetuate, and
legitimize forms of bias and harm represents a step change
from previous technologies, warranting prompt reappraisal
of these tools to ensure ethical and socially beneficial use
 . When AI companies and institutions formulate their
own ethical guidelines, regularly incorporate ethical considerations into their public relations work, or adopt ethically motivated “self-commitments”, efforts to create a truly
binding legal framework are continuously discouraged .
Instead, we need genuine accountability mechanisms, external to companies and accessible to populations. Any AI system that is integrated into people’s lives must be capable of
contest, account, and redress to citizens and representatives
of the public interest, asking which systems really deserve
to be built? Which problems most need to be tackled? Who
is best placed to build them? And who decides? 
Citizens and consumers all have a stake in the answers to
these questions. Shanahan cautions for the “self-perpetuating tendency for power, wealth and resources to concentrate
in the hands of few” . Coeckelbergh advises that “if we
endorse the ideal of democracy and if that concept includes
inclusiveness and participation in decision-making about the
future of our societies, then hearing the voice of stakeholders
is not optional but ethically and politically required” .
Ethics principles and governance methods have a symbiotic relationship. The works on ethics rules for technology
can be precursors of the law. They can give orientation on
the possible content of legal rules but, they cannot replace
the law . Regulation itself, on the other hand, is not the
only answer, and is only one of a range of tools that can be
used to lend tangible shape to ethical principles. The lessons
learned and synergistic use of various governance instruments at different levels (multi-level governance) are vital
in view of the complexity and dynamism of data ecosystems
5  Conclusion
Ethics and values are culture sensitive. Diversity of perspectives and experiences provide immense richness to any product and system. This new field of AI ethics still needs a lot
of work to incorporate the wisdom and values of different
cultures as it is going through its birthing pains and expand
from its current heavily US-West-centric state. It needs to
address the intersection of these principles with structures
of power, with structural and historical inequities and ensure
that the principles do not lead to the further power imbalances between private companies and states, or the disenfranchisement, oppression and exploitation of individuals
and communities by either the private companies or states.
AI and Ethics 1:41–47
The development of future work needs to stay true to the
principles’ claims to be global and beneficial to all.
In reviewing the principles and frameworks, and in building a roadmap and choosing our next actions, we need to
remember the questions Cath raised, “who sets the
agenda for AI governance? What cultural logic is represented by that agenda and who benefits from it?” It is crucial to remain critical of proposed generalizations and solutions when these eventually lead to development of norms,
standards, practices, and regulation . Private industry
invests in the development of these products and benefits
from them, so it is expected that there will be efforts to try
to shape the conversation. Field of AI ethics needs to ensure
that it is not blindly legitimizing these aims and efforts and
hold these entities to higher standards and better practices.
In short term, creating principles and business models that
are responsible, ethical, and inclusive will cost money, time
and resources. However, in the long term, it will help create
better and sustainable products, services that respect society
and work with the society’s needs rather than governments’
and private companies’ interests.
Funding  The author declares that no funding was received for this
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest  The author declares that she has no conflict of interest.