Building Ethics into Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Han Yu1,2,3, Zhiqi Shen1,2,3, Chunyan Miao1,2,3, Cyril Leung2,3,4, Victor R. Lesser5 and Qiang Yang6
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2 LILY Research Centre, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3 Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Singapore
4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Canada
5 School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
6 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{han.yu, zqshen, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, , , 
As artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems become increasingly ubiquitous, the topic of AI governance
for ethical decision-making by AI has captured
public imagination. Within the AI research community, this topic remains less familiar to many researchers. In this paper, we complement existing
surveys, which largely focused on the psychological, social and legal discussions of the topic, with
an analysis of recent advances in technical solutions for AI governance. By reviewing publications in
leading AI conferences including AAAI, AAMAS,
ECAI and IJCAI, we propose a taxonomy which
divides the ﬁeld into four areas: 1) exploring ethical dilemmas; 2) individual ethical decision frameworks; 3) collective ethical decision frameworks;
and 4) ethics in human-AI interactions. We highlight the intuitions and key techniques used in each
approach, and discuss promising future research directions towards successful integration of ethical
AI systems into human societies.
Introduction
As artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies enter many areas of our daily life [Cai et al., 2014; Shi et al., 2016;
Pan et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2018], the problem of ethical decision-making, which has long been a grand challenge
for AI [Wallach and Allen, 2008], has caught public attention. A major source of public anxiety about AI, which tends
to be overreactions [Bryson and Kime, 2011], is related to
artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) [Goertzel and Pennachin,
2007] research aiming to develop AI with capabilities matching and eventually exceeding those of humans. A self-aware
AGI [Dehaene et al., 2017] with superhuman capabilities is
perceived by many as a source of existential risk to humans. Although we are still decades away from AGI, existing
autonomous systems (such as autonomous vehicles) already
warrant the AI research community to take a serious look into
incorporating ethical considerations into such systems.
According to [Cointe et al., 2016], ethics is a normative
practical philosophical discipline of how one should act towards others. It encompasses three dimensions:
1. Consequentialist ethics: an agent is ethical if and only if
it weighs the consequences of each choice and chooses
the option which has the most moral outcomes. It is also known as utilitarian ethics as the resulting decisions
often aim to produce the best aggregate consequences.
2. Deontological ethics: an agent is ethical if and only if
it respects obligations, duties and rights related to given
situations. Agents with deontological ethics (also known
as duty ethics or obligation ethics) act in accordance to
established social norms.
3. Virtue ethics: an agent is ethical if and only if it acts
and thinks according to some moral values (e.g. bravery,
justice, etc.). Agents with virtue ethics should exhibit an
inner drive to be perceived favourably by others.
Ethical dilemmas refer to situations in which any available
choice leads to infringing some accepted ethical principle and
yet a decision has to be made [Kirkpatrick, 2015].
The AI research community realizes that machine ethics is a determining factor to the extent autonomous systems
are permitted to interact with humans. Therefore, research
works focusing on technical approaches for enabling these
systems to respect the rights of humans and only perform actions that follow acceptable ethical principles have emerged. Nevertheless, this topic remains unfamiliar to many
AI practitioners and is in need of an in-depth review. However, existing survey papers on the topic of AI governance
mostly focused on the psychological, social and legal aspects of the challenges [Arkin, 2016; Etzioni and Etzioni, 2017;
Pavaloiu and Kose, 2017]. They do not shed light on technical solutions to implement ethics in AI systems. The most
recent survey on technical approaches for ethical AI decisionmaking was conducted in 2006 [Mclaren, 2006] and only covered single agent decision-making approaches.
In this paper, we survey recent advances in techniques for
incorporating ethics into AI to bridge this gap. We focus on
recent advances published in leading AI research conferences
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Exploring Ethical
Individual Ethical
Collective Ethical
Ethics in Human-AI
Decision Frameworks
Decision Frameworks
Interactions
[Anderson and Anderson, 2014]
[Dehghani et al., 2008]
[Singh, 2014; 2015]
[Battaglino and Damiano, 2015]
[Bonnefon et al., 2016]
[Blass and Forbus, 2015]
[Pagallo, 2016]
[Stock et al., 2016]
[Sharif et al., 2017]
[van Riemsdijk et al., 2015]
[Greene et al., 2016]
[Luckin, 2017]
[Cointe et al., 2016]
[Noothigattu et al., 2018]
[Yu et al., 2017b]
[Conitzer et al., 2017]
[Berreby et al., 2017]
[Loreggia et al., 2018]
[Wu and Lin, 2018]
Table 1: A taxonomy of AI governance techniques.
including AAAI, AAMAS, ECAI and IJCAI, as well as articles from well-known journals. We propose a taxonomy
which divides the ﬁeld into four areas (Table 1):
1. Exploring Ethical Dilemmas:
technical systems enabling the AI research community to understand human
preferences on various ethical dilemmas;
2. Individual Ethical Decision Frameworks:
generalizable decision-making mechanisms enabling individual
agents to judge the ethics of its own actions and the actions of other agents under given contexts;
3. Collective Ethical Decision Frameworks: generalizable
decision-making mechanisms enabling multiple agents
to reach a collective decision that is ethical; and
4. Ethics in Human-AI Interactions: frameworks that incorporate ethical considerations into agents which are
designed to inﬂuence human behaviours.
Promising future research directions which may enable ethical AI systems to be successfully integrated into human societies are discussed at the end.
Exploring Ethical Dilemmas
In order to build AI systems that behave ethically, the ﬁrst
step is to explore the ethical dilemmas in the target application scenarios. Recently, software tools based on expert review and crowdsourcing have emerged to serve this purpose.
In [Anderson and Anderson, 2014], the authors proposed
the GenEth ethical dilemma analyzer.
They realized that
ethical issues related to intelligent systems are likely to exceed the grasp of the original system designers, and designed
GenEth to include ethicists into the discussion process in order to codify ethical principles in given application domains. The authors proposed a set of representation schemas for
framing the discussions on AI ethics. It includes:
1. Features: denoting the presence or absence of factors
(e.g., harm, beneﬁt) with integer values;
2. Duties: denoting the responsibility of an agent to minimize/maximize a given feature;
3. Actions: denoting whether an action satisﬁes or violates
certain duties as an integer tuple;
4. Cases: used to compare pairs of actions on their collective ethical impact; and
5. Principles: denoting the ethical preference among different actions as a tuple of integer tuples.
GenEth provides a graphical user interface for discussing ethical dilemmas in a given scenario, and applies inductive logic
programming to infer principles of ethical actions.
Whereas GenEth can be regarded as an ethical dilemma
exploration tool based on expert review, the Moral Machine
project ( from Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) leverages the wisdom of the
crowd to ﬁnd resolutions for ethical dilemmas. The Moral
Machine project focuses on studying the perception of autonomous vehicles (AVs) which are controlled by AI and has
the potential to harm pedestrians and/or passengers if they
malfunction. When a human driver who has used due caution
encounters an accident, the instinct for self-preservation coupled with limited time for decision-making makes it hard to
blame him/her for hurting others on ethical grounds. However, when the role of driving is delegated to an AI system,
ethics becomes an unavoidable focal point of AV research since designers have the time to program logics for making
decisions under various accident scenarios.
The Moral Machine project allows participants to judge
various ethical dilemmas facing AVs which have malfunctioned, and select which outcomes they prefer.
decisions are analyzed according to different considerations
including: 1) saving more lives, 2) protecting passengers, 3)
upholding the law, 4) avoiding intervention, 5) gender preference, 6) species preference, 7) age preference, and 8) social
value preference. The project also provides a user interface
for participants to design their own ethical dilemmas to elicit
opinions from others.
Based on feedbacks from 3 million participants, the Moral
Machine project found that people generally prefer the AV to
make sacriﬁces if more lives can be saved. If an AV can save
more pedestrian lives by killing its passenger, more people
prefer others’ AVs to have this feature rather than their own
AVs [Bonnefon et al., 2016; Sharif et al., 2017]. Nevetheless, self-reported preferences often do not align well with
actual behaviours [Zell and Krizan, 2014]. Thus, how much
the ﬁndings reﬂect actual choices is still an open question.
There are also suggestions from others that under such ethical
dilemmas, decisions should be made in a random fashion (i.e.
let fate decide) possibly based on considerations in [Broome,
1984], while there are also calls for AVs to be segregated from
human trafﬁc [Bonnefon et al., 2016]. Such diverse opinions
underscore the challenge of automated decision-making under ethical dilemmas.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
Individual Ethical Decision Frameworks
When it comes to ethical decision-making in AI systems, the
AI research community largely agrees that generalized frameworks are preferred over ad-hoc rules. Flexible incorporation
of norms into AI to enable ethical user and prevent unethical
use is useful since ethical bounds can be contextual and dif-
ﬁcult to deﬁne as design time. Nevertheless, if updates are
provided by people, some review mechanisms should be put
in place to prevent abuse [van Riemsdijk et al., 2015].
In [Dehghani et al., 2008], the authors observed that moral
decision-making by humans not only involves utilitarian considerations, but also moral rules. These rules are acquired
from past example cases and are often culturally sensitive.
Such rules often involve protected values (a.k.a. sacred values), which morally forbids the commitment of certain actions regardless of consequences (e.g., the act of attempting
to murder is morally unacceptable regardless the outcome).
The authors proposed MoralDM which enables an agent to
resolve ethical dilemmas by leveraging on two mechanisms: 1) ﬁrst-principles reasoning, which makes decisions based
on well-established ethical rules (e.g., protected values); and
2) analogical reasoning, which compares a given scenario to
past resolved similar cases to aid decision-making. As the
number of resolved cases increases, the exhaustive comparison approach by MoralDM is expected to become computationally intractable.
Thus, in [Blass and Forbus, 2015],
MoralDM is extended with structure mapping which trims the
search space by computing the correspondences, candidate
inferences and similarity scores between cases to improve the
efﬁciency of analogical generalization.
A framework that enables agents to make judgements on
the ethics of its own and other agents’ actions was proposed
in [Cointe et al., 2016]. It contains representations of ethics based on theories of good and theories of right, and ethical judgement processes based on awareness and evaluation.
The proposed agent ethical judgement process is based on the
Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent mental model [Rao and
Georgeff, 1995]. To judge the ethics of an agent’s own actions, the awareness process generates the beliefs that describe
the current situation facing the agent and the goals of the agent. Based on the beliefs and goals, the evaluation process
generates the set of possible actions and desirable actions.
The goodness process then computes the set of ethical actions
based on the agent’s beliefs, desires, actions, and moral value
rules. Finally, the rightness process evaluates whether or not
executing a possible action is right under the current situation
and selects an action which satisﬁes the rightfulness requirement. When making ethical judgements on other agents, this
process is further adapted to the conditions of: 1) blind ethical judgement (the given agent’s state and knowledge are unknown); 2) partially informed ethical judgement (with some
information about a given agent’s state and knowledge); and
3) fully informed ethical judgement (with complete information about a given agent’s state and knowledge). Nevertheless, the current framework has no quantitative measure of
how far a behaviour is from rightfulness or goodness.
In [Conitzer et al., 2017], the authors proposed two possible ways towards developing a general ethical decisionmaking framework for AI based on game theory and machine
learning, respectively. For the game theory based framework,
the authors suggest the extensive form (a generalization of
game trees) as a foundation scheme to represent dilemmas.
As the current extensive form does not account for protected
values in which an action can be treated as unethical regardless of its consequence, the authors proposed to extend the extensive form representation with passive actions for agents to
select in order to be ethical. For machine learning based ethical decision-making, the key approach is to classify whether a
given action under a given scenario is morally right or wrong.
In order to achieve this goal, well-labeled training data, possibly from human judgements, should be acquired. The Moral
Machine project mentioned in the previous section could be
a possible source of such data, although we may have to
take into account potential inconsistencies as a result of cultural backgrounds and other factors before using such data
for training. The main challenge in machine learning based
moral decision-making is to design a generalizable representation of ethical dilemmas. Existing approaches which identify nuanced features based on insights into particular application scenarios may not be enough for this purpose. The authors suggest leveraging psychological frameworks of moral
foundation (e.g., harm/care, fairness/reciprocity, loyalty, authority and purity) [Clifford et al., 2015] as bases for developing a generalizable representation of ethical dilemmas for
machine learning-based approaches. Game theory and machine learning can be combined into one framework in which
game theoretic analysis of ethics is used as a feature to train
machine learning approaches, while machine learning helps
game theory identify ethical aspects which are overlooked.
Ethics requirements are often exogenous to AI agents.
Thus, there needs to be some ways to reconcile ethics requirements with the agents’ endogenous subjective preferences in
order to make ethically aligned decisions. In [Loreggia et
al., 2018], the authors proposed an approach to leverage the
CP-net formalism to represent the exogenous ethics priorities and endogenous subjective preferences. The authors further established a notion of distance between CP-nets so as
to enable AI agents to make decisions using their subjective preferences if they are close enough to the ethical principles. This approach helps AI agents balance between fulﬁlling their preferences and following ethical requirements.
So far, the decision-making frameworks with ethical and
moral considerations reviewed put the burden of codifying
ethics on AI system developers. The information on what is
morally right or wrong has to be incorporated into the AI engine during the development phase. In [Berreby et al., 2017],
the authors proposed a high level action language for designing ethical agents in an attempt to shift the burden of moral
reasoning to the autonomous agents. The framework collects action, event and situation information to enable an agent
to simulate the outcome of various courses of actions. The
event traces are then passed to the causal engine to produce
causal traces. The ethical speciﬁcations and priority of ethical considerations under a given situation are used to compute
the goodness assessment on the consequences. These outputs
are then combined with deontological speciﬁcations (duties,
obligations, rights) to produce a ﬁnal rightfulness assessment.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
The framework is implemented with answer set programming
[Lifschitz, 2008]. It has been shown to be able to generate
rules to enable agents to decide and explain their actions, and
reason about other agents’ actions on ethical grounds.
Reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 1998] is
one of the commonly used decision-making mechanisms in
AI. In [Wu and Lin, 2018], the authors investigated how to
enable RL to take ethics into account. Leveraging on the
well-established technique of reward shaping in RL which incorporates prior knowledge into the reward function to speed
up the learning process, the authors proposed the ethics shaping approach to incorporate ethical values into RL. By assuming that the majority of observed human behaviours are
ethical, the proposed approach learns ethical shaping policies
from available human behaviour data in given application domains. The ethics shaping function rewards positive ethical
decisions, punishes negative ethical decisions, and remains
neutral when ethical considerations are not involved. Similar
in spirit to [Berreby et al., 2017], by separating ethics shaping
from the RL reward function design, the proposed approach
aims to shift the burden of codifying ethics away from RL
designers so that they do not need to be well-versed in ethical
decision-making in order to develop ethical RL systems.
Collective Ethical Decision Frameworks
By enabling individual agents to behave ethically and judge
the ethics of other agents’ actions, is it enough to create a
society of well coordinated and collaborative agents acting
with human wellbeing as their primary concern? In [Pagallo,
2016], the author believes that this is not enough. The author
advocates the need of primary rules governing social norms
and allowing the creation, modiﬁcation and suppression of
the primary rules with secondary rules as situations evolve. In
this section, we focus on decision-making frameworks which
help a collective of autonomous entities (including agents and
humans) to select ethical actions together.
In [Singh, 2014; 2015], the author proposed a framework
that uses social norms to govern autonomous entities’ (e.g.,
AI agents’ or human beings’) behaviours. Such an approach
is inherently distributed rather than relying on a central authority.
Individuals maintain their autonomy through executing their own decision policies, but are subjected to social norms deﬁned by the collective through roles (which require qualiﬁcations from individuals, grant them privileges,
and impose penalties if they misbehave). Social norms are
deﬁned through a template containing codiﬁed commitment,
authorization, prohibition, sanction and power. The individuals then form a network of trust based on reputation modelling techniques [Yu et al., 2010; 2013] to achieve collective
self-governance through dynamic interactions.
In [Greene et al., 2016], the authors envisioned a possible
way forward to enable human-agent collectives [Jennings et
al., 2014] to make ethical collective decisions. By imbuing
individual agents with ethical decision-making mechanisms
(such as those mentioned in the previous section), a population of agents can take on different roles when evaluating
choices of action with moral considerations in a given scenario. For instance, some agents may evaluate deontological
ethics. Others may evaluate consequentialist ethics and virtue
ethics. Based on a set of initial ethics rules, more complex
rules can be acquired gradually through learning. Their evaluations, manifested in the form of preferences and limited by
feasibility constraints, can be aggregated to reach a collective
decision on the choices of actions by leveraging advances in
the preference aggregation and multi-agent voting literature.
Nevertheless, the authors of [Greene et al., 2016] also highlighted the need for new forms of preference representation in
collective ethical decision-making. When dealing with ethical decision-making, the potential candidate actions to choose
from can vastly outnumber the number of agents involved
which is very different from multi-agent voting scenarios.
Moreover, the candidate actions may not be independent from
each other, some of them may share certain features which
describe their ethical dilemma situations. Preference information by agents on actions may be missing or imprecise
which introduces uncertainty into the decision-making process. These challenges need to be resolved towards collective
ethical decision-making with AI.
Following up on this vision, [Noothigattu et al., 2018] proposed a voting-based system for autonomous entities to make
collective ethical decisions. The proposed approach leverages data collected from the Moral Machine project. Selfreported preference over different outcomes under diverse
ethical dilemmas are used to learn models of preference for
the human voters over different alternative outcomes. These
individual models are then summarized to form a model that
approximates the collective preference of all voters.
authors introduced the concept of swap-dominance1 when
ranking alternatives to form a model of ethical preferences.
When new decisions need to be made, the summarized model is used to compute a collective decision that results in the
best possible outcome (i.e. satisfying consequentialist ethics). This is made efﬁcient with the swap-dominance property.
Ethics in Human-AI Interactions
In AI applications which attempt to inﬂuence people’s behaviours, the principles established by the Belmont Report
[Bel, 1978] for behavioural sciences have been suggested
to be a starting point for ensuring ethics [Luckin, 2017;
Yu et al., 2017b]. The principles include three key requirements: 1) people’s personal autonomy should not be violated (they should be able to maintain their free will when
interacting with the technology); 2) beneﬁts brought about
by the technology should outweigh risks; and 3) the beneﬁts
and risks should be distributed fairly among the users (people should not be discriminated based on their personal backgrounds such as race, gender and religion). The challenge
of measuring beneﬁts and risks remains open for application
designers albeit the IEEE Ethically Aligned Design guidelines can be a useful starting point [IEEE, 2018]. Human centric values have been incorporated into the objective functions
1Assuming everything else is ﬁxed, an outcome a swapdominates another outcome b if every ranking which ranks a higher
than b has a weight which is equal to or larger than rankings that
rank b higher than a.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
of recent AI-powered algorithmic crowdsourcing approaches
[Yu et al., 2016; 2017a; 2017c].
One of the application areas in which AI attempts to inﬂuence people’s behaviours is persuasion agents [Kang et al.,
2015; Rosenfeld and Kraus, 2016]. In [Stock et al., 2016],
the authors conducted a large-scale study to investigate human perceptions on the ethics of persuasion by an AI agent.
The ethical dilemma used is the trolley scenario which involves making a participant actively cause harm to an innocent bystander by pushing him on to the train track in order to save the lives of ﬁve people. It is a consequentialist
ethical outcome which requires the decision-maker to violate
a sacred value (i.e. one shall not kill). The authors tested
three persuasive strategies: 1) appealing to the participants
emotionally; 2) presenting the participants with utilitarian arguments; and 3) lying. The three strategies are delivered to
some participants by a person playing the role of an authority
(the station master of the train station) and by a persuasion
agent. The results suggested that participants hold a strong
preconceived negative attitude towards the persuasion agent,
and argumentation-based and lying-based persuasion strategies work better than emotional persuasion strategies. The
ﬁndings did not show signiﬁcant variation across genders or
cultures. The study suggests that the adoption of persuasion
strategies should take into account differences in individual
personality, ethical attitude and expertise in the given domain.
Although emotional appeals may not be an effective persuasive strategy under ethical dilemmas, ethically appropriate emotional responses from agents can enhance human-AI
interaction. In [Battaglino and Damiano, 2015], an approach
based on the Coping Theory [Marsella and Gratch, 2003] to
allow agents to deal with strong negative emotions by changing the appraisal of the given situation was proposed. The
agent assesses the ethical effects of its own actions and other
agents’ actions. If its own action violates a given moral value,
the shame emotion is triggered which serves to lower the priority of continuing with the given action. If another agent’s
action violates a given moral value, the reproach emotion is
triggered in the observing agent which serves to increase social distance with the given agent . The ethical decision-making process is similar
to existing individual ethical decision frameworks. The triggering of emotions serves as an implicit reward for the agent
and facilitates communications with humans in the loop.
Discussions and Future Research
Based on recent advances in AI governance techniques, it appears that most work focused on developing generalizable individual ethical decision frameworks combining rule-based
and example-based approaches to resolving ethical dilemmas.
In order to learn appropriate rules from examples of ethical
decision-making by humans, more work on collecting data
about various ethical dilemmas from people with different
cultural backgrounds is required. Works on collective ethical decision-making based on multi-agent voting have also
appeared, but much work is still needed to design mechanisms to represent ethical preferences by agents. How AI can
act ethically when making recommendations to humans and
express their ethical judgements affectively are the current foci of ethical human-AI interaction research. In addition,
AI engineers need to engage more with the ethics and decision making communities. These people want to help and the
AI research community be reaching out to them to leverage
their expertise in the pursuit of ethical AI technologies. Since
such AI technologies as autonomous vehicles, autonomous
weapons, and cryptocurrencies are becoming a reality and affecting societies, a global and uniﬁed AI regulatory framework needs to be established as soon as possible to address
the ethical issues by drawing on interdisciplinary expertise
[Erd´elyi and Goldsmith, 2018].
In order for ethics to be built into AI, [Burton et al., 2017;
Goldsmith and Burton, 2017] advocate that ethics should be
part of the AI curricula. This is based on the observation
that consequentialist ethics (or ethics based on the utilitarian analysis of possible outcomes) is most closely related
to the decision-theoretic frame of mind familiar to today’s
AI researchers.
Deontological ethics (or rule-based ethics) and virtue ethics are less familiar among AI researchers.
Understanding deontological ethics can help AI researchers
determine which rules are more fundamental and, therefore,
should take priority in an ethical decision framework. Understanding virtue ethics, which concerns questions on whom
one wishes to become, can help AI researchers frame ethical
discussions in the context of changing social conditions (possibly brought on by AI technologies) and guide the incorporation of ethics into AI which shape the paths of learning.
Learning materials on these different dimensions of ethics
could help AI researchers understand more clearly the topic
of ethical decision-making and steer the ﬁeld of AI towards
more emphasis on ethical interactions with humans.
From this survey, we envision several possible future research directions which can impact this ﬁeld going forward. Firstly, the current mechanism of crowdsourcing selfreported preference on ethical dilemmas, such as the Moral
Machine project, has its limitations.
Self-reported preferences have been shown to deviate from actual choice behaviours. Researchers from multiple disciplines need to conduct social-systems analysis [Crawford and Calo, 2016] of AI
in order to understand the impact of AI under different social,
cultural and political settings. There may be opportunities
for transfer learning [Pan and Yang, 2010] to be applied in
this case to model different ethics due to diversities in culture
and other aspects. The insights from such studies can complement crowdsourced human preference data when building
computational models of human ethics. In addition, they may
also help AI researchers establish coherent utility functions
from apparently inconsistent human ethical judgements.
Secondly, with AI becoming increasingly ubiquitous in our
daily life, we may need to consider revising our current social
contracts. Research in this area will help us establish regulations about who is responsible when things go wrong with regard to AI, and how to monitor and enforce these regulations.
This research direction is inherently dynamic and interdisciplinary in nature as it must be updated with changing cultural,
social, legal, philosophical and technological realities.
another important research area for ethical
decision-making by AI is to enable AI to explain its decisions
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-18)
under the framework of human ethics. The challenge here is
that as deployed AI programs learn to update the decisionmaking logic, the AI designers may not be able to anticipate all outcomes at design time and may not understand
the decisions made by the AI entities later [Li et al., 2015;
Venema, 2018]. Argumentation-based explainable AI [Fan
and Toni, 2015; Langley et al., 2017] can be a good starting
point for this purpose as it is well suited to the consequentialist ethics which is a commonly adopted approach for implementing AI ethics. Nevertheless, depending on how the
explanations are used, researchers need to strike a balance on
the level of details to be included. Full transparency may be
too overwhelming if the objective is to persuade a user to follow a time-critical recommendation, but can be useful as a
mechanism to trace the AI decision process afterwards. On
the other hand, not enough transparency may hamper users’
trust in the AI. AI researchers can borrow ideas from the ﬁeld
of mass communication to design proper trade-offs.
Lastly, incorporating ethics into AI systems will inﬂuence
human-AI interaction dynamics. By knowing that AI decisions follow ethical principles, some people may adapt their
behaviours in order to take advantage of this and render the
AI systems unable to achieve their design objectives. For example, an ethical autonomous gun system (if there can be
such a thing) could be disabled by a child (who is generally regarded as a non-combatant and in need of protection)
with a spray paint (which is generally not considered a lethal
weapon) painting over the sensor system of the gun. In this
case, Adversarial Game Theory [Vorobeychik et al., 2012]
may need to be incorporated into future AI ethical decision
frameworks in order to enable AI to preserve the original design objectives in the presence of strategic human behaviours.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation,
Singapore under its IDM Futures Funding Initiative; the Singapore
Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 1 ; the Singapore Ministry of Health under its National Innovation Challenge on Active and Conﬁdent Ageing ; Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Assistant Professorship (NAP); and the NTU-PKU
Joint Research Institute, a collaboration between Nanyang Technological University and Peking University that is sponsored by a donation from the Ng Teng Fong Charitable Foundation.