Fast Heuristic Search for RTS Game Combat Scenarios
David Churchill
University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E8, Canada ( )
Abdallah Safﬁdine
Universit Paris-Dauphine, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France ( )
Michael Buro
University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E8, Canada ( )
Heuristic search has been very successful in abstract game
domains such as Chess and Go. In video games, however,
adoption has been slow due to the fact that state and move
spaces are much larger, real-time constraints are harsher, and
constraints on computational resources are tighter. In this paper we present a fast search method — Alpha-Beta search for
durative moves — that can defeat commonly used AI scripts
in RTS game combat scenarios of up to 8 vs. 8 units running
on a single core in under 5ms per search episode. This performance is achieved by using standard search enhancements
such as transposition tables and iterative deepening, and novel
usage of combat AI scripts for sorting moves and state evaluation via playouts. We also present evidence that commonly
used combat scripts are highly exploitable — opening the
door for a promising line of research on opponent combat
modelling.
Introduction
Automated planning, i.e. ﬁnding a sequence of actions leading from a start to a goal state, is a central problem in artiﬁcial intelligence research with many applications such
as robot navigation and theorem proving.
While searchbased planning approaches have had a long tradition in the
construction of strong AI systems for abstract games like
Chess and Go, only in recent years have they been applied to modern video games, such as ﬁrst-person shooter
(FPS) and real-time strategy (RTS) games . Generating move sequences automatically has considerable advantages over scripted behavior, as anybody who tried to write a good rule-based
Chess program can attest:
• Search naturally adapts to the current situation. By looking ahead it will often ﬁnd winning variations, where
scripted solutions fail due to the enormous decision complexity. For example, consider detecting mate-in-3 situations statically, i.e. without enumerating move sequences.
• Creating search-based AI systems usually requires less
expert knowledge and can therefore be implemented
Testament to this insight is Monte Carlo tree
search, a recently developed sample based search technique that revolutionized computer Go .
Copyright c⃝2012, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
These advantages come at a cost, namely increased runtime
and/or memory requirements. Therefore, it can be challenging to adapt established search algorithms to large scale realtime decision problems, e.g. video games and robotics. In
what follows, we will see how the Alpha-Beta search algorithm can be used to solve adversarial real-time planning
problems with durative moves. We begin by motivating the
application area — small scale combat in RTS games —
and discussing relevant literature. We then deﬁne our search
problem formally, describe several solution concepts, and
then present our ABCD algorithm (Alpha-Beta Considering
Durations) which we will evaluate experimentally. We conclude by discussing future research directions in this area.
Modelling RTS Game Combat
Battle unit management (also called micromanagement) is
a core skill of successful human RTS game players and is
vital to playing at a professional level. One of the top STAR-
CRAFT players of all time, Jaedong, who is well known for
his excellent unit control, said in a recent interview: “That
micro made me different from everyone else in Brood War,
and I won a lot of games on that micro alone”.1 It has also
been proved to be decisive in the previous STARCRAFT AI
competitions, with many battles between the top three AI
agents being won or lost due to the quality of unit control.
In this paper we focus on small-scale battle we call combat,
in which a small number of units interact in a small map
region without obstructions.
In order to perform search for combat scenarios in STAR-
CRAFT, we must construct a system which allows us to efﬁciently simulate the game itself. The BWAPI programming
interface allows for interaction with the STARCRAFT interface, but unfortunately, it can only run the engine at 32 times
“normal speed” and does not allow us to create and manipulate local state instances efﬁciently. As one search may
simulate millions of moves, with each move having a duration of at least one simulation frame, it remains for us to
construct an abstract model of STARCRAFT combat which is
able to efﬁciently implement moves in a way that does not
rely on simulating each in-game frame.
1 id=
Proceedings, The Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
Combat Model
To fully simulate RTS game combat, our model is comprised
of three main components: states, units, and moves.
State s = ⟨t, p, m, U1, U2⟩
• Current game time t
• Player p who performed move m to generate s
• Sets of units Ui under control of player i
Unit u = ⟨p, hp, hpmax, ta, tm, v, w⟩
• Position p = (x, y) in R2
• Current hit points hp and maximum hit points hpmax
• Time step when unit can next attack ta, or move tm
• Maximum unit velocity v
• Weapon properties w = ⟨damage, cooldown⟩
Move m = {a0, . . . , ak} which is a combination of unit
actions ai = ⟨u, type, target, t⟩, with
• Unit u to perform this action
• The type type of action to be performed:
Attack unit target
Move u to position target
Wait until time t
Legal Move Generation
Given a state s containing unit u, we generate legal unit actions as follows: if u.ta ≤s.t then u may attack any target
in its range, if u.tm ≤s.t then u may move in any legal
direction, if u.tm ≤s.t < u.ta then u may wait until u.ta.
If both u.ta and u.tm are > s.t then a unit is said to have no
legal actions. A legal player move is then a set of all combinations of one legal unit action from each unit a player
Unlike strict alternating move games like chess, our
model’s moves have durations based on individual unit properties, so either player (or both) may be able to move at a
given state. We deﬁne the player to move next as the one
which contains the unit with the minimum time for which it
can attack or move.
Model Limitations
While the mathematical model we propose does not exactly
match the combat mechanics of STARCRAFT it captures essential features. Because we don’t have access to STAR-
CRAFT’s source code, we can only try to infer missing features based on game play observations:
• no spell casting (e.g. immobilization, area effects)
• no hit point or shield regeneration
• no travel time for projectiles
• no unit collisions
• no unit acceleration, deceleration or turning
• no fog of war
Quite a few STARCRAFT AI competition entries are designed with a strong focus on early game play (rushing). For
those programs some of the listed limitations, such as single
weapons and spell casting, are immaterial because they become important only in later game phases. The utility of
adding others, such as dealing with unit collisions and acceleration, will have to be determined once our search technique becomes adopted.
Solution Concepts for Combat Games
The combat model deﬁned in Section 2 can naturally be
complemented with a termination criterion and utility functions for the players in terminal positions.
A position is
called terminal if all the units of a player have reached 0hp,
or if a certain time limit (measured in game frames, or unit
actions) has been exceeded. Combining the combat model
with the termination criterion and utility functions deﬁnes
a class of games we call combat games. In what follows
we will assume that combat games are zero-sum games, i.e.,
utilities for both players add up to a constant across all terminal states. This property together with simultaneous moves
and fully observable state variables places combat games in
the class of “stacked matrix games”. Such games can — in
principle — be solved by backward induction starting with
terminal states via Nash equilibrium computations for instance by solving linear programs . However, Furtak and Buro showed that
deciding which player survives in combat games in which
units can’t even move is PSPACE-hard in general.
means that playing combat games optimally is computationally hard and that in practice we have to resort to approximations. There are various ways to approximate optimal
play in combat games. In the following sub-sections we will
discuss a few of them.
Scripted Behaviors
The simplest approach, and the one most commonly used in
video game AI systems, is to deﬁne static behaviors via AI
scripts. Their main advantage is computation speed, but they
often lack foresight, which makes them vulnerable against
search-based methods, as we will see in Section 5, where
we will evaluate the following simple combat AI scripts:
• The Random strategy picks legal moves with uniform
probability.
• Using the Attack-Closest strategy units will attack the
closest opponent unit within weapon’s range if it can currently ﬁre. Otherwise, if it is within range of an enemy
but is reloading, it will wait in-place until it has reloaded.
If it is not in range of any enemy, it will move toward the
closest enemy a ﬁxed distance.
• The Attack-Weakest strategy is similar to Attack-Closest,
except units attack an opponent unit with the lowest hp
within range when able.
• Using the Kiting strategy is similar to Attack-Closest, except it will move a ﬁxed distance away from the closest
enemy when it is unable to ﬁre.
Best Response
Script node
Figure 1: Maxmin, Minmax, Best Response, Nash
The Attack-Closest script was used in second-place entry
UAlbertaBot in the 2010 AIIDE STARCRAFT AI competition, whereas Skynet, the winning entry, used a behavior
similar to Kiting.
Game Theoretic Approximations
As mentioned above, combat games fall into the class of
two-player zero-sum simultaneous move games. In this setting, the concepts of optimal play and game values are well
deﬁned, and the value Nash(G) of a game G (in view of
the maximizing player MAX) can be determined by using
backward induction. However, as discussed earlier, this process can be very slow. Kovarsky and Buro describe
how games with simultaneous moves can be sequentialized
to make them amenable to fast alpha-beta tree search, trading optimality for speed. The idea is to replace simultaneous
move states by two-level subtrees in which players move
in turn, maximizing respectively minimizing their utilities
(Figure 1: Minmax and Maxmin). The value of the sequentialized games might be different from Nash(G) and it depends on the order we choose for the players in each state
with simultaneous moves: If MAX chooses his move ﬁrst
in each such state (Figure 1: Minmax), the value of the resulting game we call the pure maxmin value and denote it
by mini(G). Conversely, if MAX gets to choose after MIN,
we call the game’s value the pure minmax value (denoted
maxi(G)). An elementary game theory result is that pure
minmax and maxmin values are bounds for the true game
Proposition 1. For stacked matrix games G, we have
mini(G) ≤Nash(G) ≤maxi(G), and the inequalities are
strict iff the game does not admit optimal pure strategies.
It is possible that there is no optimal pure strategy in a
game with simultaneous moves, as ROCK-PAPER-SCISSORS
proves. Less intuitively so, the need for randomized strategies also arises in combat games, even in cases with 2
vs. 2 immobile units ).
To mitigate the potential unfairness caused by the Minmax and
Maxmin game transformations, 
propose the Random-Alpha-Beta (RAB) algorithm. RAB is
a Monte Carlo algorithm that repeatedly performs Alpha-
Beta searches in transformed games where the player-tomove order is randomized in interior simultaneous move
nodes. Once time runs out, the move with the highest total score at the root is chosen. 
shows that RAB can outperform Alpha-Beta search on the
Maxmin-transformed tree, using iterative deepening and a
simple heuristic evaluation function. In our experiments,
we will test the stripped down RAB version we call RAB’,
which only runs Alpha-Beta once.
Another approach of mitigating unfairness is to alternate
the player-to-move order in simultaneous move nodes on the
way down the tree. We call this tree transformation Alt.
Because RAB’ and the Alt transformation just change the
player-to-move order, the following result on the value of
the best RAB move (rab(G)) and Alt move (alter(G)) are
easy to prove by induction on the tree height:
Proposition 2. For stacked matrix game G, we have
mini(G) ≤rab(G), alter(G) ≤maxi(G)
The proposed approximation methods are much faster than
solving games by backward induction. However, the computed moves may be inferior. Section 5 we will see how they
perform empirically.
Fast Alpha-Beta Search for Combat Games
In the previous section we discussed multiple game transformations that would allow us to ﬁnd solutions by using
backward induction. However, when playing RTS games
the real-time constraints are harsh. Often, decisions must be
made during a single simulation frame, which can be 50 ms
or shorter. Therefore, computing optimal moves is impossible for all but the smallest settings and we need to settle for
approximate solutions: we trade optimality for speed and
hope that the algorithms we propose defeat the state of the
art AI systems for combat games.
The common approach is to declare nodes to be leaf nodes
once a certain depth limit is reached. In leaf nodes MAX’s
utility is then estimated by calling an evaluation function,
and this value is propagated up the tree like true terminal
node utilities.
In the following subsections we will ﬁrst adapt the Alpha-
Beta search algorithm to combat games by handling durative moves explicitly and then present a series of previously
known and new evaluation functions.
Alpha-Beta Search with Durative Moves
Consider Figure 2 which displays a typical path in the sequentialized game tree. Because of the weapon cooldown
Action Sequences
Path in Game Tree
Figure 2: Durations
and the space granularity, battle games exhibit numerous durative moves. Indeed, there are many time steps where the
only move for a player is just pass, since all the units are
currently unable to perform an action. Thus, non-trivial decision points for players do not occur on every frame.
Given a player p in a state s, deﬁne the next time
where p is next able to do a non-pass move by τ(s, p) =
minu∈s.Up(u.ta, u.tm). Note that for any time step t such
that s.t < t < min(τ(s, MAX), τ(s, MIN)), players cannot perform any move but pass.
It is therefore possible
to shortcut many trivial decision points between s.t and
min(τ(s, MAX), τ(s, MIN)).
Assume an evaluation function has been picked, and remaining simultaneous choices are sequentialized as suggested above. It is then possible to adapt the Alpha-Beta
algorithm to take advantage of durative moves as presented
in Algorithm 1
We use the terminal(s, d) function to decide when to call
the evaluation function. It is parametrized by a maximal
depth dmax and a maximal time tmax and return “true” if
s is a terminal position or d ≥dmax or s.t ≥tmax.
The third argument to the ABCD algorithm is used to handle the delayed action effect mechanism for sequentialized
simultaneous moves. If the state does not correspond to a
simultaneous decision, m0 holds a dummy value ∅. Otherwise, we apply the effects of m0 after move m is generated
because m0 should not affect the generation of the complementary moves.
Evaluation Functions
A straight-forward evaluation function for combat games is
the hitpoint-total differential, i.e.
Algorithm 1 Alpha-Beta (Considering Durations)
1: procedure ABCD(s, d, m0, α, β)
if computationTime.elapsed then return timeout
else if terminal(s, d) then return eval(s)
toMove ←s.playerToMove(policy)
while m ←s.nextMove(toMove) do
if s.bothCanMove and m0 = ∅and d ̸= 1 then
val ←ABCD(s, d −1, m, α, β)
s′ ←copy(s)
if m0 ̸= ∅then s′.doMove(m0)
s′.doMove(m)
v ←ABCD(s′, d −1, ∅, α, β)
if toMove = MAX and (v > α) then α ←v
if toMove = MIN and (v < β) then β ←v
if α ≥β then break
return toMove = MAX ? α : β
which, however, doesn’t take into account other unit properties, such as damage values and cooldown periods. Kovarsky and Buro propose an evaluation based on the
life-time damage a unit can inﬂict, which is proportional to
its hp times its damage-per-frame ratio:
dpf(u) = damage(w(u))
cooldown(w(u))
hp(u) · dpf(u) −
hp(u) · dpf(u)
A second related evaluation function Kovarsky and Buro
 propose favours uniform hp distributions:
hp(u)·dpf(u)−
hp(u)·dpf(u)
While these evaluation functions are exact for terminal positions, they can be drastically inaccurate for many nonterminal positions. To improve state evaluation by also taking other unit properties such as speed and weapon range
into account, we can try to simulate a game and use the outcome as an estimate of the utility of its starting position.
This idea is known as performing a playout in game tree
search and is actually a fundamental part of Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms which have revolutionized
computer GO . However, there are differences between the playouts we advocate for combat games
and previous work on GO and HEX: the playout policies we
use here are deterministic and we are not using MCTS or a
best-ﬁrst search algorithm, but rather depth-ﬁrst search.
Move Ordering
It is well-known in the game AI research community that a
good move ordering fosters the performance of the Alpha-
Beta algorithm. When transposition tables (TTs) and iterative deepening are used, reusing previous search results can
improve the move ordering. Suppose a position p needs to
be searched at depth d and was already searched at depth
d′. If d ≤d′, the value of the previous search is sufﬁciently
accurate and there is no need for an additional search on p.
Otherwise, a deeper search is needed, but we can explore the
previously found best move ﬁrst and hope for more pruning.
When no TT information is available, we can use scripted
strategies to suggest moves.
We call this new heuristic
scripted move ordering. Note that this heuristic could also
be used in standard sequential games like CHESS. We believe the reason it has not been investigated closely in those
contexts is the lack of high quality scripted strategies.
Experiments
We implemented the proposed combat model, the scripted
strategies, the new ABCD algorithm, and various tree transformations. We then ran experiments to measure 1) the in-
ﬂuence of the suggested search enhancements for determining the best search conﬁguration, and 2) the real-time exploitability of scripted strategies.
Because the scripts we presented in Subsection 3.1 are
quite basic, we added a few smarter ones to our set of scripts
• The Attack-Value strategy is similar to Attack-Closest,
except units attack an opponent unit u with the highest
dpf(u)/hp(u) value within range when able. This choice
leads to optimal play in 1 vs. n scenarios (Furtak and Buro
• The NOK-AV (No-OverKill-Attack-Value) strategy is
similar to Attack-Value, except units will not attack an
enemy unit which has been assigned lethal damage this
round. It will instead choose the next priority target, or
wait if one does not exist.
• Using the Kiting-AV strategy is similar to Kiting, except
it will choose an attack target similar to Attack-Value.
Most scripts we described make decisions on an individual
unit basis, with some creating the illusion of unit collaboration (by concentrating ﬁre on closest or weakest or mostvaluable units). NOK-AV is the only script in our set that
exhibits true collaborative behaviour by sharing information
about unit targeting.
Because of time constraints, we were only able to test the
following tree transformations: Alt, Alt’, and RAB’, where
Alt’ in simultaneous move nodes selects the player that acted
last, and RAB’ selects the player to move like RAB, but only
completes one Alpha-Beta search.
The combat scenarios we used for the experiments involved
equally sized armies of n versus n units, where n varied
from 2 to 8. 1 versus 1 scenarios were omitted due to over
95% of them resulting in draws. Four different army types
were constructed to mimic various combat scenarios. These
armies were: Marine Only, Marine + Zergling, Dragoon +
Zealot, and Dragoon + Marine. Armies consisted of all possible combinations of the listed unit type with up to 4 of
each, for a maximum army size of 8 units. Each unit in the
army was given to player MAX at random starting position
(x, y) within 256 pixels of the origin, and to player MIN at
position (−x, −y), which guaranteed symmetric start locations about the origin. Once combat began, units were allowed to move inﬁnitely within the plane. Unit movement
was limited to up, down, left, right at 15 pixel increments,
which is equal to the smallest attack range of any unit in our
These settings ensured that the Nash value of the starting position was always 0.5. If the battle did not end in
one player being eliminated after 500 actions, the simulation was halted and the ﬁnal state evaluated with LTD. For
instance, in a match between a player p1 and an opponent p2,
we would count the number of wins by p1, w, and number
of draws, d, over n games and compute r = (w + d/2)/n.
Both players perform equally well in this match if r ≈0.5.
As the 2011 StarCraft AI Competition allowed for 50ms
of processing per game logic frame, we gave each search
episode a time limit of 5ms. This simulates the real-time
nature of RTS combat, while leaving plenty of time (45ms)
for other processing which may have been needed for other
computations.
Experiments were run single-threaded on an Intel Core i7
2.67 GHz CPU with 24 GB of 1600 MHz DDR3 RAM using the Windows 7 64 bit operating system and Visual C++
2010. A transposition table of 5 million entries (20 bytes
each) was used. Due to the depth-ﬁrst search nature of the
algorithm, very little additional memory is required to facilitate search. Each result table entry is the result of playing
365 games, each with random symmetric starting positions.
Inﬂuence of the Search Settings
To measure the impact of certain search parameters, we perform experiments using two methods of comparison. The
ﬁrst method plays static scripted opponents vs. ABCD with
various settings, which are then compared.
The second
method plays ABCD vs. ABCD with different settings for
each player.
We start by studying the inﬂuence of the evaluation function selection on the search performance (see Section 4.2).
Preliminary experiments revealed that using NOK-AV for
the playouts was signiﬁcantly better than using any of the
other scripted strategies. The playout-based evaluation function will therefore always use the NOK-AV script.
We now present the performance of various settings for
the search against script-based opponents (Table 1) and
search-based opponents (Table 2). In Table 1, the Alt sequentialization is used among the ﬁrst three settings which
allow to compare the leaf evaluations functions LTD, LTD2,
and playout-based. The leaf evaluation based on NOK-AV
playouts is used for the last three settings which allow to
compare the sequentialization alternatives described in Subsection 3.2.
We can see based on the ﬁrst three settings that doing a
search based on a good playout policy leads to much better
performance than doing a search based on a static evaluation
function. The search based on the NOK-AV playout strategy is indeed dominating the searches based on LTD and
LTD2 against any opponent tested. We can also see based
Table 1: ABCD vs. Script - scores for various settings
ABCD Search Setting
NOK-AV Playout
Table 2: Playout-based ABCD performance
NOK-AV Playout
Alt-NOK-AV
Alt’-NOK-AV
RAB’-NOK-AV
Table 3: Real-time exploitability of scripted strategies.
Random Weakest Closest AV Kiter Kite-AV NOK-AV
on the last three settings that the Alt and Alt’ sequentializations lead to better results than RAB’.
Estimating the Quality of Scripts
The quality of scripted strategies can be measured in at least
two ways: the simplest approach is to run the script against
multiple opponents and average the results.
To this end,
we can use the data presented in Table 1 to conclude that
NOK-AV is the best script in our set. Alternatively, we can
measure the exploitability of scripted strategies by determining the score a theoretically optimal best-response-strategy
would achieve against the script. However, such strategies
are hard to compute in general. Looking forward to modelling and exploiting opponents, we would like to approximate best-response strategies quickly, possibly within one
game simulation frame. This can be accomplished by replacing one player in ABCD by the script in question and
then run ABCD to ﬁnd approximate best-response moves.
The obtained tournament result we call the real-time exploitability of the given script. It constitutes a lower bound
(in expectation) on the true exploitability and tells us about
the risk of being exploited by an adaptive player. Table 3
lists the real-time exploitability of various scripted strategies. Again, the NOK-AV strategy prevails, but the high
value suggests that there is room for improvement.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have presented a framework for fast Alpha-
Beta search for RTS game combat scenarios of up to 8 vs. 8
units and evaluate it under harsh real-time conditions. Our
method is based on an efﬁcient combat game abstraction
model that captures important RTS game features, including unit motion, an Alpha-Beta search variant (ABCD) that
can deal with durative moves and various tree transformations, and a novel way of using scripted strategies for move
ordering and depth-ﬁrst-search state evaluation via playouts.
The experimental results are encouraging. Our search, when
using only 5 ms per episode, defeats standard AI scripts as
well as more advanced scripts that exhibit kiting behaviour
and minimize overkill. The prospect of opponent modelling
for exploiting scripted opponents is even greater: the practical exploitability results indicate large win margins bestresponse ABCD can achieve if the opponent executes any of
the tested combat scripts.
The ultimate goal of this line of research is to handle
larger combat scenarios with more than 20 units on each side
in real-time. The enormous state and move complexity, however, prevents us from applying heuristic search directly, and
we therefore will have to ﬁnd spatial and unit group abstractions that reduce the size of the state space so that heuristic
search can produce meaningful results in real-time. Balla
and Fern present initial research in this direction, but
their UCT-based solution is rather slow and depends on preassigned unit groups.
Our next steps will be to integrate ABCD search into
a STARCRAFT AI competition entry to gauge its performance against previous year’s participants, to reﬁne our
combat model if needed, to add opponent modelling and
best-response-ABCD to counter inferred opponent combat
policies, and then to tackle more complex combat scenarios.