Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
 
 
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only.
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their
employer(s) is intended or implied.
The Stata Journal 
3, Number 4, pp. 412–419
From the help desk: Local polynomial
regression and Stata plugins
Roberto G. Gutierrez
Jean Marie Linhart
Jeﬀrey S. Pitblado
Local polynomial regression is a generalization of local mean smoothing as described by Nadaraya and Watson . Instead of ﬁtting a local
mean, one instead ﬁts a local pth-order polynomial. Calculations for local polynomial regression are naturally more complex than those for local means, but local
polynomial smooths have better statistical properties. The computational complexity may, however, be alleviated by using a Stata plugin. In this article, we
describe the locpoly command for performing local polynomial regression. The
calculations involved are implemented in both ado-code and with a plugin, allowing
the user to assess the speed improvement obtained from using the plugin. Source
code for the plugin is also provided as part of the package for this program.
Keywords: st0053, local polynomial, local linear, smoothing, kernel, plugin
Introduction
The last twenty years or so have seen a signiﬁcant outgrowth in the literature on the
subject of scatterplot smoothing, otherwise known as univariate nonparametric regression. Of most appeal is the idea of not making any assumptions about the functional
form for the expected value of a response given a regressor but instead allowing the
data to “speak for itself”. Various methods and estimators fall into the category of
nonparametric regression, including local mean smoothing, as described independently
by Nadaraya and Watson ; the Gasser–M¨uller estimator; locally
weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS), as described by Cleveland ; wavelets
 ; and splines , to name a few. Much of the vast literature focuses on automating the amount of smoothing to be performed and dealing with
the bias/variance trade-oﬀinherent to this type of estimation. For example, in the case
of Nadaraya–Watson, the amount of smoothing is controlled by choosing a bandwidth.
Smoothing via local polynomials is by no means a new idea but instead one that has
been rediscovered in recent years in articles such as Fan . A natural extension
of the local mean smoothing of Nadaraya–Watson, local polynomial regression, involves
ﬁtting the response to a polynomial form of the regressor via locally weighted least
squares. Compared with the Nadaraya–Watson estimator (local polynomial of degree
zero), local polynomials of higher order have better bias properties and, in general, do
not require bias adjustment at the boundary of the regression space. For a deﬁnitive
reference on local polynomial smoothing, see Fan and Gijbels .
c⃝2003 StataCorp LP
R. G. Gutierrez, J. M. Linhart, and J. S. Pitblado
The apparent cost of these improved properties is that local polynomial smooths are
computationally more complex. For example, the Nadaraya–Watson estimator requires
at each point in the smoothing grid the calculation of a locally weighted mean, whereas
local polynomial smoothing would require a weighted regression at each grid point.
This cost, however, can be alleviated by using approximation methods such as linear
binning or by using updating methods that retain information
from previous points in the smoothing grid . For purposes
of simplicity of code, no such devices are considered in this paper. Instead, we will
work with the idea of running a full regression at each grid point and gain speed by
performing these regressions using a Stata plugin.
Plugins are a relatively new feature of Stata, made available in July 2003. A Stata
plugin is a piece of compiled code (written in C or C++) that a user attaches to
the Stata executable and then executes either interactively or from within a program.
Because they consist of precompiled code, plugins generally run faster than equivalent
code written in the ado language, where each command must be interpreted each time
it is executed.
In the context of local polynomial regression, we implement a Stata plugin to perform
all the required linear regressions, thus speeding up execution considerably.
paper, we do not discuss the actual creation of the plugin, although we do make our
source code available for your examination; for more information on creating Stata
plugins, see StataCorp .
Calculations are implemented in both ado-code and
with a plugin, allowing for comparison in execution times between the two. A dialogbox generating program for locpoly is also provided, along with instructions on how
you can permanently add an entry for locpoly to the Stata User menu.
Section 2 describes the method of local polynomial regression. Section 3 provides
documentation for the locpoly command. Section 4 brieﬂy discusses some issues of
using Stata plugins and compares execution times for locpoly when the calculations
are performed entirely in ado-code with those for which the plugin is used.
Local polynomial regression
Consider a set of scatterplot data {(X1, Y1), . . . , (Xn, Yn)} from the model
Yi = m(Xi) + ǫi
for some unknown mean function m() and symmetric errors ǫi. Without making any
assumption about the functional form of m(), we wish to estimate m(x0) = E(Y |X =
For some x in the neighborhood of x0, a Taylor expansion of m(x) gives
m(x) ≈m(x0) + m(1)(x0)(x −x0) + m(2)(x0)
(x −x0)2 + · · · + m(p)(x0)
That is, we can approximate m(x) locally by a pth order polynomial in x −x0. Substituting this approximation into (1), we see that for Xis local to x0, m(x0) can be
From the help desk
estimated as the constant term (intercept) of a regression of Yi on the polynomial terms
(Xi −x0), (Xi −x0)2, . . . , (Xi −x0)p.
To preserve the locality, we introduce a kernel function K(), which is a probability
density function that is symmetric about zero and a bandwidth h to control the degree
of locality. Deﬁning βj = m(j)(x0)/j! for j = 0, . . . , p, we can then estimate β0 = m(x0)
by minimizing in βj the weighted least squares expression
βj(Xi −x0)j
Kh(Xi −x0)
for Kh(a) = h−1K(a/h).
The above is equivalent to a weighted linear regression with weights equal to Kh(Xi−
x0). Thus, a local polynomial smooth can be obtained by specifying a smoothing grid
consisting of a series of x0s and then, for each x0 in the grid, performing the above
weighted regression (with polynomial terms (Xi −x0)j as regressors) and picking oﬀthe
estimated intercept term β0 = m(x0).
It is up to the user to specify the degree p, kernel function K(), and bandwidth
h. When p = 0, the above reduces to local mean smoothing, otherwise known as the
Nadaraya–Watson estimator. Note that the above scheme also allows for estimation of
the ﬁrst p derivatives of m() with m(j)(x0) = j!βj, j = 1, . . . , p, although no facility for
retrieving these estimates is provided in our implementation.
Stata implementation
locpoly yvar xvar
, degree(#) width(#) n(#)
at(varx) generate(
epanechnikov | biweight | cosine |
gaussian | parzen | rectangle | triangle
adoonly nograph noscatter
plot(plot) line options twoway options
degree(#) speciﬁes the degree of the polynomial to be used in the smoothing. Zero is
the default, meaning local mean smoothing.
width(#) speciﬁes the halfwidth of the kernel, the width of the smoothing window
around each point.
If width() is not speciﬁed, the default width is used; see
[R] kdensity. Note that this default is appropriate for kernel-density estimation
and not for local polynomial smoothing. It is best to use the default as a starting
point and adjust the bandwidth according to your needs.
R. G. Gutierrez, J. M. Linhart, and J. S. Pitblado
n(#) speciﬁes the number of points at which the smooth is to be evaluated. The default
is min(N, 50), where N is the number of observations in your data.
at(varx) speciﬁes a variable that contains the values at which the smooth should be
evaluated. at() allows you to more easily obtain smooths for diﬀerent variables or
diﬀerent subsamples of a variable and then overlay the estimates for comparison. By
default, the smoothing is done on an equally spaced grid, but you can use at() to
perform the smoothing at the observed xs, for example.
newvary) creates new variables storing the results of the estimation. newvary will contain the estimated smooth. newvarx will contain the smoothing grid. If at() is not speciﬁed, then both newvarx and newvary must be speciﬁed.
Otherwise, only newvary is to be speciﬁed.
epanechnikov, biweight, cosine, guassian, parzen, rectangle, and triangle specify the kernel, with epanechnikov being default. For deﬁnitions of these kernels, see
[R] kdensity.
adoonly suppresses the use of the Stata plugin and instead performs the necessary
regressions entirely using ado-code. That is, the ﬁle containing this program includes
a subroutine written in the ado language. This subroutine has also been implemented
as a plugin. Both produce the same results, but the plugin is faster and hence run
by default. By specifying adoonly, you run only in ado-code. Thus, adoonly is
useful should the plugin not be available on your platform (in our case it will always
be), or if you wish to perform speed comparisons.
nograph suppresses drawing the graph of the estimated smooth. This option is often
used in conjunction with generate().
noscatter suppresses superimposing a scatterplot of the observed data over the smooth.
This option is useful when the number of resulting points would be so large as to
clutter the graph.
plot(plot) provides a way to add other plots to the generated graph. See
[G] plot option.
line options aﬀect the rendition of the plotted line(s); see [G] graph twoway line.
twoway options are any of the options documented in [G] twoway options, excluding
by(). These include options for titling the graph (see [G] title options) and options
for saving the graph to disk (see [G] saving options).
Local polynomial regression is described in section 2. For an example, consider the
motorcycle data as examined (among other places) in Fan and Gijbels .
data consist of 133 observations and measure the acceleration (accel measured in g) of
the head of a test object during impact over time (time measured in milliseconds). For
these data, we use locpoly to ﬁt a local cubic polynomial with Gaussian kernel and
bandwidth equal to 2.
From the help desk
. use motorcycle, clear
 )
. describe
Contains data from motorcycle.dta
Motorcycle data from Fan &
Gijbels 
5 Nov 2003 16:18
1,596 (99.9% of memory free)
variable name
variable label
time (msec)
acceleration (g)
Sorted by:
. locpoly accel time, degree(3) gaussian width(2)
acceleration (g)
time (msec)
acceleration (g)
locpoly smooth: acceleration (g)
Local polynomial smooth
Figure 1: Local cubic smooth of the motorcycle data.
Saved Results
locpoly saves in r():
smoothing polynomial degree
number of successful regressions
name of kernel
R. G. Gutierrez, J. M. Linhart, and J. S. Pitblado
The locpoly package includes a dialog-box program for this command, contained in
the ﬁle locpoly.dlg, which is downloaded with the program. To launch this dialog
interactively, type db locpoly from within Stata.
Alternately, GUI users can add locpoly permanently to their User menu by including the following in profile.do:
if _caller() > 7 {
if "‘c(console)’"=="" {
window menu append item "stUserGraphics" /*
*/ "Local Polynomial Smoothing (&locpoly)" "db locpoly"
The ﬁrst line ensures that you are running Stata 8 or later, and the second ensures
that you are running a GUI version of Stata and not console Stata. The window command
then adds an entry for local polynomial smoothing within the Graphics submenu of
the User menu, and selecting this entry launches the locpoly dialog.
For more information on customizing your User menu, see [P] window menu.
locpoly uses a Stata plugin
Plugins are useful for speeding up numerical calculations and similar manipulations, but
Stata ado-code is much better at tasks such as parsing syntax, dealing with options,
saving results, and as is the case of locpoly, creating graphs. As such, most programs
that utilize plugins will be written almost entirely in ado-code, with only the most
computationally intense portions relegated to plugins.
In the case of locpoly, the diﬃcult computations are the regressions required for
each point in the smoothing grid. Since the number of points in the grid can be as
large as the number of observations in the data, looping over these points can be slow.
Also, from within Stata, the best way to ﬁt a weighted linear regression model for
which the weights are nonintegers is to use regress with iweights. Since regress
is a built-in command, it is very fast. However, since we are only interested in the
estimated intercept, running a full-blown regression can be bit wasteful.
Therefore,
there is considerable speed to be gained by writing a plugin that does the looping
implicitly and that cleverly performs the matrix manipulations necessary to estimate
only the intercept term in a weighted regression.
Within locpoly.ado exists the subroutine Lpwork, which loops over the grid and
performs a weighted regression at each point. Lpwork is written entirely in ado-code,
but an equivalent plugin routine has also been provided in precompiled form in the
ﬁle locpoly.plugin, which is downloaded as part of this package. Since plugins are
platform speciﬁc, the version of locpoly.plugin that you download depends on your
computer platform (Windows, Macintosh, IBM–AIX, etc.), but this is handled automatically within the Stata package ﬁle (.pkg) for this package; see [R] net for the details
From the help desk
on making platform-speciﬁc ﬁles available for download. Note that since we work at
StataCorp, it was easy enough for us to compile the plugin code on all platforms, so
locpoly.plugin is available to anyone who can run Stata.
For those interested in compiling the plugin themselves following the instructions
given in StataCorp , or for those interested in examining the source code, the
ﬁle locpoly.c is also available as part of this package for download via net get; see
When we initially wrote locpoly, we wrote it entirely in ado-code; i.e., we implemented the calculations via the Lpwork subroutine. When we implemented the equivalent plugin routine, we could have just thrown Lpwork away in favor of locpoly.plugin,
but we realized that keeping both around would allow us to compare the execution times
for both implementations and to reestablish at a future time that both implementations
produced the same results. In order to easily switch between the two, we added the
adoonly option to locpoly. By default, locpoly calls the plugin to perform the calculations. When you specify adoonly, however, locpoly instead uses Lpwork, which,
again, is written entirely as ado-code.
Using the motorcycle data, we can use the adoonly option to compare execution
times, with and without the plugin. We perform the same smooth that we did before,
this time setting the size of smoothing grid equal to the number of observations in our
data. We also add the nograph option, so as to not confound our comparison with the
time required to draw the graph.
. use motorcycle, clear
 )
. set rmsg on
r; t=0.00 17:00:31
. locpoly accel time, degree(3) gaussian width(2) n(133) nograph
r; t=0.01 17:00:31
. locpoly accel time, degree(3) gaussian width(2) n(133) nograph adoonly
r; t=0.12 17:00:31
Using the plugin in this case resulted in code that ran about 12 times faster. We ran
the above on a 2.4GHz PC running Linux. Timings will vary depending on the platform,
size of the dataset, number of smoothing points, degree of the polynomial, etc., but in
general, the speed gain obtained from using locpoly with the plugin is substantial.