Causal Inference and Observational Research: The Utility of
Matt McGue1,2, Merete Osler2,3, and Kaare Christensen4
1 Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
2 Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
3 Research Center for Prevention and Health, Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark
4 The Danish Twin Registry and The Danish Aging Research Center Institute of Public Health,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
Valid causal inference is central to progress in theoretical and applied psychology. Although the
randomized experiment is widely considered the gold standard for determining whether a given
exposure increases the likelihood of some specified outcome, experiments are not always feasible
and in some cases can result in biased estimates of causal effects. Alternatively, standard
observational approaches are limited by the possibility of confounding, reverse causation, and the
nonrandom distribution of exposure (i.e., selection). We describe the counterfactual model of
causation and apply it to the challenges of causal inference in observational research, with a
particular focus on aging. We argue that the study of twin pairs discordant on exposure, and in
particular discordant monozygotic twins, provides a useful analog to the idealized counterfactual
design. A review of discordant-twin studies in aging reveals that they are consistent with, but do
not unambiguously establish, a causal effect of lifestyle factors on important late-life outcomes.
Nonetheless, the existing studies are few in number and have clear limitations that have not always
been considered in interpreting their results. It is concluded that twin researchers could make
greater use of the discordant-twin design as one approach to strengthen causal inferences in
observational research.
discordant-twin design; causal inference; twin research; lifestyle influences in aging
A central aim within psychological gerontology is to explicate the causal mechanisms that
underlie the aging of psychological functions. Without such understanding, the development
of effective interventions is likely to be impeded; our understanding of psychological aging
processes will be incomplete . Thus, it is
important that aging researchers determine whether social engagement protects against
depression , whether intellectual
© The Author(s) 2010
Corresponding Author: Matt McGue, Department of Psychology/Elliott Hall, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
 .
Reprints and permission: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
 
Perspect Psychol Sci. 2010 October 11; 5(5): 546–556. doi:10.1177/1745691610383511.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
stimulation reduces risk of cognitive impairment , and whether a physically active lifestyle increases longevity while reducing
morbidity . Nonetheless, as in many areas in
psychology, the standard methodological approaches available to aging researchers severely
constrain their ability to draw unambiguous causal inferences. The purpose of this article is
to both characterize some of the major challenges associated with causal inference in
observational psychology, with a particular focus on psychological gerontology, and
describe how a twin study, long a staple in behavioral genetics, might address some of these
challenges. Our article begins with a discussion of the nature of causation and alternative
approaches to estimating causal effects. We next discuss how twin studies might be used to
strengthen causal inference in observational research, and review how twin studies have
been used in this way in psychological gerontology. Finally, we report an application of a
twin-study design to a longstanding controversy: Does moderate alcohol consumption
promote, interfere with, or have no effect on late-life cognitive functioning?
What is a Causal Effect and How Can It Be Estimated?
The Counterfactual Model of Causality
One of the enduring debates within the philosophy of science concerns the nature of cause
 . Rather than describe alternative philosophical
approaches to defining what is meant by cause, we can highlight the essence of the issue by
considering what is meant when someone claims that social disengagement is a cause of
dementia. First, they are probably not claiming that no socially engaged person ever
develops dementia. Similarly, they are unlikely to be arguing that every disengaged person
eventually becomes demented. Rather, the conception of causation within the social and
behavioral sciences extends beyond formal deterministic relationships based on sufficiency
and necessity. In this regard, the statement probably comes closest to meaning something
like, if an individual becomes socially engaged he or she will lower their probability of
developing dementia below what it would have been had they not been engaged. This
perspective on causation allows that, even though on average individuals would reduce their
chance of becoming demented if they increased their level of social engagement, many
socially engaged individuals will develop dementia, whereas many socially disengaged
individuals will not. But how can this conception of causation be formalized and how might
we use this definition to evaluate alternative methodologies for drawing causal inferences
within the behavioral and social sciences?
Recently, Rubin and colleagues , building on the earlier work by
Neyman , proposed a framework for evaluating
causal inference within epidemiology. The counterfactual or potential outcomes framework
provides both a coherent definition of causal effect for complex multidetermined outcomes
 and an integrative framework for evaluating alternative approaches for the
estimation of causal effects . Suppose we are interested in the effect
of some exposure X (= T or C) on outcome Y in a population of N individuals. We would
then define the causal effect of exposure X for the ith person as
ith person’s outcome when exposed and
is the outcome when he or she is not exposed.
The average causal effect is obtained by taking the average of the individual effects, or δ̄i =
ȲiT − ȲiC. Of course it is not possible to observe an individual’s outcome both when that
individual is exposed and at the same time when he or she is not. Consequently, causal
effects so defined cannot be directly observed. Rather, the virtue of the counterfactual model
is that it places the problem of causal inference within a general missing data framework.
That is, valid causal inference requires approaches that allow us to accurately estimate the
missing nonexposure outcomes for those who were exposed and, conversely, the missing
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
exposure outcomes for those who were not exposed. It is important to note that there is no
fundamental difference between experimental and observational approaches—both are
evaluated in terms of whether they allow for accurate estimation of the relevant
counterfactuals.
There is general recognition that experimental approaches, being based on the ability to
randomly assign individuals to different levels of exposure, afford the greatest opportunity
for strong causal inference . The counterfactual model helps us to
understand why. Specifically, random assignment should ensure that those assigned to the
control group will provide on average a reasonable counterfactual for those exposed to the
treatment and, conversely, that those assigned to the treatment should, on average, provide a
reasonable counterfactual for those who were not. The counterfactual approach also helps to
identify some of the limitations of experimental approaches for causal inference. For
example, even with random assignment, the estimated average causal effect, , may be
substantially biased if treatment response among those who volunteer to participate in an
experiment differs from those who decline to participate. It seems almost certain that those
who participate in interventions that provide, for example, high levels of intellectual, social,
and physical stimulation will not be representative of the general population of older
individuals . Loss to
follow-up and failure to comply with intervention guidelines are additional factors that can
lead to biased estimates of causal effects in treatment studies. Although clearly powerful,
experimental approaches may systematically underestimate or overestimate the effect of
social and behavioral interventions . Inferences from experimental studies should be validated with alternative
approaches. Moreover, for many important psychological questions, an experiment may not
be feasible or ethical or it may not adequately address the central question of interest. For
example, the effects of a short-term intensive physical or intellectual intervention may tell us
little about the impact of lifestyle factors whose effects play out over years rather than weeks
 . Despite their perceived strengths, experiments may not always be the
best approach to causal inference in the behavioral sciences.
Causal Inference and Observational Research
Concern with observational approaches to causal inference center on two alternatives to true
causation as an explanation for an association between exposure and outcome: reverse
causation and confounding. Both can be illustrated by considering the association that exists
between intellectual engagement and cognitive functioning and the controversy that
surrounds its interpretation. This association may arise because of true causation (i.e.,
intellectual engagement influences cognitive functioning) as some have suggested
 . Alternatively,
the association may also arise by reverse causation, whereby high cognitive functioning
leads to intellectual engagement as others have suggested . In principle, resolving true causation from reverse causation can be
achieved through longitudinal research that allows for the sequencing of exposure and
outcome. In practice, the valid sequencing of exposure and outcome is far from trivial,
involving significant design challenges and strong assumptions about the nature of
measurement .
Arguably, confounding represents a more pervasive challenge to valid inference in
observational research than the possibility of reverse causation. For a variable to be
considered a confounder it must (a) be a cause of the outcome, (b) be correlated with
exposure, and (c) not be affected by exposure . In the present case,
educational attainment might be considered an example of a potential confounder, because
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
educational attainment might be a cause of cognitive functioning (the outcome) and
correlated with, but not caused by, an intellectually engaged lifestyle (the exposure).
Researchers have generally attempted to deal with confounding in observational research
either through post hoc statistical adjustments (e.g., covariate adjustment) or by executing
research designs that approximate a randomized trial even if observational .
Unfortunately, post hoc statistical approaches to confounding are fraught with difficulty
 . Most psychologists are familiar with the use of partial correlational
methods to correct for potential confounders. They will also be familiar with the limitations
of this approach (or its regression-based equivalents). Adjustment cannot be made for
confounders that were not assessed, and adjustment for confounders that were measured
poorly is certain to be inadequate. Moreover, only rarely do social and behavioral scientists
rigorously evaluate whether the covariates in their regression model meet the criteria for a
confounder . As a consequence, even if it seems sensible, adjusting the
correlation between cognitive functioning and intellectual engagement for educational
attainment will not provide an unbiased estimate of causal effect if educational attainment is
not a true confounder (e.g., because it is consequence rather than a cause of cognitive
functioning), if educational attainment is measured with error (in which case the statistical
adjustment would be imperfect), or if a key confounder was not included as a covariate (e.g.,
the association of intellectual engagement and cognitive functioning may owe in part to
common genetic factors).
Some social and behavioral scientists have turned to structural equation modeling (SEM)
approaches in an attempt to address the problems of confounding . There is no doubt that SEM has gained enormously in popularity over
the past few decades. The number of entries to SEM in social and behavioral sciences
journals in Thomson’s Institute for Scientific Information database increased from 2 in 1977
to over 900 in 2008. Yet although there is little question over the utility of SEM for
describing complex multivariate data sets such as those generated in longitudinal research
 , less certain is the extent to which SEM has facilitated valid
causal inference by addressing the problem of confounding in observational data . Rutter recently provided a broad overview of natural
experiments available to observational researchers in the social and behavioral sciences.
Although these approaches are not without their own limitations, the advantage of natural
experiments is that they approach the problem of confounding as something to be addressed
a priori through research design rather than a posteriori through statistical analysis. Our
focus here is on one of the natural experiments described by Rutter . The cotwin
control or discordant-twin-pairs design has the advantage that there are a large number of
twin studies in psychology even if the particular use of a twin study we will emphasize here
is not often taken advantage of.
The Cotwin Control or Discordant-Twin-Pairs Design
Logic of the Cotwin Control Design
Twin studies have long been a staple within the field of behavioral genetics. There are
hundreds, perhaps thousands of twin studies of behavioral and social phenotypes . In most cases, these studies have sought to
estimate heritability by comparing the phenotypic similarity of monozygotic (MZ) twins,
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
who are genetically identical, with that of dizygotic (DZ) twins, who are no more genetically
similar than ordinary siblings. Less widely recognized perhaps is the utility of twin studies
to explore the environmental basis of individual differences in behavior . Specifically, twins discordant for exposure approximate the alternative outcomes
presumed under the counterfactual model. The basic logic of the approach can be illustrated
by one of the earliest applications of the so-called cotwin control or discordant-twin design:
Does smoking increase mortality?
The eminent statistician, R.A. Fisher, was skeptical that the association of smoking with
lung cancer reflected a causal effect of the former on the latter: “that cigarette-smoking and
lung cancer, though not mutually causative, are both influenced by a common cause, in this
case the individual genotype” . For Fisher, genetic confounding rather
than true causation might be the basis of the association of smoking with lung cancer. In a
subsequent letter to Nature, Fisher provided what he thought to be support for his
genetic hypothesis: “that the smoking habits of monozygotic, or one-egg, twins were clearly
more alike than those of twins derived from two eggs” (p. 596). But heritability of exposure
does not preclude causality of effect. Fisher did not undertake the critical follow-up to his
observation that smoking exposure was heritable. Namely, among twins who are discordant
for smoking, is the smoking member of the pair more likely to suffer lung cancer and early
mortality than the nonsmoking member? Subsequent research on MZ and DZ twin pairs
discordant for smoking has adequately answered this question. Within discordant pairs, the
smoking twin has significantly increased mortality relative to the nonsmoking twin
 . Findings from the discordant-twin
design led to the disconfirmation of Fisher’s genetic hypothesis by providing more powerful
support for a causal influence of smoking than is possible with standard epidemiological
It is helpful to analyze the logic of the cotwin control approach within the counterfactual
framework. Let
be the outcome when the ith twin is a smoker and
be the outcome
when he or she is not. Then the causal effect of smoking for the ith twin is given by
. Assume further that
is the outcome for the ith twin’s nonsmoking cotwin
(designated i′). Then the cotwin control design involves estimating δi by
is, the cotwin control design involves implicitly using the nonsmoking cotwin of a smoker to
estimate what the smoker would have looked like had he or she not smoked. Of course the
nonsmoking cotwin will not necessarily be a perfect match under this alternative outcomes
scenario. Nonetheless, discordant MZ twins, who have both a common genotype and a
common early rearing environment, are likely to be better matches than discordant DZ
twins, who have a common early rearing environment but share only 50% of their
segregating genetic alleles.
These expectations can be formalized within a biometric formulation. That is, the observed
phenotype (P) or outcome can be assumed to be a function of (a) additive genetic effects
(A), which are shared completely by MZ twins but are only 50% shared by DZ twins; (b)
shared early environmental effects (C; e.g., the effects of rearing social class), which are
shared completely by both MZ and DZ twins; and (c) non-shared environmental effects (E;
e.g., the effects of adult social class), which are not shared by either MZ or DZ twins.
Individual-level associations (e.g., as estimated from an individual-level regression of
outcome on exposure) reflect potential confounding of exposure and outcome by A, C, and E
effects. Associations within DZ twin pairs discordant for exposure (i.e., the exposure effect
estimated comparing the two members of discordant DZ pairs), control for C effects and
partially for A effects. Associations within MZ twin pairs discordant for exposure control for
both C and A effects. Neither within-pair comparison controls for confounding due to E
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
factors, an important point to which we return below. Regardless, if exposure is truly a cause
of outcome, then we expect exposure to be associated with outcome at the individual level,
as well as within DZ twin pairs discordant for exposure and within MZ twin pairs discordant
for exposure.
Figure 1 illustrates three possible patterns of individual-level versus within-pair effects . In Scenario A, the effect of exposure is the same at the individual level
and within DZ and MZ pairs discordant on exposure. This is the pattern we would expect if
exposure were causal and there was no confounding by either A or C. In Scenario B, the
within-pair effect is reduced in DZ twins relative to the individual-level effect and is
completely absent in MZ twins. This pattern suggests that the association of exposure and
outcome is due entirely to confounding by A and C. In this case, failure to observe an effect
within discordant MZ twin pairs is inconsistent with causality. In Scenario C, the exposure
effect is reduced but not eliminated within both DZ and MZ pairs discordant on exposure
relative to the individual-level effect. This pattern suggests that the association of exposure
to outcome is due partially to confounding, whereas the existence of an exposure effect
within discordant MZ pairs is consistent with at least a partial causal effect. Clearly the
power of the discordant-twin design stems largely from the within-MZ pair analysis,
because MZ comparisons afford the greatest control for confounding. Nonetheless, the
biometric formulation also helps to identify one of the limitations of the discordant-twin
approach. That is, only exposures on which MZ twins differ can be explored (i.e., exposures
mediated by the non-shared environment), so that this design cannot be of help in exploring
the impact of shared environmental exposures such as maternal depression and rearing
social class—at least in the usual case when the MZ twins have been reared together.
Discordant-Twin Studies in Gerontology
The extent to which the discordant-twin design will be of utility in gerontology will depend
on the degree to which exposure to putative aging risk factors is heritable, just as Fisher
 reasoned for smoking more the 50 years ago. That is, the power of the discordanttwin design is that it controls for potential genetic (and also shared environmental)
confounding, and without heritability there can be no genetic confounding. In fact, twin
studies have shown that a wide range of factors of relevance to aging are heritable. These
include smoking , heavy alcohol consumption , achieved social class , social engagement , and physical activity . The heritability
of these lifestyle factors may reflect selection effects, whereby individuals adopt lifestyles
that complement and reinforce heritable characteristics . We
know, for example, that genetic factors contribute to individual differences in personality
 . We know further that individuals with outgoing and cheerful
dispositions are more likely to have satisfying relations and a socially engaged lifestyle than
are individuals who are withdrawn or sullen, in part because cheerful individuals strive to
construct experiences that reinforce their sunny dispositions .
Thus, heritable influences on personality become translated as heritable influences on social
engagement, raising the possibility that the association of social engagement with, for
example, depression risk reflects genetic selection rather than true causation. But as with
smoking exposure, the mere demonstration of heritability is not sufficient to establish
genetic selection. If the association of social engagement with outcome is due entirely to
genetic selection, then differences within genetically identical MZ twin pairs discordant for
engagement should be unrelated to differences in outcome.
Table 1 summarizes findings from discordant-twin studies in the psychological aging field
in terms of the association between exposure and outcome at the individual level (i.e.,
without regard to twin-pair status) and the various within-pair estimates reported in each
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
study. Although the number of studies is limited, a range of exposures and outcomes has
been investigated. Several tentative conclusions seem appropriate. First, for most outcomes,
findings from individual-level analyses are confirmed by showing exposure effects within
discordant twin pairs, even if the magnitudes of the within-pair effects are smaller than those
at the individual level. The one notable exception is adult social class, for which Osler,
McGue, and Christensen reported no association with health and cognitive outcomes
in MZ twin pairs discordant for adult social class. Second, in most cases, the discordanttwin-pair analysis did not distinguish MZ from DZ twins, making it difficult to interpret the
significance of the results (cf. Fig. 1). Failure to report findings by zygosity presumably
owes to the modest size of most of the discordant twin samples. Nonetheless, a pooled MZ
and DZ analysis cannot totally rule out the possibility of genetic confounding since an
association within discordant DZ pairs, who are not matched for genotype, is expected even
under genetic selection. Finally, in the few studies that analyzed discordant MZ twins,
findings generally confirm those found at the individual level. Thus, Carlson, Andersson,
Lichtenstein, Michaelsson, and Ahlbom reported that among MZ twins discordant for
physical activity, the less active twin had higher mortality over a 29-year period; Kujala,
Kaprio, and Koskenvuo reported that smoking and heavy alcohol use were associated
with mortality within MZ twin pairs discordant on exposure; and McGue and Christensen
 reported that in MZ twin pairs discordant for social engagement, the least social twin
had lower physical and cognitive functioning and higher rates of depression
symptomatology.
It is important to recognize that the comparison of discordant MZ twins does not guarantee
certain causal inference even if it is more powerful than individual-level analyses. The
generalizability of findings from research on twins will always be questioned, even though
research has repeatedly shown that twins are generally unremarkable with respect to their
personalities , cognitive abilities , risk for mental disorders , and adult mortality trajectories . In addition, the standard discordant-twin design cannot rule out reverse causation
even if it addresses issues surrounding confounding. That is, if outcome differences lead to
differences in exposure (e.g., as might occur when the outcome is cognitive ability and
exposure is intellectual engagement), then we would still expect to observe within-pair
associations. Ruling out reverse causation requires longitudinal designs.
A further significant limitation concerns the asymmetrical nature of causal evidence from a
discordant-twin study. That is, although failure to observe a within-pair association would
seem to disconfirm the existence of a causal effect (although even this can be debated; see
discussion on reliability below), the observation of an association between exposure and
outcome within discordant pairs cannot establish causality. A recent example from the
substance abuse field can help to illustrate the issue. Lynskey et al. reported that
among MZ twins discordant for early onset cannabis abuse, the early-using twin was more
likely to be a drug abuser or an alcoholic as an adult than the late-using or nonusing twin.
These findings are consistent with, but do not establish, a causal effect of early cannabis use
on adult substance abuse. This is because the factors that led to the twins being discordant in
their cannabis use might also be the factors that account for their differences in outcome.
This may be the case with early cannabis use. In a separate study, Vink, Nawijn, Boomsma,
and Willemsen reported that MZ twin discordance in cannabis exposure was
associated with preexisting personality indicators of risk. That is, the early-using twin was
more likely to be high in sensation seeking and neuroticism than his or her nonearly-using
but genetically identical cotwin. Consequently, the association of early cannabis use with
adult outcomes, rather than being causal, may arise because the personality factors that
increase risk of early use also increase risk of adult substance abuse.
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Thus the discordant-twin design does not obviate the need to consider the role of
confounding factors even though it provides a basis for powerful tests of causality in
observational settings. This is because MZ twins do not provide a perfect counterfactual
pair. That is, even if they are matched on genotype and early rearing environment, the two
members of an MZ twin pair are not matched on the nonshared experiences that make them
psychologically unique. Consequently, a within-MZ pairs association of exposure with
outcome may reflect true causality or, alternatively, the effect of the nonshared experiences
that led to differences in exposure. Unfortunately, none of the studies included in Table 1
systematically explored the factors associated with twin discordance in exposure.
Finally, in some cases the discordant-twin design may fail to observe a within-pair
association even when there is a causal influence of exposure on outcome and the sample is
large enough to provide adequate power. Specifically, measurement error in the exposure
variable is expected to attenuate within-pair associations to a greater degree than individuallevel associations because of the compounding of error inherent in taking a difference score
 . Under classical test score theory, if σ is the common
estimate of the proportion of measurement error in the exposure variable and ρ is the twin
correlation, then the regression coefficient of outcome on exposure is attenuated by σ at the
individual level but by σ/(1−ρ) at the within-pair level .
Thus, for example, if measurement error accounted for 10% in an exposure variable, then
the individual-level estimate would be attenuated by 10%, but the within-pair estimate
would be attenuated by 33% when the twin correlation on exposure is .7 and 20% when the
twin correlation is .5. Consequently, we expect attenuation of within-pair estimates due to
the compounding of measurement error. Moreover, since MZ twin correlations are typically
higher than DZ twin correlations, we expect the within-pair attenuation to be greater for MZ
than DZ pairs.
An Example of the Discordant-Twin Design: Moderate Drinking and Late-
Life Cognitive Function
Background
Although the harmful effects of heavy and abusive drinking on health and lifespan have
been unambiguously documented, less certain are the potential health benefits of moderate
levels of alcohol consumption . There have been
more than 100 epidemiological investigations of the association of moderate alcohol
consumption with disease morbidity and total mortality, with a particular focus on middleage and elderly populations . A recent meta-analysis showed that
although risk of several diseases (e.g., esophageal cancer, liver cirrhosis, and chronic
pancreatitis) increased monotonically with increasing level of alcohol consumption, risk of
cardiovascular disease was lower among light and moderate drinkers than among heavy
drinkers or those who were abstinent .
Less clear is whether the presumed benefits of moderate drinking extend to
noncardiovascular outcomes and especially cognitive outcomes. Although there is evidence
that moderate levels of alcohol consumption may be protective against cognitive decline and
the onset of dementia , other studies
have failed to find an association between moderate alcohol consumption and cognitive
functioning or change in cognitive functioning . Shaper, Wannamethee,
and Walker hypothesized that the apparent benefits of moderate drinking might be a
consequence of inclusion in the alcohol abstinent group individuals who had quit drinking
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
due to the onset of illness or cognitive impairment. Fillmore, Kerr, Stockwell, Chikritzhs,
and Bostrom recently published a meta-analysis showing that when individuals who
reduced their drinking due to ill health are eliminated from the sample, the association of
moderate drinking with health disappears. Fillmore’s methodology and interpretations are
controversial and have been criticized , so the beneficial effects
of moderate drinking remain uncertain.
Longitudinal Study of Aging Danish Twins (LSADT)
LSADT began in 1995 with an assessment of surviving twins from same-sex twin pairs born
in Denmark before 1920 and continued with successive assessments of the original cohort,
as well as subsequent birth cohorts who had aged into the catchment age range every 2 years
through 2005 . A total of over
4,700 individuals and over 1,100 intact twin pairs age 70 years and older have participated
in at least one wave of the six-wave longitudinal study. As part of their intake interview
assessment, participants reported whether they drank alcohol and, if they did, how many
drinks they had in a typical week. Responses to these questions were used to classify
participants as either current light-to-moderate drinkers or nondrin-kers (the questions did
not allow us to differentiate heavy drinkers from light-to-moderate drinkers). The sample
used in the present analysis consisted of 412 MZ (23 concordant nondrinkers, 309
concordant drinkers, and 80 discordant) and 597 same-sex DZ (29 concordant nondrinkers,
407 concordant drinkers, and 161 discordant) pairs. Rate of nondrinking did not differ
significantly in MZ or DZ pairs (15.3% vs. 17.1%), but MZ pairs were more similar in their
drinking status (tetrachoric correlation, rt = .46) than DZ pairs (rt = .20), indicating that
drinking status is heritable and raising the possibility that any association of drinking with
outcome may be due to genetic confounding. Cognitive functioning was assessed with the
Mini Mental State Examination and with a
composite of five brief cognitive tests selected to be sensitive to age-related changes
 . To facilitate comparisons, researchers scaled both the
cognitive composite and the MMSE to a T score metric (mean of 50 and standard deviation
of 10). At the individual level, alcohol use was associated with a moderate but highly
significant mean increase in performance on both the cognitive composite (mean T score
difference of 3.2 ± 0.5, p < .0001) and the MMSE and Gurrin, Carlin, Sterne, Dite, and Hopper provide a
mixed-level regression framework for investigating within-pair and between-pair
relationships of exposure with outcome. Let yij be the observed outcome for the jth twin (j =
1,2) in the ith twin pair (i = 1,2 …, N) and let xij be the corresponding exposure index for
this individual. Then the overall, or individual-level, regression of outcome on exposure is
given by the regression model
where β1 is the individual-level effect of exposure (here alcohol consumption) on outcome
(cognitive functioning), β0 is the intercept term, and xij is the residual (here, correlated
across the two members of a twin pair). The overall regression effect can be further
represented in terms of a within-pair (βw) and a between-pair (βB) effect using the regression
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where x̄i: is the mean exposure index for the ith twin pair. The within-pair regression
coefficient provides a direct estimate of the effect of alcohol consumption within discordanttwin pairs.
We fit the models given in Equations 1 and 2 to the multiple waves of LSADT cognitive
data using SAS Proc Mixed . Because twins
within a pair are matched for age and gender, these demographic factors were treated as
covariates in the between-pair analyses. The major results of these analyses are summarized
in Figure 2. For both the cognitive composite and MMSE, moderate drinkers score about
one third of a standard deviation higher on both cognitive measures (i.e., the individual-level
effect). This drinking effect remained statistically significant within DZ pairs discordant for
drinking but not within MZ discordant pairs. That is, within the 80 pairs of MZ twins who
were discordant for drinking, the moderate-drinking twin scored on average 0.7 (±0.9) T
score units higher on the cognitive composite and 1.3 (±1.0) points higher on the MMSE
than his or her nondrinking cotwin, both nonsignificant differences.
Although the pattern of results is consistent with Scenario B in Figure 1, suggesting that
genetic confounding rather than true causation accounts for the association of moderate
drinking and cognitive functioning, it is important to evaluate these findings in light of the
limitations discussed above. Given that we do not observe an association within MZ pairs,
neither reverse causation (i.e., cognitive ability causing drinking) nor the contribution of
unmeasured confounders underlying differences in exposure (e.g., nondrinkers are more
likely than drinkers to be in poor health) seem to provide alternative explanations for our
findings. Error in measuring alcohol exposure, however, could produce the pattern of results
summarized in Figure 2. That is, since the drinking status of MZ twins is more highly
correlated than the drinking status of DZ twins, measurement error could lead to greater
attenuation of estimates within MZ than within DZ pairs. Unfortunately, we do not have an
independent estimate of measurement error in our exposure index and so we cannot entirely
rule out this possibility.
Developing effective prevention and intervention strategies will require that we understand
the origins of what we are trying to prevent. Although experimental designs are rightly
considered the most powerful approach for drawing causal inferences, they are not without
limitations. Observational approaches have much to offer. The counterfactual or alternative
outcomes model proposed by Rubin and colleagues provides a unified
framework for evaluating causal inference and helps in identifying the relative strengths and
weaknesses of both observational and experimental approaches. Experimental approaches
may not always be feasible, and even when they are feasible, they may lead to biased
estimation if only nonrepresentative subsamples of individuals are willing to submit to
experimental assignment. The utility of observational approaches to causal inference will
depend on the degree to which they lead to accurate estimation of the unobserved
counterfactual: What would the outcomes have been among exposed individuals had they
not been exposed? The essence to answering this question will depend on how observational
researchers deal with confounding. Observational approaches based on statistically adjusting
for confounders a posteriori although popular are often based on untested assumptions or fail
to adequately consider the full range of confounders. Approaches that attempt to control for
confounders through the use of observational research designs that approximate true
McGue et al.
Perspect Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 May 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
experiments have great potential in gerontology, even if they have been only infrequently
employed and their limitations have not always been noted.
We focused on one natural experiment that might be of utility to psychological researchers:
the discordant-twin design. MZ twin pairs who are discordant for exposure approximate,
although clearly do not mirror, a true experiment. If exposure is causal, we expect that
exposed members within MZ discordant pairs will show higher rates of the outcome than
their unexposed cotwins. This is what was observed in the classic case of smoking and
mortality. Unfortunately, there have been only a limited number of discordant-twin studies
in gerontology. Findings from these studies suggest that social, intellectual, and physical
activity may be protective against a range of impairments in late life. To take full advantage
of the discordant-twin design, researchers will need large samples of twins to ensure
observation of a sufficient number of discordant pairs and differential analysis of discordant
MZ and DZ pairs to fully evaluate the genetic confounding alternative. Twin researchers
need also be aware of the limitations of the discordant-twin design: (a) it does not
necessarily rule out the possibility of reverse causation, (b) the factors that led to differences
in exposure may account for differences in outcome, and (c) measurement error can result in
differential attenuation of effect estimates by zygosity in within-pair analyses.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the U.S. National Institute on Aging (P01-AG08761), National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (R01 AA009367), and the Danish National Research Foundation.