The COVID-19 epidemic
Thirumalaisamy P. Velavan1,2,3* and Christian G. Meyer1,2,3*
1 Institute of Tropical Medicine, Universit€atsklinikum T€ubingen, Germany
2 Vietnamese German Center for Medical Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
3 Faculty of Medicine, Duy Tan University, Da Nang, Vietnam
keywords COVID-19, Epidemic, SARS-CoV2, Wuhan, 2019-nCoV
The current outbreak of the novel coronavirus SARS-
CoV-2 , epi-centred in Hubei Province of the People’s
Republic of China, has spread to many other countries.
On 30. January 2020, the WHO Emergency Committee
declared a global health emergency based on growing
case notiﬁcation rates at Chinese and international locations. The case detection rate is changing daily and can
be tracked in almost real time on the website provided by
Johns Hopkins University and other forums. As of
midst of February 2020, China bears the large burden of
morbidity and mortality, whereas the incidence in other
Asian countries, in Europe and North America remains
low so far.
Coronaviruses are enveloped, positive single-stranded
large RNA viruses that infect humans, but also a wide
range of animals. Coronaviruses were ﬁrst described in
1966 by Tyrell and Bynoe, who cultivated the viruses
from patients with common colds . Based on their
morphology as spherical virions with a core shell and surface projections resembling a solar corona, they were termed coronaviruses (Latin: corona = crown). Four
subfamilies, namely alpha-, beta-, gamma- and deltacoronaviruses exist. While alpha- and beta-coronaviruses
apparently originate from mammals, in particular from
bats, gamma- and delta-viruses originate from pigs and
birds. The genome size varies between 26 kb and 32 kb.
Among the seven subtypes of coronaviruses that can
infect humans, the beta-coronaviruses may cause severe
disease and fatalities, whereas alpha-coronaviruses cause
asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic infections. SARS-
CoV-2 belongs to the B lineage of the beta-coronaviruses
and is closely related to the SARS-CoV virus . The
major four structural genes encode the nucleocapsid protein (N), the spike protein (S), a small membrane protein
(SM) and the membrane glycoprotein (M) with an additional membrane glycoprotein (HE) occurring in the
HCoV-OC43 and HKU1 beta-coronaviruses .
SARS-CoV-2 is 96% identical at the whole-genome level
to a bat coronavirus .
SARS-CoV-2 apparently succeeded in making its transition from animals to humans on the Huanan seafood
market in Wuhan, China. However, endeavours to identify potential intermediate hosts seem to have been
neglected in Wuhan and the exact route of transmission
urgently needs to be clariﬁed.
The initial clinical sign of the SARS-CoV-2-related disease COVID-19 which allowed case detection was pneumonia. More recent reports also describe gastrointestinal
symptoms and asymptomatic infections, especially among
young children . Observations so far suggest a mean
incubation period of ﬁve days and a median incubation
period of 3 days (range: 0–24 days) . The proportion of
individuals infected by SARS-CoV-2 who remain asymptomatic throughout the course of infection has not yet been
deﬁnitely assessed. In symptomatic patients, the clinical
manifestations of the disease usually start after less than a
week, consisting of fever, cough, nasal congestion, fatigue
and other signs of upper respiratory tract infections. The
infection can progress to severe disease with dyspnoea and
severe chest symptoms corresponding to pneumonia in
approximately 75% of patients, as seen by computed
tomography on admission . Pneumonia mostly occurs in
the second or third week of a symptomatic infection.
Prominent signs of viral pneumonia include decreased oxygen saturation, blood gas deviations, changes visible
through chest X-rays and other imaging techniques, with
ground glass abnormalities, patchy consolidation, alveolar
*Both authors contributed equally. TPV is a member of the Pan
African Network for Rapid Research, Response, and Preparedness for Infectious Diseases Epidemics consortium (PANDORA-
ID-NET; RIA2016E-1609).
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Tropical Medicine and International Health
doi:10.1111/tmi.13383
volume 25 no 3 pp 278–280 march 2020
exudates and interlobular involvement, eventually indicating deterioration. Lymphopenia appears to be common,
and inﬂammatory markers (C-reactive protein and proin-
ﬂammatory cytokines) are elevated.
Recent investigations of 425 conﬁrmed cases demonstrate that the current epidemic may double in the number of affected individuals every seven days and that each
patient spreads infection to 2.2 other individuals on average (R0) . Estimates from the SARS-CoV outbreak in
2003 reported an R0 of 3 . A recent data-driven analysis from the early phase of the outbreak estimates a mean
R0 range from 2.2 to 3.58 .
Dense communities are at particular risk and the most
vulnerable region certainly is Africa, due to dense trafﬁc
between China and Africa. Very few African countries
have sufﬁcient and appropriate diagnostic capacities and
obvious challenges exist to handle such outbreaks.
Indeed, the virus might soon affect Africa. WHO has
identiﬁed 13 top-priority countries (Algeria, Angola,
Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Nigeria, South
Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia) which either maintain direct links to China or a high volume of travel to
Recent studies indicate that patients ≥60 years of age
are at higher risk than children who might be less likely
to become infected or, if so, may show milder symptoms
or even asymptomatic infection . As of 13. February
2020, the case fatality rate of COVID-19 infections has
been approximately 2.2% ; it was 9.6% (774/8096) in the
SARS-CoV epidemic and 34.4% (858/2494) in the
MERS-CoV outbreak since 2012 .
Like other viruses, SARS-CoV-2 infects lung alveolar
epithelial cells using receptor-mediated endocytosis via
the angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) as an
entry receptor . Artiﬁcial intelligence predicts that
drugs associated with AP2-associated protein kinase 1
(AAK1) disrupting these proteins may inhibit viral entry
into the target cells . Baricitinib, used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, is an AAK1 and Janus
kinase inhibitor and suggested for controlling viral
replication . Moreover, one in vitro and a clinical
study indicate that remdesivir, an adenosine analogue
that acts as a viral protein inhibitor, has improved the
condition in one patient . Chloroquine, by
increasing the endosomal pH required for virus-cell
fusion, has the potential of blocking viral infection 
and was shown to affect activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which is involved in
replication of HCoV-229E . A combination of the
antiretroviral drugs lopinavir and ritonavir signiﬁcantly
improved the clinical condition of SARS-CoV patients
 and might be an option in COVID-19 infections.
Further possibilities include leronlimab, a humanised
monoclonal antibody (CCR5 antagonist), and galidesivir, a nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor, both of
which have shown survival beneﬁts in several deadly
virus infections and are being considered as potential
treatment candidates . Repurposing these available
drugs for immediate use in treatment in SARS-CoV-2
infections could improve the currently available clinical
management. Clinical trials presently registered at ClinicalTrials.gov focus on the efﬁcacy of remdesivir,
immunoglobulins, arbidol hydrochloride combined with
interferon atomisation, ASC09F+Oseltamivir, ritonavir
plus oseltamivir, lopinavir plus ritonavir, mesenchymal
stem cell treatment, darunavir plus cobicistat, hydroxychloroquine, methylprednisolone and washed microbiota
transplantation .
Given the fragile health systems in most sub-Saharan
African countries, new and re-emerging disease outbreaks such as the current COVID-19 epidemic can
potentially paralyse health systems at the expense of
primary healthcare requirements. The impact of the
Ebola epidemic on the economy and healthcare structures is still felt ﬁve years later in those countries
which were affected. Effective outbreak responses and
preparedness during emergencies of such magnitude are
challenging across African and other lower-middle-income countries. Such situations can partly only be mitigated by supporting existing regional and sub-Saharan
African health structures.