Edinburgh Research Explorer
The PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge
Citation for published version:
Everingham, M, van Gool, L, Williams, CKI, Winn, J & Zisserman, A 2010, 'The PASCAL Visual Object
Classes (VOC) Challenge', International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303-338.
 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Early version, also known as pre-print
 
International Journal of Computer Vision
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
The PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge
Mark Everingham · Luc Van Gool · Christopher K. I. Williams ·
John Winn · Andrew Zisserman
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract The PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) challenge is a benchmark in visual object category recognition
and detection, providing the vision and machine learning
communities with a standard dataset of images and annotation, and standard evaluation procedures. Organised annually from 2005 to present, the challenge and its associated
dataset has become accepted as the benchmark for object
detection.
This paper describes the dataset and evaluation procedure. We review the state-of-the-art in evaluated methods for
both classiﬁcation and detection, analyse whether the methods are statistically different, what they are learning from the
images (e.g. the object or its context), and what the methods ﬁnd easy or confuse. The paper concludes with lessons
learnt in the three year history of the challenge, and proposes
directions for future improvement and extension.
Keywords Database · Benchmark · Object recognition ·
Object detection
M. Everingham
University of Leeds, UK,
E-mail: 
L. Van Gool
KU Leuven, Belgium
C.K.I. Williams
University of Edinburgh, UK
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
A. Zisserman
University of Oxford, UK
1 Introduction
The PASCAL1 Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge consists of two components: (i) a publicly available dataset
of images and annotation, together with standardised evaluation software; and (ii) an annual competition and workshop. The VOC2007 dataset consists of annotated consumer photographs collected from the ﬂickr2 photo-sharing
web-site. A new dataset with ground truth annotation has
been released each year since 2006. There are two principal challenges: classiﬁcation – “does the image contain
any instances of a particular object class?” (where the object classes include cars, people, dogs, etc), and detection
– “where are the instances of a particular object class in
the image (if any)?”. In addition, there are two subsidiary
challenges (“tasters”) on pixel-level segmentation – assign
each pixel a class label, and “person layout” – localise the
head, hands and feet of people in the image. The challenges
are issued with deadlines each year, and a workshop held
to compare and discuss that year’s results and methods. The
datasets and associated annotation and software are subsequently released and available for use at any time.
The objectives of the VOC challenge are twofold: ﬁrst
to provide challenging images and high quality annotation,
together with a standard evaluation methodology – a “plug
and play” training and testing harness so that performance
of algorithms can be compared (the dataset component); and
second to measure the state of the art each year (the competition component).
The purpose of this paper is to describe the challenge:
what it is, and the reasons for the way it is. We also describe
the methods, results and evaluation of the challenge, and so
1 PASCAL stands for pattern analysis, statistical modelling and computational learning. It is an EU Network of Excellence funded under
the IST Programme of the European Union.
2 
Everingham, M., Gool, L., Williams, C. K. I., Winn, J., & Zisserman, A. . The PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 88(2), 303-338, doi: 10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4
in that respect are describing the state-of-the-art in object
recognition (at least as measured for these challenges and by
those who entered). We focus mainly on the 2007 challenge,
as this is the most recent, but also discuss signiﬁcant changes
since earlier challenges and why these were made.
1.1 Relation to other Datasets
Challenge datasets are important in many areas of research
in order to set goals for methods, and to allow comparison of
their performance. Similar datasets and evaluation methodologies are sprouting in other areas of computer vision and
machine learning, e.g. the Middlebury datasets for stereo,
MRF optimisation, and optical ﬂow comparison .
In addition to organised challenges, there are several
datasets contributed by the vision community which are related to that collected for the VOC challenges.
The “Caltech 101” dataset
 contains
images of 101 categories of object, and is relatively widely
used within the community for evaluating object recognition. Each image contains only a single object. A principal
aim of the Caltech datasets is to evaluate multi-category object recognition, as a function of the (relatively small) number of training images. This is complementary to the aims
of the VOC challenge, which measures performance on a
smaller number of classes and without such constraints on
the amount of training data available.
A common criticism of this dataset, addressed by the
VOC challenge, is that the images are largely without clutter,
variation in pose is limited, and the images have been manually aligned to reduce the variability in appearance. These
factors make the dataset less applicable to “real world” evaluation than the images provided for the VOC challenge.
The “Caltech 256” dataset
 corrected
some of the deﬁciencies of Caltech 101 – there is more variability in size and localisation, and obvious artifacts have
been removed. The number of classes is increased (from 101
to 256) and the aim is still to investigate multi-category object recognition with a limited number of training images.
For the most part there is only a single object per image – as
is required to support the 1-of-m evaluation adopted (“which
one of m classes does this image contain?”).
The “LabelMe” dataset
 at MIT is
most similar to the VOC challenge dataset in that it contains more-or-less general photographs containing multiple
objects. LabelMe has been ground-breaking in providing
a web-based annotation interface, encouraging casual and
professional users alike to contribute and share annotation.
Many object categories are labelled, with annotation consisting of a bounding polygon and category, with some objects additionally being labelled with pose and object parts.
For the most part the dataset is incompletely labelled – volunteers are free to choose which objects to annotate, and
which to omit. This means that, while a very valuable resource for training images, the dataset is unsuitable for testing in the manner of the VOC challenge since precision and
recall cannot accurately be estimated. Recently the LabelMe
organisers have proposed subsets of the database to use for
training and testing, which are completely annotated with a
set of seven object (person, car) and “stuff” (building, sky,
etc.) classes. However, no evaluation protocol is speciﬁed.
The “TREC Video Retrieval Evaluation” ) is also similar to the VOC challenge in
that there is a new dataset and competition each year, though
the dataset is only available to participants and is not publicly distributed. TRECVID includes several tasks, but the
one most related to VOC is termed “high-level feature extraction”, and involves returning a ranked list of video shots
for speciﬁed “features”. For the 2008 competition these features include scene categories (such as classroom, cityscape
or harbour), object categories (such as dog, aeroplane ﬂying or telephone) and actions/events (such as a demonstration/protest). Annotation is not provided by the organisers,
but some is usually distributed amongst the participants. The
submissions are scored by their Average Precision (AP). The
evaluation of the ranked lists is carried out by the organisers using a mixture of ground truth labelling and “inferred
ground truth” obtained from high
ranked results returned by the participants’ methods.
The Lotus Hill dataset is a large, recently
produced dataset, a small part of which is made freely available to researchers. It contains 8 data subsets with a range of
annotation. Particularly we highlight (a) annotations providing a hierarchical decomposition of individual objects e.g.
vehicles (9 classes, 209 images4), other man-made objects
(75 classes, 750 images) and animals (40 classes, 400 images); and (b) segmentation labelling of scenes to a pixel
level (444 images). As this dataset has only recently been
released there has not yet been a lot of work reported on it.
The datasets look to have a useful level of annotation (especially with regard to hierarchical decompositions which
have not been attempted elsewhere), but are somewhat limited by the number of images that are freely available.
3 
4 The number of images quoted is the number that are freely available.
1.2 Paper layout
This paper is organised as follows: we start with a summary
of the four challenges in Sect. 2, then describe in more detail in Sect. 3 the datasets – their method of collection; the
classes included and the motivation for including them; and
their annotation and statistics. Sect. 4 describes the evaluation procedure and why this procedure was chosen. Sect. 5
overviews the main methods used in the 2007 challenge
for classiﬁcation and detection, and Sect. 6 reports and discusses the results. This discussion includes an analysis of
the statistical signiﬁcance of the performances of the different methods, and also of which object classes and images
the methods ﬁnd easy or difﬁcult. We conclude with a discussion of the merits, and otherwise, of the VOC challenge
and possible options for the future.
2 Challenge Tasks
This section gives an overview of the two principal challenge tasks on classiﬁcation and detection, and on the two
subsidiary tasks (“tasters”) on pixel-level segmentation, and
“person layout”.
2.1 Classiﬁcation
For each of twenty object classes, predict the presence/absence of at least one object of that class in a test
image. Participants are required to provide a real-valued
conﬁdence of the object’s presence for each test image so
that a precision/recall curve can be drawn. Participants may
choose to tackle all, or any subset of object classes, for example “cars only” or “motorbikes and cars”.
Two competitions are deﬁned according to the choice
of training data: (1) taken from the VOC training/validation
data provided, or (2) from any source excluding the VOC
test data. In the ﬁrst competition, any annotation provided
in the VOC training/validation data may be used for training, for example bounding boxes or particular views e.g.
“frontal” or “left”. Participants are not permitted to perform
additional manual annotation of either training or test data.
In the second competition, any source of training data may
be used except the provided test images. The second competition is aimed at researchers who have pre-built systems
trained on other data, and is a measure of the state-of-the-art.
2.2 Detection
For each of the twenty classes, predict the bounding boxes
of each object of that class in a test image (if any), with
associated real-valued conﬁdence. Participants may choose
to tackle all, or any subset of object classes. Two competitions are deﬁned in a similar manner to the classiﬁcation
challenge.
2.3 Segmentation Taster
For each test image, predict the object class of each pixel,
or “background” if the object does not belong to one of the
twenty speciﬁed classes. Unlike the classiﬁcation and detection challenges there is only one competition, where training
data is restricted to that provided by the challenge.
2.4 Person Layout Taster
For each “person” object in a test image (if any), detect the
person, predicting the bounding box of the person, the presence/absence of parts (head/hands/feet), and the bounding
boxes of those parts. Each person detection should be output with an associated real-valued conﬁdence. Two competitions are deﬁned in a similar manner to the classiﬁcation
challenge.
3 Datasets
The goal of the VOC challenge is to investigate the performance of recognition methods on a wide spectrum of natural images. To this end, it is required that the VOC datasets
contain signiﬁcant variability in terms of object size, orientation, pose, illumination, position and occlusion. It is also
important that the datasets do not exhibit systematic bias,
for example, favouring images with centred objects or good
illumination. Similarly, to ensure accurate training and evaluation, it is necessary for the image annotations to be consistent, accurate and exhaustive for the speciﬁed classes.
This section describes the processes used for collecting and
annotating the VOC2007 datasets, which were designed to
achieve these aims.
3.1 Image Collection Procedure
For the 2007 challenge, all images were collected from the
ﬂickr photo-sharing web-site. The use of personal photos
which were not taken by, or selected by, vision/machine
learning researchers results in a very “unbiased” dataset, in
the sense that the photos are not taken with a particular purpose in mind i.e. object recognition research. Qualitatively
the images contain a very wide range of viewing conditions
(pose, lighting, etc.) and images where there is little bias toward images being “of” a particular object, e.g. there are images of motorcycles in a street scene, rather than solely im-
dining table
potted plant
TV/monitor
Fig. 1 Example images from the VOC2007 dataset. For each of the 20 classes annotated, two examples are shown. Bounding boxes indicate all
instances of the corresponding class in the image which are marked as “non-difﬁcult” (see Sect. 3.3) – bounding boxes for the other classes are
available in the annotation but not shown. Note the wide range of pose, scale, clutter, occlusion and imaging conditions.
ages where a motorcycle is the focus of the picture. The annotation guidelines provided
guidance to annotators on which images to annotate – essentially everything which could be annotated with conﬁdence. The use of a single source of “consumer” images addressed problems encountered in previous challenges, such
as in VOC2006 where images from the Microsoft Research
Cambridge database were included.
The MSR Cambridge images were taken with the purpose
of capturing particular object classes, so that the object instances tend to be large, well-illuminated and central. The
use of an automated collection method also prevented any
selection bias being introduced by a researcher manually
performing image selection. The “person” category provides
a vivid example of how the adopted collection methodology
leads to high variability; in previous datasets “person” was
essentially synonymous with “pedestrian”, whereas in the
VOC dataset we have images of people engaged in a wide
range of activities such as walking, riding horses, sitting on
buses, etc. (see Fig. 1).
In total, 500,000 images were retrieved from ﬂickr. For
each of the 20 object classes to be annotated (see Fig. 1),
images were retrieved by querying ﬂickr with a number of
related keywords (Table 1). No other query criteria, e.g. date
of capture, photographer’s name, etc. were speciﬁed – we
return to this point below.
For a given query, ﬂickr is asked for 100,000 matching
images (ﬂickr organises search results as “pages” i.e. 100
pages of 1,000 matches). An image is chosen at random
from the returned set and downloaded along with the corresponding metadata. A new query is then selected at random,
and the process is repeated until sufﬁcient images have been
downloaded. Images were downloaded for each class in parallel using a python interface to the ﬂickr API, with no restriction on the number of images per class or query. Thanks
to ﬂickr’s fast servers, downloading the entire image set took
just a few hours on a single machine.
Table 1 lists the queries used for each of the classes,
produced by “free association” from the target classes. It
might appear that the use of keyword queries would bias
the images to pictures “of” an object, however the wide
range of keywords used reduces this likelihood; for example the query “living room” can be expected to return scenes
containing chairs, sofas, tables, etc. in context, or the query
“town centre” to return scenes containing cars, motorcycles,
pedestrians, etc. It is worth noting, however, that without
using any keyword queries the images retrieved randomly
from ﬂickr were, subjectively, found to be overwhelmingly
“party” scenes containing predominantly people. We return
to the problem of obtaining sufﬁcient examples of “minority” object classes in Sect. 7.1.
All exact duplicate and “near duplicate” images were removed from the downloaded image set, using the method
Table 1 Queries used to retrieve images from ﬂickr. Words in bold
show the “targeted” class. Note that the query terms are quite general
– including the class name, synonyms and scenes or situations where
the class is likely to occur.
– aeroplane, airplane, plane, biplane, monoplane, aviator, bomber,
hydroplane, airliner, aircraft, ﬁghter, airport, hangar, jet, boeing,
fuselage, wing, propellor, ﬂying
– bicycle, bike, cycle, cyclist, pedal, tandem, saddle, wheel, cycling,
ride, wheelie
– bird, birdie, birdwatching, nest, sea, aviary, birdcage, bird feeder,
bird table,
– boat ship, barge, ferry, canoe, boating, craft, liner, cruise, sailing,
rowing, watercraft, regatta, racing, marina, beach, water, canal,
river, stream, lake, yacht,
– bottle, cork, wine, beer, champagne, ketchup, squash, soda, coke,
lemonade, dinner, lunch, breakfast
– bus, omnibus, coach, shuttle, jitney, double-decker, motorbus,
school bus, depot, terminal, station, terminus, passenger, route
– car, automobile, cruiser, motorcar, vehicle, hatchback, saloon,
convertible, limousine, motor, race, trafﬁc, trip, rally, city, street,
road, lane, village, town, centre, shopping, downtown, suburban
– cat, feline, pussy, mew, kitten, tabby, tortoiseshell, ginger, stray
– chair, seat, rocker, rocking, deck, swivel, camp, chaise, ofﬁce, studio, armchair, recliner, sitting, lounge, living room, sitting room
– cow, beef, heifer, moo, dairy, milk, milking, farm
– dog, hound, bark, kennel, heel, bitch, canine, puppy, hunter, collar,
– horse. gallop, jump, buck, equine, foal, cavalry, saddle, canter,
buggy, mare, neigh, dressage, trial, racehorse, steeplechase, thoroughbred, cart, equestrian, paddock, stable, farrier
– motorbike, motorcycle, minibike, moped, dirt, pillion, biker,
trials, motorcycling, motorcyclist, engine, motocross, scramble,
sidecar, scooter, trail
– person, people, family, father, mother, brother, sister, aunt, uncle,
grandmother, grandma, grandfather, grandpa, grandson, granddaughter, niece, nephew, cousin
– sheep, ram, fold, ﬂeece, shear, baa, bleat, lamb, ewe, wool, ﬂock
– sofa, chesterﬁeld, settee, divan, couch, bolster
– table, dining, cafe, restaurant, kitchen, banquet, party, meal
– potted plant, pot plant, plant, patio, windowsill, window sill, yard,
greenhouse, glass house, basket, cutting, pot, cooking, grow
– train, express, locomotive, freight, commuter, platform, subway,
underground, steam, railway, railroad, rail, tube, underground,
track, carriage, coach, metro, sleeper, railcar, buffet, cabin, level
– tv, monitor, television, plasma, ﬂatscreen, ﬂat screen, lcd, crt,
watching, dvd, desktop, computer, computer monitor, PC, console,
of . Near duplicate images are those that
are perceptually similar, but differ in their levels of compression, or by small photometric distortions or occlusions
for example.
After de-duplication, random images from the set of
500,000 were presented to the annotators for annotation.
During the annotation event, 44,269 images were considered
for annotation, being either annotated or discarded as unsuitable for annotation e.g. containing no instances of the 20
object classes, according to the annotation guidelines , or being impossible to annotate correctly and completely with conﬁdence.
One small bias was discovered in the VOC2007 dataset
due to the image collection procedure – ﬂickr returns query
results ranked by “recency” such that if a given query is satisﬁed by many images, more recent images are returned ﬁrst.
Since the images were collected in January 2007, this led to
an above-average number of Christmas/winter images containing, for example, large numbers of Christmas trees. To
avoid such bias in VOC20085, images have been retrieved
using queries comprising a random date in addition to keywords.
3.2 Choice of Classes
Fig. 2 shows the 20 classes selected for annotation in the
VOC2007 dataset. As shown, the classes can be considered
in a taxonomy with four main branches – vehicles, animals,
household objects and people6. The ﬁgure also shows the
year of the challenge in which a particular class was included. In the original VOC2005 challenge , which used existing annotated datasets, four
classes were annotated (car, motorbike, bicycle and person).
This number was increased to 10 in VOC2006, and 20 in
Over successive challenges the set of classes has been
expanded in two ways: First, ﬁner-grain “sub-classes” have
been added e.g. “bus”. The choice of sub-classes has been
motivated by (i) increasing the “semantic” speciﬁcity of the
output required of systems, for example recognising different types of vehicle e.g. car/motorbike (which may not be
visually similar); (ii) increasing the difﬁculty of the discrimination task by inclusion of objects which might be considered visually similar e.g. “cat” vs. “dog”. Second, additional
branches of the notional taxonomy have been added e.g. “animals” (VOC2006) and “household objects” (VOC2007).
The motivations are twofold: (i) increasing the domain of
the challenge in terms of the semantic range of objects covered; (ii) encouraging research on object classes not widely
addressed because of visual properties which are challenging for current methods, e.g. animals which might be considered to lack highly distinctive parts (c.f. car wheels), and
chairs which are deﬁned functionally, rather than visually,
and also tend to be highly occluded in the dataset.
The choice of object classes, which can be considered
a sub-tree of a taxonomy deﬁned in terms of both semantic and visual similarity, also supports research in two areas
5 
6 These branches are also found in the Caltech 256 taxonomy as transportation, animal, household & everyday, and
human – though the Caltech 256 taxonomy has many other branches.
Aeroplane3
Motorbike1
Dining table3
TV/monitor3
Potted plant3
Fig. 2 VOC2007 Classes. Leaf nodes correspond to the 20 classes.
The year of inclusion of each class in the challenge is indicated by
superscripts: 20051, 20062, 20073. The classes can be considered in
a notional taxonomy, with successive challenges adding new branches
(increasing the domain) and leaves (increasing detail).
which show promise in solving the scaling of object recognition to many thousands of classes: (i) exploiting visual
properties common to classes e.g. vehicle wheels, for example in the form of “feature sharing” ;
(ii) exploiting external semantic information about the relations between object classes e.g. WordNet ,
for example by learning a hierarchy of classiﬁers . The availability of a class hierarchy
may also prove essential in future evaluation efforts if the
number of classes increases to the extent that there is implicit ambiguity in the classes, allowing individual objects to
be annotated at different levels of the hierarchy e.g. hatchback/car/vehicle. We return to this point in Sect. 7.3.
3.3 Annotated Attributes
In order to evaluate the classiﬁcation and detection challenges, the image annotation includes the following attributes for every object in the target set of object classes:
– class: one of: aeroplane, bird, bicycle, boat, bottle, bus,
car, cat, chair, cow, dining table, dog, horse, motorbike,
person, potted plant, sheep, sofa, train, tv/monitor.
– bounding box: an axis-aligned bounding box surrounding the extent of the object visible in the image.
The choice of an axis aligned bounding-box for the annotation is a compromise: for some object classes it ﬁts quite
well (e.g. to a horizontal bus or train) with only a small proportion of non-class pixels; however, for other classes it can
be a poor ﬁt either because they are not box shaped (e.g. a
person with their arms outstretched, a chair) or/and because
they are not axis-aligned (e.g. an aeroplane taking off). The
advantage though is that they are relatively quick to annotate. We return to this point when discussing pixel level annotation in Sect. 3.6.1.
In addition, since VOC2006, further annotations were
introduced which could be used during training but which
were not required for evaluation:
Fig. 3 Example of the “difﬁcult” annotation. Objects shown in red
have been marked difﬁcult, and are excluded from the evaluation. Note
that the judgement of difﬁculty is not solely by object size – the distant
car on the right of the image is included in the evaluation.
– viewpoint: one of: front, rear, left, right, unspeciﬁed.
This annotation supports methods which treat different
viewpoints differently during training, such as using separate detectors for each viewpoint.
– truncation: an object is said to be “truncated” when the
bounding box in the image does not correspond to the
full extent of the object. This may occur for two reasons:
(a) the object extends outside the image e.g. an image of
a person from the waist up; (b) the boundary of the object is occluded e.g. a person standing behind a wall. The
aim of including this annotation was to support recognition methods which require images of an entire object as
training data, for example assuming that the bounding
boxes of the objects can be aligned.
For the VOC2008 challenge, objects are additionally annotated as “occluded” if a high level of occlusion is present.
This overcomes a limitation of the VOC2007 dataset that
“clean” training examples without occlusion cannot automatically be identiﬁed from the available annotation.
– difﬁcult: labels objects which are particularly difﬁcult
to detect due to small size, illumination, image quality
or the need to use signiﬁcant contextual information. In
the challenge evaluation, such objects are discarded, although no penalty is incurred for detecting them. The
aim of this annotation is to maintain a reasonable level
of difﬁculty while not contaminating the evaluation with
many near-unrecognisable examples.
Fig. 3 shows an example of the “difﬁcult” annotation.
The criteria used to judge an object difﬁcult included conﬁdence in the class label e.g. is it certain that all the animals
in Fig. 3 are cows? (sometimes we see sheep in the same
ﬁeld), object size, level of occlusion, imaging factors e.g.
motion blur, and requirement for signiﬁcant context to enable recognition. Note that by marking difﬁcult examples,
rather than discarding them, the data should remain useful
as methods able to cope with such examples are developed.
Furthermore, as noted, any current methods able to detect
difﬁcult objects are not penalised for doing so.
3.4 Image Annotation Procedure
The VOC2007 annotation procedure was designed to be:
– consistent, so that the annotation of the images is consistent, in terms of the deﬁnition of the classes, how
bounding boxes are placed, and how viewpoints and
truncation are deﬁned.
– accurate, so that there are as few annotation errors as
– exhaustive, so that all object instances are labelled.
Consistency was achieved by having all annotation take
place at a single annotation “party” at the University of
Leeds, following a set of annotation guidelines which were
discussed in detail with the annotators. The guidelines covered aspects including: what to label; how to label pose
and bounding box; how to treat occlusion; acceptable image quality; how to label clothing/mud/snow, transparency,
mirrors, and pictures. The full guidelines are available on the WWW. In addition, during the annotation process, annotators were periodically observed to ensure that the guidelines were being followed.
Several current annotation projects rely on untrained annotators or have annotators geographically distributed e.g. LabelMe , or even ignorant of their task e.g.
the ESP Game . It is very dif-
ﬁcult to maintain consistency of annotation in these circumstances, unlike when all annotators are trained, monitored
and co-located.
Following the annotation party, the accuracy of each annotation was checked by one of the organisers, including
checking for omitted objects to ensure exhaustive labelling.
To date, only one error has been reported on the VOC2007
dataset, which was a viewpoint marked as unspeciﬁed rather
than frontal. During the checking process, the “difﬁcult”
annotation was applied to objects judged as difﬁcult to
recognise. As checking the annotation is an extremely timeconsuming process, for VOC2008 this has been incorporated into the annotation party, with each image checked for
completeness and each object checked for accuracy, by one
of the annotators. As in previous years, the “difﬁcult” annotation was applied by one of the organisers to ensure consistency. We return to the question of the expense, in terms of
person hours, of annotation and checking, in Sect. 7.3.
3.5 Dataset Statistics
Table 2 summarises the statistics of the VOC2007 dataset.
For the purposes of the challenge, the data is divided
Table 2 Statistics of the VOC2007 dataset. The data is divided into two main subsets: training/validation data (trainval), and test data (test),
with the trainval data further divided into suggested training (train) and validation (val) sets. For each subset and class, the number of images
(containing at least one object of the corresponding class) and number of object instances are shown. Note that because images may contain objects
of several classes, the totals shown in the image columns are not simply the sum of the corresponding column.
Dining table
Potted plant
Tv/monitor
into two main subsets: training/validation data (trainval),
and test data (test). For participants’ convenience, the
trainval data is further divided into suggested training
(train) and validation (val) sets, however participants are
free to use any data in the trainval set for training, for
example if a given method does not require a separate validation set. The total number of annotated images is 9,963,
roughly double the 5,304 images annotated for VOC2006.
The number of annotated objects similarly rose from 9,507
to 24,640. Since the number of classes doubled from 10 to
20, the average number of objects of each class increased
only slightly from 951 to 1,232, dominated by a quadrupling
of the number of annotated people.
Fig. 4 shows a histogram of the number of images and
objects in the entire dataset for each class. Note that these
counts are shown on a log scale. The “person” class is by
far the most frequent, with 9,218 object instances vs. 421
(dining table) to 2,421 (car) for the other classes. This is
a natural consequence of requiring each image to be completely annotated – most ﬂickr images can be characterised
as “snapshots” e.g. family holidays, birthdays, parties, etc.
and so many objects appear only “incidentally” in images
where people are the subject of the photograph.
While the properties of objects in the dataset such as size
and location in the image can be considered representative
of ﬂickr as a whole, the same cannot be said about the frequency of occurrence of each object class. In order to provide a reasonable minimum number of images/objects per
class to participants, both for training and evaluation, certain minority classes e.g. “sheep” were targeted toward the
end of the annotation party to increase their numbers – annotators were instructed to discard all images not containing
one of the minority classes. Examples of certain classes e.g.
“sheep” and “bus” proved difﬁcult to collect, due either to
lack of relevant keyword annotation by ﬂickr users, or lack
of photographs containing these classes.
3.6 Taster Competitions
Annotation was also provided for the newly introduced segmentation and person layout taster competitions. The idea
behind these competitions is to allow systems to demonstrate a more detailed understanding of the image, such that
objects can be localised down to the pixel level, or an object’s parts (e.g. a person’s head, hands and feet) can be localised within the object. As for the main competitions, the
emphasis was on consistent, accurate and exhaustive annotation.
3.6.1 Segmentation
For the segmentation competition, a subset of images from
each of the main datasets was annotated with pixel-level segmentations of the visible region of all contained objects.
These segmentations act as a reﬁnement of the bounding
Object segmentation
Class segmentation
(a) Segmentation taster
(b) Person layout taster
Fig. 5 Example images and annotation for the taster competitions. (a) Segmentation taster annotation showing object and class segmentation.
Border regions are marked with the “void” label indicating that they may be object or background. Difﬁcult objects are excluded by masking with
the ‘void’ label. (b) Person Layout taster annotation showing bounding boxes for head, hands and feet.
Table 3 Statistics of the VOC2007 segmentation dataset. The data is divided into two main subsets: training/validation data (trainval), and
test data (test), with the trainval data further divided into suggested training (train) and validation (val) sets. For each subset and class, the
number of images (containing at least one object of the corresponding class) and number of object instances are shown. Note that because images
may contain objects of several classes, the totals shown in the image columns are not simply the sum of the corresponding column. All objects
in each image are segmented, with every pixel of the image being labelled as one of the object classes, “background” (not one of the annotated
classes) or “void” (uncertain i.e. near object boundary).
Diningtable
Pottedplant
box, giving more precise shape and localisation information.
In deciding how to provide pixel annotation, it was necessary to consider the trade-off between accuracy and annotation time: providing pixel-perfect annotation is extremely
time intensive. To give high accuracy but to keep the annotation time short enough to provide a large image set, a border
area of 5 pixels width was allowed around each object where
the pixels were labelled neither object nor background (these
were marked “void” in the data, see Fig. 5a). Annotators
were also provided with detailed guidelines to ensure consistent segmentation . In keeping with the main competitions, difﬁcult examples of objects
were removed from both training and test sets by masking
these objects with the “void” label.
The object segmentations, where each pixel is labelled
with the identiﬁer of a particular object, were used to create class segmentations (see Fig. 5a for examples) where
each pixel is assigned a class label. These were provided
diningtable
pottedplant
Fig. 4 Summary of the entire VOC2007 dataset. Histogram by class of
the number of objects and images containing at least one object of the
corresponding class. Note the log scale.
to encourage participation from class-based methods, which
output a class label per pixel but which do not output an object identiﬁer, e.g. do not segment adjacent objects of the
same class. Participants’ results were submitted in the form
of class segmentations, where the aim is to predict the correct class label for every pixel not labelled in the ground
truth as “void”.
Table 3 summarises the statistics of the segmentation
dataset. In total, 422 images containing 1,215 segmented objects were provided in the combined training/validation set.
The test set contained 210 images and 607 objects.
3.6.2 Person layout
For the person layout competition, a subset of “person” objects in each of the main datasets was annotated with information about the 2-D pose or “layout” of the person.
For each person, three types of “part” were annotated with
bounding boxes: the head, hands, and feet, see Fig. 5b. These
parts were chosen to give a good approximation of the overall pose of a person, and because they can be annotated with
relative speed and accuracy compared to e.g. annotation of a
“skeleton” structure where uncertainty in the position of the
limbs and joints is hard to avoid. Annotators selected images
to annotate which were of sufﬁcient size such that there was
no uncertainty in the position of the parts, and where the
head and at least one other part were visible – no other criteria were used to “ﬁlter” suitable images. Fig. 5b shows
some example images, including partial occlusion (upperleft), challenging lighting (upper-right), and “non-standard”
pose (lower-left). In total, the training/validation set contained 439 annotated people in 322 images, and the test set
441 annotated people in 441 images.
4 Submission and Evaluation
The submission and evaluation procedures for the VOC2007
challenge competitions were designed to be fair, to prevent
over-ﬁtting, and to demonstrate clearly the differences in accuracy between different methods.
4.1 Submission of Results
The running of the VOC2007 challenge consisted of two
phases: At the start of the challenge, participants were issued a development kit comprising training/validation images with annotation, and MATLAB7 software to access the
annotation ), to compute the evaluation measures, and including simple baseline implementations for
each competition. In the second phase, un-annotated test images were distributed. Participants were then required to run
their methods on the test data and submit results as deﬁned
in Sect. 4.2. The test data was available for approximately
three months before submission of results – this allowed
substantial time for processing, and aimed to not penalise
computationally expensive methods, or groups with access
to only limited computational resources.
Withholding the annotation of the test data until completion of the challenge played a signiﬁcant part in preventing
over-ﬁtting of the parameters of classiﬁcation or detection
methods. In the VOC2005 challenge, test annotation was
released and this led to some “optimistic” reported results,
where a number of parameter settings had been run on the
test set, and only the best reported. This danger emerges
in any evaluation initiative where ground truth is publicly
available. Because the test data is in the form of images, it
is also theoretically possible for participants to hand-label
the test data, or “eyeball” test results – this is in contrast to
e.g. machine learning benchmarks where the test data may
be sufﬁciently “abstract” such that it cannot easily be labelled by a non-specialist. We rely on the participants’ honesty, and the limited time available between release of the
test data and submission of results, to minimise the possibility of manual labelling. The possibility could be avoided by
requiring participants to submit code for their methods, and
never release the test images. However, this makes the evaluation task difﬁcult for both participants and organisers, since
methods may use a mixture of MATLAB/C code, proprietary libraries, require signiﬁcant computational resources,
etc. It is worth noting, however, that results submitted to the
VOC challenge, rather than afterward using the released annotation data, might appropriately be accorded higher status since participants have limited opportunity to experiment
with the test data.
7 MATLAB R⃝is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc.
In addition to withholding the test data annotation, it was
also required that participants submit only a single result per
method, such that the organisers were not asked to choose
the best result for them. Participants were not required to
provide classiﬁcation or detection results for all 20 classes,
to encourage participation from groups having particular expertise in e.g. person or vehicle detection.
4.2 Evaluation of Results
Evaluation of results on multi-class datasets such as
VOC2007 poses several problems: (i) for the classiﬁcation task, images contain instances of multiple classes, so
a “forced choice” paradigm such as that adopted by Caltech 256 – “which one of m classes
does this image contain?” – cannot be used; (ii) the prior
distribution over classes is signiﬁcantly nonuniform so a
simple accuracy measure (percentage of correctly classiﬁed
examples) is not appropriate. This is particularly salient in
the detection task, where sliding window methods will encounter many thousands of negative (non-class) examples
for every positive example. In the absence of information
about the cost or risk of misclassiﬁcations, it is necessary
to evaluate the trade-off between different types of classiﬁcation error; (iii) evaluation measures need to be algorithmindependent, for example in the detection task participants
have adopted a variety of methods e.g. sliding window classiﬁcation, segmentation-based, constellation models, etc.
This prevents the use of some previous evaluation measures
such as the Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) commonly used
for evaluating pedestrian detectors ,
since this is applicable only to sliding window methods constrained to a speciﬁed window extraction scheme, and to
data with cropped positive test examples.
Both the classiﬁcation and detection tasks were evaluated as a set of 20 independent two-class tasks: e.g. for
classiﬁcation “is there a car in the image?”, and for detection “where are the cars in the image (if any)?”. A separate
“score” is computed for each of the classes. For the classiﬁcation task, participants submitted results in the form of
a conﬁdence level for each image and for each class, with
larger values indicating greater conﬁdence that the image
contains the object of interest. For the detection task, participants submitted a bounding box for each detection, with
a conﬁdence level for each bounding box. The provision of
a conﬁdence level allows results to be ranked such that the
trade-off between false positives and false negatives can be
evaluated, without deﬁning arbitrary costs on each type of
classiﬁcation error.
Average Precision (AP). For the VOC2007 challenge, the
interpolated average precision was
used to evaluate both classiﬁcation and detection.
For a given task and class, the precision/recall curve is
computed from a method’s ranked output. Recall is deﬁned
as the proportion of all positive examples ranked above a
given rank. Precision is the proportion of all examples above
that rank which are from the positive class. The AP summarises the shape of the precision/recall curve, and is de-
ﬁned as the mean precision at a set of eleven equally spaced
recall levels [0,0.1,...,1]:
r∈{0,0.1,...,1}
pinterp(r)
The precision at each recall level r is interpolated by taking
the maximum precision measured for a method for which
the corresponding recall exceeds r:
pinterp(r) = max
˜r:˜r≥r p(˜r)
where p(˜r) is the measured precision at recall ˜r.
The intention in interpolating the precision/recall curve
in this way is to reduce the impact of the “wiggles” in
the precision/recall curve, caused by small variations in the
ranking of examples. It should be noted that to obtain a high
score, a method must have precision at all levels of recall –
this penalises methods which retrieve only a subset of examples with high precision (e.g. side views of cars).
The use of precision/recall and AP replaced the “area
under curve” (AUC) measure of the ROC curve used in
VOC2006 for the classiﬁcation task. This change was made
to improve the sensitivity of the metric (in VOC2006 many
methods were achieving greater than 95% AUC), to improve
interpretability (especially for image retrieval applications),
to give increased visibility to performance at low recall, and
to unify the evaluation of the two main competitions. A comparison of the two measures on VOC2006 showed that the
ranking of participants was generally in agreement but that
the AP measure highlighted differences between methods to
a greater extent.
Bounding box evaluation. As noted, for the detection task,
participants submitted a list of bounding boxes with associated conﬁdence (rank). Detections were assigned to ground
truth objects and judged to be true/false positives by measuring bounding box overlap. To be considered a correct detection, the area of overlap ao between the predicted bounding
box Bp and ground truth bounding box Bgt must exceed 0.5
(50%) by the formula
ao = area(Bp ∩Bgt)
area(Bp ∪Bgt)
where Bp ∩Bgt denotes the intersection of the predicted and
ground truth bounding boxes and Bp ∪Bgt their union.
The threshold of 50% was set deliberately low to account
for inaccuracies in bounding boxes in the ground truth data,
for example deﬁning the bounding box for a highly nonconvex object, e.g. a person with arms and legs spread, is
somewhat subjective. Sect. 6.2.3 evaluates the effect of this
threshold on the measured average precision. We return to
the question of the suitability of bounding box annotation in
Sect. 7.3.
Detections output by a method were assigned to ground
truth objects satisfying the overlap criterion in order ranked
by the (decreasing) conﬁdence output. Multiple detections
of the same object in an image were considered false detections e.g. 5 detections of a single object counted as 1 correct
detection and 4 false detections – it was the responsibility of
the participant’s system to ﬁlter multiple detections from its
4.2.1 Evaluation of the segmentation taster
A common measure used to evaluate segmentation methods is the percentage of pixels correctly labelled. For the
VOC2007 segmentation taster, this measure was used per
class by considering only pixels labelled with that class in
the ground truth annotation. Reporting a per-class accuracy
in this way allowed participants to enter segmentation methods which handled only a subset of the classes. However,
this evaluation scheme can be misleading, for example, labelling all pixels “car” leads to a perfect score on the car
class (though not the other classes). Biases in different methods can hence lead to misleading high or low accuracies on
individual classes. To rectify this problem, the VOC2008
segmentation challenge will be assessed on a modiﬁed perclass measure based on the intersection of the inferred segmentation and the ground truth, divided by the union:
seg. accuracy =
true pos.+false pos.+false neg.
Pixels marked “void” in the ground truth are excluded
from this measure. Compared to VOC2007, the measure penalises methods which have high false positive rates (i.e.
that incorrectly mark non-class pixels as belonging to the
target class). The per-class measure should hence give a
more interpretable evaluation of the performance of individual methods.
4.2.2 Evaluation of the person layout taster
The “person layout” taster was treated as an extended detection task. Methods were evaluated using the same AP
measure used for the main detection competition. The criterion for a correct detection, however, was extended to
require correct prediction of (i) the set of visible parts
(head/hands/feet); (ii) correct bounding boxes for all parts,
using the standard overlap threshold of 50%.
As reported in Sect. 6.4 this evaluation criterion proved
extremely challenging. In the VOC2008 challenge, the evaluation has been relaxed by providing person bounding boxes
for the test data (disjoint from the main challenge test set),
so that methods are not required to complete the detection
part of the task, but only estimate part identity and location.
Table 4 summarises the participation in the VOC2007 challenge. A total of 16 institutions submitted results . Taking into account multiple groups in
an institution and multiple methods per group, there were a
total of 28 methods submitted .
5.1 Classiﬁcation Methods
There were 17 entries for the classiﬁcation task in 2007,
compared to 14 in 2006 and 9 in 2005.
Many of the submissions used variations on the basic bag-of-visual-words method ; Sivic
and Zisserman ) that was so successful in VOC2006,
see Zhang et al : local features are computed (for example SIFT descriptors); vector quantised (often by using
k-means) into a visual vocabulary or codebook; and each
image is then represented by a histogram of how often the
local features are assigned to each visual word. The representation is known as bag-of-visual-words in analogy with
the bag-of-words (BOW) text representation where the frequency, but not the position, of words is used to represent
text documents. It is also known as bag-of-keypoints or bagof-features. The classiﬁer is typically a support vector machine (SVM) with χ2 or Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) kernel.
Within this approach, submissions varied tremendously
in the features used: both their type and their density. Sparse
local features were detected using the Harris interest point
operator and/or the SIFT detector , and then
represented by the SIFT descriptor. There was some attention to exploring different colour spaces (such as HSI) in the
detection for greater immunity to photometric effects such
as shadows (PRIP-UvA). Others (e.g. INRIA Larlus) computed descriptors on a dense grid, and one submission (MPI)
combined both sparse and dense descriptors. In addition to
SIFT, other descriptors included local colour, pairs of adjacent segments (PAS) , and Sobel edge
histograms.
The BOW representation was still very common, where
spatial information, such as the position of the descriptors
is disregarded. However, several participants provided additional representations (channels) for each image where as
well as the BOW, spatial information was included by various tilings of the image (INRIA Genetic, INRIA Flat), or
using a spatial pyramid (TKK).
While most submissions used a kernel SVM as the classiﬁer (with kernels including χ2 and EMD), XRCE used lo-
Table 4 Participation in the VOC2007 challenge. Each method is assigned an abbreviation used in the text, and identiﬁed as a classiﬁcation method
(Cls) or detection method (Det). The contributors to each method are listed with references to publications describing the method, where available.
Abbreviation
Contributors
References
Mario Fritz and Bernt Schiele,
TU Darmstadt
Fritz and Schiele 
INRIA Flat
Marcin Marszalek, Cordelia Schmid,
Hedi Harzallah and Joost Van-de-weijer,
INRIA Rhone-Alpes
Zhang et al ; van de Weijer and
Schmid ; Ferrari et al 
INRIA Genetic
INRIA Larlus
Diane Larlus and Frederic Jurie,
INRIA Rhones-Alpes
INRIA Normal
Hedi Harzallah, Cordelia Schmid, Marcin
Marszalek, Vittorio Ferrari, Y-Lan
Boureau, Jean Ponce and Frederic Jurie,
INRIA Rhone-Alpes
Ferrari et al ; van de Weijer and
Schmid ; Zhang et al 
INRIA PlusClass
Ivan Laptev, IRISA/INRIA Rennes and
Evgeniy Tarassov, TT-Solutions
Laptev 
Christoph Lampert and Matthew
Blaschko, MPI Tuebingen
Lampert et al 
MPI Center
Ondrej Chum and Andrew Zisserman,
University of Oxford
Chum and Zisserman 
Julian Stottinger and Allan Hanbury,
Vienna University of Technology; Nicu
Sebe and Theo Gevers, University of
Stoettinger et al 
Jianguo Zhang, Queen Mary University
Zhang et al 
QMUL LSPCH
Ville Viitaniemi and Jorma Laaksonon,
Helsinki University of Technology
Viitaniemi and Laaksonen 
ToshCam rdf
Jamie Shotton, Toshiba Corporate R&D
Center, Japan & Matthew Johnson,
University of Cambridge
ToshCam svm
Dong Wang, Xiaobing Liu, Cailiang Liu,
Zhang Bo and Jianmin Li, Tsinghua
University
Wang et al ; Liu et al 
Pedro Felzenszwalb, University of
Chicago; David McAllester and Deva
Ramanan, Toyota Technological Institute,
Felzenszwalb et al 
UVA Bigrams
Koen van de Sande, Jan van Gemert and
Jasper Uijlings, University of Amsterdam
van de Sande et al ; van Gemert
et al ; Geusebroek ; Snoek
et al 
UVA FuseAll
Florent Perronnin, Yan Liu and Gabriela
Csurka, Xerox Research Centre Europe
Perronnin and Dance 
Table 5 Classiﬁcation results. For each object class and submission, the AP measure (%) is shown. Bold entries in each column denote the
maximum AP for the corresponding class. Italic entries denote the results ranked second or third.
diningtable
pottedplant
INRIA Flat
INRIA Genetic
INRIA Larlus
QMUL LSPCH
ToshCam rdf
ToshCam svm
UVA Bigrams
UVA FuseAll
gistic regression with a Fisher kernel , and ToshCam used a random forest classiﬁer.
Where there was greatest diversity was in the methods for combining the multiple representations (channels).
Some methods investigated “late fusion” where a classiﬁer
is trained on each channel independently, and then a second
classiﬁer combines the results. For example TKK used this
approach, for details see Viitaniemi and Laaksonen .
Tsinghua combined the individual classiﬁers using Rank-
Boost. INRIA entered two methods using the same channels, but differing in the manner in which they were combined: INRIA Flat uses uniform weighting on each feature
 ); INRIA Genetic uses a different class-dependent weight for each feature, learnt from the
validation data by a genetic algorithm search.
In 2006, several of the submissions tackled the classi-
ﬁcation task as detection – “there is a car here, so the image contains a car”. This approach is perhaps more in line
with human intuition about the task, in comparison to the
“global” classiﬁcation methods which establish the presence
of an object without localising it in the image. However, in
2007 no submissions used this approach.
The VOC challenge invites submission of results from
“off-the-shelf” systems or methods trained on data other
than that provided for the challenge (see Sect. 2.1), to be
evaluated separately from those using only the provided
data. No results were submitted to VOC2007 in this category. This is disappointing, since it prevents answering the
question as to how well current methods perform given unlimited training data, or more detailed annotation of training
data. It is an open question how to encourage submission of
results from e.g. commercial systems.
5.2 Detection Methods
There were 9 entries for the detection task in 2007, compared to 9 in 2006 and 5 in 2005. As for the classiﬁcation
task, all submitted methods were trained only on the provided training data.
The majority of the VOC2007 entries used a “sliding
window” approach to the detection task or variants thereof.
In the basic sliding window method a rectangular window of
the image is taken, features are extracted from this window,
and it is then classiﬁed as either containing an instance of
a given class or not. This classiﬁer is then run exhaustively
over the image at varying location and scale. In order to deal
with multiple nearby detections a “non-maximum suppression” stage is then usually applied. Prominent examples of
this method include the Viola and Jones face detector
and the Dalal and Triggs pedestrian detector.
Darmstadt,
INRIA Normal,
RIA PlusClass and IRISA were essentially sliding window
methods, with the enhancements that INRIA PlusClass
also utilised the output of a whole image classiﬁer, and
that IRISA also trained separate detectors for person-on-X
where X was horse, bicycle, or motorbike. Two variations
on the sliding window method avoided dense sampling
of the test image: The Oxford entry used interest point
detection to select candidate windows, and then applied
an SVM classiﬁer; see Chum and Zisserman for
details. The MPI ESSOL entry used a
branch-and-bound scheme to efﬁciently maximise the classiﬁer function determined on a
per-class basis at training time) over all possible windows.
The UoCTTI entry used a more complex variant of the
sliding window method, see Felzenszwalb et al for
details. It combines the outputs of a coarse window and sev-
eral higher-resolution part windows which can move relative
to the coarse window; inference over location of the parts
is performed for each coarse image window. Note that improved results are reported in Felzenszwalb et al relative to those in Table 6; these were achieved after the public
release of the test set annotation.
The method proposed by TKK automatically segments
an image to extract candidate bounding boxes and then classiﬁes these bounding boxes, see Viitaniemi and Laaksonen
 for details. The MPI Center entry was a baseline that
returns exactly one object bounding box per image; the box
is centred and is 51% of the total image area.
In previous VOC detection competitions there had been
a greater diversity of methods used for the detection problem, see Everingham et al for more details. For example in VOC2006 the Cambridge entry used a classiﬁer
to predict a class label at each pixel, and then computed
contiguously segmented regions; the TU Darmstadt entry
made use of the Implicit Shape Model (ISM) ; and the MIT Fergus entry used the “constellation”
model .
This section reports and discusses the results of the
VOC2007 challenge. Full results including precision/recall
curves for all classes, not all of which are shown here due
to space constraints, can be found on the VOC2007 website .
6.1 Classiﬁcation
This section reports and discusses the results of the classiﬁcation task. A total of 17 methods were evaluated. All
participants tackled all of the 20 classes. Table 5 lists the
AP for all submitted methods and classes. For each class the
method obtaining the greatest AP is identiﬁed in bold, and
the methods with 2nd and 3rd greatest AP in italics. Precision/recall curves for a representative sample of classes are
shown in Fig. 6. Results are shown ordered by decreasing
maximum AP. The left column shows all results, while the
right column shows the top ﬁve results by AP. The left column also shows the “chance” performance, obtained by a
classiﬁer outputting a random conﬁdence value without examining the input image – the precision/recall curve and corresponding AP measure are not invariant to the proportion
of positive images, resulting in varying chance performance
across classes. We discuss this further in Sect. 6.1.3.
6.1.1 Classiﬁcation results by method
Overall the INRIA Genetic method stands out as the most
successful method, obtaining the greatest AP in 19 of the 20
50.6 49.3 48.9
44.8 44.4 44.2 42.9
Median AP (%)
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
QMUL_LSPCH
UVA_FuseAll
INRIA_Larlus
ToshCam_rdf
UVA_Bigrams
ToshCam_svm
Fig. 7 Summary of the classiﬁcation results by method. For each
method the median AP over all classes is shown.
classes. The related INRIA Flat method achieves very similar performance, with AP between the two methods differing by just 1–2% for most classes. As described in Sect. 5.1
these methods use the same set of heterogeneous image features, and differ only in the way that features are fused in a
generalised radial basis function (RBF) kernel: INRIA Flat
uses uniform weighting on each feature, and INRIA Genetic
learns a different weight for each feature from the validation
data. The XRCE method comes third in 17 of 20 classes and
ﬁrst in one. This method differs from the INRIA methods
in using a Fisher kernel representation of the distribution of
visual features within the image, and uses a smaller feature
set and logistic regression cf. the kernel SVM classiﬁer used
by the INRIA methods.
Fig. 7 summarises the performance of all methods, plotting the median AP for each method computed over all
classes, and ordered by decreasing median AP. Despite
the overall similarity in the features used, there is quite a
wide range in accuracy of 32.1–57.5%, with one method
(PRIPUVA) substantially lower at 21.1%. The high performing methods all combine multiple features (channels)
though, and some (INRIA Genetic, INRIA Flat, TKK) include spatial information as well as BOW. Software for the
feature descriptors used by the UVA methods has been made publicly available, and would
form a reasonable state-of-the-art baseline for future challenges.
6.1.2 Statistical signiﬁcance of results
A question often overlooked by the computer vision community when comparing results on a given dataset is whether
the difference in performance of two methods is statistically
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (85.9)
INRIA_Flat (84.5)
XRCE (84.0)
TKK (82.2)
QMUL_LSPCH (80.8)
QMUL_HSLS (80.6)
UVA_SFS (80.4)
UVA_FuseAll (79.4)
UVA_MCIP (78.6)
ToshCam_svm (78.1)
ToshCam_rdf (77.9)
INRIA_Larlus (77.2)
Tsinghua (76.9)
MPI_BOW (75.7)
UVA_Bigrams (74.6)
UVA_WGT (74.2)
PRIPUVA (62.0)
(chance) (43.4)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (85.9)
INRIA_Flat (84.5)
XRCE (84.0)
TKK (82.2)
QMUL_LSPCH (80.8)
(a) all results
(b) top 5 by AP
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (79.2)
INRIA_Flat (77.6)
QMUL_LSPCH (76.5)
XRCE (75.1)
QMUL_HSLS (73.1)
TKK (71.1)
UVA_SFS (67.4)
UVA_MCIP (66.6)
UVA_FuseAll (66.2)
INRIA_Larlus (62.7)
MPI_BOW (60.6)
Tsinghua (58.9)
UVA_WGT (50.7)
ToshCam_rdf (50.1)
UVA_Bigrams (49.9)
ToshCam_svm (45.5)
PRIPUVA (26.7)
(chance) (5.8)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (79.2)
INRIA_Flat (77.6)
QMUL_LSPCH (76.5)
XRCE (75.1)
QMUL_HSLS (73.1)
(c) all results
(d) top 5 by AP
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (58.8)
INRIA_Flat (57.6)
QMUL_LSPCH (55.1)
QMUL_HSLS (54.0)
TKK (51.2)
XRCE (50.3)
INRIA_Larlus (44.2)
UVA_FuseAll (41.9)
UVA_SFS (41.9)
UVA_MCIP (40.5)
MPI_BOW (40.2)
UVA_WGT (36.3)
Tsinghua (35.2)
ToshCam_svm (34.6)
ToshCam_rdf (33.0)
PRIPUVA (31.4)
UVA_Bigrams (31.3)
(chance) (8.3)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (58.8)
INRIA_Flat (57.6)
QMUL_LSPCH (55.1)
QMUL_HSLS (54.0)
TKK (51.2)
(e) all results
(f) top 5 by AP
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (33.1)
INRIA_Flat (29.2)
XRCE (28.5)
QMUL_HSLS (27.8)
TKK (27.3)
QMUL_LSPCH (27.2)
Tsinghua (23.7)
ToshCam_rdf (23.6)
UVA_WGT (22.2)
UVA_FuseAll (19.9)
UVA_SFS (18.8)
INRIA_Larlus (17.8)
ToshCam_svm (17.0)
MPI_BOW (16.9)
UVA_MCIP (16.8)
UVA_Bigrams (16.5)
PRIPUVA (6.4)
(chance) (4.4)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
INRIA_Genetic (33.1)
INRIA_Flat (29.2)
XRCE (28.5)
QMUL_HSLS (27.8)
TKK (27.3)
(g) all results
(h) top 5 by AP
Fig. 6 Classiﬁcation results. Precision/recall curves are shown for a representative sample of classes. The left column shows all results; the right
shows the top 5 results by AP. The legend indicates the AP (%) obtained by the corresponding method.
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
QMUL_LSPCH
UVA_FuseAll
INRIA_Larlus
ToshCam_rdf
ToshCam_svm
UVA_Bigrams
Fig. 8 Analysis of statistically signiﬁcant differences in the classiﬁcation results. The mean rank over all classes is plotted on the x-axis for
each method. Methods which are not signiﬁcantly different (p = 0.05),
in terms of mean rank, are connected.
signiﬁcant. For the VOC challenge, we wanted to establish
whether, for the given dataset and set of classes, one method
can be considered signiﬁcantly more accurate than another.
Note that this question is different to that investigated e.g. in
the Caltech 101 challenge, where multiple training/test folds
are used to establish the variance of the measured accuracy.
Whereas that approach measures robustness of a method
to differing data, we wish to establish signiﬁcance for the
given, ﬁxed, dataset. This is salient, for example, when a
method may not involve a training phase, or to compare
against a commercial system trained on proprietary data.
Little work has considered the comparison of multiple
classiﬁers over multiple datasets. We analysed the results of
the classiﬁcation task using a method proposed by Demsar
 , speciﬁcally using the Friedman test with Nemenyi
post hoc analysis. This approach uses only comparisons between the rank of a method (the method achieving the greatest AP is assigned rank 1, the 2nd greatest AP rank 2, etc.),
and thus requires no assumptions about the distribution of
AP to be made. Each class is treated as a separate test, giving one rank measurement per method and class. The analysis then consists of two steps: (i) the null hypothesis is made
that the methods are equivalent and so their ranks should
be equal. The hypothesis is tested by the Friedman test (a
non-parametric variant of ANOVA), which follows a χ2 distribution; (ii) having rejected the null hypothesis the differences in ranks are analysed by the Nemenyi test (similar to
the Tukey test for ANOVA). The difference between mean
ranks (over classes) for a pair of methods follows a modiﬁed Studentised range statistic. For a conﬁdence level of
p = 0.05 and given the 17 methods tested over 20 classes,
the “critical difference” is calculated as 4.9 – the difference
in mean rank between a pair of methods must exceed 4.9 for
the difference to be considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Fig. 8 visualises the results of this analysis using the CD
(critical difference) diagram proposed by Demsar .
The x-axis shows the mean rank over classes for each
diningtable
pottedplant
Fig. 9 Summary of classiﬁcation results by class. For each class three
values are shown: the maximum AP obtained by any method (max),
the median AP over all methods (median) and the AP obtained by a
random ranking of the images (chance).
method. Methods are shown clockwise from right to left in
decreasing (ﬁrst to last) rank order. Groups of methods for
which the difference in mean rank is not signiﬁcant are connected by horizontal bars. As can be seen, there is substantial
overlap between the groups, with no clear “clustering” into
sets of equivalent methods. Of interest is that the differences
between the ﬁrst six ranked methods (INRIA Genetic, IN-
RIA Flat, XRCE, TKK, QMUL LSPCH, QMUL HSLS) cannot be considered statistically signiﬁcant.
A limitation of this analysis is that the relatively small
number of observations (20 classes per method) limits the
power of the test. Increasing the number of classes will make
it more feasible to establish signiﬁcant differences between
methods in terms of their performance over a wide range
of classes. As discussed in Sect. 7.1, we are also keen to
highlight differences in the approach taken by methods, not
solely their performance.
6.1.3 Classiﬁcation results by class
Fig. 9 summarises the results obtained by object class, plotting for each class the maximum and median AP taken over
all methods. Also shown is the “chance” performance – the
AP obtained by a classiﬁer outputting a random conﬁdence
value without examining the input image. Results are shown
ordered by decreasing maximum AP. There is substantial
variation in the maximum AP as a function of object class,
from 33.1% (bottle) to 85.9% (person). The median AP
varies from 15.6% (potted plant) to 75.7% (person). The median results can be seen to approximately follow the ranking
of results by maximum AP, suggesting that the same classes
proved difﬁcult across methods, but individual differences
can be seen, for example the difference in maximum AP for
the 2nd to 4th classes is very small such that the ordering
is somewhat arbitrary. The high AP for the “person” class
can be attributed in part to the high proportion of images in
the dataset containing people – the chance AP for this class
is 43.4%. However, as can be seen in Fig. 9, the results are
substantially above chance for all classes.
While results on some classes e.g. person and train
(Fig. 6a–d) are very promising, for all classes there is substantial room for improvement. For some classes e.g. bottle
(Fig. 6g–h), the precision/recall curves show that the methods’ precision drops greatly at moderate recall, and current
methods would not give satisfactory results in the context of
an image retrieval system. It is also worth noting that if one
views the classiﬁcation task as image retrieval, the evaluation is somewhat “benign” since the prior probability of an
image containing an object of interest is still quite high, 2%
for the least frequent class (sheep). We might expect that in
a real world scenario, for example image-based web search,
the prior probability for some classes would be much lower.
We return to this point in Sect. 7.3.
6.1.4 What are the classiﬁcation methods learning?
As noted, the quantitative evaluation of methods by AP gives
a summary of a method’s precision/recall trade-off. It is interesting to examine the success and failure modes of the
methods to derive some insight into what current methods
are learning, and what limitations might be addressed in development of future methods.
We ﬁrst examined the kinds of images which methods
found “easy” or “difﬁcult”. Five submitted methods were
selected which represented somewhat different approaches
rather than small variations (e.g. INRIA Genetic vs. IN-
RIA Flat): INRIA Genetic, XRCE, TKK, QMUL LSPCH
and UVA FuseAll. Each test image was then assigned a rank
by each method (using the method’s conﬁdence output for
that image). An overall rank for the image was then assigned
by taking the median over the ranks from the ﬁve selected
methods. By looking at which images, containing the class
of interest or not, are ranked ﬁrst or last, we can gain insight
into what properties of the images make recognition easy or
difﬁcult for current methods.
Fig. 10 shows ranked images for the “car” class. The
ﬁrst row shows the ﬁve positive images (containing cars) assigned the highest rank (1st–5th) – these can be considered
images which are “easy” for current methods to recognise as
containing cars. The second row shows the ﬁve positive images (containing cars) assigned the lowest rank – these are
images for which current methods cannot easily establish
the presence of a car. The third row shows the ﬁve negative images (not containing cars) assigned the highest rank
– these are images which “confuse” current methods, which
judge them highly likely to contain cars.
The high ranked positive images (Fig. 10a) include images where a single car dominates the image, in an uncluttered or “expected” background i.e. a road, and images
where a number of cars are visible. The inclusion of images
with multiple cars is perhaps surprising, but as discussed
below, may be attributed to the reliance of current methods on “textural” properties of the image rather than spatial arrangement of parts. The low ranked positive images
(Fig. 10b) are typical across all classes, showing the object
of interest small in the image, poorly lit or heavily occluded.
For methods based on global image descriptors, such as the
BOW approach, these factors cause the presence of the car
to contribute little to the feature vector describing the image.
In the case of the car class, the high ranked negative images
(Fig. 10c) show an “intuitive” confusion – the ﬁrst ﬁve images shown all contain buses or lorries (not considered part
of the “car” class). This may be considered a pleasing result
since there is some natural fuzziness in the distinction between the classes “car” and “bus”, and the classes certainly
share both semantic and visual properties. However, as discussed below, these “natural” confusions are not apparent
for all classes.
Fig. 11 shows the ﬁve highest ranked positive and negative images for the “cat” class. Here also the confusion
appears natural, with all ﬁve of the highest ranked non-cat
images containing dogs. However, it can also be seen that
the composition of the images for the cat and dog classes is
very similar, and this may play a signiﬁcant role in the learnt
classiﬁers. This is a bias in the content of ﬂickr images, in
that photographers appear to take many “close-up” images
of their pets.
Fig. 12 shows corresponding images for the “bicycle”
class. The high ranked positive images show a similar pattern to the “car” class, containing uncluttered images of bicycles in “canonical” poses, and images where the scene is
dominated by multiple bicycles. For this class, however, the
high ranked negative images (Fig. 12b) are anything but intuitive – all of the ﬁrst ﬁve negative images show scenes
of birds sitting on branches, which do not resemble bicycles at all to a human observer. The reason for this confusion might be explained by the lack of informative spatial information in current methods. Examining the negative
images (Fig. 12b), which are dominated by “wiry” or barlike features, it seems clear that a BOW representation may
closely resemble that of a bicycle, with the representation of
branches matching that of the bicycle tubes and spokes. This
is a limitation of BOW methods, in that information about
the spatial arrangement of features is discarded, or represented only very weakly and implicitly, by features representing the conjunction of other features. For methods using
tiling or spatial pyramids, the spatial information is captured
(a) car: highest ranked positive images
(b) car: lowest ranked positive images
(c) car: highest ranked negative images
Fig. 10 Ranked images for the “car” classiﬁcation task (see text for details of ranking method). (a) ﬁve highest ranked positive images (containing
cars); (b) ﬁve lowest ranked positive images (containing cars); (c) ﬁve highest ranked negative images (not containing cars). The number in each
image indicates the corresponding median rank.
(a) cat: high ranked positive images
(b) cat: high ranked negative images
Fig. 11 Ranked images for the “cat” classiﬁcation task. (a) ﬁve highest ranked positive images (containing cats); (b) ﬁve highest ranked negative
images (not containing cats). The number in each image indicates the corresponding median rank.
(a) bicycle: highest ranked positive images
(b) bicycle: highest ranked negative images
Fig. 12 Ranked images for the “bicycle” classiﬁcation task. (a) ﬁve highest ranked positive images (containing bicycles); (b) ﬁve highest ranked
negative images (not containing bicycles). The number in each image indicates the corresponding median rank.
(a) chair: highest ranked positive images
(b) chair: highest ranked negative images
Fig. 13 Ranked images for the “chair” classiﬁcation task. (a) ﬁve highest ranked positive images (containing chairs); (b) ﬁve highest ranked
negative images (not containing chairs). The number in each image indicates the corresponding median rank.
(a) person: highest ranked positive images
(b) person: highest ranked negative images
Fig. 14 Ranked images for the “person” classiﬁcation task. (a) ﬁve highest ranked positive images (containing people); (b) ﬁve highest ranked
negative images (not containing people). The number in each image indicates the corresponding median rank.
only at a coarse image/scene level, and not at the level of individual objects.
Fig. 13 shows images for the “chair” class. Results here
are interesting in that none of the high ranked positive images are close-up views of isolated chairs, even though these
are present in the dataset. All the high ranked negative images (Fig. 13b) show indoor scenes which might well be expected to contain chairs, but do not. Only one of the ﬁrst ﬁve
negative images contains a sofa, which might be considered
the most easily confused class both semantically and visually. It seems likely that in this case the classiﬁers are learning about the scene context of chairs rather than modelling
the appearance of a chair itself. Again, this is a somewhat
natural consequence of a global classiﬁcation approach. The
use of context may be seen in both positive and negative
lights – while there is much interest in the ﬁeld in exploiting
contextual cues to object recognition , the incorporation of
context by use of a global descriptor leads to failure when
objects are presented out of context, or over-reliance on context when the training set contains mostly images of scenes
rather than individual objects. The question of whether current methods are learning object or scene representations is
considered further below.
Finally, Fig. 14 shows images for the “person” class. In
this case, the negative images (Fig. 14b) contain (i) dining
tables (3rd and 5th image), and (ii) motorbikes (1st, 2nd and
4th images). The confusion with the “dining table” class
seems natural, in the same manner as the “chair” class, in
that the presence of a dining table seems a good predictor for
the presence of a person. Statistics of the dataset reveal that
the presence of a motorbike is a similarly effective predictor: 68.9% of the images containing motorbikes also contain
people (although an alternative explanation may be the elongated vertical shape of the motorbikes seen from the front or
rear). These “unintentional” regularities in the dataset are
a limiting factor in judging the effectiveness of the classi-
ﬁcation methods in terms of object recognition rather than
image retrieval. The detection task, see Sect. 6.2, is a much
more challenging test of object recognition.
6.1.5 Effect of object size on classiﬁcation accuracy
All of the methods submitted are essentially global, extracting descriptors of the entire image content. The ranking of
minimum area (%)
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
QMUL_LSPCH
INRIA_Larlus
UVA_FuseAll
ToshCam_rdf
ToshCam_svm
UVA_Bigrams
minimum area (%)
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
QMUL_LSPCH
INRIA_Larlus
ToshCam_rdf
UVA_FuseAll
UVA_Bigrams
ToshCam_svm
(b) motorbike
minimum area (%)
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
UVA_FuseAll
QMUL_LSPCH
INRIA_Larlus
ToshCam_svm
ToshCam_rdf
UVA_Bigrams
minimum area (%)
INRIA_Genetic
INRIA_Flat
UVA_FuseAll
QMUL_LSPCH
INRIA_Larlus
ToshCam_rdf
UVA_Bigrams
ToshCam_svm
Fig. 15 Classiﬁcation results as a function of object size. Plots show results for four representative classes. For each plot the x-axis shows the
lower threshold on object size for a positive image to be included in the test set; the y-axis shows the corresponding AP. A threshold of 30% means
that all positive images (e.g. containing “car”) which contained fewer than 30% positive (i.e. car) pixels were removed from the test set; a threshold
of 0% means that no images were discarded.
images also suggests that the image context is used extensively by the classiﬁers. It is interesting therefore to examine
whether methods are biased toward images where the object
of interest is large, or whether conversely the presence of adequate scene context determines the accuracy of the results.
We conducted experiments to investigate the effect of
object size on the submitted methods’ accuracy. A series of
test sets was made in which all positively-labelled images
contained at least some proportion of pixels labelled as the
object of interest. For example, given a threshold of 10%,
only images for which at least 10% of the pixels were “car”
were labelled as containing a car; images with some car pixels, but less than 10%, were removed from the test set, and
the negative examples always had zero car pixels. The proportion of pixels belonging to a particular class was approximated by the union of the corresponding bounding boxes.
Fig. 15 shows results of the experiments for a representative
set of classes. For each plot, the x-axis shows the threshold
on the proportion of positive pixels in an image for the image to be labelled positive, deﬁning one of the series of test
sets. For each threshold, the AP was measured and is shown
on the y-axis.
Fig. 15a/b show classes “car” and “motorbike”, for
which some positive correlation between object size and AP
can be observed. As shown, the AP increases as images with
fewer object pixels are discarded, and peaks at the point
where the only positive images included have at least 15%
object pixels. This effect can be accounted for by the use of
interest point mechanisms to extract features, which break
down if the object is small such that no interest points are
detected on it, and in the case of dense feature extraction, by
the dominance of the background or clutter in the global representation, which “swamps” the object descriptors. For the
“motorbike” class, the AP is seen to decrease slightly when
only images containing at least 20% of object pixels are included – this may be explained by the reduction of relevant
context in such images.
For most classes, zero or negative correlation between
object size and AP was observed, for example “bird”, shown
in Fig. 15c. This is compatible with the conclusions from
examining ranked images, that current methods are making
substantial use of image composition or context. For some
classes, e.g. “chair”, shown in Fig. 15d, this effect is quite
dramatic – for this class the learnt classiﬁers are very poor
at recognising images where chairs are the dominant part of
the scene. These results are in agreement with the ranked
images shown in Fig. 13b, suggesting a reliance on scene
2007: Median AP (%)
2006: Median AP (%)
INRIA_Flat
INRIA_Genetic
UVA_Bigrams
UVA_FuseAll
Fig. 16 Comparison of classiﬁcation results on VOC2006 vs.
VOC2007 test sets. All methods were trained on the VOC2007 training/validataion set. The median AP over the 10 classes common to the
VOC2006/VOC2007 challenges is plotted for each method and test
set. The line marked VOC2006 indicates the best result obtained in the
VOC2006 challenge, trained using the VOC2006 training/validation
6.1.6 Classiﬁcation results on the VOC2006 test set
In order to gauge progress since the 2006 VOC challenge,
participants in the 2007 challenge were asked to additionally submit results on the VOC2006 dataset. Since the training phase for many methods is computationally expensive,
for example requiring multiple cross-validation runs, participants were asked to submit results trained using VOC2007
data i.e. not requiring re-training. This allows us to answer
two questions: (i) do methods which perform well on the
VOC2007 test set also perform well on VOC2006 test set?
(ii) do newer methods trained on VOC2007 data outperform
older methods trained on VOC2006 data?
Participants submitted classiﬁcation results on both test
sets for 9 methods. Fig. 16 summarises the results. The xaxis show the median AP over all classes on the VOC2007
test set. The y-axis shows the median AP over all classes
on the VOC2006 test set. The line labelled “VOC2006” indicates the best result reported in the 2006 challenge. Note
that since the median is taken over the 10 classes common
to the 2006 and 2007 challenges (see Fig. 2), the ranking of
methods does not match that shown in Fig. 7, for example
the XRCE method outperforms the INRIA methods on the
VOC2007 data for this subset of classes.
As the ﬁgure shows, there is very high correlation between the results on the VOC2006 and VOC2007 data. This
suggests that methods performing well on VOC2007 are
“implicitly” more successful, rather than obtaining good results due to excessive ﬁtting of the statistics of the VOC2007
data. There are small differences in the ranking of methods,
for example the XRCE method is 1st on VOC2007 (over
the subset of 10 classes common to both challenges) but
3rd on VOC2006. The INRIA Genetic method gives results
marginally lower than XRCE on the VOC2007 data, but convincingly better results on the VOC2006 data.
However, for all methods the performance on the
VOC2006 data is less than on VOC2007, by 5.0% (IN-
RIA FLAT) to 12.7% (Tsinghua). This implies that methods
have failed to generalise to the VOC2006 data to some extent. There are two possible reasons: (i) there is fundamentally insufﬁcient variability in the VOC2007 data to generalise well to the VOC2006 data; (ii) the classiﬁers have over-
ﬁt some “peculiarities” of the VOC2007 data which do not
apply to the VOC2006 data. Factors might include the difference in the time of year of data collection (see Sect. 3.1).
A possible concern might be that the better results obtained
on VOC2006 are due to the presence of “near-duplicate”
images spanning the training/test sets. This possibility was
minimised by removing such images when the dataset was
collected (see Sect. 3.1).
Tested on the VOC2006 data, the maximum median-
AP achieved by a method submitted in 2007 was 62.1%
compared to 74.5% in 2006. This again suggests either that
the 2007 methods over-ﬁt some properties of the VOC2007
data, or that there were peculiarities of the VOC2006 data
which methods trained on that data in 2006 were able to exploit. One such possibility is the inclusion of the MSR Cambridge images in the VOC2006 data (see Sect. 3.1) which
may have provided a “boost” to 2006 methods learning their
speciﬁc viewpoints and simple scene composition.
6.2 Detection
This section reports and discusses the results of the detection task. A total of 9 methods were evaluated. Six participants tackled all of the 20 classes, with the others submitting results on a subset of classes. Table 6 lists the AP for all
submitted methods and classes. For each class the method
obtaining the greatest AP is identiﬁed in bold, and the methods with 2nd and 3rd greatest AP in italics. Precision/recall
curves for a representative sample of classes are shown in
6.2.1 Detection results by method
It is difﬁcult to judge an overall “winner” in the detection task because different participants tackled different subsets of classes (this is allowed under the rules of the challenge). Oxford won on all 6 (vehicle) classes that they entered, UoCTTI won on 6 classes, and MPI ESSOL on 5. The
Oxford method achieved the greatest AP for all of the six
classes entered, with the AP substantially exceeding the second place result, by a margin of 4.0–11.4%. The UoCTTI
method entered all 20 classes, and came ﬁrst or second in
Table 6 Detection results. For each object class and submission, the AP measure (%) is shown. Bold entries in each column denote the maximum
AP for the corresponding class. Italic entries denote the results ranked second or third. Note that some participants submitted results for only a
subset of the 20 classes.
diningtable
pottedplant
INRIA Normal
INRIA PlusClass
MPI Center
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Oxford (43.2)
UoCTTI (34.6)
IRISA (31.8)
Darmstadt (30.1)
INRIA_PlusClass (29.4)
INRIA_Normal (26.5)
TKK (18.4)
MPI_Center (17.2)
MPI_ESSOL (12.0)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Oxford (40.9)
UoCTTI (36.9)
INRIA_PlusClass (28.7)
IRISA (28.1)
INRIA_Normal (24.6)
MPI_ESSOL (15.7)
MPI_Center (11.0)
(b) bicycle
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
IRISA (22.1)
UoCTTI (21.3)
INRIA_Normal (12.1)
MPI_ESSOL (11.7)
INRIA_PlusClass (9.2)
MPI_Center (9.1)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
UoCTTI (9.4)
MPI_Center (3.1)
INRIA_PlusClass (2.5)
MPI_ESSOL (1.6)
INRIA_Normal (0.2)
(c) person
Fig. 17 Detection results. Precision/recall curves are shown for a representative sample of classes. The legend indicates the AP (%) obtained by
the corresponding method.
14. MPI ESSOL also entered all 20 classes, but it is noticeable that on some classes the AP score for this method is
poor relative to other entries.
These methods differ quite signiﬁcantly in approach:
Oxford used interest point detection to select candidate detection regions, and applied an SVM classiﬁer using a spatial pyramid representation to the candidate region; the UoCTTI method used a sliding window
approach, but with a “star” model of parts; and MPI ESSOL
used an SVM classiﬁer based on a BOW or spatial pyramid
representation of the candidate window.
It would have been particularly interesting to see results
of the Oxford method on all classes, since it might be expected that the use of interest points and a ﬁxed grid representation might limit the applicability to classes with limited
distinguishing features or signiﬁcant variability in shape,
e.g. animals.
Promising results were obtained by all methods, but
with results for each method varying greatly among the object classes. It seems clear that current methods are more
or less suited to particular classes. An example is the failure of the UoCTTI method on the “dog” class (AP=2.3)
compared to the MPI ESSOL method (AP=16.2). While
the former emphasises shape, the latter uses a BOW/spatial
pyramid representation which might better capture texture,
but captures shape more coarsely. Conversely, the UoCTTI
pottedplant
diningtable
Fig. 18 Summary of detection results by class. For each class two values are shown: the maximum AP obtained by any method (max) and
the median AP over all methods (median).
method obtains good results on “bottle” (AP=21.4), where
it is expected that shape is a very important feature, and
the MPI ESSOL method fails (AP=0.1). The trained detector
used by the UoCTTI method has
been made publicly available, and would form a reasonable
state-of-the-art baseline for future challenges.
6.2.2 Detection results by class
Fig. 18 summarises the results obtained by object class, plotting for each class the maximum and median AP taken over
all methods. Results are shown ordered by decreasing maximum AP. It should be noted that, because some participants
only submitted results for some classes, the number of results available varies for each class. There is substantial variation in the maximum AP as a function of object class, from
9.4% (boat) to 43.2% (car). The median AP varies from
2.8% (boat) to 29.4% (car). The median results can be seen
to approximately follow the ranking of results by maximum
Results on some classes e.g. car/bicycle (Fig. 17a-b) are
quite promising, with the best performing methods obtaining precision close to 100% for recall up to 15–20%. However, precision drops rapidly above this level of recall. This
suggests that methods are retrieving only a subset of examples with any accuracy, perhaps the “canonical” views (e.g.
car side, car rear). A challenge for future methods is to increase the recall. In the related domain of face detection
the move from frontal-only detection to arbitrary pose has
proved challenging.
It can be seen from Fig. 18 that the best results were
obtained for classes which have traditionally been investigated in object detection, e.g. car, bicycle and motorbike.
overlap threshold (%)
INRIA_PlusClass
INRIA_Normal
MPI_Center
Fig. 19 Effect of the bounding box overlap threshold on the AP measure. For the class “car”, on which the submitted methods gave the
best results, AP is plotted as a function of the overlap threshold. The
threshold adopted for the challenge is 50%.
Such classes have quite predictable visual properties, with
distinctive parts e.g. wheels, and relatively ﬁxed spatial arrangement of parts. For classes with signiﬁcant variation in
shape or appearance e.g. people (Fig. 17c) and household
objects (which are often signiﬁcantly occluded), results are
substantially worse. Results on the important “person” class
were, however quite promising overall. The best results in
terms of AP on this class were obtained by the IRISA and
UoCTTI methods. As noted in Sect. 5.2 the IRISA method
trained multiple person detectors, for example “person on
horse/person on bicycle”. The UoCTTI method is also potentially better able to deal with varying articulation, by its
approach of simultaneous “pose” inference and detection.
For several classes the results are somewhat counterintuitive, for example good results are obtained on the “train”
class (max AP=33.4%) which might be expected to be challenging due to the great variation in appearance and aspect
ratio with pose. The results for this class may be explained
by the inclusion of several methods which exploited whole
image classiﬁcation – MPI Center which predicts a single detection per image of ﬁxed size, and INRIA PlusClass
which combines sliding window detection with a global
classiﬁer. Because trains tend to appear large in the image,
these global methods prove successful on this data, however it is notable that the Oxford method also did well for
this class. For the “horse” class, the good results may be
attributable to unwanted regularities in the dataset, which
includes many images of horses taken by a single photographer at a single gymkhana event. Such regularities will
be reduced in the VOC2008 dataset by distributing searches
over time, as noted in Sect. 3.1. Results for the classes with
low AP, for example boat (Fig. 17d) leave much scope for
improvement, with precision dropping to zero by 20% recall. The VOC2007 dataset remains extremely challenging
for current detection methods.
(a) car true positives: Oxford method
(b) car true positives: UoCTTI method
(c) car true positives: IRISA method
Fig. 20 Highest ranked true positive detections for the “car” detection task. The ﬁve highest ranked true positives are shown for each of the three
methods with greatest AP. The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection.
(a) bicycle true positives: Oxford method
(b) bicycle true positives: UoCTTI method
(c) bicycle true positives: INRIA PlusClass method
Fig. 21 Highest ranked true positive detections for the “bicycle” detection task. The ﬁve highest ranked true positives are shown for each of the
three methods with greatest AP. The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection.
6.2.3 Evaluation of the overlap threshold
As noted in Sect. 4.2, detections are considered true positives if the predicted and ground truth bounding boxes overlap by 50% according to the measure deﬁned in Eqn. 3, with
the threshold of 50% set low to account for uncertainty in
the bounding box annotation. We evaluated the effect the
overlap threshold has on the measured AP by varying the
threshold. Fig. 19 shows AP as a function of the overlap
threshold for the class “car”, on which the best results (in
terms of AP with overlap threshold of 50%) were obtained
by the submitted methods. One caveat applies: participants
were aware of the 50% threshold, and were therefore free to
optimise their methods at this threshold, for example in their
schemes for elimination of multiple detections.
As Fig. 19 shows, the measured AP drops steeply for
thresholds above 50%, indicating that none of the methods
give highly accurate bounding box predictions. Reducing
the threshold to 10% results in an increase in measured AP
of around 7.5%. Note that for all but one pair of methods
(Darmstadt and INRIA PlusClass) the ordering of methods
by AP does not change for any threshold in the range 0–50%
(a) bicycle false positives: Oxford method
(b) bicycle false positives: UoCTTI method
(c) bicycle false positives: INRIA PlusClass method
Fig. 22 High ranked false positive detections for the “bicycle” detection task. The false positives shown are in images where no bicycles are
present. The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection. Results are shown for the three methods with greatest AP.
(a) motorbike false positives: Oxford method
(b) motorbike false positives: UoCTTI method
(c) motorbike false positives: INRIA PlusClass method
Fig. 23 High ranked false positive detections for the “motorbike” detection task. The false positives shown are in images where no motorbikes are
present. The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection. Results are shown for the three methods with greatest AP.
(the AP of these two methods at a threshold of 50% differs
by only 0.7%). We conclude that the measure is performing
satisfactorily, capturing the proportion of objects detected
without overly penalising imprecise bounding box predictions.
6.2.4 What are the detection methods learning?
As in the classiﬁcation task it is interesting to examine the
success and failure modes of the methods to derive some
insight into what current methods are learning, and what
limitations might be addressed in the development of future
Each detection method provides a list of bounding boxes
ranked by the corresponding conﬁdence output. We present
some of the highest ranked true positive (object) and false
positive (non-object) detections here. Since the detection
methods varied greatly in approach and success, as measured by AP, we present individual results for selected
classes and methods. For a given class, we present results of
the three methods giving greatest AP. The classes selected
were those where results are particularly promising, or in-
(a) person false positives: IRISA method
(b) person false positives: UoCTTI method
(c) person false positives: INRIA Normal method
Fig. 24 High ranked false positive detections for the “person” detection task. The false positives shown are in images where no people are present.
The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection. Results are shown for the three methods with greatest AP.
(a) person “near misses”: IRISA method
(b) person “near misses”: UoCTTI method
(c) person “near misses”: INRIA Normal method
Fig. 25 “Near miss” false positives for the “person” detection task. The images shown contain people, but the detections do not satisfy the VOC
overlap criterion. The number in each image indicates the rank of the detection. Results are shown for the three methods with greatest AP.
teresting observations can be made e.g. confusion between
“motorbike” and “bicycle”.
Fig. 20 shows the ﬁve highest ranked true positive detections for the “car” class. The methods shown, obtaining greatest AP, are Oxford, UoCTTI and IRISA. As can
be seen the Oxford method has a preference for large objects (Fig. 20a) which is less apparent for the other two
methods (Fig. 20b/c). We analyse this bias toward large objects further in the next subsection. For this class, there is
no apparent preference for a particular viewpoint or “aspect” – the methods all return cars with varying pose at
high conﬁdence. However, for the “bicycle” class shown
in Fig. 21, the most successful methods (Oxford, UoCTTI
and INRIA PlusClass) all return side views of bicycles with
highest conﬁdence. For the UoCTTI method in particular
there seems no preference for left or right facing bicycles,
though the bias toward right facing bicycles for the Oxford
method may be a statistical bias in the dataset.
We turn now to the false positive detections – bounding boxes which do not correspond to an object of interest.
For each class and method we show high-ranked false positive detections. To increase the diversity of results presented
we have ﬁltered the images shown: (i) images with any (undetected) object of interest have been removed, though see
discussion of the “person” class below; (ii) only the most
conﬁdent false positive detection per image is shown. For
example in Fig. 22b, multiple high conﬁdence false positives
were output for the 3rd image due to the repeated structure.
Fig. 22 shows false positives for the “bicycle” class output by the Oxford, UoCTTI and INRIA PlusClass methods.
All methods generated some “intuitive” false positives on
motorbikes, though in many such cases the predicted bounding box does not correspond to the full extent of the object.
It is interesting to observe that several of the false positives
for the Oxford method are the same images of tree branches
which confused the classiﬁcation methods (Fig. 12b). This
may be explained by the pyramid representation of spatial
information in this method or by the method learning the
strong gradients of the frames (if you squint you can see
a frame in the second and fourth images of Fig. 22a). For
the UoCTTI method, the false positives were observed to
often resemble the side-view of a bicycle as “two blobs horizontally aligned” (Fig. 22b, 3rd and 4th image). The most
conﬁdent false positive output by this method is actually a
drawing of a bicycle on a trafﬁc sign, not labelled as “bicycle” according to the annotation guidelines. For the IN-
RIA PlusClass method, 4 of the 5 highest conﬁdence false
positive images contain motorcycles, however the poor prediction of bounding boxes in these cases suggest that the
scene context introduced by the incorporation of a global
image classiﬁer in this method may be a factor, rather than a
“natural” confusion between the classes.
Fig. 23 shows corresponding high ranked false positives
for the “motorbike” class, with the same methods as for the
“bicycle” class shown. For the UoCTTI method, 4 out of 5
false positives are bicycles, with the remaining false positive shown covering a pair of car wheels. These results suggest that this method is really capturing something about
the dominant shape of the motorbike. The Oxford method
outputs two bicycles in the ﬁrst ﬁve false positives, and the
INRIA PlusClass method outputs one. The remaining high
ranked false positives for these two methods are difﬁcult to
explain, consisting mainly of highly cluttered scenes with
little discernable structure.
Fig. 24 shows high ranked false positives for the “person” class, with the three most successful methods shown:
IRISA, UoCTTI and INRIA Normal. This class is particularly challenging because of the high variability in human pose exhibited in the VOC dataset. As can be seen,
it is difﬁculty to see any consistent property of the false
positives. Some bias toward “elongated vertical” structures
can be observed e.g. trees (Fig. 24a) and dogs in a frontal
pose (Fig. 24b), and more of these were visible in lower
ranked false positives not shown. However, many false positives seem to be merely cluttered windows with strong texture. The ﬁfth false positive output by the IRISA method
(Fig. 24a) is interesting (motorbike panniers occluded by
another motorbike) and is most likely an artefact of that
method learning separate “person on X” detectors.
Thus far the false positives shown exclude images where
any object of interest is present. Fig. 25 shows false positives for the “person” class, where people are present in
the image. These represent “near miss” detections where the
predicted bounding box does not meet the VOC overlap criterion of 50%. As noted, this class presents particular challenges because of the high variability in pose and articulation. As can be seen in Fig. 25a/b, the localisation of these
false positives for the IRISA and UoCTTI methods is generally quite good, e.g. the top of the bounding box matches the
top of the head, and the person is horizontally centred in the
bounding box. The failure modes here are mainly inaccurate
prediction of the vertical extent of the person (Fig. 25a and
Fig. 25b, 1st and 2nd image) due e.g. to occlusion, and failure on non-frontal poses (Fig. 25b, 1st and 5th images). This
is a limitation of current methods using ﬁxed aspect ratio
bounding boxes, which is a poor model of the possible imaged appearance of a person. The false positive in Fig. 25a,
1st image, is accounted for by the “person on X” approach
taken by the IRISA method. The high ranked near misses
output by the INRIA Normal method (Fig. 25c) mostly cover
multiple people, and might be accounted for by capturing
person “texture” but not layout.
As noted in Sect. 4.2.2, in the 2007 challenge we introduced a “person layout” taster to further evaluate the ability
of person detectors to correctly “parse” images of people,
and motivate research into methods giving more detailed interpretation of scenes containing people.
6.2.5 Effect of object size on detection accuracy
As in the classiﬁcation task, it is interesting to investigate
how object size affects the accuracy of the submitted detection methods, particularly for those such as the Oxford
method which makes use of interest point detection, which
may fail for small objects, and the INRIA PlusClass method
which combines sliding window detection with a whole image classiﬁer.
We followed a corresponding procedure to that for the
classiﬁcation task, creating a series of test sets in which
all objects smaller than a threshold area were removed
from consideration. For the detection task, this was done by
adding a “difﬁcult” annotation to such objects, so that they
count neither as false positives or negatives. Fig. 26 shows
results of the experiments for a representative set of classes.
For each plot, the x-axis shows the threshold on object size,
as a proportion of image size, for an object to be included
in the evaluation. For each threshold, the AP was measured
and is shown on the y-axis.
min area (%)
INRIA_PlusClass
INRIA_Normal
MPI_Center
min area (%)
INRIA_PlusClass
MPI_Center
INRIA_Normal
(b) motorbike
Fig. 26 Detection results as a function of object size. Plots show results for two representative classes. For each plot the x-axis shows the lower
threshold on object size for an object to be included in the test set; the y-axis shows the corresponding AP. A threshold of 30% means that all
objects smaller than 30% of the image area were ignored in the evaluation (contributing neither true nor false positives); a threshold of 0% means
that no objects were ignored.
As Fig. 26 shows, all submitted methods have lower AP
for very small objects below around 2% image area. For the
“car” class (Fig. 26a), the accuracy of most methods does
not increase if objects less than 5% area are removed from
the evaluation, indicating limited preference for large objects. For the INRIA Normal and IRISA methods the AP
can be seen to fall slightly with increasing object size, indicating that some highly ranked correct detections are for
small objects. For the “motorbike” class (Fig. 26b), the IN-
RIA PlusClass and MPI ESSOL methods peak for objects
above around 17% image area, the IRISA and UoCTTI methods show no clear preference for large objects, and AP for
all other methods increases monotonically with object size.
Three methods show substantial correlation between object size and AP: MPI Center, MPI ESSOL and Oxford. The
MPI Center method outputs a ﬁxed bounding box with area
51% of the image, and conﬁdence determined by a global
image classiﬁer. This clearly biases results to images where
most of the image is covered by the object of interest, and
while an interesting baseline (as intended), is not a successful strategy since many of the objects in the dataset are
small. The MPI ESSOL method has two aspects which may
bias it toward larger objects: (i) it combines a whole image
classiﬁer with a sliding window detector to “score” detections; (ii) it incorporates a log Gaussian prior on object size,
ﬁt by maximum likelihood to the training data, and this prior
may have biased results toward large objects. The Oxford
method relies on scale-invariant interest point operators to
provide candidate detections, and the lack of interest points
on small objects may explain the correlation between its accuracy and object size.
6.2.6 Detection results on the VOC2006 test set
As in the classiﬁcation task, participants in the detection task
of the 2007 challenge were asked to additionally submit results on the VOC2006 dataset, trained using the VOC2007
Participants submitted classiﬁcation results on both test
sets for 3 methods. Table 7 summarises the results, showing
the AP (%) obtained for each method, class and test set. The
ﬁnal row shows the maximum AP obtained by any method
in the 2006 challenge, trained on the VOC2006 data. Since
participants submitted results for different subsets of classes,
the results have not been summarised e.g. by median AP as
in the classiﬁcation task.
For all but one class the ranking of methods by AP is
the same for the VOC2007 and VOC2006 datasets, suggesting that methods performing well on VOC2007 are “intrinsically” more successful, rather than obtaining good results
due to excessive ﬁtting of the statistics of the VOC2007 data.
For the “cat” class, the UoCTTI method comes ﬁrst and the
Oxford method second, reversing the order on VOC2007,
but the difference in AP is small (53.5% vs. 55.5%).
Particularly encouraging is the observation that for 7 out
of 10 classes a method submitted in 2007 achieves greater
AP than any of the 2006 methods. The UoCTTI method exceeds the 2006 results on 7 of the 10 classes entered, the
Oxford method on all four classes entered, and the IRISA
method on 4 of the 8 classes entered. The improvement
is substantial, e.g. 19.1% AP on the “bus” class (Oxford)
and 9.8% on the “person” class (UoCTTI). While it is possible that the improvement is due to the VOC2007 training/validation data being more “useful”, this effect was not
observed for the classiﬁcation task. It therefore seems likely
that the results represent measurable progress in object detection.
6.3 Segmentation
All participants in the detection challenge were automatically entered into the segmentation challenge by deriving
Table 7 Comparison of detection results on VOC2006 vs. VOC2007 test sets. All methods were trained on the VOC2007 training/validataion
set. The AP measure (%) is shown for each method, class, and test set. The ﬁnal row (VOC2006) lists the best result obtained in the VOC2006
challenge, trained using the VOC2006 training/validation set. Bold entries denote the maximum AP for each dataset and class. Bold entries in the
ﬁnal row indicate where results obtained in 2006 exceeded those obtained in 2007.
Test on 2007
Test on 2006
Ground truth
Kohli et al
Fig. 27 Example segmentation results. Columns show: test images,
ground truth annotations, segmentations from Kohli et al and
segmentations derived from the bounding boxes of the TKK detection
a segmentation from the inferred bounding boxes (overlaps were resolved heuristically). In addition, only one
segmentation-speciﬁc method was submitted, by Lubor
Ladicky, Pushmeet Kohli and Philip Torr of Oxford Brookes
University . Example segmentations from
this team and from the TKK automatic entry are shown in
Fig. 27. The best overall performance was given by one of
the “automatic” participants (segmentation derived algorithmically from detection), most likely due to an unﬁnished
segmentation-only entry. In future challenges, it is anticipated that methods which are optimised for the segmentation problem will outperform automatic detection entries. In
any case, providing a challenge which directly compares detection and segmentation methods should help encourage innovation in how to combine these two types of methods to
best effect.
6.4 Person Layout
Only one result was submitted for the person layout taster,
by Martin Bergtholdt, J¨org Hendrik Kappes and Christoph
Schn¨orr of the University of Mannheim . Fig. 28 shows some example results for this method.
(a) correct localisation
(b) incorrect localisation
Fig. 28 Example person layout results for the Mannheim method. For
each image the ground truth bounding boxes are shown in white, and
the predicted bounding boxes colour-coded: yellow for “head” and
cyan for “hand”.
For some images, where the person is in a “canonical”
frontal pose, the method successfully localises the parts
(Fig. 28a). For more varied poses, the method fails to predict
the correct locations, or confuses hands and feet (Fig. 28b).
Despite some correct results, the ranking of results by the
method’s conﬁdence output is poor, such that the measured
AP is zero. This raised the question of whether the evaluation criterion adopted for VOC2007 is sufﬁciently sensitive,
and as described in Sect. 4.2.2, the requirements for the person layout taster have been relaxed for the VOC2008 challenge.
7 Discussion and the Future
The VOC challenge has already had a signiﬁcant, and we
believe positive, impact in terms of providing a rich, standardised dataset for the community and an evaluation framework for comparing different methods. Participation in the
challenges has increased steadily since their ﬁrst introduc-
tion, as has the use of the VOC dataset beyond the challenge
itself. For example, in CVPR07 the VOC dataset was referenced in 15 papers; in CVPR08 this number increased to
27, i.e. almost a year-to-year doubling of the dataset’s popularity. To retain this popularity, the challenge must evolve
to meet the requirements and address the criticisms of the
research community. In the following sections we discuss
some criticisms of the challenge, look at how the challenge
is evolving through the taster competitions, and suggest directions in which the dataset and challenge can be improved
and extended in the future.
7.1 Criticisms
No benchmark remains without criticism for long, and the
VOC challenge has not been an exception. A common objection raised about any competition of this sort is that:
“Datasets stiﬂe innovation, because the community concentrates effort on this data to the exclusion of others”. While
it is difﬁcult to avoid this effect completely, if the challenge
is well ahead of capabilities then it will not necessarily stiﬂe
the types of methods used. Datasets have a shelf life, and as
performance starts to saturate a new one is needed to drive
research. Conversely, it is also necessary for datasets to remain consistent, so that they can be used to gauge progress
made by the community. Assessing progress is difﬁcult if
the test (and training) set are different every time the challenge is run. The VOC challenge aims to meet these apparently contradictory goals of innovation and consistency
by introducing separate “taster” challenges to promote research in new directions (see the next section), while retaining the existing classiﬁcation and detection competitions so
that progress can be consistently tracked.
Fostering innovation is also a question of the attitude
of the community as a whole: it is important that we do
not discourage novel approaches to object recognition simply because they do not yet achieve the greatest success as
measured by our benchmarks. High methodological novelty
must not be sacriﬁced on the altar of benchmark ranking,
and this is the last thing the VOC challenge is intended to
achieve. An important part of encouraging novel methods is
our selection of speakers for the annual challenge workshop,
where we have given time to both particularly successful,
and particularly interesting methods.
A further criticism raised against the VOC series of
challenges in particular is that the level of difﬁculty is
too high, thereby obscuring the way forward. However,
methods submitted in 2007 for the detection task demonstrated substantial improvements over those submitted in
2006 (see Sect. 6.2.6). We are of the opinion that providing
researchers with such challenging, yet natural, data is only
stimulating progress. It is the very fact of being well ahead
of current capabilities which makes the dataset so useful.
In contrast, datasets for which performance is “saturated”
are likely to encourage ﬁne tuning of implementation details
rather than fundamental progress, and such progress may be
unmeasurable, being lost in the noise.
A fundamental question is whether the VOC challenges
are probing for the right kind of tasks. In a recent paper,
Pinto et al criticised the use of “natural” images altogether, arguing for the use of synthetic data (e.g. rendered
3D models) for which one has better control over the variability in the data – parameter settings can be sampled at will
and annotation is not needed, as perfect ground truth is available by design. In their view, this is a much better way to
generate the variability that is needed to critically test recognition performance. This issue of whether to use natural images or completely control imaging conditions is an ongoing debate in the psychophysics community. In our case, the
VOC datasets have been designed to contain large variability
in pose, illumination, occlusion, etc. Moreover, correlations
that occur in the real world are captured, whereas synthetic
datasets cannot be expected to reﬂect those faithfully.
7.2 Taster competitions
The taster competitions, which make demands of methods
quite far ahead of the state-of-the-art, aim to play a key part
in encouraging fundamental research progress. These were
introduced in 2007 to encourage both diversity of approach
and the development of more powerful methods to address
these more demanding tasks. For example, the segmentation
competition not only requires much more precise localisation of objects than the detection task, but it has also been
set up to allow either detection-based or segmentation-based
approaches to be used. The hope is that the two approaches
are complementary, so that detection methods can be used
to improve segmentation performance and vice-versa. This
belief is justiﬁed by the similar situation which has already
arisen between the classiﬁcation and detection tasks, where
global image classiﬁcation has aided detection performance
(see Sect. 5.2). By encouraging participants to blend the best
aspects of different methodologies, a greater diversity of approaches will be encouraged.
It is inevitable that any challenge is very much of its
time, only testing what can be thought of by current practitioners, governed by current methods and hardware, and to
some extent unaware of these limitations. Through the use
of the taster competitions, the VOC challenge is being updated to allow a broader range of approaches and to address
more current research issues. However, it is recognised that
the challenge must continue to adapt and remain agile in
responding to the needs and concerns of the growing community of researchers who use the datasets and participate
in the competitions.
7.3 The Future
In the area of object class recognition, a lot of progress is
being made and the requirements for a benchmark evolve
quickly with this evolution. Here we give a non-exhaustive
list of aspects which could be improved or added in future
VOC challenges.
More object classes. A ﬁrst and rather obvious extension is
to increase the number of annotated object classes. A primary goal here is to put more emphasis on the issue of
scalability – running as many detectors as there are object
classes may not remain a viable strategy, although this is by
far the dominant approach today. Different aspects of detection schemes may become important, for example the ability to share features between classes ,
or exploit properties of multiple “parent” classes . Introducing more classes would also stimulate research in discrimination between more visually similar classes, and in exploiting semantic relations between
classes, for example in the form of a class hierarchy. However, increasing the number of classes will also pose additional difﬁculties to the running of the VOC challenge: (i) it
will prove more difﬁcult to collect sufﬁcient data per class;
(ii) it raises questions of how to annotate objects accurately,
for example labelling an object as “van” vs. “truck” is often subjective; (iii) evaluation of recognition must be more
ﬂexible, for example a method might assign a class from
{hatchback,car,vehicle} and be assigned varying “scores”
dependent on accuracy or level of detail.
Object parts. VOC2007 introduced annotation of body
parts in order to evaluate and encourage development of
methods capable of more detailed image annotation than
object location alone. Such more detailed indication of the
parts of objects is an important direction to pursue. Although
many techniques today start from local features, these features typically have very little to do with the semantic parts
of the objects. However, often the purpose of object detection and recognition is to support interaction with objects
(e.g. in robotics). A good understanding of where parts are
(arms, wheels, keyboards, etc.) is often essential to make
such practical use of object recognition, and should be incorporated into at least a component of the evaluation scheme.
Thus far, VOC has conﬁned itself to object classes and
annotation where “discrete” objects can be identiﬁed. With
the introduction of the segmentation taster, it is natural to
also include “stuff” classes (grass, sky, etc.) and additionally
consider annotation of classes which can appear as “stuff”
in the distance e.g. “person” vs. “crowd” – images containing such ambiguities are currently omitted from the VOC
Beyond nouns. Increasingly, vision researchers are forging
strong links with text analysis, and are exploiting tools coming from that area such as WordNet . Part
of this endeavour is to build vision systems that can exploit and/or generate textual descriptions of scenes. This
entails bringing objects (nouns) in connection with actions
(verbs) and attributes (adjectives and adverbs). As progress
in this direction continues, it will be appropriate to introduce
benchmarks for methods producing richer textual descriptions of a scene than the “noun + position” outputs which
are currently typical. The interest in methods for exploiting
textual description at training time also suggests alternative
weaker forms of annotation for the dataset than bounding
boxes; we discuss this further below.
Scene dynamics. Thus far, the VOC challenge has focused
entirely on classifying and detecting objects in still images
(also the case for VOC2008). Including video clips would
expand the challenge in several ways: (i) as training data
it would support learning richer object models, for example
3D or “multi-aspect”. Video of objects with varying viewing
direction would provide relations between parts implicitly
available through tracking; (ii) as test data it would enable
evaluation of new tasks: object recognition from video (e.g.
people), and recognition of actions. This would also bring
the VOC challenge into the domain of other benchmarks,
e.g. TRECVID which includes an “interactive search” task
with increasing emphasis on events/actions such as “a door
being opened” or “a train in motion”.
Alternative annotation methods. Manual annotation is timeconsuming and therefore expensive. For example, annotation of the VOC2008 dataset required around 700 person
hours. Moreover, since the VOC challenge runs annually,
new test data is required each year in order to avoid participants having access to the ground truth annotations and
over-ﬁtting on the test set. Increasing the level of annotation, for example by increasing the number of classes, only
makes annotation more time-consuming.
We also found that when increasing the number of
classes, from 10 in 2006 to 20 in 2007, annotators made
many more mistakes as they failed to hold in memory the
complete set of classes to be annotated. This in turn required
more time to be allocated to checking and correction to ensure high quality annotation. This raises several questions
concerning: how the annotation format relates to ease-ofannotation, how much agreement there is between different
human annotators e.g. on bounding box position, and how
the annotation tools affect annotation quality. To date, we
have not yet gathered data during the checking process that
could help answer these questions and this is something we
aim to rectify in future years. Annotating pixel-wise segmentations instead of bounding boxes puts even higher pressure on the sustainability of manual annotation. If object
parts, attributes and especially video are to be added in future, then the method of annotation will certainly need to
evolve in concert with the annotation itself. Possibilities include recruiting help from a much larger pool of volunteers
(in the footsteps of LabelMe), combined with a centralised
effort to check quality and make corrections. We are also
investigating the use of systems like Mechanical Turk to
recruit and pay for annotation . Alternatively, commercial annotation initiatives could be considered, like the aforementioned
Lotus Hill dataset , in combination with
sampled quality inspection.
As noted above, there has recently been considerable interest in learning recognition from “weak” supervision . This suggests
alternative forms of annotation which could be introduced,
for example per-image annotation with keywords or phrases
(e.g. “red car in a street scene”). Such annotation could be
provided alone for some images, in addition to a set of images with more precise annotation, providing complementary supervision for training at low cost. Another possibility for “lighter” annotation is to collect (possibly additional)
training images directly from a web search engine (such as
Google image search) . The additional
complication here is that such data is typically noisy, in
that only a subset of the images are relevant to the supplied
search terms.
The future is bright. There has been tremendous progress in
object class recognition this decade. At the turn of the millennium, few would have dreamt that by now the community
would have such impressive performance on both classiﬁcation and detection for such varied object classes as bicycles,
cars, cows, sheep, and even for the archetypal functional
class of chairs. This progress has gone hand in hand with
the development of image databases — which have provided
both the training data necessary for researchers to work in
this area; and the testing data necessary to track the improvements in performance. The VOC challenge has played a vital
part in this endeavour, and we hope that it will continue to
Acknowledgements
The preparation and running of the VOC challenge is supported by the EU-funded PASCAL Network of Excellence on
Pattern Analysis, Statistical Modelling and Computational
We gratefully acknowledge the VOC2007 annotators:
Moray Allan, Patrick Buehler, Terry Herbert, Anitha Kannan, Julia Lasserre, Alain Lehmann, Mukta Prasad, Till
Quack, John Quinn, Florian Schroff. We are also grateful
to James Philbin, Ondra Chum, and Felix Agakov for additional assistance.
Finally we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their detailed and insightful comments.