Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
A Study of the Effectiveness of the
Louisiana Algebra I Online Course
Laura M. O’Dwyer
Boston College
Rebecca Carey and glenn kleiman
Education Development Center, Inc.
Student enrollment in K–12 online learning programs showed a tenfold expansion in the
years between 2002 and 2005. Despite increased implementation to fulfill critical local needs,
there is very little evidence-based research available to inform education leaders’ decisions
relating to these initiatives. To address the important question of whether online learning
can be as effective as traditional face-to-face learning, this research presents the findings from
a quasi-experimental design implemented to examine the effect of the Louisiana Algebra I
Online initiative on student outcomes. The findings presented suggest that the Louisiana
Algebra I Online model is a viable online model for providing effective Algebra I instruction.
(Keywords: online learning, algebra I, virtual learning, distance learning.)
Increasing numbers of schools and districts are implementing online courses
for students. Estimates of student enrollment in K–12 online learning programs
show a tenfold expansion in four years, from an estimated 40,000–50,000 students
during the 2001-2002 school year, to more than 520,000 in the 2004-2005 school
year . In addition to helping
address shortages of qualified teachers in specific subject areas and geographical
regions, online learning also offers schools and districts the opportunity to broaden
the variety of course offerings available to students . These advantages are particularly salient given the current mandates of
No Child Left Behind for improving student achievement and for providing
all students with highly qualified teachers. Rural schools are leading the way in
online course enrollment with 46% of rural districts reporting that their students
were participating in distance education courses compared with 28% in urban
school districts and 23% in suburban districts . Within the
umbrella term “distance education” or “online learning” there are myriad models
through which coursework can be delivered. for example, during the 2002-2003
school year, many districts reported that they used two-way videoconferencing
to teach classes (55%) while others described asynchronous computer-based
instruction delivered via the Internet (47%) . other
online models include pre-recorded video instruction, synchronous computerbased courses delivered via the Internet, or using other technologies such as
teleconferencing or CD-RoM to provide instruction to students.
While online learning programs are becoming more widely used by K–12 schools
and districts, there is very little evidence-based research available to guide education
leaders’ choice of initiative. for example, there has been very little high quality
JoURNAL of RESEARCh oN TEChNoLoGy IN EDUCATIoN, 39(3), 289–306
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
research on the effectiveness of online learning at the high school level compared
to traditional face-to-face learning, and almost no research on curriculum specific
interventions. for example, in a meta-analysis of 19 research studies that examined
K–12 online programs, Cavanaugh reported that there was preliminary
evidence that suggests that students in online courses do as well as students who
receive face-to-face instruction. however, only 10% of the studies examined by
Cavanaugh employed an experimental or quasi-experimental approach. Similarly,
another meta-analysis conducted by Ungerleider and Burns found that only
two of the 232 studies that focused on online learning at the K–12 level met their
criteria of being “empirically sound” (i.e., used experimental or quasi-experimental
methods, used appropriate data analyses, and made conclusions appropriate to the
methodology used).
Looking to the research that has been conducted in online learning environments
in higher education settings, several studies have found that online learning
programs provide students and teachers with quite different learning and teaching
environments than those provided in traditional, face-to-face settings . The
distinguishing characteristics include class structure , the
level and types of peer-to-peer and student-teacher interactions that take place
 , and the lack of “social presence”
during the learning process . While many studies of higher education learning outcomes have
found no statistical differences in achievement for online courses compared to
traditional, face-to-face courses, there remains concern that the quality and depth
of learning may be affected in online courses . Mediating variables that may promote or hinder learning
success in an online environment have been isolated in several studies and these
include students’ attitudes towards the online environment and their beliefs about the efficacy of online learning .
While much of the available research on online learning focuses on higher
education settings, these studies provide us with a framework for understanding
how and why student outcomes in K–12 online distance learning programs may
be different from those in traditional, face-to-face courses. The current lack of
sound empirical evidence about the impacts of online learning in K–12 settings
is troublesome given its widespread and growing use and the costs incurred from
limited school budgets to support its use. Since many online learning initiatives are
implemented to fulfill critical local needs, the important question is whether online
learning can be as effective as traditional, face-to-face learning. That is, do students
who participate in online learning initiatives perform as well as students who
participate in traditional, face-to-face courses? Also of interest is whether students in
online learning programs engage in different types of peer-to-peer interactions than
students in traditional courses and whether they differ in how they perceive their
learning. With these questions in mind, we conducted this research to examine how
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
student outcomes from one particular type of K–12 online distance learning model
compared with those of students in a traditional, face-to-face course.
The 2004-2005 school year implementation of the Louisiana Algebra I online
project provided a unique opportunity to use a quasi-experimental design to
examine these questions. This online distance learning initiative, a program of
the Louisiana Virtual School (LVS), was first implemented in 2002. During the
2004-2005 school year, 257 students from 18 intact classrooms in six school
districts and two private schools participated in the initiative. Designed for schools
in which a sufficient number of certified mathematics teachers were not available,
the goal of the initiative was to improve educational opportunities for students by
providing them with a high-quality, standards-based curriculum delivered online by
a certified mathematics teacher. Additionally, this highly qualified teacher mentored
a classroom teacher who was not certified to teach mathematics. The innovation of
the Louisiana model is that it enables a school to have a certified teacher available
when one is not locally present, while still providing students with the structure and
opportunities afforded by regular class meetings.
With its large number of rural school districts in which teacher recruitment
and retention remain problems, Louisiana faces a particular challenge in helping
students gain proficiency in mathematics. According to Beeson and Strange ,
26.3% of public school students in Louisiana are enrolled in rural school districts.
of this percentage, 31.7% of the students are classified as minority students and
21.5% live in poverty. overall, 90.5% of Louisiana’s teachers were classified as
“highly qualified” during the 2003-2004 school year. however, when the data
are disaggregated by school poverty level, it is evident that high poverty schools in
Louisiana have lower percentages of highly qualified teachers. for example, during
the 2003-2004 school year, only 86.5% of the teachers were considered highly
qualified in the high poverty schools, compared to the 93.1% of teachers in low
poverty schools .
ThE LOUISIANA ALgEBRA I ONLINE PROJECT
Students enrolled in the Louisiana Algebra I online program participated in
an algebra class that met on a standard class schedule, with all students meeting
together in a technology-equipped classroom. Each student had a multimedia,
Internet-connected computer during class time where the course curriculum and
materials could be accessed. Students who had access to an Internet-connected
computer at home or elsewhere could access their course materials outside of
the school day. Each student benefited by having two teachers: an experienced
secondary certified mathematics teacher who was available online and a teacher
available in the classroom who was not certified to teach mathematics. In addition
to giving students access to two teachers, this approach provided a unique
professional development model for the in-class teachers since they worked
throughout the year with a highly qualified mathematics teacher who was available
The Algebra I online course used a curriculum designed by the Louisiana
Center for Educational Technology (LCET) and the Louisiana School for Math,
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
Science, and the Arts (LSMSA). The course was aligned to the National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) standards and the Louisiana state content
standards, benchmarks, and Grade Level Expectations (GLEs) ( 
la.us ). Delivered via the Blackboard online learning platform, the course design
incorporated e-mail, Internet tools such as Java Applets, and video into the lessons.
Students also used graphing calculators and Graphire 2 Digital Tablets™ with a
stylus and handwriting capture system. Students in the comparison classrooms
received the traditional or “business as usual” approach to algebra instruction and
the curriculum and textbooks used in both the treatment and comparison group
classrooms addressed the same content standards and learning goals as outlined in
the Louisiana GLEs ( 
The online teacher served as the teacher of record for the students in the Algebra
I online classrooms and as a mentor and model to the in-class teacher. The online
teachers were expected to respond to the students’ questions and assignments in
a timely manner, to provide feedback on homework, tests, and discussion board
postings, to keep the students and the in-class teacher informed about student
progress and status, maintain the schedule in the course delivery system used
for the online course, provide whole group and individual communications and
instruction, and stay in constant contact with the in-class teacher. The online
teachers reported grades to LVS on a regular basis and maintained e-mail backups
to submit to LVS three times a year.
The in-class teachers, most of whom were either certified in other areas or
were working toward a secondary mathematics teaching credential, followed the
curriculum guide to facilitate face-to-face learning activities and collaborated with
the online teachers in guiding and supporting the students. Their responsibilities
included creating an atmosphere conducive to learning in the classroom, assisting
students with technology, supervising and guiding the Algebra I students through
the coursework, working with students when problems arose, staying in constant
contact with the online teacher, providing feedback on activity days, and proctoring
tests and exams. Both the in-class and online teachers participated in workshops to
prepare them for participation in the Algebra I online initiative .
In the first year of the course delivery , the Southwest Educational
Development Laboratory (SEDL) included the Algebra I online course as part
of a study to determine the quality and effectiveness of curriculum, instruction,
and student assessment in online courses. The study reported that the Algebra I
online program “meets the criteria” of an effective and quality Web-based course
for middle and high school students based on (1) alignment with state standards,
(2) providing resources that enrich course content, (3) providing opportunities for
students to engage in abstract thinking and critical reasoning skills, (4) providing
appropriate student-to-student, as well as teacher-to-student interactions.
STUDY DESIgN AND SAMPLE ChARACTERISTICS
A quasi-experimental design was used to examine the impact of the Louisiana
Algebra I online initiative on student outcomes. Under this design, student
outcomes for those receiving the treatment were compared with those of students
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
in matched comparison classrooms. Implemented in 18 intact classrooms in six
school districts and two private schools, a total of 257 students participated in the
Louisiana Algebra I online project during the 2004-2005 school year. To enroll
in the Algebra I online program, districts were required to demonstrate a need for
certified mathematics teachers and a desire to provide professional development
to teachers interested in obtaining certification in secondary mathematics.
District leaders were asked to identify the schools in which the program was to be
implemented, the teachers who would serve as in-class teachers for the Algebra I
program, and a comparison classroom.
According to the NCES 2001-02 School District Locator, four participating
districts qualified as rural or small town districts and the remaining two were
classified as urban fringe of mid-size city districts. All six districts had previously
participated in the Algebra I online program during the 2003-2004 school year,
and two had participated in the pilot year in 2002-03. The Algebra I online
course was available to students in Grades 8 and 9 and there were no academic
prerequisites for enrolling in the course. The course was not intended for those who
had previously failed algebra, so regardless of grade, students were taking Algebra
I for the first time. Since online learning makes certain demands upon students
beyond those in face-to-face algebra courses, the districts and schools were asked to
avoid selecting students on the basis of prior mathematics achievement and instead
to consider students’ ability to work independently and communication skills when
selecting students for the Algebra I online course. Students who were deemed
eligible to participate in the project were then assigned to classrooms that would
receive the intervention.
The majority of teachers who served as in-class teachers for the Algebra I online
program did not hold a secondary mathematics certification. Approximately 50%
of these teachers were certified to teach elementary education and the remainder
held certifications in middle school mathematics, special education, health and
physical education. The average number of years teaching for the in-class teachers
was 8.5, and they taught an average of five classes per semester with an average class
size of 21 students.
Districts were asked to identify comparison classrooms that were similar with
regard to mathematics ability, environment, and size, but where teachers used
traditional “business as usual” approaches to teaching algebra. In Louisiana, the
only requirement for a traditional algebra classroom is for the teachers to cover
the Louisiana content standards and benchmarks, as well as the Grade Level
Expectations ( While there was ongoing professional
development on effective classroom strategies, there was no statewide mandate on
how the classes should be taught. Since the comparison group teachers were not
required to alter instruction it was anticipated that these classes might make use
of some technologies. In fact, when survey data from the comparison classrooms
were analyzed, 76.2% of students reported using technology during their
traditional, face-to-face algebra course. of these students, 83.7% said they used a
graphing calculator, 9.8% said they used online simulations, 17.6% said they used
spreadsheets, and 2% reported using e-mail.
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
Eighty-five percent of the teachers in the comparison classrooms were certified to
teach secondary math. The average number of years teaching for these teachers was
11.7, and similar to the in-class participating teachers, teachers in the comparison
classrooms reported teaching an average of five classes per semester with an average
class size of 22 students.
The online teachers were selected on the basis of their outstanding teaching
credentials and were identified by the Louisiana Department of Education to be
at the level of “mentor teachers.” They were master teachers who were certified to
teach secondary mathematics and experienced with technology.
To assess the fidelity of the implementation of the Algebra I online program,
classroom observations were conducted in a convenience sample of the treatment
group classrooms; nine of the 18 classrooms made up this convenience sample.
The classroom observations documented the types of instructional phases (i.e.,
transition, whole group instruction/discussion, student individual work, etc.), the
roles fulfilled by the in-class teacher, and types of student interactions across the
treatment classrooms. Additional observational data recorded how the technologies
were used and how the classrooms were set-up. With two trained observers in each
of nine classrooms, the classroom observation data showed high levels of similarity
among the activities being conducted across the treatment classrooms, and in each
case these activities were directly linked with how the course content was presented.
for example, in each of the treatment classrooms, students used technology to
“analyze information,” “evaluate information,” and “self-assess or assess” their own
work or work from classmates .
INSTRUMENTS
Three instruments were used to gather data from students in the treatment
and comparison classrooms. These were (a) a pretest designed to assess general
mathematics ability, (b) a posttest aligned with Louisiana’s GLEs in Algebra I,
and (c) a survey to gather data about students’ experiences in both the traditional
face-to-face course and the Algebra I online course .
Administered in September 2004, the pretest comprised 25 multiple-choice
items that assessed students’ general mathematics ability and mathematics
comprehension. Scores from the pretest were used to examine the equivalence of
the treatment and comparison groups prior to the implementation of the Algebra I
online Project. The Cronbach’s alpha estimate of reliability for the pretest was 0.70.
The posttest, administered in June 2005, was also a 25-item multiple choice test
but was aligned with the Algebra I online course objectives and Louisiana’s GLEs
outlined by the Louisiana Department of Education. The Cronbach’s alpha estimate
of reliability for the posttest was 0.81.
To ensure the content validity of the posttest for assessing Algebra I learning, two
mathematics educators with experience developing curriculum and assessments
mapped the items on the test to the Louisiana GLE and Algebra standards, rated
them for levels of difficulty, and subsequently selected 20 to represent a balanced
sample of the Louisiana GLEs with varying levels of difficulty .
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
To examine criterion validity evidence for these assessments, the correlations
between the pretest and posttest scores and students’ standardized test scores
 were calculated. At grade eight, the Louisiana
Educational Assessment Program (LEAP) assessment scores for students in the
Algebra I online course were compiled. Similarly at grade nine, student scores on
the norm-referenced Iowa Test of Educational Development (Iowa) assessment
( were compiled. for both tests, only an overall math
score was available and so it was not possible to separate the Algebra strand from the
general mathematics score. Despite this, the correlations between the eighth grade
LEAP data and the pretest and posttest scores were moderately strong and positive
at 0.55 and 0.67, respectively. for the ninth grade Iowa data, the correlations were
0.50 and 0.55, respectively. In terms of criterion validity evidence, the magnitude
and direction of the relationship suggests that scores on the pre- and posttest
measures were related in a valid way to scores on the state tests.
Surveys were administered to all students to gather additional information
about students’ experiences and their reactions to their Algebra I courses. Due to
student confidentiality concerns, students’ survey responses could not be linked
to individual students and their test scores. for this reason, student survey data
provided only general information about student characteristics and their views
about their participation in the project. A 38-item survey was administered online
to students in the treatment classrooms. This instrument was designed to collect
data about students’ confidence levels with algebra and technology, their experience
in class, their use of technology, and how they interacted with one another and their
Students in the comparison classrooms were administered a 10 item paperand-pencil survey that was designed to collect data about the comparison group
students’ comfort level with algebra and technology, their experience in the class,
their use of technology during their traditional, face-to-face course, and how they
interacted with one another in the course.
for the treatment group, pretest achievement data were gathered from 261
students and posttest data were collected from 231 students. of the 231 students
who completed both the pretest and posttest, survey responses were collected from
213; 179 eighth grade students and 52 ninth grade students. This resulted in a
survey response rate of approximately 92% in the treatment group. Within the
comparison classrooms, pretest data were collected from 360 students and posttest
data from 232 students. of the 232 students that completed both the pretest
and posttest, survey responses were gathered from 207 students; 91 eighth grade
students and 141 ninth grade students. The resulting survey response rate in the
comparison group was approximately 89%. Since students in the treatment group
and comparison groups were taking Algebra I for the first time regardless of grade,
data from both grades were combined for analysis.
In the treatment and comparison classrooms, pretest achievement data were
gathered from 621 students and posttest data were collected 463 students. Since
158 students who had taken the pretest did not take the posttest, patterns of non-
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
completion were examined. Approximately half of the students who were missing
posttest scores appeared to be missing at random within classrooms. The remaining
students with missing posttest scores appeared to be from comparison group
classrooms where the range of missing scores within classrooms was between 50%
and 100%. The mean pretest score for all students with missing posttest scores
(13.25) was statistically significantly lower than the mean for the students who
had taken both the pretest and the posttest (14.90) (t = -3.99, df = 146, p < .001).
The analyses of student outcomes presented here were conducted using only those
students for whom pre- and post-invention outcomes were available for a total of
463 students.
Pretest data were used to examine the equivalence of the treatment and
comparison group classrooms prior to the implementation of the intervention.
With a maximum possible score of 25 points, Table 1 shows that the mean pretest
score for the comparison group students was 14.99 points, and the mean for the
treatment group was 14.91 points. The difference between the treatment and
comparison group means on the pretest was not statistically significant (t = 0.27, df
= 461, p = 0.788).
The mean posttest score for the comparison group was 14.61 points and the
treatment group mean was 15.27 points. Similar to the pretest, the comparison
group posttest scores were slightly more variable than the treatment groups’ scores;
5.37 compared to 4.50.
Pre-to-posttest gain scores were not examined because the pre- and posttests were
not psychometrically equivalent. Instead, a multilevel regression model in which
students pretest scores were included as a covariate was used to examine the effect
of the intervention on students’ posttest scores. Specifically, students were modeled
as nested within classrooms, and posttest scores were modeled as a function of
students’ pretest scores at level-1 and a dummy variable representing treatment
or comparison group membership at level-2. Since the intervention was applied
at the classroom level and students were nested within classrooms, this approach
accounted for the hierarchical nature of the data .
In total, 463 treatment and comparison group students were nested within 33
classrooms.
Prior to inclusion in the two-level model, students’ pretest scores were adjusted
for measurement error or unreliability (recall that the Cronbach’s alpha for the
pretest was 0.70). While measurement error in the pretest and/or posttest may
reduce the precision of the estimate of the treatment effect; measurement error in
Total Pretest Score
Comparison group
Treatment group
Total Posttest Score
Comparison group
Treatment group
Table 1: Pretest and posttest means for treatment and comparison groups
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
the pretest in particular may also introduce a bias when estimating the regression
slope and in turn produce a biased estimate of the treatment effect . By correcting for unreliability in the pretest measure, the
regression coefficient in the multilevel model for the pretest scores was likely to be
an unbiased estimate of the population regression coefficient. 1
The results in Table 2 show the coefficients and the related significance levels
for the two-level regression model that included students’ adjusted pretest scores
at level-1 and students’ membership in a treatment or comparison classroom at
level-2. The model explained approximately 30% of the variability in students’
posttest scores. At level-1, the adjusted pretest scores were significant predictors of
students’ posttest scores (p < 0.001). The level-2 coefficient for the dummy variable
representing membership in the treatment or comparison group (1.85) indicates a
positive effect for group membership; that is, membership in the treatment group
was associated with slightly higher posttest scores. however the coefficient was not
statistically significant (p = 0.093) indicating that after controlling for scores on
the pretest, group membership was not statistically significantly related to students’
posttest scores. These results suggest that students in the participating Algebra I
online classrooms appear to have performed as well on the posttest as students
who participated in the traditional algebra I course. This finding is similar to that
reported in other studies which compared learning outcomes for online and face-toface courses .
To examine whether the groups differed in terms of their responses to particular
types of items on the post-intervention assessment, item-level means were
compared. The treatment classrooms’ mean was higher than the comparison
classrooms’ mean on 18 of the 25 items included on the posttest. The largest
group of items (5) that assessed a single skill related to students’ ability to “write an
algebraic expression from a real-world example” and for each of these five items, the
treatment group mean was higher than the comparison group mean. The difference
between the groups was statistically significant for four of the five items. of the
seven items on which the comparison group classrooms outscored the treatment
group classrooms, the difference between the comparison and treatment group
means was statistically significant for only three.
Coefficient
Level-1 Model
Adjusted Pretest Scores
Level-2 Model
Group Membership
Table 2: Reliability-Adjusted Two-Level Model to Predict Posttest Scores
1 The adjusted pretest scores were calculated using the formula
where r is the reliability of the pretest measure, in this case,
Cronbach’s alpha. The corrections for treatment and comparison groups were made
separately.
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
Survey responses from students in the treatment and comparison group
classrooms were also compared to examine whether students in the online learning
program engaged in different types of peer-to-peer interactions than students in
the traditional, face-to-face course and whether they differed in how they perceived
their learning. Students in the treatment group were asked several questions related
to their experiences in the Louisiana Algebra I online project. These questions
related to their perception about the difficulty of the course, their experiences with
the technology and the course materials, and the type and level of communication
they engaged in with the in-class and online teachers. Since students in the
treatment group were expected to use technology extensively throughout the
course, students were asked to describe their experience level with technology before
enrolling in the Algebra I online course. The majority of treatment group students
reported that they were either somewhat experienced (64.30%) or very experienced
(26.80%) with technology before enrolling in this course.
When asked to identify the characteristics that they most liked about the online
course, Table 3 shows that the largest percentage of students in the treatment group
classrooms agreed that they liked using technology to learn math (71.8%), working
with other students (68.5%), and having a new experience (59.2%). The pace of
the course was the least selected characteristic (23.9%).
The students in the treatment group classrooms were asked to identify the most
difficult aspect of the Algebra I course. Table 4 shows that 70% of students said
Percentage of students in treatment group
agreeing that they liked this aspect of the
Using technology to learn math
Working with other students
New experience
Activity days
Challenging material
having two teachers
The pace of the course
Table 3: Enjoyable Aspects of the Algebra I Online Course
Table 4: Treatment group Students Reported Difficult Aspects of the
Online Algebra I Course
Percentage of students in treatment
group agreeing that this was the
hardest thing about the course
Getting the assignments done on time
Getting used to a new class structure
Working independently
Using the technology
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
they found that getting their assignments done on time was the most difficult.
While about half the students reported finding it difficult to get used to the
new class structure, only 15% reported that using the technology was the most
challenging aspect. The online format likely required more independent work than
a traditional face-to-face course and only about one-third of the students reported
having difficulty working independently.
The treatment group was also administered survey items to gather information
about their experiences with the course materials and technologies that were most
helpful to them in learning algebra. Table 5 shows that the majority of treatment
group students identified the TI-83 graphing calculator as being the most helpful;
82.6% of treatment group students said that the graphing calculator was either very
helpful or extremely helpful. The Graphire 2 Digital Tablet, the animated tutorials,
and e-mail were also identified as being very or extremely helpful by the students in
the treatment group classrooms.
To investigate the role of the in-class teacher, the students in the treatment group
classrooms were asked how often they approach their in-class teacher with content
or technology questions. Table 6 shows that more than half (59.6%) the students
Discovering Algebra Textbook
Blackboard course
Animated tutorials
TI-83 Graphing Calculators
Graphire 2 Digital Tablet™
Table 5: Course Materials and Technologies Most helpful for the Treatment
group Students
how often did you ask
your in-class teacher
questions about Algebra
how often did you ask
your in-class teacher
questions about
technology?
frequency of the
communication with
the online teacher?
Table 6: Frequency of Students Asking In-Class Teachers about Content
or Technology
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
in the treatment group classrooms reported asking their in-class teacher about the
algebra content either a couple of times a week or every lesson. Conversely, a smaller
percentage of students reported asking their in-class teachers about technology more
than once a week; more than half the students in the treatment group classrooms
(64.4%) reported asking their in-class teacher questions about technology either
“never” or “every couple of weeks.” Table 6 also shows that almost half (44.6%) of
the treatment group students said that they communicated with their online teacher
during every lesson. fewer than 9% of treatment group students reported that they
almost never had e-mail communication with their online teacher.
on a similar note, the students in the treatment group classrooms were asked to
share their perceptions about the adequacy of the interaction between them and
the online teacher. When asked whether the online teacher-student interaction was
adequate for their needs, only 38% of the treatment group students said that the
interaction was adequate. When asked how helpful their online teacher was for
understanding algebra, approximately three-quarters of treatment group students
said that the online teacher was either “extremely helpful,” “very helpful,” or
“helpful.”
Several common survey items were administered to the treatment and
comparison group students to examine their Algebra I learning experiences. Table
7 shows that the majority of students in both groups reported that they had a good
or satisfactory learning experience in their respective Algebra I courses. A higher
percentage of treatment group students reported that they did not have a good
learning experience; 20.70% in the treatment group compared to 6.30% in the
comparison group. While these findings are similar to those of Allen, Bourhis,
Burrell, and Mabry who found that not all students were satisfied with their
online learning experiences or place a similar value on online learning, other studies
have found that students in online and traditional settings have similar levels of
satisfaction with their learning experience .
As Table 8 shows, a higher percentage of students in the comparison classrooms
reported feeling either confident or very confident in their algebra skills after
taking this course (67.6%) compared to the students from the treatment group
classrooms (49.8%). While this finding is interesting given that students in the
treatment classrooms had a mean posttest score that was similar to the mean in the
comparison classrooms, it is consistent with the findings from other studies that
suggest that students in online learning courses may have poorer perceptions of
their learning . The data also show that the students in the
treatment group classrooms reported higher rates of feeling either confident or very
confident in their technology skills after taking this course (79.8%) than did the
Satisfactory
Comparison Group Students
Treatment Group Students
Table 7: Student Responses to the Question “Did the Course Provide a
good Learning Experience?”
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
students from the comparison group (62.1%). This is not surprising considering the
online nature of the course.
Examination of peer-to-peer interactions was deemed important because the lack
of “social presence” during the learning process has been found to be an important
mediating variable for learning and attitudinal outcomes . for this reason, students in both
groups were asked about the circumstances under which they interacted with other
students in their Algebra I classroom. As the results in Table 9 show, the students
in the comparison classrooms reported spending less time interacting with other
students to talk about the math in the course; 68% in the comparison classrooms
compared to 84% in the treatment classrooms. The comparison group students also
spent less time working together on activities than the students in treatment group
classrooms; 60.9% compared to 86.9%. The amount of time spent socializing,
interacting to understand assignment directions, and working together on both
in-class assignments and homework were approximately equivalent across the two
groups. It would appear from the data that there was no perceived lack of “social
presence” among the treatment group students. This may have been due to the
hybrid nature of the course, whereby students benefited from meeting on a regular
class schedule with an in-class teacher and their peers while also having access to a
highly-qualified teacher online.
Confident Confident Somewhat
confidence in
algebra skills
Comparison 20.30%
confidence in
technology skills
Comparison 13.60%
Table 8: Student Confidence in their Algebra and Technology Skills
Treatment group
Comparison
group Students
To talk about the math in the course
To talk about the technology
To socialize
To understand assignment directions
To work together on in-class assignments
To work together on homework
To work together on activities
Table 9: Student Interaction in Treatment and Comparison Classrooms
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The Louisiana Algebra I online model was designed and implemented to bring
highly qualified mathematics teachers to students in places where they would not be
otherwise available, to provide students with the structure of a regular class period,
and to provide a unique professional development model for local teachers. To
address the critical need for evidence-based research to inform the proliferation of
online distance learning initiatives, this paper described a quasi-experiment that was
conducted to examine the effect of one particular model for online learning at the
high-school level on student performance; namely, the Louisiana Algebra I online
model. To complement the learning outcomes, survey responses from students in
the treatment and comparison group classrooms were examined. Recognizing that
content delivery methods (online versus traditional, face-to-face delivery) should
not hinder student learning, it was important for us to understand the experiences
of students in the treatment and comparison classrooms during their participation
in the Algebra I online course .
The survey data showed that the students in the treatment classrooms appeared
to have had adequate access to technology, enjoyed using technology to learn math,
and enjoyed the new learning experience. The students identified the characteristics
of the Algebra I online course that were most helpful to them in learning algebra
and these included graphing calculators, Graphire 2 Digital Tablet hardware, as
well as the animated tutorials and e-mail communications. The data showed that
in terms of implementation, the project was successful in providing adequate
and reliable technology access to those students participating in the course. Also,
with the majority of students reporting that they liked to use technology to learn
mathematics, students in the treatment classrooms appear to have responded
positively to the online learning environment in which the mathematics content
was presented.
The Algebra I online model also required changes to the type and level of
interaction between students and teachers, and among the students in the class. The
majority of students in the treatment classrooms felt that the interaction with their
online teacher was somewhat less than adequate or should have been a lot more.
With regard to peer-to-peer interactions, the students in the treatment classrooms
reported spending more time interacting with other students to talk about the
content of the course and working together on course activities. The amount
of time spent socializing, interacting to understand assignment directions, and
working together on both in-class assignments and homework were approximately
equivalent across the two groups. The types of interactions among the students
in the treatment classrooms appear to contradict the commonly held concern
that students in K–12 online classes will not remain on task. As studies in higher
education have shown, online programs can often isolate students during the
learning process . While the
Louisiana online Algebra I program is unusual in that it provides students with
the benefit of a regular class schedule where they interact with their peers as well
as an online teacher, other emerging K–12 online models may not provide such
opportunities for important socio-academic interactions. As more K–12 online
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
distance learning models emerge, the ways in which peer-to-peer interactions
manifest will no doubt continue to evolve and studies of these interactions should
be undertaken. This is particularly important given the important role that social
interaction plays during the K–12 years.
When compared to the comparison group students, a higher percentage of
students in the treatment group classrooms reported that they did not have a good
learning experience. Considering the same content standards were covered in both
groups, the difference in learning experience may have been a function of the
newness of the online model, specific differences in the curricula, and/or differences
in classroom approaches. Although some studies in higher education settings have
found there to be no difference between students’ level of satisfaction in online and
traditional courses , other studies point to
fundamental differences between the learning experiences that lead some students
to be less satisfied with their online experience . Similarly, students in the treatment and control classrooms differed with
respect to their confidence in their algebra skills. Despite having similar posttest
means, compared to the comparison group, a lower percentage of students in the
treatment classrooms reported feeling either confident or very confident in their
algebra skills after the course. This finding supports those from studies described by
Bernard et al in their meta-analysis on how online and traditional classroom
experiences vary. It may be that the model of delayed feedback and dispersed
authority in the online course led to a “lost” feeling where students could gauge
“how they were doing.” There is currently a lack of research on the mediating
or moderating effect of student satisfaction and confidence levels on learning
outcomes in K–12 settings. Given the importance of student attitudes and beliefs
for moderating learning outcomes in traditional, face-to-face learning environments
 , future research into the
effectiveness of online or distance learning initiatives in K–12 settings should pay
particular attention to student satisfaction and other affective measures.
Despite their feeling less confident in their algebra skills, the data showed that
students in the treatment classrooms outscored the comparison classrooms on 18
of the 25 items on the posttest. The data also showed that students in the treatment
classrooms tended to do better than students in the comparison classrooms on the
group of items that required them to create an algebraic expression from a realworld example. Bearing in mind that the content standards covered in both courses
was the same, the differential effect of the online distance learning initiative on
particular types of algebra skills should be explored further. It may be that students
in the treatment classrooms acquired better conceptual understanding of some
aspects of the content due to the nature of the technology-enhanced teaching
tools employed. further research would need to be conducted to substantiate
this hypothesis. overall, students in the treatment group performed as well as
students in the comparison face-to-face classrooms. While this finding is similar
to that reported in other studies that compared learning outcomes , more research is needed at the K–12 level to
examine this important issue. With more than half a million elementary, middle
and high school students impacted by some form of online learning initiative
Spring 2007: Volume 39 Number 3
Copyright © 2007, ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education), 800.336.5191
(U.S. & Canada) or 541.302.3777 (Int’l), , www.iste.org. All rights reserved.
during the 2004-2005 school year, it is vital that the educational community and in
particular state and local decision-makers have access to high-quality research they
can use to inform their ongoing investments in online learning initiatives.
Although there are many types of online and distance learning models available
for schools and districts, the results of this research suggest that the Louisiana
Algebra I online model is a viable approach to providing Algebra I instruction,
particularly when a certified mathematics teacher is not available locally. With the
recent increase in investments for online distance learning initiatives at the K–12
level, there will be a continuing need for sound empirical evidence about the effect
of these programs on teaching and learning outcomes, and in particular on student
performance.
Contributors
Laura o’Dwyer is an assistant professor at the Lynch School of Education at
Boston College. her research focuses on examining the effects of organizational
characteristics on individual outcomes, international comparative studies, and
educational technology as a teaching and learning tool. (Address: Laura M.
o’Dwyer, Assistant Professor, Educational Research, Measurement and Evaluation
Department, Lynch School of Education, Boston College; ; 617.
552 .8089.)
Rebecca Carey is a project director in the Northeast and Islands Regional
Laboratory and the Center for online Professional Education. her research focuses
on applied research in educational technology, specifically online education for
students and adults.
Glenn Kleiman is vice president of Education Development Center, Inc.,
director of the EDC Center for online Professional Education, and co-director
of the Regional Education Laboratory for the Northeast and Islands Region. his
work focuses on applied research to inform policy and program decisions about
educational innovations. (EDC, 55 Chapel Street, Newton, MA 02458-1060;
 and ; 617.969.7100.)