Proceedings of the Workshop on Stylistic Variation, pages 94–104
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Controlling Linguistic Style Aspects in Neural Language Generation
Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
{jessica.ficler, yoav.goldberg}@gmail.com
Most work on neural natural language
generation (NNLG) focus on controlling
the content of the generated text. We experiment with controlling several stylistic
aspects of the generated text, in addition
to its content.
The method is based on
conditioned RNN language model, where
the desired content as well as the stylistic parameters serve as conditioning contexts.
We demonstrate the approach on
the movie reviews domain and show that
it is successful in generating coherent sentences corresponding to the required linguistic style and content.
Introduction
The same message (e.g. expressing a positive sentiment towards the plot of a movie) can be conveyed in different ways. It can be long or short,
written in a professional or colloquial style, written in a personal or impersonal voice, and can
make use of many adjectives or only few.
Consider for example the following to sentences:
(1) “A genuinely unique, full-on sensory experience that treads its own path between narrative
clarity and pure visual expression.”
(2) “OMG... This movie actually made me cry a
little bit because I laughed so hard at some parts
They are both of medium length, but the ﬁrst
appears to be written by a professional critic, and
uses impersonal voice and many adjectives; while
the second is written in a colloquial style, using a
personal voice and few adjectives.
In a text generation system, it is desirable to
have control over such stylistic aspects of the
text: style variations are used to express the social meanings of a message, and controlling the
style of a text is necessary for appropriately conveying a message in a way that is adequate to the
social context . This work focuses
on generating text while allowing control of its
stylistic properties.
The recent introduction of recurrent neural language models and recurrent sequence-to-sequence
architectures to NLP brought with it a surge of
work on natural language generation.
these research efforts focus on controlling the content of the generated text ,
while a few model more stylistic aspects of the
generated text such as the identity of the speaker in
a dialog setting ; the politeness of
the generated text or the text length in a machinetranslation setting ; or the tense in generated movie reviews . Each of these works targets a single, focused stylistic aspect of the text.
Can we achieve ﬁner-grained control over the generated outcome, controlling several stylistic aspects simultaneously?
We explore a simple neural natural-language
generation (NNLG) framework that allows for
high-level control on the generated content (similar to previous work) as well as control over multiple stylistic properties of the generated text. We
show that we can indeed achieve control over each
of the individual properties.
As most recent efforts, our model (section 3) is
based on a conditioned language model, in which
the generated text is conditioned on a context vector.1 In our case, the context vector encodes a set
1 See for other conditioning models.
of desired properties that we want to be present in
the generated text.2 At training time, we work in
a fully supervised setup, in which each sentence is
labeled with a set of linguistic properties we want
to condition on. These are encoded into the context vector, and the model is trained to generate the
sentence based on them. At test time, we can set
the values of the individual properties to get the
desired response. As we show in section 6.3, the
model generalizes fairly well, allowing the generation of text with property combinations that were
not seen during training.
The main challenge we face is thus obtaining
the needed annotations for training time. In section 4 we show how such annotations can be obtained from meta-data or using specialized textbased heuristics.
Recent work tackles a similar goal to ours.
They propose a novel generative model combining variational auto-encoders
and holistic attribute discriminators, in order to
achieve individual control on different aspects of
the generated text. Their experiments condition on
two aspects of the text (sentiment and tense), and
train and evaluate on sentences of up to 16 words.
In contrast, we propose a much simpler model
and focus on its application in a realistic setting:
we use all naturally occurring sentence lengths,
and generate text according to two content-based
parameters (sentiment score and topic) and four
stylistic parameters (the length of the text, whether
it is descriptive, whether it is written in a personal
voice, and whether it is written in professional
style). Our model is based on a well-established
technology - conditioned language models that
are based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM),
which was proven as strong and effective sequence
We perform an extensive evaluation, and verify
that the model indeed learns to associate the different parameters with the correct aspects of the
text, and is in many cases able to generate sentences that correspond to the requested parameter values. We also show that conditioning on the
given properties in a conditioned language model
indeed achieve better perplexity scores compared
to an unconditioned language model trained on the
entire dataset, and also compared to unconditioned
models that are trained on subsets of the data that
2Another view is that of an encoder-decoder model, in
which the encoder component encodes the set of desired
properties.
correspond to a particular conditioning set.
Finally, we show that the model is able to generalize, i.e., to generate sentences for combinations
that were not observed in training.
Task Description and Deﬁnition
Our goal is to generate natural language text that
conforms to a set of content-based and stylistic
properties. The generated text should convey the
information requested by the content properties,
while conforming to the style requirements posed
by the style properties.
For example in the movie reviews domain,
theme is a content parameter indicating the topical aspect which the review refers to (i.e.
plot, the acting, and so on); and descriptive
is a style parameter that indicates whether the review text uses many adjectives.
The sentence
“A wholly original, well-acted, romantic comedy
that’s elevated by the modest talents of a lesser
known cast.” corresponds to theme:acting
and descriptive:true, as it includes many
descriptions and refers to the acting, while the sentence “In the end, there are some holes in the story,
but it’s an exciting and tender ﬁlm.” corresponds to
theme:plot and descriptive:false.
More formally, we assume a set of k parameters
{p1, . . . , pk}, each parameter pi with a set of possible values {v1, . . . , vpi}. Then, given a speciﬁc
assignment to these values our goal is to generate a
text that is compatible with the parameters values.
Table 1 lists the full set of parameters and values
we consider in this work, all in the movie reviews
domain. In section 4 we discuss in detail the different parameters and how we obtain their values
for the texts in our reviews corpus.
To give a taste of the complete task, we provide
two examples of possible value assignments and
sentences corresponding to them:
Professional
21-40 words
11-20 words
Descriptive
Sentences for value set 1:
• “This movie is excellent, the actors aren’t all over
the place ,but the movie has a lot of fun, exploring
the lesson in a way that they can hold their own
Description
Possible values
Professional
Whether the review is written in
the style of a professional critic
“So glad to see this movie !!”
“This is a breath of fresh air, it’s a welcome return to the franchise’s brand of satirical humor.”
Whether the review describes
subjective experience (written in
personal voice) or not
“Very similar to the book.”
“I could see the movie again, “The Kid With Me”
is a very good ﬁlm.”
Number of words
≤10 words / 11-20 words / 21-40 words / > 40 words
Descriptive
Whether the review is in descriptive style or not
“Such a hilarious and funny romantic comedy.”
“A deﬁnite must see for fans of anime fans, pop
culture references and animation with a good
laugh too.”
The score that the reviewer gave
“In other words: “The Four” is so much to keep
you on the edge of your seat.”
“While the ﬁlm doesn’t quite reach the level of
sugar ﬂuctuations, it’s beautifully animated.”
“At its core ,it’s a very low-budget movie that just
seems to be a bunch of ﬂuff.”
Whether the sentence’s content is about the Plot, Acting,
Production, Effects or none of
these (Other)
“The characters were great and the storyline had
me laughing out loud at the beginning of the
“The only saving grace is that the rest of the cast
are all excellent and the pacing is absolutely ﬂawless.”
Production
“If you’re a Yorkshire fan, you won’t be disappointed, and the director’s magical.”
“Only saving grace is the sound effects.”
“I’m afraid that the movie is aimed at kids and
adults weren’t sure what to say about it.”
Table 1: Parameters and possible values in the movie-reviews domain.
• “It’s a realistic and deeply committed performance from the opening shot, the movie gives an
excellent showcase for the ﬁnal act, and the visuals are bold and daring.”
Sentences for value set 2:
• “My biggest gripe is that the whole movie is
pretty absurd and I thought it was a little too predictable.”
• “The ﬁrst half is pretty good and I was hoping for
a few funny moments but not funny at all.”
Conditioned Language Model
Like in previous neural language-generation work
 , our model
is also a conditioned language model. In a regular language model (LM), each token wt is conditioned on the previous tokens, and the probability
of a sentence w1, ..., wn is given by:
P(w1, ..., wn) = Πn
t=1P(wt|w1, . . . wt−1)
In a conditioned language model, we add an additional conditioning context, c:
P(w1, ..., wn|c) = Πn
t=1P(wt|w1, . . . wt−1, c)
Each token in the sentence is conditioned on the
previous ones, as well the additional context c.
A conditioned language model can be implemented using an recurrent neural network language model ),
where the context c is a vector that is concatenated
to the input vector at each time step.
Conditioned language models were shown to be
effective for natural language generation. We differ from previous work by the choice of conditioning contexts, and by conditioning on many parameters simultaneously.
In our case, the condition vector c encodes the
desired textual properties. Each parameter value
is associated with an embedding vector, and c is
a concatenation of these embedding vectors. The
vector c is fed into the RNN at each step, concate-
nated to the previous word in the sequence.
Technical Details
We use an LSTM-based
language model , and encode the vocabulary using Byte Pair
Encoding (BPE), which allows representation of
an open vocabulary through a ﬁxed-size vocabulary by splitting rare words into subword units,
providing a convenient way of dealing with rare
words. Further details regarding layer sizes, training regime, vocabulary size and so on are provided
in the supplementary material.
Data-set Collection and Annotation
For training the model, we need a dataset of review texts, each annotated with a value assignment to each of the style and the content parameters. We obtain these values from two sources: (1)
We derive it from meta-data associated with the
review, when available. (2) We extract it from the
review text using a heuristic. We use three kinds
of heuristics:
based on lists of content-words;
based on the existence of certain function words;
and based on the distribution on part-of-speech
tags. These annotations may contain noise, and
indeed some of our heuristics are not very tight.
We demonstrate that we can achieve good performance despite the noise. Naturally, improving the
heuristics is likely to results in improved performance.
Our reviews corpus is based on the Rotten-
Tomatoes website.3
We collected 1,002,625
them into sentences.
Each sentence is then
annotated according to four style parameters
(professional, personal, descriptive
parameters
(sentiment and theme).
The meanings of
these properties and how we obtain values for
them are described below.
Annotations Based on Meta-data
Professional
indicates whether the review is
written in a professional (true) or a colloquial (false) style.
We label sentences as
professional:true if it is written by either
(1) a reviewer that is a professional critic; (2) a reviewer that is marked as a “super-reviewer” on the
RottenTomatoes website (a title given to reviewers
who write high-quality reviews). Other sentences
are labeled as professional:false.
3 
reﬂects the grade that was given by
the review writer. Possible values for grade are:
positive, neutral, negative or none. In
audience reviews the movies are rated by the reviewer on a scale of 0 to 5 stars.
In critic reviews, the score was taken from the original review (which is external to the rotten-tomatoes
website). We normalized the critics scores to be
on 0-5 scale. We then consider reviews with grade
0-2 as negative, 3 as neutral and 4-5 as
positive. Cases where no score information
was available are labeled as none.4
Annotations Derived from Text
We count the number of tokens in the
sentence and associate each sentence to one of
four bins: ≤10, 11-20, 21-40, >40.
whether the sentence is written in
a personal voice, indicating a subjective point
of view (“I thought it was a good movie.”,
“Just not my cup of tea.”) or not (“Overall,
it is deﬁnitely worth watching.”, “The movie
doesn’t bring anything new.”), We label sentences
that include the personal pronoun or possessive
(“I”, “my”) as personal:true and others as
personal:false.
the aspect of the movie that the sentence
refers to. The possible values are plot, acting,
production and effects. We assign a category to a sentence using word lists. We went over
the frequent words in the corpus, and looked for
words that we believe are indicative of the different aspects (i.e., for plot this includes words
such as sciprt, story, subplots. The complete word
lists are available in the supplementary material).
Each sentence was labeled with the category that
has the most words in the sentence. Sentences that
do not include any words from our lists are labeled
Descriptive
whether the sentence is descriptive
(“A warm and sweet, funny movie.”) or not (“It’s
one of the worst movies of the year, but it’s not a
total waste of time.”), Our (somewhat simplistic)
heuristic is based on the premise that descriptive
texts make heavy use of adjectives. We labeled
a sentence as descriptive:true if at least
4Note that while the sentiment scores are assigned to a
complete review, we associate them here with individual sentences. This is a deﬁciency in the heuristic, which may explain some of the failures observed in section 6.1.
(a) Professional
(b) Personal
(c) Descriptive
(d) Sentiment
Production
(f) Length
Figure 1: Movie reviews data-set statistics.
35% of its part-of-speech sequence tags are adjectives (JJ). All other sentences were considered as
non-descriptive.
Dataset Statistics
Our ﬁnal data-set includes 2,773,435 sentences
where each sentence is labeled with the 6 parameters. We randomly divided the data-set to training (#2,769,138), development (#2,139) and test
(#2,158) sets. Figure 1 shows the distribution of
the different properties in the dataset.
Evaluating Language Model Quality
In our ﬁrst set of experiments, we measure the
quality of the conditioned language model in terms
of test-set perplexity.
Conditioned vs. Unconditioned
Our model is a language model that is conditioned
on various parameters. As a sanity check, we verify that knowing the parameters indeed helps in
achieving better language modeling results. We
compare the dev-set and test-set perplexities of our
conditioned language model to an unconditioned
(regular) language model trained on the same data.
The results, summarized in the following table,
show that knowing the correct parameter values
indeed results in better perplexity.
Not-conditioned
Conditioned
Table 2: Conditioned and not-conditioned language model perplexities on the development and
test sets.
Conditioned vs. Dedicated LMs
A second natural baseline to the conditioned LM
is to train a separate unconditioned LM on a
subset of the data.
For example, if we are interested in generating sentences with the properties personal:false, sentiment:pos,
professional:false, theme:other and
length:≤10, we will train a dedicated LM on
just the sentences that ﬁt these characteristics.
We hypothesize that the conditioned LM trained
on all the data will be more effective than a dedicated LM, as it will be able to generalize across
properties-combinations, and share data between
the different settings. In this set of experiment, we
verify this hypothesis.
parameters
{p1, p2, · · · pn}, we train n sub-models where
each sub-model mi is trained on the subset of
sentences that match parameters {p1, p2, · · · pi}.
For example, given the set of parameters values as above, we train 5 sub-models: the ﬁrst
on data with personal:false only,
second on data with persoal:false and
sentiment:positive,
parameters, the size of the training set of the
sub-model decreases.
For each dedicated sub-model, we measure its
perplexity on the test-set sentences that match the
criteria, and compare it to a conditioned LM with
these criteria, and to an unconditioned language
model. We do this for 4 different parameter-sets.
Figure 2 presents the results.
The results indicate that when only few conditioning parameters are needed, and if the coverage
of the parameter combination in the training set
is large enough, the dedicated LM approach in-
Professional
Parameters (incremental)
Dedicated LM
General LM
Conditioned LM
Professional
Parameters (incremental)
Dedicated LM
General LM
Conditioned LM
Professional
Descriptive
Parameters (incremental)
Dedicated LM
General LM
Conditioned LM
Parameters (incremental)
Dedicated LM
General LM
Conditioned LM
Figure 2: Perplexities of conditioned, unconditioned and dedicated language models for various parameter combinations. The numbers on the dedicated-model line indicates the number of sentences that the
sub-model was trained on.
deed outperforms the conditioned LM. This is the
case in the ﬁrst three sub-models in 2a, and the
ﬁrst two sub-models in 2c. With few conditioning criteria, the dedicated LM approach is effective. However, it is not scalable. As we increase
the number of conditioning factors, the amount
of available training data to the dedicated model
drops, and so does the modeling quality. In contrast, the conditioned model manages to generalize
from sentences with different sets of properties,
and is effective also with large number of conditioning factors. We thus conclude that for our use
case, in which we need to condition on many different aspects of the generated sentence, the conditioned LM is far more suitable than the dedicated
Conditioned vs. Flipped Conditioning
The previous experiments show that a conditioned model outperforms an unconditioned one.
Here, we focus on the effect of the individual
conditioning parameters.
We compare the perplexity when using the correct conditioning values to the perplexity achieved when ﬂipping the
parameter value to an incorrect one.
that for parameters that have opposing values:
personal, professional, sentiment and
descriptive. The following table summarizes
the results:
Correct Value
Replacing Descriptive with non-Descriptive
Replacing Personal
Replacing Professional
Replacing Sentiment Pos with Neg
Table 3: Test-set perplexities when supplying the
correct parameter values and when supplying the
opposite values.
There is a substantial drop in quality (increase
in perplexity) when ﬂipping the parameter values.
The drop is smallest for sentiment, and largest for
descriptiveness and personal voice. We conclude
that the model distinguishes descriptive text and
personal voice better than it distinguishes sentiment and professional text.
Evaluating the Generated Sentences
In section 5.3 we veriﬁed the effectiveness of the
conditioned model by showing that ﬂipping a conditioning parameter value results in worse perplexity. However, we still need to verify that the model
indeed associates each parameter with the correct
behavior. In this set of experiments, we use the
model to generate random sentences with different conditioning properties, and measure how well
they match the requested behavior.
We generated 3,285 sentences according to
the following protocol:
for each propertycombination attested in the development set, we
generated 1,000 random sentences conditioned on
these properties. We then sorted the generated sentences according to their probability, and chose the
top k = (cf/mf) ∗100 sentences, where cf is the
frequency of the property-combination in the dev
set and mf is the frequency of the most frequent
property-combination in the dev set.
This process resulted in 3,285 high-scoring but
diverse sentences, with properties that are distributed according to the properties distribution in
the development set.
Capturing Individual Properties
We measure the average, minimum and
maximum lengths, and deviation of the sentences
that were generated for a requested length value.
The following table summarizes the results:
Requested Length
Deviationm=2
minimum and maximum
lengths of the sentences generated according to the
correspond length value; as well as deviation percentage with margin (m) of 2.
The average length ﬁts the required range for
each of the values and the percentage of sentences
that exceed the limits with margin 2 is between
0.2% to 2.6%.
Descriptive
We measure the percentage of
sentences that are considered as descriptive
(containing >35% adjectives) when requesting
descriptive:true,
and when requesting
descriptive:false.
When requesting descriptive text, 85.7% of the generated sentences ﬁt
the descriptiveness criteria. When requesting nondescriptive text, 96% of the generated sentences
are non-descriptive according to our criteria.
Personal Voice
We measure the percentage of
sentences that are considered as personal voice
(containing the pronouns I or my) when requesting personal:true, and when requesting personal:false. 100% of the sentence
for which we requested personal voice were indeed in personal voice.
When requesting nonpersonal text, 99.85% of the sentences are indeed
non-personal.
For each of the possible theme values,
we compute the proportion of the sentences that
were generated with the corresponding value. The
confusion matrix in the following table
shows that the vast majority of sentences are
generated according to the requested theme.
Requested value
Production
Table 5: Percentage of generated sentences from
each theme, when requesting a given theme value.
Professional
The professional property of
the generated sentences could not be evaluated automatically, and we thus performed manual evaluation using Mechanical Turk. We randomly created 1000 sentence-pairs where one is generated
with professional:true and the other with
professional:false (the rest of the property values were chosen randomly). For example
in the following sentence-pair the ﬁrst is generated with professional:true and the second with professional:false:
(t) “This ﬁlm has a certain sense of imagination
and a sobering look at the clandestine indictment.”
(f) “I know it’s a little bit too long, but it’s a great
movie to watch !!!!”
The annotators were asked to determine which of
the sentences was written by a professional critic.
Each of the pairs was annotated by 5 different annotators. When taking a majority vote among the
annotators, they were able to tell apart the professional from non-professional sentences generated
sentences in 72.1% of the cases.
When examining the cases where the annotators
failed to recognise the desired writing style, we
saw that in a few cases the sentence that was generated for professional:true was indeed not
professional enough (e.g. “Looking forward to the
trailer.”, and that in many cases, both sentences
could indeed be considered as either professional
or not, as in the following examples:
(t) “This is a cute movie with some funny moments,
and some of the jokes are funny and entertaining.”
(f) “Absolutely amazing story of bravery and dedication.”
(t) “A good ﬁlm for those who have no idea what’s
going on, but it’s a fun adventure.”
(f) “An insult to the audience’s intelligence.”
To measure sentiment generation quality,
we again perform manual annotations using Mechanical Turk.
We randomly created 300 pairs of generated sentences
positive/negative, positive/neutral
and negative/neutral. The annotators were
asked to mark which of the reviewers liked the
movie more than the other.
Each of the pairs
was annotated by 5 different annotators and we
choose by a majority vote. The annotators correctly identiﬁed 86.3% of the sentence in the Positive/Negative case, 63% of the sentences in the
Positive/Neutral case, and 69.7% of the sentences
in the negative/neutral case.
Below are some examples for cases where the
annotators failed to recognize the intended sentiment:
(Pos) “It’s a shame that this ﬁlm is not as good as
the previous ﬁlm, but it still delivers.”
(Neg) “The premise is great, the acting is not bad,
but the special effects are so bad.”
(Pos) “The story line is a bit predictable but it’s a
nice one, sweet and hilarious in its own right.”
(Neg) “It’s a welcome return to form an episode
of Snow White, and it turns in a great way.”
Examples of Generated Sentences
All of the examples throughout the paper were
generated by the conditioned LM. Additional examples are available in the supplementary material.
Generalization Ability
Finally, we test the ability of the model to generalize: can it generate sentences for parameter
combinations it has not seen in training? To this
end, we removed from the training set the 75,421
sentences which were labeled as theme:plot
and personal:true, and re-trained a conditioned LM. The trained model did see 336,567 examples of theme:plot and 477,738 examples
of personal:true, but has never seen examples where both conditions hold together. We then
asked the trained model to generate sentences with
these parameter values. 100% of the generated
sentences indeed contained personal pronouns,
and 82.4% of them ﬁt the theme:plot criteria
(in comparison, a conditioned model trained on all
the training data managed to ﬁt the theme:plot
criteria in 97.8% of the cases). Some generated
sentence examples are:
“Some parts weren’t as good as I thought it would
be and the acting and script were amazing.”
“I had a few laughs and the plot was great, but the
movie was very predictable.”
“I really liked the story and the performances were
likable and the chemistry between the two leads is
“I’ve never been a fan of the story, but this movie
is a great ﬁlm that is a solid performance from Brie
Larson and Jacob Tremblay.
Related Work
In neural-network based models for language
generation, most work focus on content that need
to be conveyed in the generated text.
to our modeling approach, generates reviews conditioned
on parameters such as category, and numeric rating scores. Some work in neural generation for
dialog condition on a dialog act (“request”,
“inform”) and a set of key,value pairs of information to be conveyed (“price=low, food=italian,
near=citycenter”). The conditioning context is encoded either similarly to our approach, or by encoding the desired information as a string and
using sequence-to-seqeunce modeling with attention. Mei et al. condition the content on
a set of key,value pairs using an encoder-decoder
architecture with a coarse-to-ﬁne attention mechanism. Kiddon et al. attempt to generate
a recipe given a list of ingredients that should be
mentioned in the text, tracking the ingredients that
were already mentioned to avoid repetitions. Lebret et al. condition on structured information in Wikipedia infoboxes for generating textual
biographies. 5 These work attempt to control the
content of the generated text, but not its style.
In other works, the conditioning context correspond to a speciﬁc writer or a group of writers.
In generation of conversational dialog, Li et al.
 condition the text on the speaker’s identity.
While the conditioning is meant for improving the
factual consistency of the utterances (i.e., keeping
track of age, gender, location), it can be considered as conditioning on stylistic factors (capturing
personal style and dialect). A recent work that explicitly controls the style of the generated text was
introduced by Sennrich et al. in the context
of Machine Translation.
Their model translates
English to German with a feature that encodes
whether the generated text (in German) should express politeness. All these works, with the exception of Sennrich et al condition on parameters that
were extracted from meta-data or some database,
while Sennrich et al heuristically extracts the politeness information from the training data. Our
5Recent work by Radford et al. trained an unconditioned LSTM language model on movie reviews, and found
in a post-hoc analysis a single hidden-layer dimension that
allows controling the sentiment of the generated reviews by
ﬁxing its value. While intriguuing, it is not a reliable method
of deriving controllable generation models.
work is similar to the approach of Sennrich et al
but extends it by departing from machine translation, conditioning on numerous stylistic aspects of
the generated text, and incorporating both metadata and heuristically derived properties.
The work of Hu et al. features a VAE
based method coupled with a discriminator network that tackles the same problem as ours: conditioning on multiple aspects of the generated text.
The Variational component allows for easy sampling of examples from the resulting model, and
the discriminator network directs the training process to associate the desired behavior with the conditioning parameters. Compared to our work, the
VAE component is indeed a more elegant solution
to generating a diverse set of sentences.
However, the approach does not seem to be scalable:
Hu et al. restrict themselves to sentences
of up to length 16, and only two conditioning aspects (sentiment and tense). We demonstrate that
our conditioned LSTM-LM appraoch easily scales
to naturally-occuring sentence lengths, and allows
control of 6 individual aspects of the generated
text, without requiring a dedicated discriminator
network. The incorporation of a variational component is an interesting avenue for future work.
In Pre-neural Text Generation The incorporation of stylistic aspects was discussed from
very early on .
Some works tackling stylistic control of text produced in a rule-based generation system include
the works of Power et al. ; Reiter and
Williams ; Hovy ; Bateman and Paris
 for a
comprehensive review). Among these, the work
of Power et al. , like ours, allows the user
to control various stylistic aspects of the generated text. This works by introducing soft and hard
constraints in a rule-based system. The work of
Mairesse and Walker introduce statistics
into the stylistic generation process, resulting in
a system that allows a user to specify 5 personality
traits that inﬂuence the generated language.
More recent statistical generation works tackling style include Xu et al. who attempt
to paraphrase text into a different style.
learn to paraphrase text in Shakespeare’s style to
modern English using MT techniques, relying on
the modern translations of William Shakespeare
plays. Abu Sheikha and Inkpen generate
texts with different formality levels by using lists
of formal and informal words.
Finally, our work relies on heuristically extracting stylistic properties from text. Computational
modeling of stylistic properties has been the focus of several lines of study, i.e.
 . Such methods are natural
companions for our conditioned generation approach.
Conclusions
We proposed a framework for NNLG allowing for
relatively ﬁne-grained control on different stylistic aspects of the generated sentence, and demonstrated its effectiveness with an initial case study
in the movie-reviews domain. A remaining challenge is providing ﬁner-grained control on the
generated content (allowing the user to specify either almost complete sentences or a set of structured facts) while still allowing the model to control the style of the generated sentence.
Acknowledgements
supported by the Israeli Science Foundation (grant
number 1555/15) and the German Research Foundation via the German-Israeli Project Cooperation
(DIP, grant DA 1600/1-1).