SpecAugment: A Simple Data Augmentation Method
for Automatic Speech Recognition
Daniel S. Park∗, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu,
Barret Zoph, Ekin D. Cubuk, Quoc V. Le
Google Brain
{danielspark, williamchan, ngyuzh, chungchengc, barretzoph, cubuk, qvl}@google.com
We present SpecAugment, a simple data augmentation method
for speech recognition.
SpecAugment is applied directly to
the feature inputs of a neural network (i.e., ﬁlter bank coef-
The augmentation policy consists of warping the
features, masking blocks of frequency channels, and masking
blocks of time steps. We apply SpecAugment on Listen, Attend
and Spell networks for end-to-end speech recognition tasks. We
achieve state-of-the-art performance on the LibriSpeech 960h
and Swichboard 300h tasks, outperforming all prior work. On
LibriSpeech, we achieve 6.8% WER on test-other without the
use of a language model, and 5.8% WER with shallow fusion
with a language model. This compares to the previous stateof-the-art hybrid system of 7.5% WER. For Switchboard, we
achieve 7.2%/14.6% on the Switchboard/CallHome portion of
the Hub5’00 test set without the use of a language model, and
6.8%/14.1% with shallow fusion, which compares to the previous state-of-the-art hybrid system at 8.3%/17.3% WER.
Index Terms: end-to-end speech recognition, data augmentation
1. Introduction
Deep Learning has been applied successfully to Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) , where the main focus of research has been designing better network architectures, for example, DNNs , CNNs , RNNs and end-to-end models
 . However, these models tend to overﬁt easily and require large amounts of training data .
Data augmentation has been proposed as a method to generate additional training data for ASR. For example, in ,
artiﬁcial data was augmented for low resource speech recognition tasks. Vocal Tract Length Normalization has been adapted
for data augmentation in . Noisy audio has been synthesised via superimposing clean audio with a noisy audio signal
in . Speed perturbation has been applied on raw audio for
LVSCR tasks in . The use of an acoustic room simulator has
been explored in . Data augmentation for keyword spotting
has been studied in . Feature drop-outs have been employed for training multi-stream ASR systems . More generally, learned augmentation techniques have explored different
sequences of augmentation transformations that have achieved
state-of-the-art performance in the image domain .
Inspired by the recent success of augmentation in the
speech and vision domains, we propose SpecAugment, an augmentation method that operates on the log mel spectrogram of
the input audio, rather than the raw audio itself. This method
is simple and computationally cheap to apply, as it directly acts
on the log mel spectrogram as if it were an image, and does not
∗Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency Program.
require any additional data. We are thus able to apply SpecAugment online during training. SpecAugment consists of three
kinds of deformations of the log mel spectrogram. The ﬁrst
is time warping, a deformation of the time-series in the time
direction. The other two augmentations, inspired by “Cutout”,
proposed in computer vision , are time and frequency masking, where we mask a block of consecutive time steps or mel
frequency channels.
This approach while rudimentary, is remarkably effective
and allows us to train end-to-end ASR networks, called Listen Attend and Spell (LAS) , to surpass more complicated
hybrid systems, and achieve state-of-the-art results even without the use of Language Models (LMs).
On LibriSpeech
 , we achieve 2.8% Word Error Rate (WER) on the testclean set and 6.8% WER on the test-other set, without the
use of an LM. Upon shallow fusion with an LM trained
on the LibriSpeech LM corpus, we are able to better our performance (2.5% WER on test-clean and 5.8% WER on testother), improving the current state of the art on test-other by
22% relatively. On Switchboard 300h (LDC97S62) , we
obtain 7.2% WER on the Switchboard portion of the Hub5’00
(LDC2002S09, LDC2003T02) test set, and 14.6% on the Call-
Home portion, without using an LM. Upon shallow fusion
with an LM trained on the combined transcript of the Switchboard and Fisher (LDC200{4,5}T19) corpora, we obtain
6.8%/14.1% WER on the Switchboard/Callhome portion.
2. Augmentation Policy
We aim to construct an augmentation policy that acts on the log
mel spectrogram directly, which helps the network learn useful features. Motivated by the goal that these features should
be robust to deformations in the time direction, partial loss of
frequency information and partial loss of small segments of
speech, we have chosen the following deformations to make up
sparse image warp of tensorflow.
a log mel spectrogram with τ time steps, we view it
as an image where the time axis is horizontal and the
frequency axis is vertical.
A random point along the
horizontal line passing through the center of the image
within the time steps (W, τ −W) is to be warped either
to the left or right by a distance w chosen from a uniform
distribution from 0 to the time warp parameter W along
that line. We ﬁx six anchor points on the boundary—the
four corners and the mid-points of the vertical edges.
2. Frequency masking is applied so that f consecutive mel
frequency channels [f0, f0 + f) are masked, where f is
ﬁrst chosen from a uniform distribution from 0 to the
 
Figure 1: Augmentations applied to the base input, given at the
top. From top to bottom, the ﬁgures depict the log mel spectrogram of the base input with no augmentation, time warp, frequency masking and time masking applied.
Figure 2: Augmentation policies applied to the base input. From
top to bottom, the ﬁgures depict the log mel spectrogram of the
base input with policies None, LB and LD applied.
frequency mask parameter F, and f0 is chosen from
[0, ν −f). ν is the number of mel frequency channels.
3. Time masking is applied so that t consecutive time steps
[t0, t0 + t) are masked, where t is ﬁrst chosen from a
uniform distribution from 0 to the time mask parameter
T, and t0 is chosen from [0, τ −t).
• We introduce an upper bound on the time mask so
that a time mask cannot be wider than p times the
number of time steps.
Figure 1 shows examples of the individual augmentations applied to a single input. The log mel spectrograms are normalized to have zero mean value, and thus setting the masked value
to zero is equivalent to setting it to the mean value.
We can consider policies where multiple frequency and
time masks are applied. The multiple masks may overlap. In
this work, we mainly consider a series of hand-crafted policies,
LibriSpeech basic (LB), LibriSpeech double (LD), Switchboard
mild (SM) and Switchboard strong (SS) whose parameters are
summarized in Table 1. In Figure 2, we show an example of a
log mel spectrogram augmented with policies LB and LD.
Table 1: Augmentation parameters for policies. mF and mT
denote the number of frequency and time masks applied.
We use Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) networks for our
ASR tasks. These models, being end-to-end, are simple to train
and have the added beneﬁt of having well-documented benchmarks that we are able to build upon to get our results.
In this section, we review LAS networks and introduce some
notation to parameterize them. We also introduce the learning
rate schedules we use to train the networks, as they turn out
to be an important factor in determining performance. We end
with reviewing shallow fusion , which we have used to incorporate language models for further gains in performance.
3.1. LAS Network Architectures
We use Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) networks for end-toend ASR studied in , for which we use the notation LASd-w. The input log mel spectrogram is passed in to a 2-layer
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with max-pooling and
stride of 2. The output of the CNN is passes through an encoder consisting of d stacked bi-directional LSTMs with cell
size w to yield a series of attention vectors. The attention vectors are fed into a 2-layer RNN decoder of cell dimension w,
which yields the tokens for the transcript. The text is tokenized
using a Word Piece Model (WPM) of vocabulary size 16k
for LibriSpeech and 1k for Switchboard. The WPM for LibriSpeech 960h is constructed using the training set transcripts.
For the Switchboard 300h task, transcripts from the training set
are combined with those of the Fisher corpus to construct the
WPM. The ﬁnal transcripts are obtained by a beam search with
beam size 8. For comparison with , we note that their “large
model” in our notation is LAS-4-1024.
3.2. Learning Rate Schedules
The learning rate schedule turns out to be an important factor
in determining the performance of ASR networks, especially
so when augmentation is present. Here, we introduce training
schedules that serve two purposes. First, we use these schedules
to verify that a longer schedule improves the ﬁnal performance
of the network, even more so with augmentation (Table 2). Second, based on this, we introduce very long schedules that are
used to maximize the performance of the networks.
We use a learning rate schedule in which we ramp-up, hold,
then exponentially decay the learning rate until it reaches 1/100
of its maximum value. The learning rate is kept constant beyond
this point. This schedule is parameterized by three time stamps
(sr, si, sf) – the step sr where the ramp-up (from zero learning
rate) is complete, the step si where exponential decay starts, and
the step sf where the exponential decay stops.
There are two more factors that introduce time scales in our
experiment. First, we turn on a variational weight noise 
of standard deviation 0.075 at step snoise and keep it constant
throughout training. Weight noise is introduced in the step interval (sr, si), i.e., during the high plateau of the learning rate.
Second, we introduce uniform label smoothing with
uncertainty 0.1, i.e., the correct class label is assigned the conﬁdence 0.9, while the conﬁdence of the other labels are increased
accordingly. As is commented on again later on, label smoothing can destabilize training for smaller learning rates, and we
sometimes choose to turn it on only at the beginning of training
and off when the learning rate starts to decay.
The two basic schedules we use, are given as the following:
1. B(asic): (sr, snoise, si, sf) = (0.5k, 10k, 20k, 80k)
2. D(ouble): (sr, snoise, si, sf) = (1k, 20k, 40k, 160k)
As discussed further in section 5, we can improve the performance of the trained network by using a longer schedule. We
thus introduce the following schedule:
3. L(ong): (sr, snoise, si, sf) = (1k, 20k, 140k, 320k)
which we use to train the largest model to improve performance.
When using schedule L, label smoothing with uncertainty 0.1 is
introduced for time steps < si = 140k for LibriSpeech 960h,
and is subsequently turned off. For Switchboard 300h, label
smoothing is turned on throughout training.
3.3. Shallow Fusion with Language Models
While we are able to get state-of-the-art results with augmentation, we can get further improvements by using a language
model. We thus incorporate an RNN language model by shallow fusion for both tasks. In shallow fusion, the “next token”
y∗in the decoding process is determined by
y∗= argmax
(log P(y|x) + λ log PLM(y)) ,
i.e., by jointly scoring the token using the base ASR model and
the language model. We also use a coverage penalty c .
For LibriSpeech, we use a two-layer RNN with embedding
dimension 1024 used in for the LM, which is trained on
the LibriSpeech LM corpus. We use identical fusion parameters
(λ = 0.35 and c = 0.05) used in throughout.
For Switchboard, we use a two-layer RNN with embedding
dimension 256, which is trained on the combined transcripts of
the Fisher and Switchboard datasets. We ﬁnd the fusion parameters via grid search by measuring performance on RT-03
(LDC2007S10). We discuss the fusion parameters used in individual experiments in section 4.2.
4. Experiments
In this section, we describe our experiments on LibriSpeech and
Switchboard with SpecAugment. We report state-of-the-art results that out-perform heavily engineered hybrid systems.
4.1. LibriSpeech 960h
For LibriSpeech, we use the same setup as , where we use
80-dimensional ﬁlter banks with delta and delta-delta acceleration, and a 16k word piece model .
The three networks LAS-4-1024, LAS-6-1024 and LAS-6-
1280 are trained on LibriSpeech 960h with a combination of
augmentation policies (None, LB, LD) and training schedules
(B/D). Label smoothing was not applied in these experiments.
The experiments were run with peak learning rate of 0.001 and
batch size of 512, on 32 Google Cloud TPU chips for 7 days.
Other than the augmentation policies and learning rate schedules, all other hyperparameters were ﬁxed, and no additional
tuning was applied. We report test set numbers validated by the
dev-other set in Table 2. We see that augmentation consistently
improves the performance of the trained network, and that the
beneﬁt of a larger network and a longer learning rate schedule
is more apparent with harsher augmentation.
We take the largest network, LAS-6-1280, and use schedule L (with training time ∼24 days) and policy LD to train
the network to maximize performance. We turn label smoothing on for time steps < 140k as noted before. The test set
performance is reported by evaluating the checkpoint with best
dev-other performance. State of the art performance is achieved
by the LAS-6-1280 model, even without a language model. We
Table 2: LibriSpeech test WER (%) evaluated for varying networks, schedules and policies. First row from .
LAS-4-1024 
LAS-4-1024
LAS-6-1024
LAS-6-1280
can incorporate an LM using shallow fusion to further improve
performance. The results are presented in Table 3.
Table 3: LibriSpeech 960h WERs (%).
Panayotov et al., 
Povey et al., 
Han et al., 
Yang et al. 
Collobert et al., 
Liptchinsky et al., 
Zhou et al., 
Zeghidour et al., 
Li et al., 
Zeyer et al., 
Zeyer et al., 
Irie et al., 
Sabour et al., 
LAS + SpecAugment
4.2. Switchboard 300h
For Switchboard 300h, we use the Kaldi “s5c” recipe to
process our data, but we adapt the recipe to use 80-dimensional
ﬁlter banks with delta and delta-delta acceleration. We use a 1k
WPM to tokenize the output, constructed using the combined vocabulary of the Switchboard and Fisher transcripts.
We train LAS-4-1024 with policies (None, SM, SS) and
schedule B. As before, we set the peak learning rate to 0.001
and total batch size to 512, and train using 32 Google Cloud
TPU chips. Here the experiments are run with and without label smoothing. Not having a canonical development set, we
choose to evaluate the checkpoint at the end point of the training schedule, which we choose to be 100k steps for schedule B.
We note that the training curve relaxes after the decay schedule
is completed (step sf), and the performance of the network does
not vary much. The performance of various augmentation policies with and without label smoothing for Switchboard 300h is
shown in Table 4. We see that label smoothing and augmentation have an additive effect for this corpus.
Table 4: Switchboard 300h WER (%) evaluated for LAS-4-1024
trained with schedule B with varying augmentation and Label
Smoothing (LS) policies. No LMs have been used.
As with LibriSpeech 960h, we train LAS-6-1280 on the
Switchboard 300h training set with schedule L (training time
∼24 days) to get state of the art performance. In this case, we
ﬁnd that turning label smoothing on throughout training beneﬁts the ﬁnal performance. We report the performance at the
end of training time at 340k steps. We present our results in the
context of other work in Table 5. We also apply shallow fusion
with an LM trained on Fisher-Switchboard, whose fusion parameters are obtained by evaluating performance on the RT-03
corpus. Unlike the case for LibriSpeech, the fusion parameters
do not transfer well between networks trained differently—the
three entries in Table 5 were obtained by using fusion parameters (λ, c) = (0.3, 0.05), (0.2, 0.0125) and (0.1, 0.025) respectively.
Table 5: Switchboard 300h WERs (%).
Vesel´y et al., 
Povey et al., 
Hadian et al., 
Zeyer et al., 
Zweig et al., 
Audhkhasi et al., 
Audhkhasi et al., 
Lu et al., 
Toshniwal et al., 
Zeyer et al., 
Weng et al., 
Zeyer et al., 
LAS + SpecAugment (SM)
LAS + SpecAugment (SS)
5. Discussion
Time warping contributes, but is not a major factor in improving performance. In Table 6, we present three training
results for which time warping, time masking and frequency
masking have been turned off, respectively. We see that the effect time warping, while small, is still existent. Time warping,
being the most expensive as well as the least inﬂuential of the
augmentations discussed in this work, should be the ﬁrst augmentation to be dropped given any budgetary limitations.
Table 6: Test set WER (%) evaluated without LM for network
LAS-4-1024 trained with schedule B.
test-other
Label smoothing introduces instability to training. We have
noticed that the proportion of unstable training runs increases
for LibriSpeech when label smoothing is applied with augmentation.
This becomes more conspicuous while learning
rate is being decayed, thus our introduction of a label smoothing schedule for training LibriSpeech, where labels are only
smoothed in the initial phases of the learning rate schedule.
Augmentation converts an over-ﬁtting problem into an
under-ﬁtting problem. As can be observed from the training
curves of the networks in Figure 3, the networks during training
not only under-ﬁt the loss and WER on the augmented training
set, but also on the training set itself when trained on augmented
data. This is in stark contrast to the usual situation where networks tend to over-ﬁt to the training data. This is the major
beneﬁt of training with augmentation, as explained below.
Figure 3: LAS-6-1280 on LibriSpeech with schedule D.
Common methods of addressing under-ﬁtting yield improvements. We were able to make signiﬁcant gains in performance by standard approaches to alleviate under-ﬁtting—
making larger networks and training longer. The current reported performance was obtained by the recursive process of
applying a harsh augmentation policy, and then making wider,
deeper networks and training them with longer schedules to address the under-ﬁtting.
Remark on related works. We note that an augmentation similar to frequency masking has been studied in the context of
CNN acoustic models in . There, blocks of adjacent frequencies are pre-grouped into bins, which are randomly zeroedout per minibatch. On the other hand, both the size and position
of the frequency masks in SpecAugment are chosen stochastically, and differ for every input in the minibatch. More ideas for
structurally omitting frequency data of spectrograms have been
discussed in .
6. Conclusions
SpecAugment greatly improves the performance of ASR networks. We are able to obtain state-of-the-art results on the LibriSpeech 960h and Switchboard 300h tasks on end-to-end LAS
networks by augmenting the training set using simple handcrafted policies, surpassing the performance of hybrid systems
even without the aid of a language model. SpecAugment converts ASR from an over-ﬁtting to an under-ﬁtting problem, and
we were able to gain performance by using bigger networks and
training longer.
Acknowledgements:
We would like to thank Yuan Cao,
Ciprian Chelba, Kazuki Irie, Ye Jia, Anjuli Kannan, Patrick
Nguyen, Vijay Peddinti, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Yonghui Wu and
Shuyuan Zhang for useful discussions. We also thank Gy¨orgy
Kov´acs for introducing us to the works .
7. References
 G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed, N. Jaitly,
A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, B. Kingsbury et al., “Deep
neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition,”
IEEE Signal processing magazine, vol. 29, 2012.
 G. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, “Context-Dependent
Pre-Trained Deep Neural Networks for Large-Vocabulary Speech
Recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 20, Jan 2012.
 T. Sainath, A. rahman Mohamed, B. Kingsbury, and B. Ramabhadran, “Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for LVCSR,” in
ICASSP, 2013.
 A. Graves, A. rahman Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech Recognition with Deep Recurrent Neural Networks,” in ICASSP, 2013.
 A. Graves and N. Jaitly, “Towards End-to-End Speech Recognition with Recurrent Neural Networks,” in ICML, 2014.
 W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, Attend and
Spell: A Neural Network for Large Vocabulary Conversational
Speech Recognition,” in ICASSP, 2016.
 D. Bahdanau, J. Chorowski, D. Serdyuk, P. Brakel, and Y. Bengio,
“End-to-End Attention-based Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition,” in ICASSP, 2016.
 C.-C. Chiu, T. N. Sainath, Y. Wu, R. Prabhavalkar, P. Nguyen,
Z. Chen, A. Kannan, R. J. Weiss, K. Rao, E. Gonina, N. Jaitly,
B. Li, J. Chorowski, and M. Bacchiani, “State-of-the-art Speech
Recognition With Sequence-to-Sequence Models,” in ICASSP,
 N. Kanda, R. Takeda, and Y. Obuchi, “Elastic spectral distortion
for low resource speech recognition with deep neural networks,”
in ASRU, 2013.
 A. Ragni, K. M. Knill, S. P. Rath, and M. J. F. Gales, “Data augmentation for low resource languages,” in INTERSPEECH, 2014.
 N. Jaitly and G. Hinton, “Vocal Tract Length Perturbation (VTLP)
improves speech recognition,” in ICML Workshop on Deep Learning for Audio, Speech and Language Processing, 2013.
 A. Hannun, C. Case, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro, G. Diamos,
E. Elsen, R. Prenger, S. Satheesh, S. Sengupta, A. Coates, and
A. Ng, “Deep Speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition,”
in arXiv, 2014.
 T. Ko, V. Peddinti, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Audio Augmentation for Speech Recognition,” in INTERSPEECH, 2015.
 C. Kim, A. Misra, K. Chin, T. Hughes, A. Narayanan, T. Sainath,
and M. Bacchiani, “Generation of large-scale simulated utterances
in virtual rooms to train deep-neural networks for far-ﬁeld speech
recognition in Google Home,” in INTERSPEECH, 2017.
 R. Prabhavalkar, R. Alvarez, C. Parada, P. Nakkiran, and T. N.
Sainath, “Automatic gain control and multi-style training for robust small-footprint keyword spotting with deep neural networks,”
in ICASSP, 2015.
 A. Raju, S. Panchapagesan, X. Liu, A. Mandal, and N. Strom,
“Data Augmentation for Robust Keyword Spotting under Playback Interference,” in arXiv, 2018.
 S. H. Mallidi and H. Hermansky, “Novel neural network based
fusion for Multistream ASR,” in ICASSP, 2016.
 E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Man´e, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le, “Autoaugment: Learning augmentation policies from data,” in CVPR,
 T. DeVries and G. Taylor, “Improved Regularization of Convolutional Neural Networks with Cutout,” in arXiv, 2017.
 V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,”
in ICASSP, 2015.
 C¸ . G¨ulc¸ehre, O. Firat, K. Xu, K. Cho, L. Barrault, H. Lin,
F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio, “On using monolingual
corpora in neural machine translation,” in arxiv, 2015.
 J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel, “SWITCHBOARD:
telephone speech corpus for research and development,” in
ICASSP, 1992.
 C. Cieri, D. Miller, and K. Walker, “The ﬁsher corpus: a resource
for the next generations of speech-to-text,” in LREC, 2004.
 A. Zeyer, K. Irie, R. Schl¨uter, and H. Ney, “Improved training of
end-to-end attention models for speech recognition,” in INTER-
SPEECH, 2018.
 K. Irie, R. Prabhavalkar, A. Kannan, A. Bruguier, D. Rybach, and
P. Nguyen, “Model Unit Exploration for Sequence-to-Sequence
Speech Recognition,” in arXiv, 2019.
 M. Schuster and K. Nakajima, “Japanese and korean voice
search,” in ICASSP, 2012.
 A. Graves, “Practical Variational Inference for Neural Networks,”
in NIPS, 2011.
 C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision,” in CVPR,
 J. Chorowski and N. Jaitly, “Towards better decoding and language model integration in sequence to sequence models,” in IN-
TERSPEECH, 2017.
 D. Povey, V. Peddinti, D. Galvez, P. Ghahrmani, V. Manohar,
X. Na, Y. Wang, and S. Khudanpur, “Purely sequence-trained
neural networks for ASR based on lattice-free MMI,” in INTER-
SPEECH, 2016.
 K. J. Han, A. Chandrashekaran, J. Kim, and I. Lane, “The CA-
PIO 2017 Conversational Speech Recognition System,” in arXiv,
 X. Yang, J. Li, and X. Zhou, “A novel pyramidal-FSMN architecture with lattice-free MMI for speech recognition,” in arXiv,
 R. Collobert, C. Puhrsch, and G. Synnaeve, “Wav2Letter: an Endto-End ConvNet-based Speech Recognition System,” in arXiv,
 V. Liptchinsky, G. Synnaeve, and R. Collobert, “Letter-Based
Speech Recognition with Gated ConvNets,” in arXiv, 2017.
 Y. Zhou, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “Improving End-to-End
Speech Recognition with Policy Learning,” in ICASSP, 2018.
 N. Zeghidour, Q. Xu, V. Liptchinsky, N. Usunier, G. Synnaeve,
and R. Collobert, “Fully Convolutional Speech Recognition,” in
arXiv, 2018.
 J. Li, V. Lavrukhin, B. Ginsburg, R. Leary, O. Kuchaiev, J. M.
Cohen, H. Nguyen, and R. T. Gadde, “Jasper: An End-to-End
Convolutional Neural Acoustic Model,” in arXiv, 2019.
 A. Zeyer, A. Merboldt, R. Schl¨uter, and H. Ney, “A comprehensive analysis on attention models,” in NIPS: Workshop IRASL,
 S. Sabour, W. Chan, and M. Norouzi, “Optimal Completion Distillation for Sequence Learning,” in ICLR, 2019.
 D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek,
N. Goel, M. Hannemann, P. Motlicek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz,
J. Silovsky, G. Stemmer, and K. Vesely, “The Kaldi Speech
Recognition Toolkit,” in ASRU, 2011.
 K. Vesely, A. Ghoshal, L. Burger, and D. Povey, “Sequencediscriminative training of deep neural networks,” in INTER-
SPEECH, 2013.
 H. Hadian, H. Sameti, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “End-to-end
speech recognition using lattice-free MMI,” in INTERSPEECH,
 G. Zweig, C. Yu, J. Droppo, and A. Stolcke, “Advances in All-
Neural Speech Recognition,” in ICASSP, 2017.
 K. Audhkhasi, B. Ramabhadran, G. Saon, M. Picheny, and D. Nahamoo, “Direct Acoustics-to-Word Models for English Conversational Speech Recognition,” in INTERSPEECH, 2018.
 K. Audhkhasi, B. Kingsbury, B. Ramabhadran, G. Saon, and
M. Picheny, “Building competitive direct acoustics-to-word models for english conversational speech recognition,” in ICASSP,
 L. Lu, X. Zhang, and S. Renals, “On training the recurrent neural
network encoder-decoder for large vocabulary end-to-end speech
recognition,” in ICASSP, 2016.
 S. Toshniwal, H. Tang, L. Lu, and K. Livescu, “Multitask Learning with Low-Level Auxiliary Tasks for Encoder-Decoder Based
Speech Recognition,” in INTERSPEECH, 2017.
 C. Weng, J. Cui, G. Wang, J. Wang, C. Yu, D. Su, and D. Yu, “Improving Attention Based Sequence-to-Sequence Models for Endto-End English Conversational Speech Recognition,” in INTER-
SPEECH, 2018.
 G. Kov´acs, L. T´oth, D. Van Compernolle, and S. Ganapathy, “Increasing the robustness of cnn acoustic models using autoregressive moving average spectrogram features and channel dropout,”
Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 100, pp. 44–50, 2017.
 L. T´oth, G. Kov´acs, and D. Van Compernolle, “A perceptually
inspired data augmentation method for noise robust cnn acoustic
models,” in SPECOM, 2018.