SYNTHETIC DATA AUGMENTATION USING GAN FOR IMPROVED LIVER LESION
CLASSIFICATION
Maayan Frid-Adar1
Eyal Klang2
Michal Amitai2
Jacob Goldberger3
Hayit Greenspan1
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
2Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
3Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
In this paper, we present a data augmentation method that
generates synthetic medical images using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). We propose a training scheme that
ﬁrst uses classical data augmentation to enlarge the training
set and then further enlarges the data size and its diversity by
applying GAN techniques for synthetic data augmentation.
Our method is demonstrated on a limited dataset of computed
tomography (CT) images of 182 liver lesions (53 cysts, 64
metastases and 65 hemangiomas). The classiﬁcation performance using only classic data augmentation yielded 78.6%
sensitivity and 88.4% speciﬁcity. By adding the synthetic data
augmentation the results signiﬁcantly increased to 85.7% sensitivity and 92.4% speciﬁcity.
Index Terms— Image synthesis, data augmentation, generative adversarial network, liver lesions, lesion classiﬁcation
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the main challenges in the medical imaging domain
is how to cope with the small datasets and limited amount
of annotated samples, especially when employing supervised
machine learning algorithms that require labeled data and
larger training examples. In medical imaging tasks, annotations are made by radiologists with expert knowledge on
the data and task and most annotations of medical images
are time consuming. Although public medical datasets are
available online, and grand challenges have been publicized,
most datasets are still limited in size and only applicable to
speciﬁc medical problems. Collecting medical data is a complex and expensive procedure that requires the collaboration
of researchers and radiologists .
Researchers attempt to overcome this challenge by using data augmentation schemes, commonly including simple
modiﬁcations of dataset images such as translation, rotation,
ﬂip and scale. Using such data augmentation to improve the
training process of networks has become a standard procedure in computer vision tasks . However, the diversity that
can be gained from small modiﬁcations of the images (such
as small translations and small angular rotations) is relatively
small. This motivates the use of synthetic data examples; such
samples enable the introduction of more variability and can
possibly enrich the dataset further, in order to improve the
system training process.
A promising approach for training a model that synthesizes images is known as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) . GANs have gained great popularity in the computer vision community and different variations of GANs
were recently proposed for generating high quality realistic
natural images . Recently, several medical imaging applications have applied the GAN framework . Most
studies have employed the image-to-image GAN technique
to create label-to-segmentation translation, segmentationto-image translation or medical cross modality translations.
Some studies have been inspired by the GAN method for
image inpainting.
In the current study we investigate the
applicability of GAN framework to synthesize high quality
medical images for data augmentation. We focus on improving results in the speciﬁc task of liver lesion classiﬁcation.
The liver is one of three most common sites for metastatic
cancer along with the bone and lungs. According to the World
Health Organization, in 2012 alone, cancer accounted for 8.2
million deaths worldwide of which 745,000 were caused by
liver cancer . There is a great need and interest in developing automated diagnostic tools based on CT images to assists
radiologists in the diagnosis of liver lesions. Previous studies
have presented methods for automatic classiﬁcation of focal
liver lesions in CT images .
In the current work we suggest an augmentation scheme
that is based on combination of standard image perturbation and synthetic liver lesion generation using GAN for
improved liver lesion classiﬁcation.
The contributions of
this work are the following: synthesis of high quality focal
liver lesions from CT images using generative adversarial
networks (GANs), design of a CNN-based solution for the
liver lesion classiﬁcation task and augmentation of the CNN
training set using the generated synthetic data - for improved
classiﬁcation results.
 
2. GENERATING SYNTHETIC LIVER LESIONS
Even a small CNN has thousands of parameters that need to
be trained. When using deep networks with multiple layers
or dealing with limited numbers of training images, there is a
danger of overﬁtting. The standard solution to reduce overﬁtting is data augmentation that artiﬁcially enlarges the dataset
 . Classical augmentation techniques on gray-scale images
include mostly afﬁne transformations. To enrich the training
data we apply here an image synthesis technique based on
the GAN network. However, to train a GAN we need many
examples as well. The approach we propose here involves
several steps: in the ﬁrst step, standard data augmentation is
used to create a larger dataset which is then used to train a
GAN. The synthetic examples created by the GAN are next
used as an additional resource for data augmentation. The
combined standard and synthetic augmentation is ﬁnally used
to train a lesion classiﬁer. Examples of real and synthetic lesions are shown in Figure 1. We next describe the details of
the proposed system.
2.1. Classic Data Augmentation
Classic augmentation techniques on gray-scale images include mostly afﬁne transformations such as translation, rotation, scaling, ﬂipping and shearing. In order to preserve
the liver lesion characteristics we avoided transformations
that cause shape deformation (like shearing and elastic deformations). In addition, we kept the ROI centered around
the lesion. Each lesion ROI was ﬁrst rotated Nrot times at
random angles θ = [0◦, ..., 180◦]. Afterwards, each rotated
ROI was ﬂipped Nflip times (up-down, left-right), translated
Ntrans times where we sampled random pairs of [x, y] pixel
values between (−p, p) related to the lesion diameter (d) by
p = min(4, 0.1 × d). Finally the ROI was scaled Nscale
times from a stochastic range of scales s = [0.1 × d, 0.4 × d].
The scale was implemented by changing the amount of tissue around the lesion in the ROI. As a result of the augmentation process, the total number of augmentations was
N = Nrot × (1 + Nflip + Ntrans + Nscale). Bicubic interpolation was used to resize the ROIs to a uniform size of
2.2. GAN Networks for Lesion Synthesis
GANs are a speciﬁc framework of a generative model.
It aims to implicitly learn the data distribution pdata from a
set of samples (e.g. images) to further generate new samples
drawn from the learned distribution.
We employed the Deep Convolutional GAN (DCGAN)
for synthesizing labeled lesions for each lesion class separately: Cysts, Metastases and Hemangiomas. We followed
the architecture proposed by Radford et al. . The model
consists of two deep CNNs that are trained simultaneously, as
depicted in Figure 2. A sample x is input to the discriminator
Fig. 1: Lesion ROI examples of Cysts (top row), Metastases
(middle row) and Hemangiomas (bottom row).
Left side:
Real lesions; Right side: Synthetic lesions.
(denoted D), which outputs D(x), its probability of being a
real sample. The generator (denoted G) gets input samples z
from a known simple distribution pz, and maps G(z) to the
image space of distribution pg. During training the generator improves in its ability to synthesize more realistic images
while the discriminator improves in its ability to distinguish
the real from the synthesized images. Hence the moniker of
adversarial training.
The generator network (Figure 2) takes a vector of 100
random numbers drawn from a uniform distribution as input
and outputs a liver lesion image of size 64 × 64 × 1. The
network architecture consists of a fully connected layer
reshaped to size 4 × 4 × 1024 and four fractionally-strided
convolutional layers to up-sample the image with a 5 × 5 kernel size. The discriminator network has a typical CNN architecture that takes the input image of size 64 × 64 × 1 (lesion
ROI), and outputs a decision - if the lesion is real or fake. In
this network, four convolution layers are used, with a kernel
size of 5 × 5 and a fully connected layer. Strided convolutions are applied to each convolution layer to reduce spatial
dimensionality instead of using pooling layers.
3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
3.1. Data and Implementation
The liver lesion data used in this work, was collected from
the Sheba Medical Center. Cases of cysts, metastases and hemangiomas, were acquired from 2009 to 2014 using a General Electric (GE) Healthcare scanner and a Siemens Medical System scanner, with the following parameters: 120kVp,
140-400mAs and 1.25-5.0mm slice thickness. Cases were
collected with the approval of the institution’s Institutional
Review Board.
The dataset was made up of 182 portal-phase 2-D CT
scans: 53 cysts, 64 metastases, 65 hemangiomas. An expert
radiologist marked the margin of each lesion and determined
its corresponding diagnosis which was established by biopsy
or a clinical follow-up. This serves as our ground truth.
Liver lesions vary considerably in shape, contrast and size
Fig. 2: Deep Convolutional GAN Architecture (generator+descriminator).
(10-102mm). They also vary in location, where some can be
located in interior sections of the liver and some are near its
boundary where the surrounding parenchyma tissue of the lesions changes. Finally, lesions also vary within categories.
Each type of lesion has its own characteristics but some characteristics may be confusing, in particular for metastasis and
hemangioma lesions. Hemangiomas are benign tumors and
metastases are malignant lesions derived from different primary cancers. Thus, the correct identiﬁcation of a lesion as
metastasis or hemangioma is especially important.
We use a liver lesion classiﬁcation CNN of the following architecture: three pairs of convolutional layers where
each convolutional layer is followed by a max-pooling layer,
and two dense fully-connected layers ending with a soft-max
layer to determine the network predictions into the three lesion classes. We use ReLU as activation functions and incorporated a dropout layer with a probability of 0.5 during training. For training we used a batch size of 64 with a learning
rate of 0.001 for 150 epochs.
The input to our classiﬁcation system are ROIs of 64×64
cropped from CT scans using the radiologist’s annotations.
The ROIs are extracted to capture the lesion and its surrounding tissue relative to its size. In all experiments and evaluations we used 3-fold cross validation with case separation at
the patient level and each fold contained a balanced number
of cyst, metastasis and hemangioma lesion ROIs. For the implementation of the liver lesion classiﬁcation CNN we used
the Keras framework. For the implementation of the GAN architectures we used the TensorFlow framework. All training
processes were performed using an NVIDIA GeForce GTX
980 Ti GPU.
3.2. Evaluation of the Synthetic Data Augmentation
We started by examining the effects of using only classic data
augmentation for the liver lesion classiﬁcation task (our baseline). We then synthesized liver lesion ROIs using GAN and
examined the classiﬁcation results after adding the synthesized lesion ROIs to the training set. A detailed description
of each step is provided next.
Fig. 3: Accuracy results for liver lesion classiﬁcation with the
increase of training set size. The red line shows the effect of
adding classic data augmentation and the blue line shows the
effect of adding synthetic data augmentation.
As our baseline, we used classical data augmentation (see
section 2.1).
We refer to this network as CNN-AUG. We
recorded the classiﬁcation results for the liver lesion classi-
ﬁcation CNN for increasing amounts of data augmentation
over the original training set. In order to examine the effect
of adding increasing numbers of examples, we formed the
data groups D1
aug ⊂... ⊂D9
aug such that the ﬁrst
data group was only made up of the original ROIs and each
group contains more augmented data. For each original ROI,
we produced a large number of augmentations (Nrot = 30,
Nflip = 3, Ntrans = 7 and Nscale = 5), resulting in N =
480 augmented images per lesion ROI and overall ∼30, 000
examples per folder. Then, we selected the images for the data
groups by sampling randomly augmented examples such that
for each original lesion we sampled the same augmentation
Table 1: Confusion Matrix for the Optimal Classical Data
Augmentation Group (CNN-AUG).
True \ Auto
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Table 2: Confusion Matrix for the Optimal Synthetic Data
Augmentation Group (CNN-AUG-GAN).
True \ Auto
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
The second step of the experiment consisted of generating synthetic liver lesion ROIs for data augmentation using
GAN. We refer to this network as CNN-AUG-GAN. Since
our dataset was too small for effective training, we incorporated classic augmentation for the training process. We employed the DCGAN architecture to train each lesion class separately, using the same 3-fold cross validation process and the
same data partition. In all the steps of the learning procedure we maintained a complete separation between train and
test subsets. After the generator had learned each lesion class
data distribution separately, it was able to synthesize new examples by using an input vector of normal distributed samples
(“noise”). The same approach that was applied in step one of
the experiment when constructing the data groups was also
applied in step two: We collected large numbers of synthetic
lesions for all three lesion classes, and constructed increased
size data groups {Dsynth}6
j=1 of synthetic examples. To keep
the classes balanced, we sampled the same number of synthetic ROIs for each class.
Results of the GAN-based synthetic augmentation experiment are shown in Figure 3. The baseline results (classical
augmentation) are shown in red. We see the total accuracy results for the lesion classiﬁcation task, for each group of data.
When no augmentations were applied, a result of 57% was
achieved; this may be due to overﬁtting over the small number of training examples (∼63 samples per fold). The results
improved as the number of training examples increased, up to
saturation around 78.6% where adding more augmented data
examples failed to improve the classiﬁcation results. We note
that the saturation starts with D6
aug = 5000 samples per fold.
We deﬁne this point as i=optimal where the smallest number
of augmented samples were used. The confusion matrix for
the optimal point appears in Table 1.
The blue line in Figure 3 shows the total accuracy results for
the lesion classiﬁcation task for the synthetic data augmentation scenario.
The classiﬁcation results signiﬁcantly improved from 78.6% with no synthesized lesions to 85.7% for
synth = 5000+3000 = 8000 samples per fold.
The confusion matrix for the best classiﬁcation results using
synthetic data augmentation is presented in Table 2.
3.3. Expert Assessment of the Synthesized Data
In order to assess the synthesized lesion data, we challenged
two radiologists to classify real and fake lesion ROIs into one
of three classes: cyst, metastasis or hemangioma. The goal
of the experiment was to check if the radiologists would perform differently on a real lesion vs. a fake one. Similar results
would indicate the relevance of the generated data, to the classiﬁcation task.
The experts were given, in random order, lesion ROIs
from the original dataset of 182 real lesions and from 120
additional synthesized lesions. The expert radiologists’ results were compared against the ground truth classiﬁcation.
It is important to note that in the deﬁned task, we challenged
the radiologists to reach a decision based on a single 2-D
ROI image.
This scenario is not consistent with existing
clinical workﬂow in which the radiologist makes a decision
based on the entire 3D volume, with support from additional
anatomical context, medical history context, and more. We
are therefore not focusing on the classiﬁcation results perse, but rather on the delta in performance between the two
presented datasets.
We received the following set of results: Expert 1 classiﬁed the real and synthesized lesions correctly in 78% and
77.5% of the cases, respectively. Expert 2 classiﬁed the real
and synthesized lesions correctly in 69.2% and 69.2% of the
cases, respectively. We observe that for both experts, the classiﬁcation performances for the real lesions and the synthesized lesions were similar. This suggests that our synthetic
generated lesions were meaningful in appearance.
4. CONCLUSION
To conclude, in this work we presented a method that uses the
generation of synthetic medical images for data augmentation
to improve classiﬁcation performance on a medical problem
with limited data. We demonstrated this technique on a liver
lesion classiﬁcation task and achieved a signiﬁcant improvement of 7% using synthetic augmentation over the classic
augmentation. In the future, we plan to extend our work to
additional medical domains that can beneﬁt from synthesis of
lesions for improved training - towards increased classiﬁcation results.
5. REFERENCES
 H. Greenspan, B. van Ginneken, and R. M. Summers, “Guest editorial deep learning in medical imaging: Overview and future promise of an exciting new
technique,”
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1153–1159, May 2016.
 A. Krizhevsky, Ilya I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2012.
 I. Goodfellow et al.,
“Generative adversarial nets,”
in Advances in neural information processing systems,
 A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala,
“Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
 
 A. Odena, C. Olah, and J. Shlens, “Conditional image
synthesis with auxiliary classiﬁer gans,” arXiv preprint
 
 P. Costa et al., “Towards adversarial retinal image synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08974, 2017.
 D. Nie et al., Medical Image Synthesis with Context-
Aware Generative Adversarial Networks, pp. 417–425,
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.
 T. Schlegl et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection with
generative adversarial networks to guide marker discovery,” in International Conference on Information Processing in Medical Imaging. Springer, 2017, pp. 146–
 J. Ferlay et al., “Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns in globocan
2012,” International Journal of Cancer, vol. 136, no. 5,
 M. Gletsos et al., “A computer-aided diagnostic system
to characterize CT focal liver lesions: design and optimization of a neural network classiﬁer,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 7,
no. 3, pp. 153–162, Sept 2003.
 C. Chang et. al,
“Computer-aided diagnosis of liver
tumors on computed tomography images,” Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, vol. 145, pp.
45–51, 2017.
 I. Diamant et al., “Task-driven dictionary learning based
on mutual information for medical image classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 64,
no. 6, pp. 1380–1392, June 2017.