On the strong anomalous diﬀusion
P. Castiglione1, A. Mazzino2,3, P. Muratore-Ginanneschi4 and A. Vulpiani1
1 Dipartimento di Fisica, and Istituto Nazionale di Fisica della Materia,
Universit`a “La Sapienza”, P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italy.
2 CNRS, Observatoire de Nice, B.P. 4229, 06304 Nice Cedex 4, France.
3 INFM - Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Genova, I–16146 Genova, Italy
4 N.B.I., Blegdamsvej 17 DK 2100, Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
May 2, 2019
The superdiﬀusion behavior, i.e. < x2(t) >∼t2ν, with ν > 1/2, in general is not
completely characherized by a unique exponent. We study some systems exhibiting
strong anomalous diﬀusion, i.e. < |x(t)|q >∼tqν(q) where ν(2) > 1/2 and qν(q) is
not a linear function of q. This feature is diﬀerent from the weak superdiﬀusion
regime, i.e. ν(q) = const > 1/2, as in random shear ﬂows.
The strong anomalous diﬀusion can be generated by nontrivial chaotic dynamics,
Lagrangian motion in 2d time-dependent incompressible velocity ﬁelds, 2d
symplectic maps and 1d intermittent maps. Typically the function qν(q) is piecewise
linear. This corresponds to two mechanisms: a weak anomalous diﬀusion for the
typical events and a ballistic transport for the rare excursions.
In order to have strong anomalous diﬀusion one needs a violation of the hypothesis of the central limit theorem, this happens only in a very narrow region of the
control parameters space.
In the presence of the strong anomalous diﬀusion one does not have a unique
exponent and therefore one has the failure of the usual scaling of the probability
distribution, i.e. P(x, t) = t−νF(x/tν). This implies that the eﬀective equation at
large scale and long time for P(x, t), cannot obey neither the usual Fick equation
nor other linear equations involving temporal and/or spatial fractional derivatives.
PACS number(s): 05.45.+b, 05.60.+w;
Introduction
The transport of mass or heat from particles passively advected by a given velocity ﬁeld is
a problem of considerable practical and theoretical interest. The coupling between advection and molecular diﬀusitivy results in a great variety of diﬀerent ﬁelds, as geophysics,
chemical engineering and disordered media . One can have highly nontrivial behavior
even in the presence of simple laminar velocity ﬁelds, e.g. very large diﬀusion coeﬃcients
due to the combined eﬀects of the molecular diﬀusitivy and some features of the velocity
ﬁelds .
Taking into account the molecular diﬀusion, the Lagrangian motion of a test particle
is described by the Langevin equation :
˙x = u(x, t) + ξ
where u(x, t) is the Eulerian velocity ﬁeld at the position x and the time t, and ξ is a
Gaussian white noise with zero mean and correlation function
⟨ξi(t)ξj(t′)⟩= 2D0δij δ(t −t′),
the coeﬃcient D0 being the molecular diﬀusivity.
If Θ is the density of tracers, the
Fokker–Planck equation associated to (1) is
∂tΘ + ∂(u Θ) = D0∂2Θ.
For times much larger than the typical time of u, the large-scale density ﬁeld ⟨θ⟩(i.e. the
ﬁeld θ averaged over a volume of linear dimension much larger than the typical length of
the velocity ﬁeld u) obeys a standard diﬀusion Fick equation:
i, j = 1, . . . , d.
All the (often nontrivial) eﬀects due to the presence of the velocity ﬁeld are in the eddy
diﬀusion coeﬃcient DE
ij. Of course if the Eq. (4) holds then one has ⟨(x(t) −x(0))2⟩≃
11 t. In practice at large time the test particle behaves as a Brownian particle.
The above scenario is the typical one. Nevertheless there exist cases where anomalous
diﬀusion is observed, i.e. ⟨(x(t) −x(0))2⟩∼t2ν with ν ̸= 1/2. The case when ν < 1/2
corresponds to subdiﬀusion while for ν > 1/2 one has superdiﬀusion. Trapping is the
basic mechanism leading to subdiﬀusion and it occurs only in compressible ﬁelds.
remarkable example of subdiﬀusion, ⟨(x(t) −x(0))2⟩∼[ln(t)]4 is the random walk in 1d
random potential .
If the velocity ﬁeld is incompressible and the molecular diﬀusivity is non zero, either
standard diﬀusion or superdiﬀusion takes place.
In the last two decades many authors have studied systems with anomalous (non
Gaussian) diﬀusion. It is practically impossible to cite the huge literature. We just mention, among the many, the contribution of Geisel and coworkers for the 1d intermittent
maps, Ishizaki et al for the symplectic maps, Zaslavky et al for the lagragian motion
in q-ﬂows , Majda & Avellaneda for the random shear ﬂows, the experimental
study of Solomon at al. on the superdiﬀusion in an anular tank, the symbolic dynamics approach of Misguich et al. for the subdiﬀusive behavior in a stochastic layer and
the anomalous diﬀusion of magnetic lines in the 3d turbulence by Zimbardo et al. .
The aim of this paper is a detailed study of the anomalous diﬀusion in simple velocity ﬁelds and discrete time dynamical systems. In particular we shall show that strong
anomalous diﬀusion may occur, i.e.
⟨(x(t) −x(0))q⟩∼tq ν(q)
where ν(q) is non-constant. In this case the probability distribution P(x, t) cannot be
described in term of a unique scaling exponent, as in the L´evy ﬂight or in the random
shear ﬂow.
Section 2 is devoted to a brief review of the known mechanisms for anomalous diﬀusion. In Sec. 3 we report detailed numerical results for the anomalous diﬀusion mechanism
in 2d time-dependent incompressible velocity ﬁeld, in the standard map (which can be
considered a discrete time version of the Lagrangian motion in a 2d time periodic incompressible velocity ﬁeld), and in an intermittent 1d map. In Sec. 4 the reader can ﬁnd some
conjectures and discussions.
A brief review on some aspects of the anomalous
Anomalous diﬀusion occurs when some, or all, of the hypothesis of the central limit
theorem break down. Practically, the system has to violate at least one of the two following
conditions :
a) ﬁnite variance of the velocity;
b) fast enough decay of the auto-correlation function of Lagrangian velocities.
This is, of course, an elementary remark. Nevertheless, in our opinion, a detailed discussion of this point can be useful. In the present paper we use the term anomalous
diﬀusion to indicate a non standard diﬀusion in the asymptotic limit of very long time.
Sometimes in the literature the term anomalous is used also for long (but non asymptotic)
transient behavior. This transient anomalous behavior can have practical relevance, e.g.
in geophysics. We do not discuss this point in details. Let us recall some well established
results on the relation between diﬀusion phenomena and correlation function. It is easy
to obtain the following formula :
⟨(xi(t) −xi(0))2⟩=
dt2⟨vi(x(t1)) vi(x(t2))⟩≃2 t
where Cij(τ) is the correlation function of the Lagrangian velocity, namely v = ˙x,
Cij(τ) = ⟨vi(x(τ)) vj(x(0)) ⟩.
Eq. (6) is the so-called Taylor relation for a test particle evolving according to the
Langevin equation (1).
For test particles whose dynamics is described by a map (discrete time),
x(n + 1) = F (x(n)),
the Taylor formula (6) is still valid with the obvious changes : v(x(t)) 7→F (x(n)) −x(n)
0 Cii(τ) 7→Cii(0)/2 + Pn
j=1 Cii(j). If both ⟨v2⟩< ∞and
0 dτ Cii(τ) < ∞then one
has standard diﬀusion and the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcients are
2 t⟨(xi(t) −xi(0))2⟩=
From the above remarks it stems that anomalous diﬀusion occurs only in two circumstances:
a) ⟨v2⟩= ∞
b) ⟨v2⟩< ∞and
0 dτ Cii(τ) = ∞, i.e. Cii(τ) ∼τ −β with β > 1, that means very
strong correlations.
Simple systems exhibiting anomalous diﬀusion
The L´evy ﬂight belongs to the ﬁrst case. Let us brieﬂy discuss it for discrete one
dimensional systems. The position x(t + 1) at the time t + 1 is obtained from x(t) as
x(t + 1) = x(t) + U(t),
where U(t)’s are independent variables identically distributed according to a α–L´evy–
stable distribution, Pα(U), with the following well-known properties :
dUeikUPα(U) ∝e−c|k|α
Pα(U) ∼U−(1+α)
with 0 < α ≤2. An easy computation gives
Note that ⟨x2⟩= ∞for any α < 2, nevertheless one can consider the L´evy ﬂight as a sort
of anomalous diﬀusion in the sense that x ∼t1/α ≫t1/2.
In spite of the relevance of the α–L´evy–stable distribution in probability theory, the
L´evy ﬂight model, in our opinion, has a rather weak importance for physical systems.
This is due to the very unrealistic property of inﬁnite variance.
An elegant way to overcome the above trouble is the introduction of a stochastic model,
called L´evy walk , corresponding to (10) but now U(t) is a random variable with
nontrivial correlations. The velocity U(t) can assume the values ±u0 and it maintains
its value for a duration T which is a random variable with probability density ψ(T).
Practically, the particle moves with constant velocity for a certain time after which it
changes direction and so on.
In the L´evy walk the origin of the possible anomaly is
transferred to the correlation function of the Lagrangian velocity. Actually, taking
ψ(T) ∼T −(α+1),
one has standard diﬀusion if α > 2 while for α < 2 one has anomalous (super) diﬀusion :
⟨x(t)2⟩∼t2ν
Sometimes in the literature the L´evy walk is (erroneously) called L´evy ﬂight.
Nontrivial anomalous diﬀusion
From the above considerations one realizes that it is not particularly diﬃcult to build up
ad hoc probabilistic models exhibiting anomalous diﬀusion. On the contrary it is much
more diﬃcult and much more interesting the understanding of the anomalous diﬀusion
in nontrivial systems like the transport in incompressible velocity ﬁelds or deterministic
maps, where the explicit probabilistic aspect (given for example by an external noise
related to the molecular diﬀusivity) cannot play a relevant role.
Avellaneda and Majda , (see also Avellaneda & Vergassola for the generalization to the time dependent case), obtained a very important and general result about the
diﬀusion in an incompressible velocity ﬁeld u(x). If the molecular diﬀusivity D0 is non
zero and the infrared contribution to the velocity ﬁeld are weak enough, namely
dk ⟨| ˆu(k) |2⟩
where ⟨· ⟩indicates the time average and ˆu represents the Fourier transform of the
velocity ﬁeld, then one has standard diﬀusion, i.e. the diﬀusion coeﬃcients Dii’s in (9)
are ﬁnite. Therefore there exist two possible origins for the superdiﬀusion
a) D0 > 0 and, in order to violate the (15), the velocity ﬁeld with very long spatial
correlation;
b) D0 = 0 and strong correlation between u(x(t)) and u(x(t + τ)) at large τ.
For the sake of completeness we brieﬂy remind one of the few nontrivial systems for which
the presence of anomalous diﬀusion can be proven in a rigorous way.
Consider a 2d random shear ﬂow :
u = (u(y) , 0)
where u(y) is a random function such that
dk eiky ˆu(k)
⟨ˆu(k) ˆu(k′)⟩= S(k) δ(k −k′),
S(k) is the spectrum and the average ⟨· ⟩is taken over the ﬁeld realizations. Matheron
& De Marsily showed that the anomalous diﬀusion in the x-direction occurs if
On the contrary, if this integral is ﬁnite one has standard diﬀusion and
11 = D0 + 1
Eq. (18) is a well-known exact result already obtained by Zeldovich . For the sake of
simplicity we consider the case
If γ > 1 then one has standard diﬀusion. On the contrary, if −1 ≤γ ≤1 one has a
superdiﬀusion, namely
⟨| x(t) −x(0) |2 ⟩∼t2ν
The condition
dk S(k) k−2 = ∞for the anomalous diﬀusion can be understood by
means of the following simple physical argument. Note that
dk S(k) k−2 ∼⟨u2⟩L2
where L is the typical length of the function u(y), i.e. the typical distance between two
sequent zeros of u(y). If ⟨u2⟩< ∞and
dk S(k) k−2 < ∞the diﬀusion process is
basically similar to that one characterized by a velocity ﬁeld given by a sequence of strips
of size L and velocity ±
⟨u2⟩and therefore the (18) is nothing but the transversal Taylor
diﬀusion in channels. The origin of the anomalous diﬀusion in this case is due to the
fact that a test particle travels in a given direction for a very long time before it changes
direction and so on. In some sense the Lagrangian motion in the random shear ﬂow for
−1 ≤γ ≤1 is a nontrivial realization of a L´evy walk. The generalization to the 3d case
u = (u(y, z), 0, 0) is straightforward.
Another nontrivial system where the presence of anomalous diﬀusion has been rigorously proven is the Kraichnan’s passive scalar model , where the velocity advecting the
scalar ﬁeld, is rapidly varying in time. For such a model, generally, the distance between
pairs of particles tends to increase with the time elapsed but, occasionally, particles may
come very close and stay so; this is the source of the anomalies in the scaling .
If the inequality (15) holds then in order to have anomalous diﬀusion one needs D0 = 0
and a correlation function Cii(τ) going to zero not too fast. These conditions are satisﬁed,
e.g., in time periodic velocity ﬁelds whose Lagrangian phase space has a complicated selfsimilar structure of island and cantori . In this case superdiﬀusion is essentially due to
the almost trapping of the trajectories for arbitrarily long time, close to the cantori which
are organized in complicated self-similar structures.
In addition, there exist a strong numerical evidence (and sometimes also theoretical
arguments) for superdiﬀusion in 1-d intermittent maps as well as in the standard map,
which is a 2-d symplectic map and therefore it can be considered as the Poincar´e map of
a Lagrangian motion in a time periodic velocity ﬁeld.
About the meaning of anomalous
Up to now we used the term anomalous as synonymous of non-Gaussian. Let us consider
now in more detail the cases with superdiﬀusion. There are two possibilities :
a) weak anomalous diﬀusion when
⟨| x(t) −x(0) |q⟩∼tqν
∀q > 0 and ν > 1
b) strong anomalous diﬀusion when
⟨| x(t) −x(0) |q⟩∼tq ν(q)
ν(q) ̸= cost
where ν(q) is a nondecreasing function of q.
In the weak anomalous diﬀusion one has for the probability distribution P(∆x, t) of
∆x = x(t) −x(0) at time t, the following expression :
P(∆x, t) = t−νF(∆x t−ν)
where in general the function F is diﬀerent from the Gaussian one. The random shear
ﬂow is an example of the weak anomalous diﬀusion .
Bouchaud at al. have shown that in the case of the random shear ﬂow (16)-(18)
with γ = 0
F(a) ∼e−c|a|4/3
There are very few numerical studies on the strong anomalous diﬀusion. Let us mention the work of Sneppen & Jensen on the motion of particles passively advected by
the dynamical membranes (the authors use the term multidiﬀusion) and an 1-d intermittent map studied by Pikovsky .
Of course the strong anomalous diﬀusion is not compatible with the simple scaling
(23). Obviously in the presence of anomalous diﬀusion P(x, t) cannot obey to the usual
Fickian diﬀusion Eq. (8).
Therefore, a quite natural problem is to ﬁnd the eﬀective
evolution equation for P(x, t) at large t. The answer to this question up to now as far as
we know, is not well understood in the general case.
For the L´evy ﬂight one can naively write
∂tP = −c (−∂2)α/2 P.
The above equation can be considered the proper one for the L´evy ﬂight in the sense
that starting at t = 0 with P(x, 0) = δ(x) at any t > 0 the probability P(x, t) is given
by th α-stable L´evy function. Of course, if α = 2 one has the usual Fick equation and
the Gaussian shape for P(x, t). For the more complicated anomalous diﬀusion there are
many proposal in terms of fractional time, and/or spatial, derivatives. We do not enter
in a detailed discussion of these works, the interested readers can see .
Numerical results
In this section we report detailed numerical results for anomalous diﬀusion in 2-d time
dependent velocity ﬁelds and maps.
Strong anomalous diﬀusion in a simple ﬂow mimicking the
Rayleigh–B´enard convection
We investigate here anomalous diﬀusion in a simple model mimicking the Rayleigh–B´enard
convection . Two-dimensional convection with rigid boundary conditions is described by the following stream function:
ψ(x, y, t) = ψ0 sin(x + B sin ωt) sin y
where the periodicity of the cell is L ≡2π, and the even oscillatory instability 
is accounted for by the term B sin ωt, representing the lateral oscillation of the rolls.
The capability of the simple ﬂow (26) to capture the essential features of the convection
problem is discussed in Ref. .
It is worth noting that, at ﬁxed B, the only relevant parameter controlling the diﬀusion
process in the ﬂow (26) is ǫ ≡ωL2/ψ0, i.e., the ratio between the lateral roll oscillation
frequency and the characteristic frequency of the passive scalar motion. Diﬀerent regimes
take place for diﬀerent values of ǫ. The two limiting cases ǫ ≪1 and ǫ ≫1 have been
investigated in Ref. . The regime ǫ ∼1 has recently been studied in Ref. , in
particular the synchronization between the lateral roll oscillation frequency (of the order
of ω) and the characteristic frequencies of the scalar ﬁeld motion (of the order of ψ0/L2)
has been investigated. This mechanism leads to enhanced diﬀusion.
We brieﬂy recall the main results of Ref. . It has been found that the synchronization between the circulation in the cells and their global oscillation is a very eﬃcient way
of jumping from cell to cell. This mechanism, similar to stochastic resonance ,
makes the eﬀective diﬀusivity as a function of the frequency ω very structured. In the
limit where the molecular diﬀusion vanishes, anomalous superdiﬀusion takes place for
narrow windows of values of ω around the peaks.
In Fig. 1 the x-component, DE
11, of the eddy diﬀusivity versus the frequency ωL2/ψ0
is shown for diﬀerent values of D0/ψ0.
We anticipate that anomalous diﬀusion in the strong sense (according to the deﬁnition
given in Sec. 2.2) takes place, making highly nontrivial the diﬀusion process only around
the values of ω corresponding to the peaks of enhanced diﬀusion.
Speciﬁcally, let us
focus our attention on the anomalous regime occurring for D0 = 0 and ωL2/ψ0 ≃1.1.
We have then integrated the Eq. (11) with D0 = 0 and u obtained from the ﬂow (26),
using a second-order Runge-Kutta scheme. In the following, averages are over diﬀerent
realizations and performed by uniformly distributing 106 particles in the basic periodic
cell. The system evolution is computed up to times of the order of 104 L2/ψ0.
In order to investigate the anomalous diﬀusion in the strong sense, a measure of
⟨[x(t) −x(0)]q⟩for diﬀerent q’s has to be made.
Figure 1: The turbulent diﬀusivity DE
11/ψ0 vs the frequency ωL2/ψ0 for diﬀerent values
of the molecular diﬀusivity D0/ψ0.
D0/ψ0 = 3 × 10−3 (dotted curve); D0/ψ0 = 1 ×
10−3(broken curve); D0/ψ0 = 5 × 10−4 (full curve).
To that end, we have performed a linear ﬁt of ln⟨[x(t) −x(0)]q⟩versus ln t, the slope
of which being the exponent q ν(q) in (22). As an example, in Fig. 2 the mean-squared
displacement, as a function of the time, has been presented.
Superdiﬀusive transport
takes thus place for ω = 1.1 in the limit D0 →0, i.e.:
⟨[x(t) −x(0)]2⟩∝t2ν(2)
ν(2) > 1/2
The presence of genuine anomalous diﬀusion is also supported by the behavior of the
coeﬃcient DE
11 as a function of D0. As suggested in Ref. , in the presence of genuine
anomalous diﬀusion, the eﬀective diﬀusivity must diverge and it is expected that DE
with β > 0. The curve DE
11 versus D0 is shown in Fig. 3. The data are well ﬁtted
by a straight line with slope β ≃0.18, conﬁrming the presence of anomalous diﬀusion at
Fits similar to that one presented in Fig. 2 have been obtained also for other values
of the order q, ranging between 0 and 6. The results are summarized in Fig. 4, where the
exponents q ν(q)’s are shown as a function of q.
Some remarks are in order. The curve, as a whole, displays a nonlinear behavior,
the ﬁrst clue of anomalous diﬀusion in the strong sense. Two linear regions are actually present: the ﬁrst one behaves up to q ∼2, the second elsewhere. The two linear
Figure 2: The mean-squared displacement vs the time for the ﬂow (26) with D0 = 0, and
ω = 1.1. Lengths and times are shown in units of L and L2/ψ0, respectively. The best-ﬁt
(dashed) line corresponds to 2ν(2) = 1.3.
regions are associated to two diﬀerent mechanisms in the diﬀusion process, as suggested
by the following simple considerations. For small q’s, i.e. for the core of the probability
distribution function F(∆x, t), only one exponent ν1 ≡ν(q) ≃0.65 for q ≲2 fully characterizes the diﬀusion process even if anomalous. The typical, i.e. non rare, events obey
a (weak) anomalous diﬀusion process, roughly speaking, one can say that at scale l the
characteristic time τ(l) behaves like
τ(l) ∼l1/ν1.
On the other hand, the behavior q ν(q) ≃q −1.04 suggests that the large deviations are
essentially associated to ballistic transport
basically due to the mechanism of synchronization between the circulation in the cells
and their global oscillation.
The character of strong anomalous diﬀusion, already evident from Fig. 4, is highlighted
by the behavior of the probability density function (p.d.f.), P(∆x, t), of the displacement
∆x = x(t) −x(0) at diﬀerent times t’s. As already pointed out in Sec. 2.3, weak and
Figure 3: The diﬀusion coeﬃcient DE
11 as a function of D0 for the frequency of the roll
oscillation ω = 1.1. The diﬀusivities are reported in units of ψ0. The best-ﬁt (dashed)
line has the slope −β = −0.18.
strong anomalous diﬀusion can indeed carefully be discriminated by means of the simple scaling law (23), which is not compatible with the strong anomalous diﬀusion. We
have considered three diﬀerent probability distribution functions for three diﬀerent times,
namely: P1(∆x, t1), P2(∆x, t2) and P3(∆x, t3), with t3 = 2t2 = 4t1 and t1, t2 and t3 are
well inside the scaling regions of the moments of the displacement. In Fig. 5 the three
renormalized probability distribution functions P(∆x(t)/˜σ), with ˜σ = exp⟨ln | ∆x(t) |⟩,
at t = t1, t2 and t3, respectively, are shown.
Some remarks are in order. The ﬁrst one concerns the tails of the three probability
distribution functions which are clearly much higher than those of the Gaussian one. The
strong character of the anomalous diﬀusion can be easily investigated by observing that
if the scaling law (23) holds then the three functions rescaled probability distributions at
diﬀerent times have to be superimposed one on the other. As one can see from Fig. 5, this
is not the case in our system. In fact, one satisﬁes (23) but only for small deviations, that
means that only the cores of the probability distribution functions obey the above scaling
law. This fact is not surprising being a direct consequence of the behavior shown for the
scaling exponents q ν(q)’s. It is worth noting that the anomalous behavior disappears for
a very small changes of the parameters, e.g. for ω = 1.075 standard diﬀusion takes place.
Figure 4: The measured scaling exponents q ν(q)’s (joined by dot-dashed straight lines)
of the moments of the displacement ∆x, as a function of the order q. The dashed line
corresponds to 0.65 q while the dotted line corresponds to q −1.04.
Standard and anomalous diﬀusion in the standard map
The standard map is a well-known symplectic map , , given by:
 Jt+1 = Jt + A
2 π sin(2 π θt)
θt+1 = θt + Jt+1
A short review of its phenomenology follows. For A = 0 it is integrable
θt = θ0 + t J0
for all rational J0 one has periodic motion on resonant tori.
As soon as A > 0 the
resonant tori disintegrate in pairs of elliptic and hyperbolic ﬁxed points according to the
Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem . In the corresponding regions chaotic motions may occur.
Still for small values of A the orbits remain trapped in invariant sets. This is due to
the persistence under small perturbation of the nonresonant (KAM) tori where aperiodic
motions take place and to the topological constraint imposed by the dimensionality of the
system. In two dimensions the chaotic orbits generated by the disintegration of resonant
tori are restricted to lie between two bounding KAM curves. Since the latter ones are
Rescaled p.d.f.
Figure 5: The normalized probability distribution function P(∆x(t)/˜σ) vs ∆˜x ≡∆x/˜σ
for the three times t1 = 500 (circles), t2 = 2t1 (diamond) and t3 = 2t2 (squares). The
dashed line represents the Gaussian function, shown for comparison.
invariant and the area enclosed by them is conserved by symplecticity the chaotic regions
are also invariant and no diﬀusion can take place 
In order to observe diﬀusive behaviors one must consider values of A large enough so
that all KAM tori which connect θ = −0.5 to θ = 0.5 disappear. The critical value of A
has been numerically determined to be Ac ≃0.97 . For A > Ac the phase space can
be pictorially described as a chaotic sea where islands of regular motions emerge. Such
islands are related to the existence of accelerator modes i.e. stable periodic solutions of
(30) speciﬁed by:
Jt+p −Jt = l
t=1 sin(2 πθt) = 2πl
Each accelerator mode can be labelled with the integer pair (p, l). It is easy to check
the stability for (1, l): the symplectic property implies that the Jacobian matrix of (30)
computed on a stable solution must give a pair of complex eigenvalues of magnitude one.
The condition is satisﬁed for all A such that:
2 π|l| ≤A ≤2 π|l|
Expression (33) implies that period one accelerator modes with diﬀerent l cannot coexist.
Furthermore the length of the interval of A values such that (1, l) is stable decreases for
large l as:
If only one stable island exists no sensitive contribution to the diﬀusion properties of the
chaotic orbits is expected. A trajectory that arrives in the neighbourhood of a stable island
sticks to it for a ﬁnite amount of time before getting away. On average the contribution
to the encircling orbit is zero. Typically one observes normal diﬀusion :
⟨[Jt −J0]2⟩≃2 D t
where the average is over the initial conditions, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D can be estimated
with a crude random phase approximation as:
D ≃DQL = 1
2⟨(Jt+1 −Jt)2⟩= 1
dθ sin2(2πθ) = A2
In Fig. 6 the standard diﬀusion behavior of the exponent q ν(q) as a function of q is
shown for A = 3.86 i.e. in the absence of any stable islands whereas. The same standard
diﬀusion occurs for A = 10.492927 when one stable island exists , . For both the
cases standard diﬀusion occurs.
The coexistence of many accelerator modes has relevant consequences on the diﬀusive
behavior of the system. For values of A corresponding to such a situation, the variance
goes asymptotically as
⟨[Jt −J0]2⟩∼t2ν(2)
ν(2) ̸= 1/2.
The sticking of the chaotic orbits to stable islands leads to the appearance of blocks of
long range correlation in the sequences of the Jt variable. This behavior is qualitatively
similar to the features of the L´evy walk.
For the case corresponding to A = 6.9115, where the fundamental accelerator mode
(1, 1) coexists with the two orbits with period three (3, ±3), we have found 2ν(2) ≃1.32
in agreement with previous works .
On the other hand, in order to investigate the presence of strong anomalous diﬀusion,
the knowledge of ν(2) does not characterize completely the diﬀusion properties of the
orbits. From the numerical results (see Fig. 7), one can extrapolate with fair agreement
Figure 6: The diﬀusion exponent q ν(q) as a function of q for A = 3.86. The results have
been obtained by averaging over 106 trajectories with J0 = 0.
Figure 7: The diﬀusion exponent q ν(q) as a function of q for A = 6.9115. The averages
are over a sample of 106 trajectories. The dashed line corresponds to 0.59 q while the
dotted line corresponds to q −0.69.
Figure 8: The rescaled probability distribution function P(∆J(t)/˜σ) after N = 4 × 106
iterations, for A = 6.9115 and t1 = 102 (circles), t2 = 103 (squares), t4 = 104 (diamonds)
with ˜σ(t) = exp{< ln |∆Jt| >}.
The second moment ν(2) ≃0.65 falls in a crossover region between the two behaviors.
The feature (38) suggests the presence of two mechanisms for the typical events and the
rare (ballistic) ones as already discussed for the 2-d time dependent ﬂow in the previous
subsection.
Such a conjecture can be tested by a direct inspection of the probability distribution
function. In Fig. 8 the rescaled probability distribution function of
∆Jt = δJt/˜σ with
˜σ = exp{< ln |∆Jt| >} for diﬀerent times t is shown.
A further natural question to be addressed is how generic is the strong anomalous
behavior observed for A = 6.9115 in the standard map. To inquire this point we have
studied the diﬀusion properties for (a), A = 6.8115, (b) A = 7.0115 and (c) A = 6.4717.
The rationale of (a) and (b) is to check the stability of the result (38) with respect to
small changes of A. In the case (a) strong anomalous diﬀusion is observed. The behavior
of the moments practically coincides with that one observed for A = 6.9115. For (b) A =
7.0115 we observe normal diﬀusion: the fact has to be related to the destabilisation of
the pair (3, ±3). Finally (c) corresponds to the coexistence with (1, 1) of two other stable
islands now generated by the pair of period ﬁve accelerator modes (5, ±5). Also in this
case there is fair evidence of strong anomalous diﬀusion although now the crossover region
between the two regimes is more extended.
At the end of this subsection we brieﬂy discuss some results recently obtained in
 where the transport in 2 −d symplectic maps (practically a modiﬁcation of the
standard map) is considered. The authors ﬁnd that the anomalous diﬀusion is rather
rare. This is particularly clear in Figs. 5 and 6 of where the exponent ν(2) for the
kicked Harper map is shown to be always equal to 1/2 apart very narrow regions in the
control parameter space.
Anomalous diﬀusion in 1-d intermittent maps
Strong anomalous diﬀusion may also occur in simpler dynamical systems of the form
where f(x) is a symmetrical Lorenz type map on the interval [−1, 1]. Diﬀusion may then
appear in the variable yt. As an example we reconsidered a map previously studied by
Pikovsky . The function f(x) is implicitly speciﬁed, ∀z > 1, for x ∈]0, 1] by
2 z[1 + f(x)]z
2 z[1 −f(x)]z
2 z < x < 1
with the further requirement of monotonicity. The extension to the interval [−1, 0[ is
obtained by imposing
f(−x) = −f(x)
The resulting shape of f(x) is plotted in Fig. 9.
Thank to the implicit deﬁnition (40), by a straightforward computation, it is easy to
verify that the map has a uniform density invariant distribution.
As discussed in Sec. 2 anomalous diﬀusion follows from power-law behavior of the
correlation function of the increments of the diﬀusing variable. Here the latter property
stems from the intermittency of the dynamics. The mapping (40) induces in the interval
[−1, 1] two qualitatively diﬀerent regions. It is not restrictive to focus on 
In the neighbourhood of x = 1 the orbits perform laminar motions. The basic features
of the dynamics are captured by the polynomial behavior around the unstable ﬁxed
f(x) = x + (1 −x)z
+ o((1 −x)z)
¿From (42) it follows that the typical duration of the laminar phase for an orbit starting
from x ≈1 is Tx ∼(1 −x)−(z−1). Since the invariant measure is uniform a reasonable
Figure 9: f(x) vs x from Eq. (42) for z = 2.5 (full line) and 1.5 (dashed line).
inference is that the probability distribution of having laminar motion of duration t
Plam(t) ∼t−
A qualitatively diﬀerent picture comes from the set [0, 1
2 z]. There the mapping has
the explicit representation:
f(x) = [(2 z |x|)
In this second region the motion is chaotic and the increments ∆xt = xt+1−xt decorrelate
after few steps. The coexistence of the two regimes prevents the dynamics from having a
typical timescale so that the increments correlation function obeys to a power law
C(τ) =< ∆xt+τ ∆xt >∼Plam(t) ∼t−1/(z−1)
as it has been shown in . Anomalous diﬀusion is therefore expected for z > 2.
We studied the diﬀusion behavior of the dynamics for four values of z.
For z = 1.5 the integral of the correlation (45) is convergent therefore the second
moment grows linearly with time. We observe standard scaling for all the moments of
power q < 3 as shown in Fig. 10.
Figure 10: The measured scaling exponents q ν(q)’s of the moments of the displacement
∆xt, as a function of the order q for z = 1.5. The dashed line 0.5 q while the dotted line
corresponds to q −1.50.
Let us note that in this case, since ν(2) = 1/2, the diﬀusion seems to be standard.
Actually, because of the nonlinear behavior of q ν(q), one can say that this is an example
of strong anomalous diﬀusion.
For z = 2 the mapping coincides with (44) in all the interval . This allows the
use of a faster iteration algorithm. The value z = 2 is also critical for the appearance
of anomalous diﬀusion, in the sense ν(2) > 1/2, due to the divergence of P∞
Actually the plot of the diﬀusion exponent q ν(q) versus q gives a fair evidence for strong
anomalous diﬀusion. In Fig. 11 the moments larger than the fourth are in agreement
with a ballistic dynamics q ν(q) ≃q −0.54 while for moments with q < 2 it results
q ν(q) ≃0.61 q.
The non Gaussian behavior of the core of the probability distribution function appears
also from the direct inspection of the distribution as shown in Fig. 12 where the probability
distributions functions calculated for diﬀerent times and rescaled by ˜σ are compared with
the normal distribution.
In Fig. 13 and 14 q ν(q) versus q is reported for z = 2.5 and z = 3.0.
As in we can infer from the previous analysis the following form of the PDF of
Figure 11: The same as in Fig. 10 for z = 2.0. The dashed line corresponds to 0.61q while
the dotted line corresponds to q −1.03.
Figure 12: The rescaled probability density as in Fig. 8 but for the Pikovsky map when
z = 2 in Eq. (39).
Figure 13: The same as Fig. 10 but for z = 2.5. The dashed line corresponds to 0.73q
while the dotted line corresponds to q −0.54.
Figure 14: The same as Fig. 10 but for z = 3.0. The dashed line corresponds to 0.78q
while the dotted line corresponds to q −0.44.
the diﬀusing variable yt for z ≥2:
P(y, t) = [1 −Plam(t)]t−νcore Fcore(J t−νcore) + Plam(t)[δ(y −t) + δ(y + t)].
A consequence of (46) is
q −1/(z −1)
The predictions of (47) are in qualitative agreement with the numerical experiments. For
z < 2 the core of the probability distribution functions becomes Gaussian.
Conjectures and remarks
We have given rather clear numerical evidence of the presence of strong anomalous diffusion generated by nontrivial dynamics. Let us do some remarks and conjectures. As
ﬁrst we note (Sec. 3) that the anomalous diﬀusion is, in some sense, rare. For example
in the ﬂow mimicking the Rayleigh-B´enard convection (Sec. 3.1) the anomalous diﬀusion
occurs only for some precise values of the parameter ω. Something similar, even if in
a weaker way, happens for the standard map (Sec. 3.2) or other 2-d symplectic maps
 . Even though for the 1-d intermittent maps anomalous diﬀusion could seem a
generic feature this is not the case. Actually the origin of the superdiﬀusion is in the
very peculiar property (marginal instability) of the ﬁxed point (see Eq. (42)) destroyed
by any generic modiﬁcations of the map. Asymptotic anomalous diﬀusion, at least that
one generated by non ad hoc dynamical systems, seems to be a nongeneric property i.e.
it disappears as soon as a small perturbation O(ǫ) in the evolution law is introduced.
However transient anomalous diﬀusion appears in the perturbed system up to a crossover
time t∗∼ǫ−α while for larger time standard diﬀusion takes place with a rather large
diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Therefore one can say that, even if asymptotic anomalous diﬀusion
is very rare, its ghost is visible .
In all the cases here considered strong anomalous diﬀusion has been found to correspond to a rather simple shape of the ν(q):
The above behavior suggests the existence of two diﬀerent mechanisms in the diﬀusion
process. The typical (i.e. non rare) events obey a (weak) anomalous diﬀusion process
characterized by the exponent ν1, i.e. the characteristic time τ(l) at the scale l behaves
like τ(l) ∼l1/ν1, but the large deviations are essentially associated to a ballistic transport
τ(l) ∼l. In the ﬂow mimicking the Rayleigh-B´enard convection the ballistic mechanism
is due to the synchronization between the circulation in the cells and their oscillations. In
the standard map it arises from the accelerator modes while in the 1-d intermittent maps
is due to the marginally unstable ﬁxed point.
We do not claim of course that the above shape (48) is universal. It is rather easy, in
fact, to build up a toy system for which ν(q) can be any function with the only constraint
that q ν(q) is a convex function. Following Elliott et al. we consider the velocity ﬁeld
u = (u(y), w)
where w is a constant and u(y) is a given quenched random ﬁeld. Neglecting the molecular
diﬀusion the Lagrangian evolution is governed by the following equations :
 ˙x = u(y)
Now, taking for the sake of simplicity w = 1, and y(0) = 0 the following equation holds
x(t) −x(0) =
which trivially relates the Lagrangian and the Eulerian statistical properties of the system.
Thus, from Eq. (51) it is not diﬃcult understand that adopting a suitable multiaﬃne
process for u(y) one can ﬁnd the relation deﬁning strong anomalous diﬀusion
⟨| x(t) −x(0) |q⟩∼tq ν(q)
ν(q) ̸= cost
with any proper shape for ν(q). A fast and eﬃcient algorithm to generate a multiaﬃne
process is done in .
A very interesting open problem is the determination of the eﬀective diﬀusion equation
both at long times and large scales for a system with strong anomalous diﬀusion. We stress
the fact that if ν(q) ̸= const the probability distribution P(∆x, t) cannot obey a simple
generalization of the standard diﬀusion equation. For sure a P(∆x, t) corresponding to a
ν(q) such that (52) holds cannot be obtained from generalized linear diﬀusion equation
involving fractional spatial derivative as Eq. (25). Even other recently proposed linear
diﬀusion equations with fractional derivatives both in space and in time are not able to
produce such nontrivial behavior .
Acknowledgments
We are particularly grateful to M. Vergassola for very stimulating discussions and suggestions. E. Aurell and R. Pasmanter are also acknowledge for their useful suggestions.
P.M.G. thanks M.H. Jensen and M. Van Hecke for fruitful discussions and all the CATS
staﬀfor the nice atmosphere at NBI Copenhagen.
P.M.G. is supported by the grant
ERB4001GT962476 from the European Commission. P.C, is grateful to the European
Science Foundation for the TAO exchange grant.
A.M. was supported by the “Henri
Poincar´e” fellowship (Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque and Conseil G´en´eral
des Alpes Maritimes). P.C. and A.V. are partially supported by INFM (Progetto Ricerca
Avanzata–TURBO) and by MURST (program no. 9702265437).