Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, 1, 00-00
1573-4056/05 $50.00+.00
©2005 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.
Voxel-Based Morphometry of the Human Brain: Methods and
Applications
Andrea Mechelli*, Cathy J. Price, Karl J. Friston, John Ashburner
Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College of London, 12 Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG
Abstract: In recent years, a whole-brain unbiased objective technique, known as voxel-based morphometry (VBM), has
been developed to characterise brain differences in vivo using structural magnetic resonance images. The present review
provides a brief description of VBM and then focuses on exemplar applications in healthy and diseased subjects. The
procedure involves normalising high-resolution structural magnetic resonance images to a standard template in
stereotactic space. Normalised images are then segmented into gray and white matter and smoothed using an isotropic
Gaussian kernel. Finally, a series of voxel-wise comparisons of gray and white matter in different groups of subjects are
performed, using Random Field theory to correct for multiple comparisons. VBM has been useful in characterizing subtle
changes in brain structure in a variety of diseases associated with neurological and psychiatric dysfunction. These include
schizophrenia, developmental and congenital disorders, temporal lobe epilepsy and even cluster headache. In addition,
VBM has been successful in identifying gross structural abnormalities, such as those observed in herpes simplex
encephalitis, multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease. Studies of normal subjects, on the other hand, have focussed on
the impact of learning and practice on brain structure. These studies have led to the finding that environmental
demands may be associated with changes in gray and white matter. For instance, it has been reported that the structure of
the brain alters when human beings learn to navigate, read music, speak a second language and even perform a complex
motor task such as juggling. We conclude the present review by discussing the potential limitations of the technique.
Keywords: Voxel-based morphometry, magnetic resonance imaging, statistical parametric mapping, gray matter, white matter.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, a number of unbiased, objective
techniques have been developed to characterize neuroanatomical differences in vivo using structural Magnetic
Resonance images. These techniques can be broadly
classified into those that deal with macroscopic differences
in brain shape and those that examine the local composition
of brain tissue after macroscopic differences have been
discounted. The former, which include deformation-based
morphometry (DBM), characterize the neuroanatomy of any
individual brain in terms of deformation fields that map each
brain to a standard reference. The latter, which include
voxel-based morphometry (VBM), compare different brains
on a voxel-by-voxel basis after the deformation fields have
been used to spatially normalize the images . One shared
aspect of these techniques is that the entire brain, rather than
a particular structure, can be examined in an unbiased and
objective manner. The appropriate approach therefore
depends on the types of structural difference that are
expected among the images. Where there are global patterns
of difference, multi-variate approaches such as DBM may be
more powerful as they can model covariances between
different structures. In contrast, mass uni-variate approaches
such as VBM are likely to provide greater sensitivity for
localizing small scale, regional differences in gray or white
*Address correspondence to this author at the Wellcome Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, 12 Queen Square London, WC1N 3BG, U.K.;
0044-(0)20-78337472;
0044-(0)20-78131420;
 
matter. An additional difference between the two approaches
relates to their computational cost. Specifically, DBM
requires computationally expensive estimation of high
resolution deformation fields that map each individual brain
to a standard reference. In contrast, VBM requires the
estimation of smooth, low frequency deformation fields and
is therefore a simple and pragmatic approach within the
capabilities of most research units.
In this review, we present a summary of the VBM
methodology and in particular describe the processing steps
required to characterize gray and white matter differences in
volume and concentration. We then focus on a number of
recent applications in diseased and healthy subjects and
discuss their contribution to our understanding of brain
organization. We conclude the present review by discussing
the potential limitations of the technique, which need to be
considered when planning an investigation and interpreting
the results.
THE METHOD
The aim of VBM is to identify differences in the local
composition of brain tissue, while discounting large scale
differences in gross anatomy and position. This is achieved
by spatially normalising all the structural images to the same
stereotactic space, segmenting the normalised images into
gray and white matter, smoothing the gray and white matter
images and finally performing a statistical analysis to
localize significant differences between two or more
experimental groups. The output is a statistical parametric
map (SPM) showing regions where gray or white matter
2 Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1
Mechelli et al.
differs significantly among the groups. There are several
approaches (e.g. RAVENS; ) that could be used for the
pre-processing of the data, but here we describe the steps that
are routinely implemented using the SPM2 software .
Spatial Normalisation
Spatial normalisation involves registering the individual
MRI images to the same template image. An ideal template
consists of the average of a large number of MR images that
have been registered in the same stereotactic space. In the
SPM2 software, spatial normalisation is achieved in two
steps. The first step involves estimating the optimum 12parameter affine transformation that maps the individual
MRI images to the template . Here, a Bayesian framework
is used to compute the maximum a posteriori estimate of the
spatial transformation based on the a priori knowledge of the
normal brain size variability. The second step accounts for
global nonlinear shape differences, which are modeled by a
linear combination of smooth spatial basis functions. This
step involves estimating the coefficients of the basis
functions that minimize the residual squared difference
between the image and the template, while simultaneously
maximizing the smoothness of the deformations. The
ensuing spatially-normalised images should have a relatively
high-resolution (1mm or 1.5mm isotropic voxels), so that the
segmentation of gray and white matter (described in the next
section) is not excessively confounded by partial volume
effects, that arise when voxels contain a mixture of different
tissue types.
It should be noted that spatial normalisation does not
attempt to match every cortical feature exactly, but merely
corrects for global brain shape differences. This is because
VBM tries to detect differences in the local concentration or
volume of gray and white matter having discounted global
shape differences. Indeed, if the spatial normalisation was
perfectly exact, all the segmented images would appear
identical and no significant differences would be detected at
a local scale.
Segmentation
The spatially normalised images are then segmented into
gray matter, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid and three nonbrain partitions. This is generally achieved by combining a
priori probability maps or “Bayesian priors”, which encode
the knowledge of the spatial distribution of different tissues
in normal subjects, with a mixture model cluster analysis
which identifies voxel intensity distributions of particular
tissue types. The segmentation step also incorporates an
image intensity non-uniformity correction to account for
smooth intensity variations caused by different positions of
cranial structures within the MRI coil. A further possible
step after segmentation would be the binarization of the
resulting tissue class images. Tissue classification methods
typically produce images where each voxel has an a
posteriori probability that that voxel should be assigned to a
particular tissue type according to the model. These
probabilities are values between zero and one. Binarization
would involve assigning each voxel to its most probable
tissue class.
The segmented gray and white matter images are now
smoothed by convolving with an isotropic Gaussian kernel.
The size of the smoothing kernel should be comparable to
the size of the expected regional differences between the
groups of brains, but most studies have employed a 12-mm
FWHM kernel. The motivation for smoothing the images
before the statistical analysis is three-fold. First, smoothing
ensures that each voxel in the images contains the average
amount of gray or white matter from around the voxel
(where the region around the voxel is defined by the
smoothing kernel). Second, the smoothing step has the effect
of rendering the data more normally distributed by the
central limit theorem, thus increasing the validity of
parametric statistical tests. Third, smoothing helps compensate for the inexact nature of the spatial normalisation.
Smoothing also has the effect of reducing the effective
number of statistical comparisons, thus making the
correction for multiple comparisons less severe. However it
may also reduce the accuracy of localization, as discussed in
the last section of this paper.
Statistical Analysis
Following the pre-processing, the final step of a VBM
analysis involves a voxel-wise statistical analysis. This
employs the general linear model (GLM), a flexible
framework that allows a variety of different statistical tests
such as group comparisons and correlations with covariates
of interest. The standard parametric procedures (t tests and F
tests) used are valid providing that the residuals, after fitting
the model, are normally distributed. If the statistical model is
appropriate, the residuals are most likely to be normally
distributed once the segmented images have been smoothed.
The results of these standard parametric procedures are
statistical parametric maps . Since a statistical parametric
map comprises the results of many voxel-wise statistical
tests, it is necessary to correct for multiple comparisons
when assessing the significance of an effect in any given
voxel. A standard Bonferroni correction for multiple
independent comparisons would be inappropriate here, given
the smoothing and the fact that gray or white matter in
contiguous voxels is highly correlated. Thus, corrections for
multiple dependent comparisons are made using the Theory
of Random Fields . It should be noted that the Random
Field correction should be based on the local maxima of the t
statistic rather than the extent statistic which relates to the
size of the clusters. This is because, for a correction based on
the extent statistic to be valid, the smoothness of the
residuals needs to be spatially invariant throughout the brain.
However, this is unlikely to be the case in VBM studies by
virtue of the highly non-stationary nature of the underlying
neuroanatomy. For example, by chance alone, large size
clusters will occur in regions where the images are very
smooth and small size clusters will occur in regions where
the images are very rough.
Standard & Optimised Pre-Processing
There are cases when structural differences, not related
directly to gray or white matter volumes, may be
misinterpreted as volumetric differences as a result of
Voxel-Based Morphometry of the Human Brain
Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1 3
normalisation. One example is when the size of the
ventricles differs significantly between two or more
experimental groups. If the ventricles of one experimental
group are enlarged during normalisation, the surrounding
gray and white matter also may be enlarged. This is because
the parameters of the normalisation only encode highly
smooth, low frequency deformations which may not
distinguish between the ventricles and the surrounding
tissue. As a result, structural differences pertaining to
ventricular volume may show up in a VBM study of gray
matter volumes. A way of minimizing this potential source
of error is to perform the normalisation using the segmented
gray and white matter volumes rather than on the wholebrain images. If all the data entering into the statistical
analysis are only derived from gray matter, then any
significant differences must be due to gray matter. Likewise,
if all the data entering into the statistical analysis are derived
only from white matter, then any significant differences must
be due to white matter changes. The caveat with this
approach, however, would be that the segmentation has to be
performed on images in native space. However the Bayesian
priors, which encode a priori knowledge about the spatial
distribution of different tissues in normal subjects, are in
stereotactic space. A way of circumventing this problem is to
use an iterative version of segmentation and normalisation
operators, (see Fig. 1). First, the original structural MRI
images in native space are segmented. The resulting gray and
white matter images are then spatially normalized to gray
and white matter templates respectively to derive the
optimized normalisation parameters. These parameters are
then applied to the original, whole-brain structural images in
native space prior to a new segmentation. This recursive
procedure, also known as “optimized VBM”, has the effect
of reducing the misinterpretation of significant differences
relative to “standard VBM” .
Concentration or Volume Differences?
In both standard and optimized pre-processing, a further
processing step can be used to compensate for the effect of
spatial normalisation. When warping a series of individual
images to match a template, volumetric differences are likely
to be introduced. For example, if one subject's temporal lobe
has half the volume of that of the template, then its volume
will be doubled. As a result, the subject’s temporal lobe will
comprise twice as many voxels after spatial normalisation
and the information about the absolute volume of this region
will be lost. In this case, VBM can be thought of as
comparing the relative concentration of gray or white matter
structures in the spatially normalized images (i.e. the
proportion of gray or white matter to all tissue types within a
region). There are cases, however, when the objective of the
study is to identify regional differences in the volume of a
particular tissue (gray or white matter), which requires the
information about absolute volumes to be preserved. Here a
further processing step, which is usually referred to as
“modulation”, can be incorporated to compensate for the
normalisation.
multiplying the spatially normalised gray matter (or other
Fig. (1). Flow diagram of the preprocessing steps in standard (left) and optimized (right) VBM. GM = gray matter images; WM = white
matter images.
4 Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1
Mechelli et al.
tissue class) by its relative volume before and after spatial
normalisation. For instance, if spatial normalisation results in
a subject's temporal lobe doubling its volume, then the
correction will halve the intensity of the signal in this region.
This ensures that the total amount of gray matter in the
subject's temporal lobe is the same before and after spatial
normalisation.
In short, the multiplication of the spatially normalised
gray matter (or other tissue class) by its relative volume
before and after warping has critical implications for the
interpretation of what VBM is actually testing for. Without
this adjustment, VBM can be thought of as comparing the
relative concentration of gray or white matter structures in
the spatially normalized images. With the adjustment, VBM
can be thought of as comparing the absolute volume of gray
or white matter structures. The two approaches are known as
“non-modulated” and “modulated” VBM, respectively .
Global or Localized Inferences?
Uniformly bigger brain will have uniformly higher gray
and white matter intensities. The critical implication here is
that any detected differences in gray or white matter volume
are likely to encompass almost all brain regions. However, in
most studies the objective is to identify regionally specific
changes in tissue composition that are not confounded by
global differences. This can be achieved by modeling
“global'' measures as confounding effects during the
statistical analyses. For instance, when investigating
differences in gray or white matter volumes between
populations, one could include the total amount of gray or
white matter in each brain or the intra-cranial volume of each
subject as a covariate of no interest. Previous studies have
also used the height or the weight of the subjects as indices
of global gray and white matter volumes. Alternatively, one
could perform a global scaling of all images prior to the
statistical analysis in order to discard overall differences
between populations. The different approaches which can be
used for modeling “global'' measures as confounding effects
are likely to account for some of the conflicting results in the
literature. In short, inferences about gray and white matter
volumes may be dependent on global differences or,
alternatively, be based on regionally specific changes. Both
types of inferences are valid, and the optimal approach
simply depends on the research hypothesis that motivated the
study, (see Fig. 2).
To summarize, voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
involves a voxel-wise comparison of the local gray and
white matter between two groups of subjects. The procedure
involves spatially normalising high-resolution MR images,
from all subjects, into the same stereotactic space. This is
followed by segmenting the gray and white matter volumes
from the spatially normalised images, and smoothing those
segments. Voxel-wise parametric statistical tests are
performed which compare the smoothed gray and white
matter images from the groups. Corrections for multiple
dependent comparisons are made using the theory of
Gaussian random fields. There are several types of analysis
that one can perform to address questions pertaining to gray
and white matter differences. For instance, “non-modulated”
VBM identifies differences in the relative concentration or
Fig. (2). Global and localized inferences may identify different
brain regions. In the example, images (i) and (ii) differ at both
global and local levels. Without modelling some kind of “global''
value as a confounding effect, the comparison would identify
greater volume for image (ii) relative to image (i) in all voxels apart
from the thinner area on the right side of image (ii). When global
differences are discounted, however, the same comparison will
detect greater volume for image (i) relative to image (ii) in the
thinner area on the right side of image (ii) only.
density of gray or white matter (i.e., the proportion of gray or
white matter relative to other tissue types within a region);
“modulated” VBM identifies differences in volume (i.e., the
absolute amount of gray or white matter in different regions).
The statistical analysis may or may not include some kind of
adjustment for global differences, depending on whether one
is interested in global or regionally-specific neuroanatomical
differences. The bottom line here is that all these approaches
are valid, but address different questions and the approach
used should be dictated by the experimental question of the
researcher.
APPLICATION TO DISEASED SUBJECTS
In recent years, VBM studies have been successful in
characterizing structural brain differences in a variety of
diseases including schizophrenia , developmental and
congenital disorders , autism , Kallman’s syndrome
 , Klinefelter’s syndrome , bipolar disorders ,
cluster headache , temporal lobe epilepsy ,
supranuclear palsy , Down’s syndrome , herpes
simplex encephalitis , Parkinson’s disease ,
Huntington's disease , Alzheimer’s disease and
primary progressive aphasia . Here we review two
exemplar studies which provide an opportunity to discuss
relevant methodological issues.
While VBM was originally devised to identify subtle
neuroanatomical changes associated with neurological and
psychiatric dysfunction, the method has also been used to
examine gross structural abnormalities. The use of VBM
with highly distorted brains presents special challenges
however, due to the difficulties that arise during spatial
normalisation. Gitelman et al. compared gray
matter concentration in five patients with gross structural
abnormalities
recovering
encephalitis with five matched control groups. Because
Voxel-Based Morphometry of the Human Brain
Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1 5
herpes simplex encephalitis is well known to affect specific
limbic regions, the study allowed the evaluation of standard
VBM with highly atypical brains. VBM identified extensive
limbic and paralimbic anatomical changes in patients with
herpes simplex encephalitis relative to the controls,
consistent with the findings of previous pathology studies
 . Thus, the method was able to identify anatomical
differences between groups even in the context of highly
distorted brains. However, after normalisation there were
residual macroscopic differences between the two groups
and in particular the ventricles were larger in the patients
relative to the controls. These differences were not reduced
when adding more basis functions and reducing the
smoothness of the deformation fields during spatial
normalisation. In addition, the segmentation was sub-optimal
in the caudate nucleus most probably as a result of group
differences in the size of the ventricles after spatial
normalisation, (see Fig. 3). Reduced gray matter was
detected in the caudate nucleus of patients relative to
controls, but it was unclear whether this was due to
volumetric differences per se or to a displacement of brain
structures surrounding the ventricles. The study by Gitelman
et al. illustrates the importance of considering
the interactions between brain morphology and analytical
methods. In this instance VBM detected caudate differences
but the attribution of these changes to gray matter loss per se
would have been an improper interpretation. The cause of
the difference probably lay at a macroscopic level and was
expressed, after normalisation and segmentation, in a
specific region. Unfortunately, there is no simple metric for
evaluating the validity of the normalisation and segmentation
procedures. The assessment of these procedures relies on
visual inspection after normalisation and segmentation
respectively. A number of solutions have been proposed to
deal with highly distorted brain. These include “masking
out” the abnormal region in the patient’s brain before
performing the spatial normalisation based on the remaining
structures, and using additional basis functions or
minimization algorithms .
Of particular interest, from a methodological point of
view, is a recent investigation of temporal lobe epilepsy by
Keller et al. . The authors used both standard and
optimised VBM and furthermore compared “modulated” and
“non-modulated”
procedures.
neuroanatomical template was also explored, by using a
default template from an independent sample of 148 healthy
subjects and a subject-specific, customised template.
Because a previous manual volumetric analysis of the same
Fig. (3). Smoothed gray matter segments and corresponding anatomical slices from one patient (top) and one control subject (bottom). Note
that the estimation of the left caudate gray matter is reduced in the patient as indicated by fewer white pixels at the arrow in the upper left
compared to the lower left image. In this case, slight mismatches between the position of the caudate in the normalized patient image and its
position in the probability interfered with segmentation. Modified from .
6 Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1
Mechelli et al.
group of patients revealed hippocampal atrophy, the study
provided an opportunity to examine the anatomical face
validity of alternative VBM approaches. All analyses
correctly detected hippocampal atrophy with a statistical
threshold of p<0.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons).
However, the distribution of both hippocampal and
extrahippocampal gray matter loss differed significantly
between standard and optimised VBM and between
“modulated” and “non-modulated” VBM, irrespective of the
neuoanatomical template (default vs. customised). Standard
VBM without modulation identified reduced gray matter in a
distributed set of extrahippocampal regions that were not
classified as abnormal in previous region-of-interest and
histopathological studies. In contrast, optimised VBM with
modulation detected extrahippocampal abnormalities that
replicated previous findings. Finally, gray matter differences
identified using optimised VBM without modulation were
confined to sub-regions of the hippocampus. These results
illustrate three important methodological points. First, in
analyses of gray matter concentration, standard VBM may
be more sensitive to subtle brain abnormalities than
optimised VBM. This is due to the use of tissue-specific
templates in optimised VBM, which ensures that the
individual gray and white matter images are more closely
matched to their templates. As a result, differences between
patient and control groups are minimised without any
correction for nonlinear warping (i.e. “modulation”). Second,
non-modulated and modulated VBM detect differences in
concentration and volume respectively and, therefore, may
identify significant effects in different regions. Third, the
difference between standard and optimised VBM, and
between “modulated” and “non-modulated” procedures, may
account for some of the inconsistencies in the literature.
APPLICATION TO HEATHY SUBJECTS
Although VBM was originally devised to examine
structural abnormalities in patients, the technique can also be
used with healthy subjects. Here, we focus on some of the
recent VBM studies that investigated the impact of learning
and practice on brain structure . These studies were
motivated by reports that experience-related structural
changes may occur in the brain of small mammals and birds
Maguire et al. first investigated the impact of
learning and practice on brain structure. The authors used
VBM to test whether structural changes could be detected in
the brain of London taxi drivers as a result of extensive
experience of spatial navigation. The posterior hippocampi
of taxi drivers were significantly larger relative to those of
healthy controls, while the anterior hippocampi were larger
in controls than taxi drivers. Furthermore, hippocampal
volume correlated with the amount of time spent as a taxi
driver (positively in the posterior and negatively in the
anterior hippocampus). These results suggest that the
posterior hippocampi expand regionally in individuals who
have extensive experience of spatial navigation. An
alternative hypothesis, however, is that the difference in the
hippocampal volume is associated with innate navigational
expertise, leading to an increased likelihood of becoming a
taxi driver.
A recent study by Draganski et al. sheds light
on this issue, by demonstrating that the acquisition of new
skills may indeed change neuroanatomy. Brain scans were
acquired from healthy subjects before they learnt a classic
three-ball cascade juggling routine and 3 months later when
they had become skilled performers. The comparison of the
scans acquired before and after practice revealed an
expansion in gray matter in bilateral mid-temporal areas and
left posterior intra-parietal sulcus. These findings were
specific to the training stimulus, as a group of controls
showed no changes in gray matter over the same period.
Because jugglers and controls were randomly divided by the
experimenters, the results can be confidently interpreted in
terms of structural changes induced by training rather than
genetic predisposition. The authors also report a decrease in
the expansion of gray matter once the jugglers stopped
practicing for 3 months. This suggests that the effect of
training on brain structure may be transient.
A recent study extends these findings by showing that
structural changes occur in the human brain in response to
second language acquisition, and that the degree of structural
reorganization depends on the age of acquisition and the
proficiency attained . To test differences in gray and
white matter volume between bilingual and monolingual
English subjects, we recruited 25 monolinguals; 25 early
bilinguals who had learnt a second European language
before the age of 5; and 33 late bilinguals who had learnt a
second European language between the ages of 10 and 15.
Increased gray matter volume was identified in the left
inferior parietal cortex of bilinguals relative to monolinguals,
with greater effects in early bilinguals than in late bilinguals,
(see Fig. 4a). We next investigated the relationship between
brain structure and second language proficiency and age of
acquisition. For this purpose, we recruited 22 medically
normal right-handed native Italian speakers who had learnt
English as a second language between the ages of 2 and 34
years. Remarkably, gray matter volume correlated with
proficiency in exactly the same left inferior parietal region
identified in the first study, (see Fig. 4b). Furthermore, gray
matter volume correlated negatively with the age of
acquisition of the second language in the same region, (see
Fig. 4c). These effects could result from structural
reorganization induced by second language acquisition, or
from genetic predisposition. However, early bilinguals are
more likely to have learnt a second language due to social
circumstances rather than genetic predisposition. Thus, we
interpret our findings in terms of structural plasticity in the
bilingual brain which is dependent on age of acquisition and
the proficiency attained. This study illustrates two
complementary applications of VBM, which can be used to
compare two or more experimental groups and to investigate
the dependency between brain structure and one or more
variables of interest.
To summarize, VBM studies of healthy subjects have
challenged the traditional view that the acquisition of new
skills only changes the way the brain functions, by showing
structural changes at the macroscopic level. These studies
have also suggested that the gray matter changes induced by
training may be transient and dependent on the age of the
subjects and the performance achieved. Future studies will
Voxel-Based Morphometry of the Human Brain
Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1 7
Fig. (4). Gray matter density, measured as cubic millimeters of gray
matter per voxel, in the left inferior parietal cortex (co-ordinates: x=
-45 y= -59 z= 48). (a) Gray matter density in monolinguals, late
bilinguals and early bilinguals. Error bars indicate standard
deviation. (b) Gray matter density as a function of second language
proficiency. (c) Gray matter density as a function of second
language age of acquisition. All values are mean corrected.
Modified from .
need to better characterize the relationship between brain
structure, age of acquisition, performance and amount of
practice, across verbal and non-verbal learning domains.
Furthermore, methods other than whole-brain MRI will
berequired to investigate whether the gray-matter increases
induced by the acquisition of new skills are related to
changes in neuropil, neuronal size, dendritic or axonal
arborisation.
LIMITATIONS OF VBM
The exemplar studies discussed above suggest that there
are potential confounds and limitations to be considered
when planning a study and interpreting the results. For
instance, all raw original structural images need to be
acquired on the same scanner with identical imaging
parameters. This is because any significant effects might be
attributable to scanner or MR sequence differences rather
than to the subjects themselves. Other potential issues relate
to the difficulty of spatially normalising atypical brains, the
robustness of standard parametric tests and the interpretation
of the results. We discuss these and related issues below.
Normalisation and Segmentation Confounds
An objection to VBM is that specific patterns of
group-specific
misregistration. As a result, VBM will be sensitive to
systematic shape differences attributable to misregistration
from the spatial normalisation step . An example is given
by the effects in the caudate nucleus reported by Gitelman et
al. that may result from group differences in the
size of the ventricles. Furthermore, a particular experimental
group may move more in the scanner, so the resulting
images contain motion artifact. This motion may interact
with the segmentation to produce systematic classification
differences. These are some of several potential systematic
differences that can arise between patients and controls that
may be detected by VBM . They reflect a real difference
between data obtained from different populations, but may
not necessarily be due to changes in gray or white matter.
Pre-processing of Atypical Brains
The investigation of brains containing severe pathologies
may also be problematic, due to the difficulties that arise
when spatially normalizing and segmenting atypical brains.
For example, if a brain contains features that are not present
in the template image, then an accurate match can not be
achieved. The effects of this mismatch may also propagate to
other brain regions because of the inherent smoothness of the
deformation fields. In addition, the segmentation model only
allows for gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid
within the brain and can not model atypical tissue types
found in pathology, such as tumors and artero-venous
malformations. Possible solutions here consists in (i)
“masking out” the abnormal region in the patient’s brain
before spatial normalisation, (ii) smoothing the nonlinear
deformation fields to minimize displacements, (iii) using
signal from the skull and other tissues outside the brain to
constrain the boundaries of normalisation and (iv) employing
additional basis functions or minimization algorithms.
Further work is necessary in order to develop warping
methods that can model the various forms of severe
pathology that may be encountered.
Accuracy of Localization
VBM uses a relatively simple warping method, which
only attempts to register the brain images “globally''.
However, one of the main disadvantages of resorting to a
method that uses a less precise image registration, is that any
volumetric
differences
8 Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1
Mechelli et al.
accurately.
Furthermore,
normalisation, a large anatomical difference in one part of
the brain can cause a systematic relative translation in
another part. When precise localization is critical, therefore,
nonlinear registration methods that estimate an exact match
between brain structures using a very high number of
parameters may be preferable. Fully optimizing a model of
this order, however, takes a very long time, and is
susceptible to local minima, which, in turn, depend upon
starting estimates. Smoothing can also affect the accuracy of
localization, by shifting the peak of the SPM slightly in a
direction toward regions of lower variance. This shift may
sometimes lead to significant effects in voxels outside the
brain, where the variance tends to be lowest.
Validity of Statistical Inferences
The standard parametric procedures (t tests and F tests)
typically used in VBM are valid providing that the residuals,
after fitting the model, are normally distributed. This raises
the possibility that non-normality in the error terms can
make statistical inferences invalid in some VBM studies.
Salmond et al. have shown that in balanced
designs, provided the data are smoothed with a 4 mm
FWHM kernel, any non-normality in the data is sufficiently
attenuated to render the tests valid. However in unbalanced
designs, such as the comparison of a single patient with a
control group, a significant number of false positives arise
when smoothing at 4 and 8 mm. Thus, in addition to being
generally less sensitive, unbalanced designs appear to be less
robust to violations of normality than balanced design. One
possible solution here involves smoothing the data to a
greater extent (e.g. 12 mm) in order to ensure the residuals to
conform to the normality assumption by central limit
theorem. Alternatively, it may be necessary to resort to nonparametric methods which do not require the residuals to be
normally distributed.
Sensitivity to Distributed, Non-linear Differences
As recently pointed out by Davatzikos , mass
uni-variate approaches such as VBM are biased toward
group differences that are localized in space. However,
pathology and experience-related changes can also be
expressed, anatomically, in a spatially complex and subtle
fashion. For instance, their expression in one part of the
brain may depend on their expression elsewhere. The
characterization of these inter-regional dependencies requires
a multi-variate approach. VBM is not a surrogate for multivariate volumetric analyses that have been specifically
developed to characterize highly distributed, non-linear
changes. However, as discussed by Friston and Ashburner
 , there are ways of using VBM to assess interregional dependencies and accommodate nonlinearities.
Interpretation.
The nature of gray and white matter changes identified
with VBM is still poorly understood especially in healthy
subjects. In studies of Alzheimer’s dementia and other
degenerative disorders, a neuronal loss is likely to be the
primary cause of the gray and white matter changes observed
in VBM. However, the interpretation of gray and white
matter differences may be problematic when subtle changes
in brain structure are observed in association with
neurological and psychiatric dysfunction. For instance, the
average amount of gray or white matter from around the
voxel is often referred to as gray or white matter “density” or
“concentration”, but should not be confused with cell
packing density measured cytoarchitectonically. Furthermore,
it is unclear whether the experience-dependent changes in
gray and white matter observed in healthy subjects are
related to changes in neuropil, neuronal size, dendritic or
axonal arborisation. In the neocortex, increased gray matter
volume could also result from more folding as well as
thicker gray matter, (see Fig. 5). This issue is of great
interest given the growing number of VBM studies being
published but can only be addressed by methods other than
We have presented a summary of the VBM methodology
and discussed a number of potential limitations which need
to be considered when planning an investigation and
interpreting the results. VBM studies of structural
abnormalities may inform the interpretation of data acquired
modalities
Tomography
Photon-Emission
Tomography (SPECT). If the amount of uptake per unit of
gray matter is the same in the patient and the control group,
then the differences observed may not be directly related to
glucose utilization per unit of gray matter but, rather, units of
gray matter per se . Thus, some of the PET/SPECT
studies comparing patients and controls may simply be
Fig. (5). Differences in gray matter volume may result from more folding or thicker gray matter. In this example, exactly the same
differences would be detected when comparing images of thin, un-folded cortex (left circle) against thin, folded cortex (middle circle) and
think, unfolded cortex (right circle).
Voxel-Based Morphometry of the Human Brain
Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 1 9
tapping into the same differences that a VBM investigation
would detect. We envisage that, in future years, VBM will
be combined with functional approaches such as functional
MRI and EEG/MEG to better characterize brain functionstructure relationships in health and disease.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
AM is supported by MH64445 from the National
Institutes of Health (USA). CP, KJF and JA are supported by
The Wellcome Trust.