Epidemiology and Health
Epidemiology and Health
Volume: 36, Article ID: e2014025, 7 pages
 
Open Access
The clinical decision analysis using decision tree
Jong-Myon Bae
Department of Preventive Medicine, Jeju National University School of Medicine, Jeju, Korea
The clinical decision analysis (CDA) has used to overcome complexity and uncertainty in medical problems.
The CDA is a tool allowing decision-makers to apply evidence-based medicine to make objective clinical deci­
sions when faced with complex situations. The usefulness and limitation including six steps in conducting CDA
were reviewed. The application of CDA results should be done under shared decision with patients’ value.
KEY WORDS: Decision analysis, Decision-making, Decision support techniques, Evidence-base medicine
INTRODUCTION
Clinical practice, aimed at solving clinical problems of indi­
vidual patients, is an act of continual decision-making. The best
clinical decision refers to making a choice that maximizes effec­
tiveness and minimizes harm . Nevertheless, when the sup­
porting evidences were scant, decision-making depends on the
subjective intuition of the physician and then becomes unpre­
dictable and non-reproducible .
Around the 1990s, Evidence-based Medicine (EBM), which
was suggested as a methodology for making clinical decisions
based on the best evidence , expanded across the entire
field of healthcare, and the terminology “evidence-based deci­
sion-making” was introduced . By overcoming the com­
plexity of medical environment and the uncertainty of
clinical decisions , the EBM aims to pursue qualitative
improvements in healthcare . Because clinical decisions
are also directly related to the development and expansion of
clinical treatment guidelines, approval of new drugs, drug pre­
scriptions, the applicability of medical insurance for procedures,
and healthcare policies .
McCreery & Truelove summarized five methodologies
for decision-making: (1) Bayes’ theorem, (2) decision-tree de­
sign, (3) receiver-operating-characteristic curves, (4) sensitivity
analysis, (5) utilities assessment. The clinical decision analysis
(CDA) was suggested to make a clinical decision based on ob­
jectively quantitative indices calculated by using these method­
ologies . This manuscript aims at reviewing the CDA meth­
odology by definition, process, usefulness, and limitations.
Definition of clinical decision analysis
In 1976, Bear & Schneiderman suggested the terminolo­
gy “clinical decision analysis” with the intention of applying
the concept of decision analysis (DA), which had already been
used in business and other social sciences, to the field of clinical
practice. In order to understand the meaning of the term CDA,
it is necessary to also look at the term DA coined by Raiffa 
in 1968. In Appendix 1, paragraphs defining DA and CDA were
arranged chronologically. CDA can be seen as a way of over­
coming ‘uncertainty’ .
Process of clinical decision analysis
Watts proposed that CDA should consist of six stages in­
cluding cost analysis, whereas Sackett et al. proposed six
stages including clinical practice. These process was well explain­
ed in the articles of Korah et al. and Aleem et al. . De­
pending on the methodology used, the CDA stages can be sum­
marized as follows: (1) designing a decision tree showing all in­
stances that can occur in a particular situation, (2) securing the
Correspondence: Jong-Myon Bae
Department of Preventive Medicine, Jeju National University School of
Medicine, 102 Jejudaehak-ro, Jeju 690-756, Korea
Tel: +82-64-755-5567, Fax: +82-64-725-2593, E-mail: 
Received: Sep 9, 2014, Accepted: Oct 29, 2014, Published: Oct 30, 2014
This article is available from: 
2014, Korean Society of Epidemiology
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ( which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly cited.
Epidemiology and Health 2014;36:e2014025
likelihood and outcome utility values for each instance by con­
ducting a literature search, (3) calculating the probabilities of
cumulative expectation using the Bayesian theorem, and (4)
performing a sensitivity analysis and assessing the variables
needed for clinical decision-making (Figure 1).
Since the content of the series of tasks that must be perform­
ed (including the construction of the decision tree) varies de­
pending on the research questions , reference papers for
different research questions are presented in Appendix 2. A de­
tailed explanation is not included. Instead, the significance of
performing a sensitivity analysis in the final stage will be dis­
cussed. The cumulative expectation probabilities obtained by
using a decision tree vary according to the input values of out­
come utility and likelihood . Consequently, by estimating
the vulnerability (how much the outcomes change according to
fluctuations in the input values) the ultimate objective was to
reduce uncertainty in decision-making . In addition, sensi­
tivity analysis could be used to elucidate the extent to which a
given clinical situational variable affects the decision ,
so that these variables can be used as latent predictor variables
for clinical prediction rules (CPR) . Moreover, areas re­
quiring future clinical research can be identified , and logi­
cal systematic errors in the designed decision tree can be de­
bugged . Traditional n-way sensitivity analysis has
been used as the statistical method for conducting a sensitivity
analysis, but more recently, the Markov Chain Monte Carlo sim­
ulation methods has been mainly used.
In the CDA process, the most difficult stages are the design of
the decision tree , the debugging of logical errors
in the designed tree , the calculation of the cumulative prob­
ability, and the Monte Carlo simulation for the sensitivity anal­
ysis . The recent development of the commercial software
TreeAge Pro is making these processes easier, and the im­
portance of the literature search to find the appropriate values
for analysis is being emphasized . The latter is crucial since
the meaning of the relevant values varies by country and gen­
eration .
Usefulness of clinical decision analysis
The usefulness of CDA in a clinical setting, being performed
with the aim of overcoming complexity and uncertainty in clin­
ical decisions, can be broadly summarized into three types.
First, true to its original purpose, CDA provides the decision
maker with objective evidence to make a judgment .
Consistent and reproducible decision-making can reduce the
misuse of medical resources caused by uncertainty, improve the
patient-physician relationship , and lead to qualita­
tive improvements in healthcare .
Second, CDA reveals the environmental variables that need
to be considered when making a decision in a clinical setting
 . This can be useful in decision-making not only for
physicians, but also for medical insurance companies or deci­
sion-makers in healthcare administration .
Third, by elucidating these predictor variables, the sensitivity
analysis can be useful for CPR development, and can be applied
to utility analysis and even cost analysis, as it reveals cases of
insufficient evidence .
Limitations of clinical decision analysis
It has been claimed that the results obtained by CDA using a
decision tree should only be used as a reference in decision-mak­
ing, and are not guaranteed as absolute . This implies
that the CDA methodology has several limitations. Since CDA
was proposed in 1970, doubts have been raised about its use­
fulness . Aleem et al. have presented a summary of
these limitations from the perspective of a performance and of
outcome analysis: (1) simplification errors may occur when mea­
suring the final outcome of treatment decisions with indices
such as quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) ; (2) per­
forming a time-consuming analysis adequately in a busy clinical
environment is difficult ; and (3) various factors (including
potential harmful, expense, and patient preference for medical
services) are involved in decision-making, and these cannot be
accurately reflected in a decision tree . Therefore, even if
a CDA result is available, diverse decision-making is ultimately
inevitable .
CONCLUSION AND PROPOSALS
Although the nature of medical treatment makes diverse de­
cision-making inevitable, Black et al. nevertheless empha­
size the usefulness of CDA based on its ability to overcome un­
certainty in medical treatment, and because the patient will en­
counter objective evidence through the internet or other sourc­
es as part of the shared decisions involving the patient. Consid­
ering the trends, four suggestions would be prepared to stimu­
late related research in South Korea:
First, detailed care is required when interpreting the results of
CDA studies and applying them to clinical practice. According
Figure 1. Steps of clinical decision analysis
using decision tree method.
Designing decision tree
Searching &
information
Calculating
cumulative
probabilities
Conducting
sensitivity
Bae J-M: The clinical decision analysis using decision tree
to the standards for evaluating the validity and applicability of
content from CDA papers , not only does an appro­
priate evaluation need to be performed, but the predicted like­
lihoods as the outcomes of the analysis must also be applied to
a patient group rather than to individual patients . In addi­
tion, data from persons of different nationalities used for CDA
have different meanings . In this regard, it is necessary to
conduct related studies to gain data on Korean individuals. If
CDA is performed, efforts to adhere to the seven principles de­
manded by Lurie & Sox must be made.
Second, the patients’ values must be reflected in decision-mak­
ing. CDA relates to the combined value of the available evidenc­
es, but EBM emphasizes that the manner in which this
evidence is interpreted and reflected in the decision depends
on the experiences of the clinical team and the preferences
of the patient . In order to synthesize these three factors,
Straus proposed the likelihood of being helped or harmed
index. In this way, shared decisions , meaning that deci­
sions made together with the patient, are increasingly being de­
manded nowadays, and there is an emphasis on patient-center­
ed clinical service . This is in line with the principles of
medical ethics and can achieve the goal of restricting
uncertainty in clinical treatment .
Third, since the patient’s opinion should be positively reflect­
ed in the decision-making, decision aids for patients should be
developed in addition to increased CDA research. As
seen in the various examples of decision aids described by O’Con­
nor , decision aids are instruments that help making a val­
ue-based decision in accordance with the patient’s individual
preferences but are different from educational material for pa­
tients . Given that research has consistently shown that these
instruments are helpful for patients , more decision aids
for Korean patients must be developed.
Fourth, CDA using decision trees, as dealt with in this manu­
script, became active in the 1990s, and entering the 2000s vari­
ous methodologies have been developed and are being applied
to healthcare and medical treatment, such as supporting vector
machines , random forest , and deep learning . In
the future, these methodologies must be investigated, so that
they may be applied to various areas in healthcare with an un­
derstanding of their strengths and weaknesses.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was conducted with the support of the 2014
Jeju National University Scholarship for the Promotion of Re­
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The author has no conflicts of interest to declare for this study.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is available at