Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 2007, 3(1), 71-81
Copyright © 2007 by Moment
ISSN: 1305-8223
The Effects of Problem-Based
Active Learning in Science
Education on Students’ Academic
Achievement, Attitude and Concept
Orhan Akınoğlu and Ruhan Özkardeş Tandoğan
Marmara Üniversitesi, Istanbul, TURKEY
Received 07 June 2006; accepted 12 November 2006
The aim of this study was to determine the effects of problem-based active learning in
science education on students’ academic achievement and concept learning. In the study,
both quantitative and qualitative research methods were utilized. Quantitative data were
obtained via the pre/post-test, treatment-control groups test model. Qualitative data were
obtained via document analysis. The research study was conducted on 50, 7th grade
students in 2004-2005 school year, in a public school in Istanbul. The treatment process
took 30 class hours in total. In the research, three measurement instruments were used: an
achievement test, open-ended questions, and an attitude scale for science education. The
reliability coefficient of the achievement test was calculated to be KR20=0.78. Cronbach α
value of the attitude scale was 0.89. While the subject matters were taught on the basis of
problem-based active learning in the treatment group, traditional teaching methods were
employed in the control group. In the face of the data collected and the evaluations made
in the research, it was determined that the implementation of problem-based active
learning model had positively affected students’ academic achievement and their attitudes
towards the science course. It was also found that the application of problem-based active
learning model affects students’ conceptual development positively and keeps their
misconceptions at the lowest level.
Keywords: Teaching Sociology, Science, Education, Problem-based learning, Active
Learning, Concept Learning, Program Development
INTRODUCTION
The student-centered active learning process within
which teacher is merely a guide is the focal point of
contemporary education systems. The active learning is
a learning process in which the learner takes the
responsibility of his/her learning and s/he is given the
opportunity
dimensions of the learning process and to perform selfregulation . In active learning process,
learning is no longer a standard process, but it
transforms into a personalized process. Here, the skills
of problem-solving, critical thinking and learning to
learn are developed. Humans face various problems in
their lives and they try to find particular ways to solve
these problems. In this respect, it is important for
students to be prepared for the future by facing real or
real-like problems in their learning environment and
producing appropriate solutions to these problems.
What is expected from education is to enable individuals
to become an effective problem solver in their actual
lives , 71-81
2003; Chin & Chia, 2004). To learn problem solving is
to learn how to learn. The most convenient approach
with regard to reaching this aim in teaching and learning
environments is the problem-based learning taken part
in active learning. The basis of problem-based learning
is rooted in Dewey’s “learning by doing and
experiencing” principle . The problembased learning is an active learning which enables the
student to become aware of and determine his/her
problem solving ability and learning needs, to learn to
learn, to be able to make knowledge operative and to
perform group works “in the face of real life problems”.
The “Problem-Based Learning” being increasingly
used in several areas recently was firstly implemented in
medical science in the 1950s, specifically in the Medical
School of Case W. University in the USA. It was begun
to be implemented in the Medical School of the
McMaster University in Canada at the end of the 1960s
 . Today, the problem-based
learning model is used in pre-clinic classes within
medical faculties of many universities such as the
Harvard University, New Mexico University and
McMaster University. This teaching model is put into
practice in medical faculties of the Hacettepe University,
Ankara University, Dokuz Eylül University and
Pamukkale University in Turkey. In addition to medical
faculties, the problem-based learning model is also
implemented in other educational institutions comprised
of fields like natural sciences, engineering and law.
When the literature is examined, it is seen that the
studies focused on the use of problem-based learning
model in primary education, secondary education and
high education have been reached by the 1980s . The problem-based
learning is a learning model which centers on student,
develops active learning, problem-solving skills and field
knowledge, and is based on understanding and problemsolving . In the classrooms where
problem-based learning model is used, learners take
much more responsibility for their own learning
progressively. They have become more independent
from their teachers gradually. And they have become
independent learners who can continue to learn in their
whole lifetime.
PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING MODEL
The problem-based learning model turns the student
from passive information recipient to active, free selflearner and problem solver, and it slides the emphasis of
educational programs from teaching to learning. This
model enables the student to learn new knowledge by
facing him/her the problems to be solved, instead of
burdened contents . By means
of problem-based learning, some attitudes of students in
relation to such areas as problem-solving, thinking,
group works, communication, information acquisition
and information sharing with others are affected
positively. The basis of the problem-based learning is
mainly comprised of ‘Problem, Solution, Practice,
Questioning,
Originality
Integration.” The aim of this learning model is to
provide acquisition of information based on facts. In
order to achieve this aim, problems are chosen out of
the real world. The individual is being developed by
making possible the integration with information
accumulation of the student. Even though some
differences are observed in practice, the problem-based
learning is performed in sessions within which there are
small working groups comprised of 6 or 8 persons
guiding by an education mentor. They deal with
scenarios involving several problems in abovementioned sessions and try to find appropriate answers
to these problems. These sessions constitute the
foundation of problem-based learning system. In these
sessions, it is aimed to enable the student to learn by
setting off the problems that explain the subject matter
in best way .
The most important role of the mentor in the problembased learning being operated in a student-centered
manner is to facilitate learning activities by guiding
students. Teaching mentors fulfill this role by
monitoring discussions, asking questions, helping the
resolution of occasional conflicts, enabling the
participation of each group member to classroom
discussions, giving examples when required, preventing
scatter of discussions and making evaluations .
PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING AND SCIENCE
When the aims of science education are examined, it
is seen that the problem-based learning is quite
appropriate for realization of these aims .
The facts that science education is based on both
practice and interpretation, that it is so connected with
real life and that it requires cooperation facilitate the
problem-based learning practices.
Problem-Based Active Learning
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
Implementation of problem-based learning in
science education
In using problem-based learning system, firstly the
concepts, learning aims and duration of the subject
matter are set. Before implementation of this system,
students are informed about problem-based learning.
Small student groups comprised of 5 or 7 persons are
formed. Students are given opportunity to examine and
recognize problems by distributing prepared problem
scenarios to them. If students have information about
the problem, they are expected to propose solutions to
this problem. If they do not have information about the
problem, they are encouraged to make research using
various data sources. All of the information obtained in
this process is shared, discussed and evaluated among
group members. Then, the solution of the problem is
reached. This solution is presented to other groups. All
information related to the targeted concept is revealed
by discussing the acquired results at the guidance of the
teacher . In problem-based learning model,
main tools which are used can be stated as the casestudy
problem-solving
project-based
cooperative learning approach. The problem-based
learning model which is closely connected to these
learning models and methods seems to be enriched by
increasingly spreading new methods such as ‘portfoliobased learning’ and ‘experimental learning’ .
The characteristics which call attention in
problem-based learning
Learning process must be started with a
problem; especially a problem which is evidently
critical/still unsolved must be used.
Contents and practices must include situations
which attract students’ attention.
Teacher must merely be a guide in the
classroom.
Students must be given necessary time to think
or gather information and to set their strategies
in problem solving, and their creative thoughts
must be encouraged in this process.
The difficulty of the subject matters to be
studied must not be at a high level which could
discourage students.
A comfortable, relaxing and safe learning
environment must be established in order to
develop students’ skills on thinking and
problem-solving by themselves .
The characteristics of the learning scenario that
constitutes the basic education tool in problem-based
learning are as follows ;
Problems must be chosen from among the
problems which are the most fitting to the real
Problem must be open-ended.
It must arouse sense of curiosity.
It must focus on only one issue.
It must teach good and ethical behaviors rather
than negative events and behaviors.
It must help students to reflect on freely and
express themselves.
By making suitable personifications, students
must be given the opportunity to treat the
problem as if it were their problem and to be
willing in solving it.
The advantages and limitations of problem-based
learning can be stated in the following manner:
Advantages of problem-based learning
Classes are student-centered instead of being
teacher-centered.
This learning model develops self-control in
students. It teaches making plans prospectively,
facing realities and expressing emotions.
This model enables students to see events multidimensionally and with a deeper perspective.
It develops students’ problem-solving skills.
It encourages students to learn new materials
and concepts when solving problems.
It develops sociability levels and communication
skills of students by enabling them to study and
work in a team.
It develops students’ high level thinking/critical
thinking and scientific thinking skills.
It unites theory and practice. It allows students
both to merge their old knowledge with new
knowledge and to develop their judging skills in
a specific discipline environment.
It motivates learning for both teachers and
Students acquire the skills of time management,
focusing, data collection, report preparation and
evaluation.
It paves the way for learning in whole lifetime
 .
O. Akınoğlu & R. Özkardeş Tandoğan
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
Limitations of problem-based learning
It could be difficult for teachers to change their
teaching styles.
It could take more time for students to solve
problematic situations when these situations are
firstly presented in the class.
Groups or individuals may finish their works
earlier or later.
Problem-based learning requires rich material
and research.
It is difficult to implement problem-based
learning model in all classes. It is unfruitful to
use this strategy with students who could not
fully understand the value or scope of the
problems with social content.
It is quiet difficult to assess learning .
By setting off the idea underlying the fact that life
means to recognize problems faced, to be aware of the
importance of these problems, to understand why these
problems occur and to eradicate possible problems at an
earlier stage, the problem-based learning serves the view
that learning must be complete and must be based on
adequacy. The efficiency level of problem-based
learning should be examined in order to acquire the
skills of reflecting on problems faced and of solving
these problems, to increase critical thinking level and
not to be afraid of possible or actual problems.
Problem-based learning model orients students towards
reflecting on, interpreting and searching solutions to the
problems faced by them not only in science classes but
also in their daily lives, instead of compelling them to
ignore all these problems. In the classrooms within
which problem-based learning model is applied,
students are encouraged to access knowledge by
themselves. The fact that the scenarios implemented as
problem-based
connected with students’ daily lives enables students to
understand how science classes are so interrelated with
real life. Furthermore, since students find the events and
characters pictured in these scenarios so close to
themselves, science classes become attractive to them
automatically. In problem-based learning model in
which teaching activities are carried out with small
groups composed of 6 or 8 students, it is achieved that
these students could strengthen their interaction and
communication with each other and their environment.
Their skill to express themselves develops. In general,
incomprehensible,
complicated, complex and abstract. This prevents
students from reflecting on, interpreting and solving
problems. In order to change this situation, it is
necessary to concretize problems and associate them
with students’ lives. It is an issue of great importance
that the science knowledge assumed to be learned
through science education in school could not be
transmitted to their actual lives by students and some
misconceptions are carried again by them. In this
respect, active learning models should be put into
practice in primary education level. The aim of this
research is to determine whether the implementation of
problem-based learning model taking part in active
learning applications in “The Meeting of Force and
Motion—Energy” unit of 7th grade in primary education
brings about significant differences with regard to
students’ academic achievement, their attitudes towards
science class and their concept learning.
With this aim, following hypotheses were set:
1. Does teaching of 7th grade science classes by
means of the Problem-Based Active Learning
Model bring about significant differences with
regard to students’ academic achievement?
2. Does teaching of 7th grade science classes by
means of the Problem-Based Active Learning
Model bring about significant differences with
regard to students’ attitudes towards science
3. Does teaching of 7th grade science classes by
means of the Problem-Based Active Learning
Model have any impact on students’ concept
Model of the research
Both quantitative and qualitative research methods
were used in this study. In quantitative research
dimension, the test model based on a pre-test and posttest with research-control groups was utilized. In
qualitative research field, document analysis was
Implementation
The research was conducted on the students who
were at the 7th grade in primary schools in the county of
Kadıköy located in the city of Istanbul during the 2004-
2005 school year, and their academic achievement and
concept learning levels in regard to “Everything in the
Universe is Moving” and “How Do Matters Behave at
Force Effect?” subject matters included by “The
Meeting of Force and Motion—Energy” unit of the
Science Program were considered. With this aim, a
primary school was chosen randomly. By applying the
pre-test including 25 questions prepared by the
researcher to the 7th grade students, research and
control groups at same level were formed. 50 students
were participated in the research in total. Of 50 students
Problem-Based Active Learning
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
having participated in the research, 30 of them were
females and 20 of them were males. After research and
control groups had been formed, 10 open-ended
questions prepared by the researcher and “The Attitude
Scale for Science Classes” developed by Akınoğlu 
were executed in each group. The study was carried out
by the researcher. While classes were given by means of
traditional method in the control group, following
techniques were employed in the research group: Before
subject matters were proceeded, information about the
problem-based active learning model used in the
research had been presented to the research group and
thus, it was enabled the members of this group to
recognize and approximate this model. The problembased active learning model is comprised of scenarios.
In this manner, some scenarios were prepared in
accordance with the acquisition of the subject matters of
“Everything in the Universe is Moving” which is
composed of two sub-headings and “How Do Matters
Behave at Force Effect?” which is composed of six subheadings. Working groups comprised of 5 or 6 students
were created in the research group. In the first session
problem-based
implemented in sessions, the scenarios prepared in
relation to the subject matter were handed out to the
members of all groups without having presented any
information. These scenarios were also showed by using
an overhead trajectory. By giving time to them, students
were enabled to recognize problem and to organize their
thoughts. After stimulating a brain storming activity
about the causes and possible solutions of the
problematic conditions in the scenarios, students’
suggestions were evaluated. Here, the researcher made
students to concentrate on important questions. In the
second session of the model, firstly, the answers
prepared by the groups were shared and personal
preparations were presented by students. Group
members were encouraged to adapt new knowledge to
the original problem, to revise previous hypotheses and
to re-adjust these hypotheses if necessary. Lastly, the
working process of groups was assessed. With this
model, it was achieved that students participated the
class actively. Moreover, by employing the model
through groups, it was accomplished that the knowledge
could be learned properly and transferred among
students. At the same time, students’ skill of expressing
themselves in the classroom and sense of selfconfidence were supported. The research took 30 class
hours (10 weeks) in total. At the end of the research, the
post-test, open-ended questions and attitude scale were
given to the students again. The results were assessed by
the researcher by taking specialists’ opinions.
Data collection and assessment
In the research, three main assessment tools
including academic achievement test, open-ended
questions and attitude scale towards science classes were
used. The data acquired by using these assessment tools
were transferred to computer environment and
evaluated by means of SPSS 10.00 package program.
information
preparation,
implementation and evaluation of the assessment tools
used in data collection is given below.
The preparation, implementation and evaluation
of the academic achievement test
The academic achievement test was prepared in
accordance with the aims and acquisitions in the subject
matters of “Everything in the Universe is Moving” and
“How Do Matters Behave at Force Effect?” of the
“The Meeting of Force and Motion—Energy” unit
taken part in the Science Curriculum for Primary
Schools of the Turkish Republic—National Education
Ministry. The subject matter was divided into subconcepts and then, 50 questions comprised of four
options were asked by the researcher in conformity with
the students’ acquisitions with regard to these subconcepts. At the end of a pilot study performed on 55
students, the reliability and validity of the questions
were calculated. Then, by taking opinions of a specialist
group comprised of four persons, namely a counselor,
an academician working in the science teaching
department of a reputable university and two science
teachers, the questions which had low validity and
reliability levels were excluded from the test and total
question number was reduced to 25. When the reliability
coefficient of the academic achievement test was
calculated, it was found as KR20=0, 78. This expression
indicates that the academic achievement test is reliable
by 78%. When general difficulty level of the academic
achievement test was computed, it was found as
Pave=11.76/25 = 0, 47. This figure shows that the
academic achievement test is at medium-level in terms
of difficulty. When the distinctiveness levels of the
questions formed the academic achievement test were
calculated, it is seen that 96% of these questions are at
or above the value of 0, 40 which is desired. Average
distinctiveness of the academic achievement test was
found as Dave=12.88/25 = 0, 51 and it was accepted
that the academic achievement test whose reliability is
detected has a high distinctiveness level. When the
academic achievement test was implemented, the
researcher was present in the classroom. Students were
given 1 class hour (40 minutes) to answer this test.
O. Akınoğlu & R. Özkardeş Tandoğan
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
The preparation, implementation and evaluation
of the open-ended questions
At the beginning, twenty open-ended questions were
prepared by the researcher by classifying the concepts
chosen in accordance with the national education
curriculum in the subject matters of “Everything in the
Universe is Moving” and “How Do Matters Behave at
Force Effect?” of “The Meeting of Force and Motion—
Energy” unit. Later on, by taking recommendations of
three specialists, namely an academician in the science
teaching department of a reputable university and two
science teachers, total question number was reduced to
8 in order to prevent students from getting
misconceptions and to be able to determine adequately
whether students learned concepts meaningfully or not.
The subject matters which were assessed through openended questions are given in Table-1.
Table 1. The subject matters assessed by openended questions
The subject matter to be assessed
Motion- Moving matters-
Motionless matters
The way moved toward and The
replacement made
Inactivity
Force and The effects of Force
Friction force
Scalar magnitude– Vectored
Gravity force
When open-ended questions were answered, the
researcher was present in the classroom. Students were
given 1 class hour (40 minutes) to answer these
questions. The open-ended questions used in the
research were encoded by means of open-encoding
method in qualitative dimension. In open-encoding, the
answers of all students were examined by the researcher.
At the end of this, the codes reached were grouped with
the codes resembled to them. And, some theses were
created after giving names to these groups. The theses
acquired in pre-implementation and in the postimplementation were compared with each other and
interpreted.
The implementation and evaluation of the
attitude scale
The 20-itemed “Attitude Scale for Science Classes”
developed by Akınoğlu was used in the research
in order to determine whether the problem-based active
learning model affects students’ attitudes towards
science classes or not. The reliability of this scale
developed by Akınoğlu is α = 0.89. The 5-step Likert
type attitude scale includes twenty positive and negative
sentences aiming to probe students’ views about science
classes. Students were given 30 minutes to respond.
FINDINGS AND COMMENTS
The findings regarding the effect of problembased active learning on academic achievement
In order to examine the effect of the “Problem-
implementation
achievement, the findings acquired in pre- and postapplication of the academic achievement test to the
research and control groups were drawn in tables, and
some comments were made in parallel to these findings.
As it can be seen in the Table 2, the arithmetic mean
of the pre-test scores taken by the research group
students was found 8.56 and the respected figure of the
control group students was found 9.16. It is observed
that there is a 0.6 point difference between group means
and p value is more than 0.05. This indicates that there
is no significant difference at the 0.05 confidence
interval between the pre-test scores of the research
group and control group students. By the fact that there
is no significant difference between the pre-test scores
of the research and control group students, the
condition concerning the nearness of pre-knowledge
level of the research and control groups before the
research is fulfilled.
Table 2. The results of the detached “T” test carried out regarding the difference between the
pre-test scores of students in the research group and in the control group
Detached group “t” test
Treatment Group
Control Group
Problem-Based Active Learning
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
As it can be seen in the Table 3, when post-test
scores of the research group and control group students
were examined, it was found that the arithmetic mean of
the post-test scores taken by the research group
students was 12.76 and the respected figure of the
control group students was 10.12. It can be seen that
there is a 2.64 point difference between group means
and p value is less than 0.05. This indicates that there is
a significant difference at the 0.05 confidence interval
between the post-test scores of the research group and
control group students on behalf of the former group.
This result demonstrates that the problem-based active
learning model plays a role in regard to increase in
academic achievement.
The findings regarding the effect of the
problem-based active learning on attitudes towards
science classes
As it can be seen in the Table 4, the arithmetic mean
of the pre-attitude scores revealed by the research group
students was found 77.16 and the respected figure for
the control group students was found 71.76. There is no
significant difference between the pre-attitude scores of
the research group and control group at the 0.05
confidence interval.
As it can be seen in the Table 5, the arithmetic mean
of the post-attitude scores revealed by the research
group students was found 73.80 and the respected
figure for the control group students was found 65.60.
In this respect, there is a significant difference between
the post-attitude scores of the research group and
control group at the 0.05 confidence interval on behalf
of the former group. Namely, it is observed that there is
a positive change in the attitudes of the research group
students towards science class. In addition to the
statistical data obtained, the opinions expressed by the
research group students at the end of the applications
performed also mirror the positive change in their
attitudes. Some of the opinions expressed by students
from this group during the activities carried out in the
research process are given below.
Ö.S: “I liked this class very much. The scenarios were
enjoyable. The scenarios made us to like problems. Group
works were good as well. I was very contented with the
applications. I believe that I will be successful with the help
of these scenarios.”
Y.S.E: “We spent a very good time with the scenario
technique, which is the newly applied technique in science
class, by both having fun and learning. In the problembased method, it is so easy to answer questions and it is so
good and fruitful to add our own ideas and discuss within
B.A: “The problem-based learning attracted me. It is
a good method. We both learn and have fun. We started
to like solving problems. We are learning concepts with
respect to animated characters. I advocate that the teaching
should go on in such way.”
Table 3. The results of the detached “T” test carried out regarding the difference between
the post-test scores of students in the research group and in the control group
Detached group “t” test
Control Group
Table 4. The results of the detached “T” test carried out regarding the difference between
the pre-attitudes of students in the research group and in the control group
Detached group “t” test
Treatment Group
Control Group
Table 5. The results of the detached “T” test carried out regarding the difference between
the post-attitudes of students in the research group and in the control group
Detached group “t” test
Treatment Group
-2,343 p <0,05
Control Group
O. Akınoğlu & R. Özkardeş Tandoğan
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
S.K: “In my opinion, the class is enjoyable, because
the scenarios are handed out and groups are formed. I like
the distribution of problem-based scenarios.”
Y.S: I like the scenario system in science class very
much. I understand subject matters better. The problems
seem to be so easy.”
General evaluation of the effect of problem-based
active learning on concept learning in the scope of
the qualitative findings obtained from the openended questions
When the answers given by the control and research
groups to the open-ended questions which measure
their conceptual development were examined in general,
it can be said that there is no positive improvement in
the control groups to which traditional teaching
methods were applied. Yet, the teaching model
employed in the research group brought about positive
improvements in the conceptual development of the
students. However, these changes were not taken place
at the desired level. When the conceptual development
levels of the control and research groups were
compared, it was seen that the model applied in the
research group had positive effects on the students.
When the groups’ answers to the 1st, 2nd, 5th and 7th
questions asking conceptual definitions in order to
measure concept learning level were examined, the
success of the research group with regard to learning
concepts and dispelling misconceptions is seen. In the
scenarios prepared in accordance with the method
applied to the research group, students do not receive
the information from teacher passively. The questions
prepared from easier to harder in connection with the
scenarios enable students to access to the information
by themselves. In relation to this, while the control
group students express their answers on the required
concept definitions with textual sentences, the research
group students do so with their own sentences. When
answers given to the open-ended questions were
examined at the end of the research process, it was
observed that the research group students reduced their
misconceptions, but they could not dispel them
completely. Nevertheless, the research group is more
successful in dispelling misconceptions than the control
group. In the research group in which a teaching model
based on group work is applied, since students are in
communication with their group members and other
groups, they could find the opportunity to discuss and
share their ideas. In this way, information transfer
among students is accomplished. The examples given
are chosen out of daily life and they are enriched by
students. The scenarios applied in the model play an
important role in the fact that the examples are so
connected to daily life. It was considered that the
scenarios should be prepared in connection with daily
life so as to attract students’ attention and to help
keeping it alive. It was ensured that events were
visualized
scenarios.
Furthermore, it was aimed that the method has positive
effect on students’ concept development by placing
previously learned concepts in the successive scenarios.
Thus, the concepts learned by students become
enduring. To sum up, it is seen that the problem-based
learning model applied is influential on students’
conceptual development.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this study in which the effects of the Problem-
Based Active Learning applications in the unit of “The
Meeting of Force and Motion - Energy” in 7th grade
science classes on students’ academic achievement,
concept learning and attitude changes were examined,
following results were obtained. It was observed that the
research group in which the problem-based learning
model was used is more successful than the control
groups to which traditional teaching methods were
applied. When pre-test and post-test scores of the
research and control groups were compared with each
other, it was observed that there is a rise in success in
both groups. However, the fact that this rise is
significantly high in the research group shows that the
model employed in this group is more successful than
traditional methods. This result verifies the hypothesis
constructed at the beginning of the research, which is
“Teaching science classes in the 7th grade of primary
schools through problem-based active learning has
effect on student achievement.” Kayalı et al. 
showed that the active learning methods are more
effective than the classic method by relying on the
findings of their research conducted on the basis of
problem-based learning, brain storming and cooperative
learning. Şenocak used problem-based learning
approach in “The Gas State of Matter” unit. In the light
of the findings, the researcher determined that the
problem-based learning approach is more influential
than the traditional teaching approach. The results of
our research and of these studies seem to support each
In respect of the findings acquired via analyses of the
open-ended questions applied to the students both at
the beginning and at the end of the study, it is seen that
conceptual development of the students was affected
positively and their misconceptions were minimized
through problem-based learning model. This is
observed clearly in the 1st, 2nd, 5th and 7th open-ended
questions by which conceptual definitions are asked.
After examining respective answers, it was understood
that examples in students’ answers have diversified in
the 1st question, that students have used concepts of
direction when they are describing their place in the 2nd
Problem-Based Active Learning
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
question, that their misconceptions concerning the
concept of “force” has reduced in the 5th question, and
that students could place the concepts given in pursuant
to the concepts of “scalar magnitude” and “vectored
magnitude” and they defined concepts accurately in the
7th question. This result proves the hypothesis that
“Teaching science classes in the 7th grade of primary
schools through problem-based active learning has
effect on student achievement.” In his study examining
the effect of problem-based learning model on teaching
of the gas state of matter, Şenocak found that the
problem-based learning model is more effective than
the traditional teaching approach in regard to learning
concepts related to this topic by students. Throughout
the application process, it was observed how students
approached the problems they faced and how they
solved these problems in the problem-solving stage of
the scenarios used in problem-based learning model.
Based upon these observations, it was seen that the
research group students implemented the stages of
problem-solving method and there was a positive
change in their problem-solving skills. In the study titled
as “Learning to Teach Primary Science through
Problem – Based Learning” conducted by Treagust and
Peterson , it was commented that the problembased learning model used in educating pre-service
teachers affects pedagogical learning judging skill
positively. The judging skill is one of the problemsolving and critical thinking skills. Since the first stage of
problem-based learning is a problem to be solved, it is
expected from students who study in a problem-based
learning environment to have developed problemsolving and critical thinking skills. To give students the
development of their problem-solving skills . At the end of the research, written
comments were asked from students. Students’ opinions
about problem-based learning approach and application
are given below.
T.Y: “I liked this class very much. It has improved
my problem-solving skill. I did not like solving problems
before, but I like it now. Unlike others, these problems are
not boring and they have pictures. They are enjoyable. I
have liked picture side of this problem-based application
for the most part. I am curious about what kind of picture
and topic there would be in each paper. There is also group
working. I take my friends’ opinions in each problem and
I learn new things. In short, we both learn and have fun
with this application.”
E.B: I enjoy science class. The scenarios handed out
makes this class more enjoyable. Learning through
scenarios is both beneficial for me and my group in regard
to understanding subject matters better and consolidating
them more. We both learn and have fun in the class.”
S.S: “I have already liked science class, but I started
to like it more with this method. This method embroidered
with various animated characters increases my willingness
to solve problems. I could understand subject matters better
H.S: “I think that it is better for me to solve
scenarios during the class. Solving scenarios with group
members attracts my intention of studying. I understand
better subject matters when I solved scenarios. Science class
is better when solving scenarios. I like discussing with
group decision very much. I understand problems more
when I am solving them.”
When students’ opinions about the classes in which
problem-based learning model is used were examined, it
is seen that the approximation with daily life of and the
visualization through pictures of the scenarios utilized in
problem-based learning model were successful in pulling
the attention of students to the class. This is caused by
the fact that students were enabled to participate
actively to the class by expressing the problems taken
part in scenarios’ content with pictures. In the study
titled as “The effects of multiple intelligence-based
teaching on 9th grade students’ achievement level in
ecology class, attitudes towards ecology and multiple
intelligence” conducted by Aşçı and Demircioğlu ,
it was found that the achievement level in ecology class
of the students from the classroom wherein multiple
intelligence-based
implemented was higher than the students from the
classrooms wherein traditional teaching methodology
was employed. It was determined that choosing scenario
contents out of daily life brought about removing
students’ fears of problem-solving, facilitating learning
and making students be aware of the fact that science is
a very part of life. Thus, this has been quite influential
developing
towards science class. The hypothesis of “Teaching
science classes in the 7th grade of primary schools
through problem-based active learning has effect on
student achievement” was verified with the results of
analyses and observations. In their study upon
determining effectiveness of problem-based learning
model, Walker & Lofton found that students’
willingness to learn increased and their attitudes
improved in a positive manner. By benefiting from the
problem-based learning model in teaching subject
matters of analytic chemistry course to students, Ram
 came to the conclusion that there were positive
progressions in students’ attitudes towards the
mentioned course at the end of his study. Besides in this
study, students expressed that they found the
opportunity to see practical fields of fundamental
chemistry knowledge by transferring this knowledge to
problems in daily life. The results of our research and of
these studies seem to support each other.
At the end of the studies carried out by the students
through problem-based learning model, it was observed
that their cooperation with each other and social
O. Akınoğlu & R. Özkardeş Tandoğan
© 2007 Moment, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 3(1), 71-81
development were influenced positively and some
positive changes occurred in their social tendencies such
as making decisions together with other group members
or acting in team spirit, etc . In the study conducted by Sharmann & Orth-
Hampton , the relationship between cooperative
learning and self-efficacy belief levels of the pre-service
teacher candidates on science was searched. At the end
of this study, it was revealed that cooperative learning
affected teacher candidates’ self-efficacy levels on
science positively. Problem-based learning is relied on
group working and group solidarity in the same manner
as cooperative learning. The rise in students’ social
development, information dissemination and activity in
line with team spirit are unavoidable in the classroom
wherein problem-based learning model involving group
works and solidarity is used. These are qualities of great
importance in terms of both social life and science
education.