Efﬁcient Object Localization Using Convolutional Networks
Jonathan Tompson, Ross Goroshin, Arjun Jain, Yann LeCun, Christoph Bregler
New York University
tompson/goroshin/ajain/lecun/ 
Figure 1: Our Model‘s Predicted Joint Positions on the MPII-human-pose database test-set 
Recent state-of-the-art performance on human-body
pose estimation has been achieved with Deep Convolutional
Networks (ConvNets). Traditional ConvNet architectures
include pooling and sub-sampling layers which reduce computational requirements, introduce invariance and prevent
over-training. These beneﬁts of pooling come at the cost
of reduced localization accuracy. We introduce a novel architecture which includes an efﬁcient ‘position reﬁnement’
model that is trained to estimate the joint offset location
within a small region of the image. This reﬁnement model
is jointly trained in cascade with a state-of-the-art ConvNet
model to achieve improved accuracy in human joint
location estimation. We show that the variance of our detector approaches the variance of human annotations on the
FLIC dataset and outperforms all existing approaches
on the MPII-human-pose dataset .
1. Introduction
State-of-the-art performance on the task of human-body
part localization has made signiﬁcant progress in recent
years. This has been in part due to the success of Deep-
Learning architectures - speciﬁcally Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) - but also due to the availability of ever larger and more comprehensive datasets (our model’s predictions for difﬁcult examples from
 are shown in Figure 1).
A common characteristic of all ConvNet architectures
used for human body pose detection to date is that they
make use of internal strided-pooling layers. These layers reduce the spatial resolution by computing a summary statistic over a local spatial region (typically a max operation in
the case of the commonly used Max-Pooling layer). The
main motivation behind the use of these layers is to promote invariance to local input transformations (particularly
translations) since their outputs are invariant to spatial location within the pooling region. This is particularly important for image classiﬁcation where local image transformations obfuscate object identity. Therefore pooling plays a
vital role in preventing over-training while reducing computational complexity for classiﬁcation tasks.
The spatial invariance achieved by pooling layers comes
at the price of limiting spatial localization accuracy. As
such, by adjusting the amount of pooling in the network,
 
for localization tasks a trade-off is made between generalization performance, model size and spatial accuracy.
In this paper we present a ConvNet architecture for ef-
ﬁcient localization of human skeletal joints in monocular
RGB images that achieves high spatial accuracy without
signiﬁcant computational overhead. This model allows us
to use increased amounts of pooling for computational efﬁciency, while retaining high spatial precision.
We begin by presenting a ConvNet architecture to perform coarse body part localization. This network outputs
a low resolution, per-pixel heat-map, describing the likelihood of a joint occurring in each spatial location. We use
this architecture as a platform to discuss and empirically
evaluate the role of Max-pooling layers in convolutional architectures for dimensionality reduction and improving invariance to noise and local image transformations. We then
present a novel network architecture that reuses hiddenlayer convolution features from the coarse heat-map regression model in order to improve localization accuracy. By
jointly-training these models, we show that our model outperforms recent state-of-the-art on standard human body
pose datasets .
2. Related Work
Following the seminal work of Felzenszwalb et al. 
on ‘Deformable Part Models’ (DPM) for human-body-pose
estimation, many algorithms have been proposed to improve on the DPM architecture . Yang and Ramanan propose a mixture of templates modeled using
SVMs. Johnson and Everingham propose more discriminative templates by using a cascade of body-part detectors.
Recently high-order DPM-based body-part dependency
models have been proposed . Pishchulin use Poselet priors and a DPM model to capture spatial relationships of body-parts. In a similar work, Gkioxari
et al. propose the Armlets approach which uses a semiglobal classiﬁer of part conﬁgurations. Their approach exhibits good performance on real-world data, however it is
demonstrated only on arms. Sapp and Taskar propose
a multi-modal model including both holistic and local cues
for coarse mode selection and pose estimation. A common
characteristic to all these approaches is that they use handcrafted features (edges, contours, HoG features and color
histograms), which have been shown to have poor generalization performance and discriminative power in comparison to learned features (as in this work).
Today, the best performing algorithms for many vision
tasks are based on convolutional networks (ConvNets). The
current state-of-the-art methods for the task of human-pose
estimation in-the-wild are also built using ConvNets . The model of Toshev et al. signiﬁcantly
output-performed state-of-art methods on the challenging
‘FLIC’ dataset and was competitive on the ‘LSP’ 
dataset. In contrast to our work, they formulate the problem
as a direct (continuous) regression to joint location rather
than a discrete heat-map output. However, their method
performs poorly in the high-precision region and we believe
that this is because the mapping from input RGB image to
XY location adds unnecessary learning complexity which
weakens generalization.
For example, direct regression does not deal gracefully
with multi-modal outputs (where a valid joint is present in
two spatial locations). Since the network is forced to produce a single output for a given regression input, the network does not have enough degrees of freedom in the output representation to afford small errors which we believe
leads to over-training (since small outliers - due to for instance the presence of a valid body part - will contribute to
a large error in XY).
Chen et al. use a ConvNet to learn a low-dimensional
representation of the input image and use an image dependent spatial model and show improvement over . Tompson et al. uses a multi-resolution ConvNet architecture
to perform heat-map likelihood regression which they train
jointly with a graphical model network to further promote
joint consistency. In similar work, Jain et al. also uses a
multi-resolution ConvNet architecture, but they add motion
features to the network input to further improve accuracy.
Our Heat-Map regression model is largely inspired by both
these works with improvements for better localization accuracy. The contributions of this work can be seen as an
extension of the architecture of , where we attempt to
overcome the limitations of pooling to improve the precision of the spatial locality.
In an unrelated application, Eigen et al. predict depth
by using a cascade of coarse to ﬁne ConvNet models. In
their work the coarse model is pre-trained and the model
parameters are ﬁxed when training the ﬁne model. By contrast, in this work we suggest a novel shared-feature architecture which enables joint training of both models to improve generalization performance and which samples a subset of the feature inputs to improve runtime performance.
3. Coarse Heat-Map Regression Model
Inspired by the work of Tompson et al. , we use a
multi-resolution ConvNet architecture (Figure 2) to implement a sliding window detector with overlapping contexts
to produce a coarse heat-map output. Since our work is an
extension of their model, we will only present a very brief
overview of the architecture and explain our extensions to
their model.
3.1. Model Architecture
The coarse heat-map regression model takes as input an
RGB Gaussian pyramid of 3 levels (in Figure 2 only 2 lev-
2x2 MaxPool
128x128x128
2x2 MaxPool
2x2 MaxPool
2x2 MaxPool
2x2 MaxPool
2x2 Upscale
SpatialDropout
2x2 MaxPool
Figure 2: Multi-resolution Sliding Window Detector With Overlapping Contexts (model used on FLIC dataset)
els are shown for brevity) and outputs a heat-map for each
joint describing the per-pixel likelihood for that joint occurring in each output spatial location. We use an input resolution of 320x240 and 256x256 pixels for the FLIC and
MPII datasets respectively. The ﬁrst layer of the network is a local-contrast-normalization (LCN) layer with the
same ﬁlter kernel in each of the three resolution banks.
Each LCN image is then input to a 7 stage multiresolution convolutional network (11 stages for the MPII
dataset model). Due to the presence of pooling the heatmap output is at a lower resolution than the input image. It
should be noted that the last 4 stages (or 3 stages for the
MPII dataset model) effectively simulate a fully-connected
network for a target input patch size (which is typically a
much smaller context than the input image). We refer interested readers to for more details.
3.2. SpatialDropout
We improve the model of by adding an additional
dropout layer before the ﬁrst 1x1 convolution layer in Figure 2. The role of dropout is to improve generalization performance by preventing activations from becoming strongly
correlated , which in turn leads to over-training. In the
standard dropout implementation, network activations are
“dropped-out” (by zeroing the activation for that neuron)
during training with independent probability pdrop. At test
time all activations are used, but a gain of 1 −pdrop is multiplied to the neuron activations to account for the increase
in expected bias.
In initial experiments, we found that applying standard
dropout (where each convolution feature map activation is
“dropped-out” independently) before the 1 × 1 convolution
layer generally increased training time but did not prevent
over-training. Since our network is fully convolutional and
natural images exhibit strong spatial correlation, the feature
map activations are also strongly correlated, and in this setting standard dropout fails.
Standard dropout at the output of a 1D convolution is
illustrated in Figure 3. The top two rows of pixels represent the convolution kernels for feature maps 1 and 2, and
the bottom row represents the output features of the previous layer. During back-propagation, the center pixel of the
W2 kernel receives gradient contributions from both f2a and
f2b as the convolution kernel W2 is translated over the input feature F2. In this example f2b was randomly dropped
out (so the activation was set to zero) while f2a was not.
Since F2 and F1 are the output of a convolution layer we
expect f2a and f2b to be strongly correlated: i.e. f2a ≈f2b
and de/df2a ≈de/df2b (where e is the error function to minimize). While the gradient contribution from f2b is zero, the
strongly correlated f2a gradient remains. In essence, the effective learning rate is scaled by the dropout probability p,
but independence is not enhanced.
( = dropped-out)
Figure 3: Standard Dropout after a 1D convolution layer
Instead we formulate a new dropout method which we
call SpatialDropout. For a given convolution feature tensor
of size nfeats×height×width, we perform only nfeats dropout
trials and extend the dropout value across the entire feature
map. Therefore, adjacent pixels in the dropped-out feature
map are either all 0 (dropped-out) or all active as illustrated
in Figure 5. We have found this modiﬁed dropout implementation improves performance, especially on the FLIC
dataset, where the training set size is small.
128x256x256
128x128x128
128x128x128
Coarse Heat-Map Model
14x128x36x36
14x128x18x18
14x128x18x18
14x128x9x9
coarse (x,y)
Fine Heat-
Final (x,y)
refinement
Figure 4: Overview of our Cascaded Architecture
( = dropped-out)
Figure 5: SpatialDropout after a 1D convolution layer
3.3. Training and Data Augmentation
We train the model in Figure 2 by minimizing the Mean-
Squared-Error (MSE) distance of our predicted heat-map to
a target heat-map. The target is a 2D Gaussian of constant
variance (σ ≈1.5 pixels) centered at the ground-truth (x, y)
joint location. The objective function is:
j (x, y) −Hj (x, y)
j and Hj are the predicted and ground truth
heat-maps respectively for the jth joint.
During training, each input image is randomly rotated
(r ∈[−20◦, +20◦]), scaled (s ∈[0.5, 1.5]) and ﬂipped
(with probability 0.5) in order to improve generalization
performance on the validation-set. Note that this follows
the same training protocol as in .
Many images contain multiple people while only a single person is annotated. To enable inference of the target
person’s annotations at test time, both the FLIC and MPII
datasets include an approximate torso position. Since our
sliding-window detector will detect all joint instances in a
single frame indiscriminately, we incorporate this torso information by implementing the MRF-based spatial model
of Tompson et al. , which formulates a tree-structured
MRF over spatial locations with a random variable for each
joint. The most likely joint locations are inferred (using
message passing) given the noisy input distributions from
the ConvNet. The ground-truth torso location is concatenated with the 14 predicted joints from the ConvNet output
and these 15 joints locations are then input to the MRF. In
this setup, the MRF inference step will learn to attenuate
the joint activations from people for which the ground-truth
torso is not anatomically viable, thus “selecting” the correct
person for labeling. Interested readers should refer to 
for further details.
4. Fine Heat-Map Regression Model
In essence, the goal of this work is to recover the spatial
accuracy lost due to pooling of the model in Section 3.1
by using an additional ConvNet to reﬁne the localization
result of the coarse heat-map. However, unlike a standard
cascade of models, as in the work of Toshev et al. , we
reuse existing convolution features. This not only reduces
the number of trainable parameters in the cascade, but also
acts as a regularizer for the coarse heat-map model since the
coarse and ﬁne models are trained jointly.
4.1. Model Architecture
The full system architecture is shown in Figure 4. It consists of the heat-map-based parts model from Section 3.1 for
coarse localization, a module to sample and crop the convolution features at a speciﬁed (x, y) location for each joint,
as well as an additional convolutional model for ﬁne tuning.
Joint inference from an input image is as follows: we
forward-propagate (FPROP) through the coarse heat-map
model then infer all joint (x, y) locations from the maximal value in each joint’s heat-map. We then use this coarse
(x, y) location to sample and crop the ﬁrst 2 convolution
layers (for all resolution banks) at each of the joint locations. We then FPROP these features through a ﬁne heatmap model to produce a (∆x, ∆y) offset within the cropped
sub-window. Finally, we add the position reﬁnement to the
coarse location to produce a ﬁnal (x, y) localization for each
Figure 6 shows the crop module functionality for a single
joint. We simply crop out a window centered at the coarse
joint (x, y) location in each resolution feature map, however
we do so by keeping the contextual size of the window constant by scaling the cropped area at each higher resolution
level. Note that back-propagation (BPROP) through this
module from output feature to input feature is trivial; output gradients from the cropped image are simply added to
the output gradients of the convolution stages in the coarse
heat-map model at the sampled pixel locations.
Figure 6: Crop module functionality for a single joint
The ﬁne heat-map model is a Siamese network of
7 instances (14 for the MPII dataset), where the weights
and biases of each module are shared (i.e. replicated across
all instances and updated together during BPROP). Since
the sample location for each joint is different, the convolution features do not share the same spatial context and
so the convolutional sub-networks must be applied to each
joint independently. However, we use parameter sharing
amongst each of the 7 instances to substantially reduce the
number of shared parameters and to prevent over-training.
At the output of each of the 7 sub-networks we then perform a 1x1 Convolution, with no weight sharing to output a
detailed-resolution heat-map for each joint. The purpose of
this last layer is to perform the ﬁnal detection for each joint.
14x128x36x36
14x128x18x18
14x128x18x18
14x128x9x9
Face Instance
Lsho Instance
Lelb Instance
Shared weights/biases
Figure 7: Fine heat-map model: 14 joint Siamese network
Note we are potentially performing redundant computations in the Siamese network. If two cropped sub-windows
overlap and since the convolutional weights are shared, the
same convolution maybe applied multiple times to the same
spatial locations. However, we have found in practice this is
rare. Joints are infrequently co-located, and the spatial context size is chosen such that there is little overlap between
cropped sub-regions (note that the context of the cropped
images shown in Figures 4 and 8 are exaggerated for clarity).
Each instance of the sub-network in Figure 7 is a ConvNet of 4 layers, as shown in Figure 8. Since the input
images are different resolutions and originate from varying
depths in the coarse heat-map model, we treat the input features as separate resolution banks and apply a similar architecture strategy as used in Section 3.1. That is we apply
the same size convolutions to each bank, upscale the lowerresolution features to bring them into canonical resolution,
add the activations across feature maps then apply 1x1 convolutions to the output features.
64x18x18 128x18x18 128x36x36
2x2 Upscale
64x18x18 128x18x18 128x36x36
4x4 Upscale
Figure 8: The ﬁne heat-map network for a single joint
It should be noted that this cascaded architecture can be
extended further as is possible to have multiple cascade levels each with less and less pooling. However, in practice we
have found that a single layer provides sufﬁcient accuracy,
and in particular within the level of label noise on the FLIC
dataset (as we show in Section 5).
4.2. Joint Training
Before joint training, we ﬁrst pre-train the coarse heatmap model of Section 3.1 by minimizing Eq 1. We then
hold the parameters of the coarse model ﬁxed and train the
ﬁne heat-map model of Section 4.1 by minimizing:
j (x, y) −Gj (x, y)
Where G′ and G are the set of predicted and ground
truth heat-maps respectively for the ﬁne heat-map model.
Finally, we jointly train both models by minimizing E3 =
E1 + λE2. Where λ is a constant used to trade-off the relative importance of both sub-tasks. We treat λ as another
network hyper-parameter and is chosen to optimize performance over our validation set (we use λ = 0.1). Ideally,
a more direct optimization function would attempt to measure the argmax of both heat-maps and therefore directly
minimize the ﬁnal (x, y) prediction. However, since the
argmax function is not differentiable we instead reformulate the problem as a regression to a set of target heat-maps
and minimize the distance to those heat-maps.
5. Results
Our ConvNet architecture was implemented within the
Torch7 framework and evaluation is performed on the
FLIC and MPII-Human-Pose datasets. The FLIC
dataset consists of 3,987 training examples and 1,016 test
examples of still scenes from Hollywood movies annotated
with upper-body joint labels. Since the poses are predominantly front-facing and upright, FLIC is considered to be
less challenging than more recent datasets. However the
small number of training examples makes the dataset a good
indicator for generalization performance. On the other-hand
the MPII dataset is very challenging and it includes a wide
variety of full-body pose annotations within the 28,821
training and 11,701 test examples. For evaluation of our
model on the FLIC dataset we use the standard PCK measure proposed by and we use the PCKh measure of 
for evaluation on the MPII dataset.
Figure 9 shows the PCK test-set performance of our
coarse heat-map model (Section 3.1) when various amounts
of pooling are used within the network (keeping the number of convolution features constant). Figure 9 results show
quite clearly the expected effect of coarse quantization in
(x, y) and therefore the impact of pooling on spatial precision; when more pooling is used the performance of detections within small distance thresholds is reduced.
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
Figure 9: Pooling impact on FLIC test-set Average Joint
Accuracy for the coarse heat-map model
For joints where the ground-truth label is ambiguous and
difﬁcult for the human mechanical-turkers to label, we do
not expect our cascaded network to do better than the expected variance in the user-generated labels. To measure
this variance (and thus estimate the upper bound of performance) we performed the following informal experiment:
Label Noise (10 images) 0.65
This work 4x (test-set)
This work 8x (test-set)
This work 16x (test-set)
Table 1: σ of (x, y) pixel annotations on FLIC test-set images (at 360 × 240 resolution)
we showed 13 users 10 random images from the FLIC training set with annotated ground-truth labels as a reference so
that the users could familiarize themselves with the desired
anatomical location of each joint. The users then annotated
a consistent set of 10 random images from the FLIC test-set
for the face, left-wrist, left-shoulder and left-elbow joints.
Figure 10 shows the resultant joint annotations for 2 of the
Figure 10: User generated joint annotations
To estimate joint annotation noise we calculate the standard deviation (σ) across user annotations in x for each of
the 10 images separately and then average the σ across the
10 sample images to obtain an aggregate σ for each joint.
Since we down-sample the FLIC images by a factor of 2
for use with our model we divide the σ values by the same
down-sample ratio. The result is shown in Table 1.
The histogram of the coarse heat-map model pixel error (in the x dimension) on the FLIC test-set when using
an 8x internal pooling is shown in Figure 11a (for the face
and shoulder joints). For demonstration purposes, we quote
the error in the pixel coordinates of the input image to the
network (which for FLIC is 360 × 240), not the original
resolution. As expected, in these coordinates there is an approximately uniform uncertainty due to quantization of the
heat-map within -4 to +4 pixels. In contrast to this, the histogram of the cascaded network is shown in Figure 11b and
is close to the measured label noise1.
PCK performance on FLIC for face and wrist are shown
in Figures 12a and 12b respectively. For the face, the per-
1When calculating σ for our model, we remove all outliers with error >
20 and error < −20. These outliers represent samples where our weak
spatial model chose the wrong person’s joint and so do not represent an
accurate indication of the spatial accuracy of our model.
−10−8 −6 −4 −2
Probabiltiy
Prediction Error (X)
STD = 3.13
−10−8 −6 −4 −2
Probabiltiy
Prediction Error (X)
STD = 1.09
−10−8 −6 −4 −2
Probabiltiy
Prediction Error (X)
STD = 4.25
(a) Coarse model only
−10−8 −6 −4 −2
Probabiltiy
Prediction Error (X)
STD = 2.43
(b) Cascaded model
Figure 11: Histogram of X error on FLIC test-set
Coarse-Model
Fine-Model
Table 2: Forward-Propagation time (milli seconds) for each
of our FLIC trained models
formance improvement is signiﬁcant, especially for the 8×
and 16× pooling part models. The FPROP time for a single
image (using an Nvidia-K40 GPU) for each of our models is
shown in Table 2; using the 8× pooling cascaded network,
we are able to perform close to the level of label noise with
a signiﬁcant improvement in computation time over the 4×
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
4x pool cascade
8x pool cascade
16x pool cascade
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
4x pool cascade
8x pool cascade
16x pool cascade
Figure 12: Performance improvement from cascaded model
The performance improvement for wrist is also signiﬁcant but only for the 8× and 16× pooling models. Our empirical experiments suggest that wrist detection (as one of
the hardest to detect joints) requires learning features with
a large amount of spatial context. This is because the wrist
joint undergoes larger amounts of skeletal deformation than
the shoulder or face, and typically has high input variability due to clothing and wrist accessories. Therefore, with
limited convolution sizes and sampling context in the ﬁne
heat-map regression network, the cascaded network does
not improve wrist accuracy beyond the coarse approximation.
Coarse Heat-
coarse (x,y)
Fine Heat-
Figure 13: Standard cascade architecture
To evaluate the effectiveness of the use of shared features
for our cascaded network we trained a ﬁne heat-map model
(shown in Figure 13) that takes a cropped version of the input image as it’s input rather than the ﬁrst and second layer
convolution feature maps of our coarse heat-map model.
This comparison model is a greedily-trained cascade, where
the coarse and ﬁne models are trained independently. Additionally, since the network in Figure 4 has a higher capacity
than the comparison model, we add an additional convolution layer such that the number of trainable parameters is the
same. Figure 14a shows that our 4x pooling network outperforms this comparison model on the wrist joint (we see
similar performance gains for other joints not shown). We
attribute this to the regularizing effect of joint training; the
ﬁne heat-map model term in the objective function prevents
over-training of the coarse model and vice-versa.
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
shared features
(a) Ours Vs. Standard Cascade
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
with Spatial Dropout
without Spatial Dropout
(b) Impact of SpatialDropout
Figure 14: FLIC wrist performance
We also show our model‘s performance with and without SpatialDropout for the wrist joint in Figure 14b. As
expected we see signiﬁcant perform gains in the high normalized distance region due to the regularizing effect of our
Yang et al.
Sapp et al.
Eichner et al.
MODEC et al.
Toshev et al.
Jain et al.
Tompson et al. 90.7
This work 4x
This work 8x
This work 16x 91.6
Table 3: Comparison with prior-art on FLIC (PCK @ 0.05)
dropout implementation and the reduction in strong heatmap outliers.
Figure 15 compares our detector’s PCK performance averaged for the wrist and elbow joints with previous work.
Our model outperforms the previous state-of-the-art results
by Tompson et al. for large distances, due to our use of
SpatialDropout. In the high precision region the cascaded
network is able to out-perform all state-of-the-art by a signiﬁcant margin. The PCK performance at a normalized distance of 0.05 for each joint is shown in Table 3.
this work 4X
this work 8x
this work 16x
Tompson et al.
Toshev et al.
Jain et al.
Yang et al.
Sapp et al.
0.025 0.05 0.075
0.125 0.15 0.175
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
Figure 15: FLIC - average PCK for wrist and elbow
Finally, Figure 16 shows the PCKh performance of our
model on the MPII human pose dataset. Similarity, table 4
shows a comparison of the PCKh performance of our model
and previous state-of-the-art at a normalized distance of 0.5.
Our model out-performs all existing methods by a considerable margin.
Since the MPII dataset provides the subject scale at testtime, in standard evaluation practice the query image is
scale normalized so that the average person height is constant, thus making the detection task easier. For practical
applications, a query image is run through the detector at
multiple scales and typically some form of non-maximum
suppression is used to aggregate activations across the resultant heat-maps. An alternative is to train the ConvNet at
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Normalized distance
Detection rate, %
this work 4X − scale norm
this work 4X − scale norm (test)
this work 4X − unnormalized
Pishchulin et al.
Figure 16: MPII - average PCKh for all joints
Head Shoulder ElbowWrist Hip Knee Ankle Upper
Gkioxari et al.
Sapp & Taskar
Yang & Ramanan
41.3 32.1 36.2 33.2 34.5
Pishchulin et al.
40.8 34.1 36.5 34.4 35.1
This work - scale normalized
83.9 77.8 80.9 72.3 64.8
This work - scale normalized (test only) 93.5
75.5 67.8 68.3 60.3 51.7
This work - unnormalized
67.5 59.8 64.6 55.6 46.1
Table 4: Comparison with prior-art: MPII (PCKh @ 0.5)
the original query image scale (which varies widely across
the test and training sets) and thus learning scale invariance
in the detection stage. This allows us to run the detector at
a single scale at test time, making it more suitable for realtime applications. In Figure 16 and table 4 we show the
performance of our model trained on the original dataset
scale (unnormalized); we show performance of this model
on both the normalized and unnormalized test set. As expected, performance is degraded as the detection problem
is harder. However, surprisingly this model also out performs state-of-the-art, showing that the ConvNet is able to
learn some scale invariance.
6. Conclusion
Though originally developed for the task of classiﬁcation , Deep Convolutional Networks have been successfully applied to a multitude of other problems. In classiﬁcation all variability except the object identity is suppressed.
On the other hand, localization tasks such as human body
pose estimation often demand a high degree of spatial precision. In this work we have shown that the precision lost
due to pooling in traditional ConvNet architectures can be
recovered efﬁciently while maintaining the computational
beneﬁts of pooling. We presented a novel cascaded architecture that combined ﬁne and coarse scale convolutional
networks, which achieved new state-of-the-art results on the
FLIC and MPII-human-pose datasets.
7. Acknowledgements
This research was funded in part by Google and by the
Ofﬁce of Naval Research ONR Award N000141210327.
We would also like the thank all the contributors to
Torch7 , particularly Soumith Chintala, for all their hard