A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine
JOHN J. DUDLEY, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
PER OLA KRISTENSSON, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
Interactive Machine Learning (IML) seeks to complement human perception and intelligence by tightly
integrating these strengths with the computational power and speed of computers. The interactive process
is designed to involve input from the user but does not require the background knowledge or experience
that might be necessary to work with more traditional machine learning techniques. Under the IML process,
non-experts can apply their domain knowledge and insight over otherwise unwieldy datasets to find patterns
of interest or develop complex data driven applications. This process is co-adaptive in nature and relies on
careful management of the interaction between human and machine. User interface design is fundamental to
the success of this approach, yet there is a lack of consolidated principles on how such an interface should be
implemented. This article presents a detailed review and characterisation of Interactive Machine Learning
from an interactive systems perspective. We propose and describe a structural and behavioural model of
a generalised IML system and identify solution principles for building effective interfaces for IML. Where
possible, these emergent solution principles are contextualised by reference to the broader human-computer
interaction literature. Finally, we identify strands of user interface research key to unlocking more efficient
and productive non-expert interactive machine learning applications.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →HCI theory, concepts and models;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Interactive machine learning, interface design
ACM Reference Format:
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson. 2018. A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine
Learning. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 1, 1, Article 1 , 37 pages. 
INTRODUCTION
Machine Learning (ML) supports the construction of mathematical models that can describe
and exhibit complex behaviour without the need for explicit programming. These techniques
have demonstrated advanced functionality in a wide variety of tasks such as recognising speech,
classifying images and playing games. This functionality is built through a process of training
that is not dissimilar from the human process of learning. In general terms, the algorithm learns
to recognise or represent a concept through repeated exposure to samples of that concept. A
mathematical model that accurately represents a concept for some functional purpose is the goal
product of a machine learning algorithm.
Despite the success of these techniques, their use as a development tool remains largely confined
to expert practitioners. However, the ability for these approaches to deliver functionality without
Authors’ addresses: John J. Dudley, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
 ; Per Ola Kristensson, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
 .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the Association for Computing Machinery.
2160-6455/2018/3-ART1 $15.00
 
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
explicit programming makes them attractive to a broad group of potential users. The recent
explosion in broad interest in machine learning further exacerbates the shortfall in intuitive
systems that allow non-experts to apply these techniques. Interactive Machine Learning (IML) has
attracted interest among human-computer interaction (HCI) researchers due to the unique aspects
of establishing effective human interactions under this paradigm.
IML (defined in detail in Section 2) makes machine learning techniques more accessible by careful
framing of the training process as an HCI task. The IML process involves the user in the training
process by, at the simplest level, using human input in the example selection, creation and labelling
process. A machine learning practitioner may be required to deploy the underlying algorithm
for use in the IML system but is not essential to the training process. In an ideal implementation,
the machine learning-naïve end user can construct their own learned concepts by creating or
collecting training data according to their need. In practice, constructing such a system is a major
challenge for both the machine learning practitioner and for the user interface designer. This article
focuses primarily on the interface design challenge but does highlight points of intersection with
the technical challenges for the machine learning practitioner.
Early efforts by Ware et al. and Fails and Olsen demonstrated that typical machine
learning tasks could be framed to take advantage of human input, and over the past decade and a
half the IML process has seen increasing attention within the HCI community. The user providing
input to the IML system need not possess any deep understanding of the models with which they are
interacting. The value of the approach is perhaps most evident when one considers the potential to
allow a domain expert to train a model. Researchers have demonstrated IML systems that leverage
domain expertise in a range of specific applications including animal behaviour annotation [Kabra
et al. 2013], insurance claims auditing [Ghani and Kumar 2011] and conducting systematic reviews
of published medical evidence [Wallace et al. 2012]. In these applications, the effort required by the
user is significantly reduced as the model improves its understanding of the concept being trained.
Wallace et al. achieved a reduction in user workload of approximately 40% by exploiting the
predictions of the trained model to mark particular research papers as irrelevant. In this way, IML
seeks to apply the complementary strengths of humans and computers.
The IML workflow is inherently co-adaptive in that the user and the target model directly
influence each other’s behaviour. It is important to recognise that it is in fact the interactions, as
an emergent property of the interface, that must actually accommodate the changing behaviour
of the user in response to the model. Appropriate design of the interface is critical to the success
of such systems and this presents a unique user interface design challenge. The approach relies
on the transformation of the data inspection and correction task into an intuitive and productive
dialogue between human and machine. Achieving this is non-trivial.
Designing the interface for an Interactive Machine Learning application exposes four key challenges. First, users can be imprecise and inconsistent. A user may not strictly adhere to a concept
during the training process or may introduce their own errors and biases into the learning process.
Poor training leads to poor models but unless users perceive their own deficiencies, this failure is
attributed to the system.
Second, there is a degree of uncertainty when relating user input and user intent. Users may
assign training data based on features that they perceive in an example which the system does not
or cannot model. In addition, the fact that a user did not assign an example to a concept does not
necessarily imply that it is a counter example.
Third, interacting with a model is not like interacting with a conventional information structure
through a user interface. The machine learning model evolves in response to user input but not
necessarily in a way that is perceived as intuitive or predictable by the user.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Fourth, training is open ended. For example, if a user is designing a part in a Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) system, the state of completion is more or less binary: the task is complete when the
part is fully specified. By contrast, training a model to be 100% accurate may be both undesirable
and impossible. Furthermore, IML has seen extensive use in exploratory and creative applications
where the actual model is perhaps of secondary importance to the process itself.
These four key challenges in aggregate make human-centred machine learning, and the IML
process specifically, a design challenge that is far more complicated than simply integrating the
relevant components.
Guidance for the designer
This paper consolidates research findings related to interface design for IML with the objective
of providing guidance to designers. It seeks to bring a binocular perspective to the challenge of
building an effective Interactive Machine Learning system: a unified consideration of the application
of intelligent algorithms and the design of the user interface. We present both a structural and
behavioural breakdown of an IML system based on our synthesis of the literature. The structural
breakdown divides the system into its constituent components (the user, the interface, the data and
the model) with the objective of helping designers think about how they might architect such a
system. The IML interface is further decomposed into four distinct interface elements that serve
different functions within the broader procedure. Awareness of these distinct interface elements
can help designers think about how they present information to users and what interactions they
The behavioural breakdown separates the process of interactively building a model into sub-tasks.
It is important to note, however, that these tasks may overlap and/or be performed iteratively. The
structural and behavioural breakdowns are not intended to serve as blueprints, but rather to support
rich discussion of design considerations with clearly defined terminology. This formalisation of the
design space will contribute to a better foundation for exchange of concepts in this emerging field.
A further contribution of this paper is the identification of emergent solution principles that
can help guide IML interface designers more generally. The six solution principles identified and
described in detail in Section 6, are:
(1) Make task goals and constraints explicit
(2) Support user understanding of model uncertainty and confidence
(3) Capture intent rather than input
(4) Provide effective data representations
(5) Exploit interactivity and promote rich interactions
(6) Engage the user
The remainder of the article is organised as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed definition of
Interactive Machine Learning, and seeks to highlight its similarities and distinctions from related
techniques. An overview of prominent efforts at making machine learning techniques and advanced
analytics more accessible to non-experts is presented in Section 3, categorised by underlying data
type. Section 4 presents a structural characterisation of the key interface elements of a generalised
IML system. An abstracted description of the typical IML process is presented in Section 5. Section
6 is an attempt to consolidate recent efforts by identifying a number of common solution principles.
We highlight that tackling user interface design challenges and advancing the state-of-the-art
requires further research in several key areas. We therefore propose four distinct strands of research
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
in Section 7 for enhancing the performance of Interactive Machine Learning applications from a
user interaction perspective. Finally, we summarise the key findings in this article in Section 8.
CONTEXT AND DEFINITIONS
This article examines Interactive Machine Learning from a user interface design perspective.
Developing an effective IML system is an interdisciplinary effort that draws on both the machine
learning and HCI domains. In order to meet the objectives of this article, we concentrate primarily
on IML studies that present user evaluations and offer suggestions for design of the interaction
component. Limited attention is given to the underlying technical requirements for the machine
learning component of the system beyond their implications for user interaction. In this section we
first seek to establish clear definitions for the terminology used throughout this article.
Interactive Machine Learning Definition
Interactive Machine Learning is an interaction paradigm in which a user or user group iteratively
builds and refines a mathematical model to describe a concept through iterative cycles of input
and review. Model refinement is driven by user input that may come in many forms, such as
providing indicative samples, describing indicative features or otherwise selecting high-level model
parameters. Interactive Machine Learning is distinct from classical machine learning in that human
intelligence is applied through iterative teaching and model refinement in a relatively tight loop of
“set-and-check”. In other words, the user provides additional information to the system to update
the model and the change in the model is reviewed against the user’s design objective. Under this
workflow, the change in the model at each iteration may be relatively small. This is in contrast to
more traditional machine learning approaches where the workflow requires wholesale pre-selection
of training data and significant changes in the model per execution step. Amershi et al. 
present a detailed discussion of the distinction between IML and classical machine learning as
well as a series of cases studies that highlight the value of the technique. The IML process is
characterised by the user being the principle driver of the interaction to deliver desired behaviour
in the system. This does not mean that the computer has no influence on the process or does not
make independent decisions. Indeed, the application may, for example, intelligently select a subset
of data for review. The notion of the user being the principle driver is more reflected in the fact
that the IML application seeks to provide the user with control over the high level behaviour of the
system. This may or may not necessarily be exercised in each discrete interaction.
Fails and Olsen introduced the concept of IML in the interactive image processing tool
Crayons, as being chiefly focused on the review and correction of classifier errors. Crayons allows
the user to draw directly on images to guide the training of an image classifier. The user reviews
the current classifier performance based on its classification of image regions and provides more
feedback by drawing on the image if necessary. ReGroup [Amershi et al. 2012] is a tool leveraging
the Interactive Machine Learning paradigm to assist users in creating custom contact groups in a
social network context. The system trains a model to classify contacts according to their likelihood
of membership to the contact group being created. The system takes a selection of a contact
for inclusion as a positive sample and the skipping of a contact in an ordered list as an implied
negative sample. The user receives feedback in the form of an ordered list of suggested contacts
after each selection. Just like Crayons, the user refines the behaviour of the model with incremental
improvements derived through iteratively applied user input.
The at-completion model behaviour in the Crayons and ReGroup systems described above could
of course be replicated using a standard machine learning approach that takes the collection of
user inputs as a batch of labelled data. However, in the applications discussed, it is the process of
refining the model itself that helps elicit the user input. These two examples help highlight the
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
fact that the benefit of Interactive Machine Learning is observable in situations where the precise
design objectives of the user are unclear and/or data labels cannot be obtained a priori.
More recent work extends the application of the interactive component beyond just review and
correction of classifier errors to other stages of the model construction exercise, i.e. the choice of
features, the choice of models, debugging and the evaluation of performance. In the context of
this article, we refer to a comprehensive IML process as one in which the system delivers all of the
necessary functionality to allow a user to configure then train a model on their data and deploy it
in the target application (this full generalised workflow is described in detail in Section 5).
During the iterative refinement stage, the user drives the IML process in a tightly coupled
arrangement between human and machine. The key elements and flow of information under
this methodology are illustrated in Figure 1. The user’s interaction may be viewed as a form of
pseudo-programming in that the user builds functionality through demonstration and labelling
samples rather than by directly writing code [Gillies et al. 2016]. As an interaction paradigm,
Interactive Machine Learning exists at the overlap between computer-as-tool and computer-aspartner as described by Beaudouin-Lafon . An IML application certainly provides a tool in
that it supports the user in building a model fit for their purposes. At the same time, the user and
computer engage in an interaction that is a partnership where both sides must respond to input
and to some extent, infer desired actions. The metaphor of moving an object with high and/or
variable inertia along a desired trajectory provides a very high level interaction model for IML.
This interaction model captures the fact that inputs may produce marginal or no response in the
object and that a sequence of inputs is required to drive change.
The Interactive Machine Learning approach is likely to see initial adoption at the two extremes
of user-data interaction tasks: at the lower complexity end, users selecting examples of things that
they do and do not like; and at the higher complexity end, users (and even developers) applying
their domain expertise to refine a classifier or build some other intelligent functionality [Groce
et al. 2014].
From a structural perspective, we separate an IML system into four key components: these are 1)
the user; 2) the model; 3) the data; and 4) the interface. These components are summarised in Figure
IML Application
Clarification
Classification /
Demonstration
Visualisation
Performance
Evaluation
Fig. 1. The user plays a central role in Interactive Machine Learning by actively training the model in an
iterative fashion. The user interface is a critical component of this interaction.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
2. The user drives the process by providing feedback and steering model training. The model is the
component being trained. The data is a collection of the pre-existing and newly created points upon
which the model is trained. The interface is the bridge between the user and the model and data
and provides the basis for interaction. The interface component is the primary focus of this article
and will be dissected further in Section 4. We briefly define the role of each of these components
within the IML process below.
User. As has been reiterated several times already, the user is the main driver of the
IML process. An assumption is made that the user possesses no deep understanding of machine
learning techniques. Furthermore, it is unreasonable to expect a typical end-user to appreciate the
subtleties of probabilistic inference. The user may possess significant domain expertise relevant to
interpretation of the data and evaluation of model outputs. It is also worthwhile highlighting that
the “user” may in fact be multiple users interacting with the system serially or in parallel.
The user is a dynamic and potentially unreliable component of the process. A single user’s
concept may drift over time [Kulesza et al. 2014] and inter-user variability in subjective annotations
may be high [Curran et al. 2012]. Unaddressed, these deficiencies are likely to have a negative
effect on trained model quality. Fortunately, careful design of the interface, both in terms of the
information presented and the guidance provided, can help to improve the consistency of users.
Model. The model is the component of the system that takes inputs and determines
appropriate outputs based on its current understanding of the concept/process the user is seeking
to capture. The high-level goal in machine learning generally, is to build a model that accurately
describes the relationship between input and output for a given concept based on data indicative
of that concept. In machine learning, this model may be implemented using a wide variety of
different algorithms and architectures. In interactive machine learning, it is the model that the
user is ultimately seeking to refine through their interactions. The user may manipulate the model
directly, i.e. by adjusting parameters, or indirectly, i.e. by relabelling or adding new data. The
machine learning community provides an extensive range of modelling techniques, each with their
corresponding advantages and disadvantages. It is important to note too that certain models, like
certain users, may be unreliable in that their behaviour is not necessarily deterministic.
Data and Model
Fig. 2. Structural breakdown of a generic IML system. The user steers the model towards a desired concept
by assigning or creating training data. The interface may also support direct interaction with the model by
exposing parameters, editable structures and choice in alternative techniques. Not independently represented
in this figure but encompassed by the interface component, is the conceptual model for the system that
frequently provides an abstraction layer between the user and the manipulated objects.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Model/algorithmic agnosticism is a design objective for IML systems but not readily achievable.
An IML system which allows the user to switch between different model structures and algorithms
while maintaining the same or similar interfaces and interactions provides greater flexibility without
a significant re-familiarisation cost. Certain machine learning techniques are more suited to direct
interaction and partial inspection than others. The machine learning community is hard at work
developing new and more powerful techniques. There is growing interest in probabilistic machine
learning methods that better capture and represent uncertainty [Ghahramani 2015]. However,
techniques such as deep neural networks (which have recently made significant advances) deliver
functionality without any clear way to support inspection or interaction.
An IML process may also leverage multiple models, either to deliver ensembled functionality or
for comparative evaluation purposes. An ideal IML system architecture would allow for state-ofthe-art techniques to be introduced with minimal adjustment.
Data. The data component in an IML system is analogous to the source code in a conventional program. The user selects, describes or generates data in order to indicate how the model
should behave in response to certain inputs. It can be useful to think of such a labelled data point as
a training sample. Unlabelled data may also contribute to the construction of a model by inferring
its association with other data points. Data type agnosticism is also a design objective for IML
systems but similarly difficult to achieve. Users are likely to value the ability to apply a familiar IML
system to whatever data type is dictated by the problem domain. IML systems have been developed
targeting a range of data types including images, text and motion data. Section 3 provides a survey
of IML applications across different data types. The features relevant to each data type may vary
considerably. Early studies in IML typically avoided user involvement at the feature level but there
has been a recent shift towards greater transparency and even user involvement in feature selection.
It does indeed seem desirable to apply domain expertise at the feature selection level in certain
circumstances provided effective interfaces and interaction methods exist.
Interface. The user interface and its interplay with the user is the central focus of this
article. A further decomposition of the interface into its potential sub-elements is presented in
Section 4. Although this section presents a structural breakdown of an IML system, it is useful
to highlight the distinction between the interface component and the actual interactions that it
supports. The interactions available to a user are dictated by the interface, but as a designer, it is of
course useful to think in terms of interactions when building an interface. Our discussion of the
user interface design for IML thus encompasses the design of corresponding interaction techniques,
and these two aspects are distinguished where possible.
The interface component is responsible for the bidirectional feedback between the user and
the model/data. It must support both the input and output mechanisms necessary to provide
this functionality. Constraints imposed on the richness of the labelling or demonstration process
represent an efferent filter on the user’s intent which may have negative consequences for user
satisfaction and model quality. Limitations of the visual representation of sample points for review
represent an afferent filter on the user’s perception and understanding which may also degrade
performance and satisfaction.
A central argument in this article is that the interface design is critical to the success of the
IML process. Careful management of the user workflow and interactions can address the four key
challenges raised in Section 1: i) users can be imprecise and inconsistent; ii) there is typically a
degree of uncertainty in the relation between user input and user intent; iii) interacting with a
model is not like interacting with a conventional information structure through an interface; and
iv) training is open ended.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
Related domains
The machine learning community has sought to make its techniques more accessible to end users.
There are a growing number of packaged toolkits and automated functionality . Fiebrink’s thesis introduces Wekinator [Fiebrink 2011], a stand-alone application for applying
supervised machine learning to real-time data streams and particularly suited to music composition
and performance.
The concept of “Machine Learning as a Service” (MLaaS) has also recently emerged in response
to the demand for advanced analytics and data driven applications within industry [Ribeiro et al.
2015]. Many service oriented machine learning platforms now exist including those offered by
major companies such as Google, Microsoft, Amazon and IBM. While these services do provide
access to machine learning functionality paired with powerful computing back-ends, they still
require familiarity with the techniques for their effective use.
Exposure of machine learning techniques to non-experts has occurred only more recently through
applications such as email filters and recommender systems. Recommender systems are a form of
Interactive Machine Learning in that the model of the user’s preferences is iteratively constructed
through interpreting their actions such as liking, disliking, purchasing and reviewing. However, in
many of these applications the user may be unaware that they are interacting with an algorithm
that is learning in response to their inputs. Some recommender systems do explicitly inform users
that they can influence the behaviour of their preference model and/or provide an interface to do so,
but even in these cases, the interaction typically focusses more on data capture than on a bipartite
process of closed-loop model refinement. In this article, we specifically focus on Interactive Machine
Learning from an interface design perspective. While the algorithmic backends of recommender
systems and their considered approach to implicit and explicit user input is certainly relevant to
understanding Interactive Machine Learning more generally, the lack of focus given to the process
excludes them from broader discussion in Section 3.
It is useful to explicitly highlight the distinction between Interactive Machine Learning and
the related concept of Active Learning. Active Learning is a machine learning technique that
focuses on selecting new points for labelling by the user. The key distinction from IML is that
point selection is driven by the learner rather than the user. IML may also leverage learner driven
point selection strategies but not to the exclusion of user driven input. For a survey of Active
Learning, see [Settles 2010]. Reinforcement Learning is a machine learning technique that guides
the learner towards a desired behaviour based on simple reward feedback. Research has examined
the potential for humans to be positioned inside this loop as a means to steering the Reinforcement
Learning algorithm. Knox and Stone provide a detailed overview of a series of experiments
on reinforcement learning based on human derived reward feedback.
Beyond human-computer interactions, IML related concepts have also been explored in humanrobot interaction research . Gopinath
et al. are motivated by the need to adjust levels of robotic assistance to accommodate the
user’s requirements. A motor impairment injury or illness may result in dynamic levels of capability
even among a single user through the stages of recovery or degeneration. Supporting user-driven
customisation of the level of assistance is a prime application for IML. There is also some overlap
between IML and aspects of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) and
Interactive Optimisation . IML differs from these fields in the emphasis
given to the role of the user and the process rather than the end goal.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
SURVEY OF IML APPLICATIONS
Interactive Machine Learning has been applied over a diverse range of data types for a variety of
end use applications. In this section we present a survey of existing approaches and applications
in Interactive Machine Learning. This paper does not claim to provide an exhaustive survey of
research in Interactive Machine Learning or its applications. The literature discussed herein is that
which: i) helps to illustrate the different dimensions of the IML paradigm and/or, ii) gives special
emphasis to the interface design considerations of IML systems. A provisional list of literature
was obtained by performing a Scopus search on the quote-enclosed phrase, ‘Interactive Machine
Learning’. The full set of search results was reviewed and culled based on its contribution to i)
and/or ii) above. Literature referenced by that in the result set is also included where relevant.
The categorisation employed here is based on the underlying data type explored in the application.
It is important to note, however, that many of the interface features and algorithmic methods used
are common across data types. An effort is made to highlight the unique requirements of developing
an IML system for each data type while extracting the common features that generalise across
application areas.
Machine learning techniques are well suited to application on textual data. Text in specific domains
can typically be obtained in high volumes and often already incorporates some degree of manual
labelling. Modern spam filters are one example of effective machine learning based on textual data
to improve the user experience.
Interactive Machine Learning systems have been developed to target use cases where a more constrained or custom categorisation is desired. Such categorisations and the features that characterise
them may be difficult to tease out from domain experts and/or may be difficult to express programmatically. Wallace et al. present abstrackr, an online tool to support screening for systematic
reviews of published medical evidence. The system can iteratively improve its classification of
relevant citations as the user works through the provisional list, starting their manual evaluation
with publications of highest relevance. In pilot evaluations, the system was able to reduce workload
by approximately 40% by successfully reclassifying publications in the provisional list as irrelevant.
The similarly laborious task of statutory analysis is targeted by Šavelka et al. . Šavelka
et al. deploy an IML system to facilitate the process of reviewing regulatory frameworks to identify
provisions relevant to a given topic (preparedness and response to public health emergencies in
the case of the study). The user is presented with a classification of provisions and can modify the
label assigned. They may also suggest terms that are important to this classification. At any time,
the user may request that the model be re-trained based on their most recent feedback iteration.
Interestingly, Šavelka et al. demonstrate that the model trained in one jurisdiction, i.e. Kansas, can be
advantageously reused in another jurisdiction, i.e. Alaska, for the same topic analysis. This system
is a prime example of the potential for IML to assist the user in completing a highly problem-specific
task while also allowing the expended effort to be leveraged on related datasets.
Kim et al. [2015a] demonstrate an interactive interface for building and editing classifications
of student code submissions. The approach was successfully applied to grading of coding tasks
by allowing teachers to choose class exemplars and thereby generate a classification of different
student answer types. Yimam et al. apply an interactive learning process to the task of
annotating medical abstracts. Huang et al. show the potential of IML to assist restaurant
review authoring and reading. Through an interactive process, the system can learn to highlight and
suggest summary sentiment in the three categories of food, service and price. The study found that
providing these suggestions during authoring can motivate users to correct erroneous predictions.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
Endert et al. introduce the concept of semantic interaction in text analytics. They make use
of the information embedded in interactions such as word search, highlighting, annotations, and
adjustment of document pin locations to iteratively refine a model of document associations. This
information is used to update a spatial visualisation of document associations.
Applying an IML process to textual data is challenged by the difficulty of providing succinct
representations of documents that facilitate rapid user review. Kim et al. [2015b] compare a variety
of machine learning techniques to the task of document feature compression. Their aim is to
identify representations that improve the speed of categorisation assessment by users. Several of
the discussed studies exploit term highlighting that indicates features relevant to the categorisation
result. Giving salience to indicative keywords is hypothesised to speed up the assessment process.
In terms of feature labelling, Raghavan et al. observe that users take up to five times longer
to label one document, i.e. assign a document to a topic, than to label one feature, i.e. assign a word
as an important term for a topic.
The categorisation of images is a very popular application area within the machine learning
community. The availability of suitable techniques for image based classification has encouraged
the examination of the potential pairing of user input through IML. As for the application of IML
to textual data, the usefulness of the technique is seen when more subtle concept discrimination
capabilities are desired.
At the inter-image level, applications have sought to allow users to train models to understand
their own, sometimes obscure, concepts. Fogarty et al. introduce CueFlik, an interactive
application that allows users to create their own concepts to incorporate into image search. The
user may define a new search rule by assigning a collection of images to describe a desired concept,
e.g. scenic. The user may then apply this rule to their search so that only results consistent with
that concept are provided. Fogarty et al. found that providing a visualisation of both the
most-confident positive and most-confident negative samples led to higher quality and faster
concept learning than providing the full ranking of images. Amershi et al. [2011a] extend CueFlik
by adding features to the interface that better allow users to model changes and visualise the current
model state. Amershi et al. also introduced a visualisation of historical model quality (expressed in
terms of model reliability and snapshots in time of ranked images) and the ability to revert back to
previous model states. Guo et al. present an IML system for clustering medical images based
on the underlying condition, and attempt to specifically incorporate expert constraints. Users can
drag images apart to indicate that they should be disconnected in the model.
Other applications of IML have sought to train systems to recognise specific objects at the
intra-image level. Crayons [Fails and Olsen 2003] is the often cited formative paper in IML that
demonstrates an interface whereby users can incrementally train a classifier by directly drawing on
an image. This approach has also been leveraged by Tsutsumi and Tateda to help measure
the amount of leaf debris flowing on a river as well as for analysis of satellite, medical and material
science images to train a classifier to recognise the desired source from within an audio
file. The user ‘paints’ on regions of a time-frequency visualisation of an audio recording to separate
out sources.
BeatBox [Hipke et al. 2014] allows users to train a system to recognise different percussive
vocalisations. Having established a custom vocabulary of vocalisations, users can then create
a track that recognises and labels the vocalisations employed. The interface separates distinct
vocalisation classes into different virtual pads and colour codes recorded vocalisations for a pad
according to their recognised class. This colour coding provides a simple to interpret sense of
the quality of a particular vocalisation class. A pad that contains recorded samples that are not
accurately classified quickly attracts the attention of the user. They can then target a new class
with greater discriminative power.
Motivated by relieving the prohibitive challenges people with disabilities face when playing
conventional musical instruments, Katan et al. apply Interactive Machine Learning to the
creation of gesture controlled instruments. Katan et al. enabled users to build a gesture vocabulary
and customise the relationship between gestures and sounds. Sarasua et al. show the potential
for customised gesture recognition to control music articulations, as a conductor might control an
orchestra with a baton. Similar approaches have demonstrated the potential for IML to support
unique forms of music composition and interactive
experiences . These
studies highlight that the goal in IML is not necessarily just about making a task more efficient or
productive, but potentially about extending human creativity.
Others have sought to produce intelligent functionality in response to data streams such as for
seizure detection and for office task automation (Dey et al. ). IML has
also been applied in training of brain computer interfaces .
Gesture Script [Lü et al. 2014] is an interactive tool for creating 2D gesture recognisers. The
application allows users to generate feature level descriptions and combine these together to
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
supplement training data. Hartmann et al. present an interaction authoring tool based on
recognising patterns in generic sensor data.
As with textual data, the application of IML to time series data can also be challenging in terms
of providing summative representations of sample points: it can be difficult to succinctly represent
the dynamic contents of an image stream or the temporal relationship between time and position
that represents a gesture. There is a risk that the requirement for serial review of samples leads to
a highly serialised process that does not scale well. Interfaces designed for this purpose must find
ways to allow users to quickly inspect and review samples.
Assisted processing of structured information
The IML systems discussed in this section exploit structured data to train models that enhance
user capabilities. These examples in particular highlight the application of domain or user-specific
expertise to the training process. Amershi et al. present a social networking assistance tool
based on the Interactive Machine Learning paradigm. The system builds a probabilistic model
based on a Naïve Bayes classifier of contacts likely to be relevant to a particular group and makes
suggestions and provides new filters for identifying new members.
Ghani and Kumar apply an IML process to greatly assist the work of auditors processing
health insurance claims. In addition to learning to highlight fields of likely interest to support the
auditor, the classification method can also help by grouping similar claims in the processing queue
to reduce inefficiencies of context switching. This later strategy is estimated to reduce time spent
per claim by 27%.
CueT is an IML system that supports network
alarm triage. The system can learn from the actions of operators to suggest alarm groupings.
Kose et al. apply IML to facilitate the process of fraud detection in electronic claims data.
The dynamic nature of the underlying data, and the potentially subtle relations that must be
identified motivate the use of a human-in-the-loop approach. AppGrouper [Chang et al. 2016]
assists in the process of delivering topically coherent application clusters in an online application
store. Users may directly edit clusters and encourage more or fewer clusters to be generated. In
evaluation, the approach was shown to improve the quality of clustering results over algorithmgenerated clusters. AppGrouper highlights the potential value in pairing human judgement with
computational intelligence through a carefully designed interface. Human input is applied only at
the stages where it is most useful.
The assisted processing applications discussed here highlight that certain domains will require
highly specialised interface design. In many cases however, the system level architecture may not
require modification. Similarly, we hypothesise that the interaction and task level strategies that
are effective are likely to remain consistent.
Raw numerical data
In an effort to demonstrate complete data type agnosticism, several studies have applied the IML
process to numerical data that is abstracted from any particular application. There are parallels that
can be drawn between Interactive Machine Learning and the uptake of spreadsheet applications
that placed basic statistical and data representation tools in the hands of non-expert users. Indeed,
Sarkar et al. have even demonstrated the capabilities of BrainCel which adds machine
learning functionality to a typical spreadsheet type interface. The user can select rows as training
data then click a ‘guess’ button to make model predictions based on those rows.
Holzinger et al. incorporate human feedback with an Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO)
framework to solve a traveling salesman problem. Users can select the path joining two cities
and adjust the pheromone levels assigned using a slider. Ware et al. present an interactive
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Inspection
Assignment
Visualization of output
sample(s) to assess
how well desired
concept operates at the
instance level.
Assignment or correction
of labels and/or creation
of new samples to
improve match with
desired concept.
View of overall
model quality and
converage to evaluate
how well concept
is captured.
View of current task
status contexualized by
coverage of training data
and improvement potential
relative to cost.
Fig. 3. Distinct interface elements in the IML process.
tree-based classification application targeted at non-experts. Users create decision branches to build
their own classifiers. Brown et al. present an iterative approach for learning user preferred
distance functions in a multidimensional scaling projection visualisation interface. The user may
drag one or many points within a scatterplot visualisation window then initiate the learning step to
identify a new distance function that better reflects the user’s desired data arrangement. This process
can be performed iteratively, while preserving the user’s interaction history, to incrementally find
the most suitable distance function.
These studies illustrate that data independent IML systems can be developed and effectively used.
This is not to say that abstracting data to a simplified representation is a preferable strategy and in
many cases this approach may be undesirable as it can limit the application of domain expertise.
Nevertheless, what these approaches lose in terms of domain relevance they gain in flexibility.
COMPOSITION OF AN IML INTERFACE
In this section we describe the structural composition of a generalised Interactive Machine Learning
interface. The design of an IML system may, of course, vary considerably depending on the nature
of the data, the intended application of the model, and the user experience desired, as well as many
other factors. Nevertheless, an understanding of the commonality can help inform the establishment
of design principles.
The interface elements presented are based on an identification of the commonality among
the broad range of IML systems reviewed. We are also guided by the requirements and desired
attributes suggested by others. Amershi et al. [2011a] highlight three important aspects of an IML
process that can be thought of as desired attributes of the interface: 1) illustrating the current state
of the learned concept; 2) guiding the user to provide input that improves concept quality; and 3)
providing revision mechanisms that allow the user to explore the model space. Stumpf et al. 
identify three activities relevant to the productive integration of the human user and machine
learning techniques: 1) conveying system reasoning to the user; 2) conveying user reasoning to the
system; and 3) ensuring both system and user profit from this feedback cycle. We split the third
activity identified by Stumpf et al. into inspecting the model and reviewing task progress. The
four key interface elements are then: sample review, feedback assignment, model inspection and
task overview. These four interface elements are summarised in Figure 3. We do not suggest that
these elements are necessarily visually distinct, or indeed necessary in all applications of IML. For
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
example, the sample review and feedback assignment interfaces may often be merged as in Crayons
[Fails and Olsen 2003] and ad hoc implementations contrived for a one-time only custom task may
have limited or no use for the model inspection or task overview interfaces. Rather, these elements
represent distinct functionality that the interface must typically support to deliver a comprehensive
IML workflow. Each of these interface elements are discussed in detail below.
Sample review
The sample review interface is the channel upon which individual or collections of model outputs
are presented for review by the user. Sample instances may be requested manually by the user or
chosen automatically based on model properties. Automatic selection of samples for review does
not negate the principle of the user being in control. Ultimately, it is the user feedback provided
on these samples (whether they are chosen manually or suggested) that will influence subsequent
changes in the model. The literature highlights a challenge in managing the competing objectives
of eliciting the necessary information to enhance the learner while avoiding excessive querying of
the user. Users are unwilling to judge large numbers of test cases and this has been the motivation
behind efforts that select representative and non-redundant samples for review [Ribeiro et al. 2016],
[Groce et al. 2014]. In addition, the human input required, while of potential value to the model,
may not be deemed worthwhile by the user [Amershi et al. 2014]. Wong et al. observe that
labelling data is a tedious exercise and that users may need to invest significant effort before a
change in the learned model is noticeable.
Presenting samples or posing queries to the user such that they promote understanding rather
than distrust is also difficult to achieve. The challenge of appropriately framing input requests is
thus also dependent upon the level of understanding possessed by the user.
The timing of user input requests is also critical as revealed by Losing et al. in their
application of online user-in-the-loop labelling of obstacles encountered by a robot. The study
highlights challenges around capturing training instances when they are relevant to the user versus
the impact this may have on violating independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumptions
in the model.
The most appropriate means of succinctly displaying output samples for review may vary based
both on data and application type. For example, the interface in an inter-image classification system
might show the best and worst samples for a given classification. Alternatively, an intra-image
classification system might show the regions of the image that belong to a given classification.
A guiding principle for the design of the sample review interface is that representations should,
to the extent possible, allow the user to assess the current state of the learned concept. There is a
distinction here between assessing the performance as reflected in a specific sample instance versus
the generalised model performance as a whole. This latter assessment of the model as a whole is
described in Section 4.3. Evaluating concept performance on an individual sample instance may
require the provision of additional information on the reasoning behind the state shown. Kulesza
et al. present an intuitive interface for model debugging involving generated explanations
for the basis of particular predictions that are human readable with accompanying explanatory
plots. For example, the classification of a particular message as being related to the topic ‘hockey’
might be accompanied by the text, “This message has more important words about Hockey than
about Baseball” [Kulesza et al. 2015]. As Lü et al. observe, people want to understand why
specific instances fail. Understanding why the model fails for a given sample may help the user
determine the most appropriate feedback strategy, independent of broader model performance
considerations. This suggests avoiding overly abstract or condensed representations of output
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Feedback assignment
The feedback assignment interface is the channel employed by the user to assign labels, select
features and/or generate new samples. It is this interface that perhaps requires the most careful
design in terms of both the interface elements and the interaction techniques provided. User
interaction at the point of describing a classification or performing a demonstration can take many
forms. Porter et al. make a useful distinction between training vocabulary and training dialog.
Porter et al. suggest that the training vocabulary in IML has expanded from just being labels to
include constraints and structures. Similarly, the training dialog is no longer exclusively a batch
process but can be highly interactive and dynamic. Generally, the preference from the user’s point
of view is for more complete and more specific feedback assignment methods. There is, however, an
inevitable trade off as Hartmann et al. note in terms of balancing the desire for user control
over behaviour versus overwhelming users with machine-centric ‘knobs’.
BrainCel [Sarkar et al. 2015] obtains user input through standard spreadsheet paradigms while
other studies have captured raw gestures inputs [Katan et al. 2015], [Sarasua et al. 2016]. Kim
et al. [2015a] found that users wish to describe high level attributes (such as code structure) that
are difficult to encode as features. Constraining the labelling or demonstration process may have
a filtering effect on the user’s intent which may ultimately be detrimental to user satisfaction
and model quality. Similarly, subjecting users to poorly implemented or confusing interaction
techniques is likely to degrade overall performance.
One difficulty faced in the collection of input from users is the fact that the concept they are
trying to train may shift over time [Kulesza et al. 2014]. This has motivated efforts to improve
the structure and guidance provided around how people are requested for, and supply input.
Rosenthal and Dey investigate what information can be provided to improve quality of
labels (amounts of context, level of context, uncertainty, prediction, and requests for user feedback).
Certain constructions can also make it more engaging for the user and promote higher quality input.
For example, Huang et al. motivate users to fix errors in sentiment analysis of restaurant
reviews by providing current predictions of the categories which their reviews cover.
Shilman et al. introduce five design principles for correction interfaces: 1) minimise
decision points by choosing appropriate operators; 2) design seamless transitions between modes;
3) provide reachability of all states; 4) appropriately scope cascading changes; and 5) promote clear
user models. Shilman et al. also summarise possible correction strategies: n-best selection,
transformation, user-driven hints, and user-driven constraints.
Amershi et al. note that the ability to model a concept is dependent upon the quality of the
data. Various studies have sought novel methods for transforming both explicit and implicit user
input into data for consumption by the learner. The system described in [Amershi et al. 2012] takes
advantage of users skipping instances (contacts in a social network) as an indicator for labelling
negative samples. Javdani et al. seek to make use of user resistance to robot actions under
shared autonomy as a means for identifying undesirable actions. The potential for feature labelling
rather than just instance labelling is also being exploited in IML studies but
does require that the learning algorithm can exploit these identified distinctions among features. In
some applications, however, the features themselves may be too abstract for users to interpret or
exploit effectively [Gillies et al. 2015a].
Model inspection
In addition to review of individual sample instances, a comprehensive IML process will typically
also support some form of inspection at the model level. This summative view of model quality is
referred to here as the model inspection interface. The assessment of model quality is not necessarily
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
limited to prediction accuracy, and may also incorporate other metrics such as coverage and
confidence. Several studies have shown the potential for user interaction with parameters and/or emergent structures as part of the model
inspection interface. GaussBox [Françoise et al. 2016] provides a tangible and interactive tool for
inspecting HMMs trained for gesture recognition.
The quality of predictions is ultimately dependent on the quality of the constructed model.
Various sources of error may affect model quality. Amershi et al. identify three main causes
of model errors: 1) mislabelled data; 2) feature deficiencies; and 3) insufficient data. Mislabelled data
is data the user incorrectly assigned some value. Feature deficiency errors result when the model
does not have sufficient samples of a given feature to make a distinction. Insufficient data errors
result when there are gaps in the data in areas relevant to model prediction. A comprehensive
model inspection interface should thus support the user in identifying such errors to facilitate
debugging and improve model quality.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) and cost curves are commonly used in the machine
learning community to support evaluation of model performance, and have been incorporated
into IML systems. Alternatively, model performance may be assessed in a more involved manner
through targeted testing. Groce et al. suggest three requirements for test methods: algorithmic
agnosticism, sufficiently fast to run in an interactive environment, and able to support effective
detection of failures using comparatively small test suites. However, constructing tests to obtain an
encompassing metric of model quality is not a simple task, especially for end users. Fiebrink et al.
 highlight that evaluating based on training set partitioning may not be meaningful and end
users in IML may be particularly ill suited to choosing a test set that represents anticipated future
Recent work has given more attention to the quality assessment and debugging task in Interactive
Machine Learning. While rapid visual inspection of model performance may be possible in certain
applications, such as with image data, doing so with other data formats (e.g. documents) is more
complicated. This difficulty grows with increasing dataset size. Amershi et al. present
ModelTracker, a concise visual representation of model performance for use in debugging exercises.
The representation allows for the rapid assessment of where labelled samples are correctly or
incorrectly predicted and the relative confidence of that prediction.
The model inspection interface provides user visibility of the global task, i.e. typically minimising
prediction error. This interface allows users to apply strategies that iteratively work towards desired
levels of model quality. We argue later, however, that framing task completion criteria purely in
terms of model quality is undesirable. Focusing an end user on model prediction accuracy alone is
likely to promote overfitting. For this reason, we make a distinction between the model inspection
and task overview interfaces.
Task overview
A self-contained IML system may additionally require information advising the user on task status
and termination conditions. In most experimental IML systems, this interface is not included as the
interaction is managed through other means such as timed exercises or constrained datasets. In
reality, however, there are non-trivial task related decisions that users require guidance on that
may be independent of instantaneous model quality.
Yimam et al. highlight the fact that a text classification system is likely to reach a point
of diminishing returns for user annotations. Ghani and Kumar also argue for a distinction
between system performance and classification accuracy. The task overview interface should
provide visibility of the global objectives, but also contextualise these with other information
relevant to the task such as the target application of the model and the availability of training data.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
For commercial applications of IML in particular, the goal of the exercise is typically to increase
the efficiency of expert users. Investing significant time to improve classification accuracy may not
always correlate well with this goal. The task overview interface should help guide the machine
learning-naïve user in making these task-level assessments.
A GENERALISED WORKFLOW FOR A COMPREHENSIVE IML PROCESS
The previous section presents a structural breakdown of a generalised IML interface. Here we
present a discussion of the task related behaviours associated with a generalised Interactive Machine
Learning workflow. The workflow proposed by Fails and Olsen attaches a feedback loop
to the training stage of the algorithm. In this workflow, the user interprets the feedback provided
then applies a correction. This workflow model is satisfactory if one constrains the scope of an
IML system to just the training stage, but has its limitations if one is interested in developing a
comprehensive IML process. Aodha et al. propose a 15 step ‘data understanding pipeline’
motivated by supporting scientists in capitalising on advances in machine learning. This pipeline
begins with ‘hypothesis formation’ and ends with ‘publicizing of results’ and provides a thorough
breakdown of the intermediary tasks. The 15 step pipeline offered by Aodha et al. is comprehensive
and informative but includes steps that occur both before and after the actual interaction with an
IML application. It is thus, not particularly well aligned to the key interaction stages of the IML
process that have distinct interface requirements. Girardi et al. presents a process model
for domain-expert-in-the-loop knowledge discovery in biomedical research which removes the
understanding the domain and understanding the data from the generic knowledge discovery
process model. It includes six stages: 1) data modelling; 2) data acquisition; 3) data validation; 4)
data preparation; 5) data analysis; and 6) evaluation. This process model highlights the key stages
relevant to the knowledge discovery domain but does not adequately capture the interactive nature
We propose a generalised workflow that extends upon the model of Fails and Olsen but
is more concise than Aodha et al.’s ‘pipeline’. We take some inspiration from Chang et al. ,
who make a distinction between the types of user input captured at the early (initialising the
algorithm), mid (steering the algorithm) and late (cluster editing) stages of the process. The six
workflow activities we propose are: 1) feature selection; 2) model selection; 3) model steering; 4)
quality assessment; 5) termination assessment; and 6) transfer. This workflow is intended to serve
as a useful reference for designers as they consider the task transitions and distinct interactions
relevant to interface design for IML. It is formulated to be closely aligned with the key interaction
stages and to be interpreted in combination with the structural breakdown of the IML interface
presented in Section 4. This workflow is illustrated in Figure 4.
The model steering task is the core activity and where the user is likely to spend the majority of
their time. The sub-tasks that occur inside this activity are essentially those described in Figure 1.
The majority of studies in IML focus on this task alone, eliminating the need to examine the outer
activities by appropriately initialising the system and constraining the scope of the experimental
task. Indeed, certain application types may render some of these outer activities unnecessary. The
workflow activities are not necessarily undertaken in a serial or ordered fashion. For example,
model or feature selection may typically occur early in the process though not necessarily. Similarly,
quality and termination assessment may typically occur only after several cycles of model steering
have been completed. The transfer activity, however, will only occur upon completion of all previous
activities. We discuss each of the workflow activities in the remainder of this section.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
Assessment
Termination
Assessment
Review of samples to
select features for
inclusion in the training
Iterative process of review,
correction and creation of
training samples to steer
model towards desired
Review of overall
model quality to
identify areas of
Review of current
task status relative
to time, cost and
relevant completion
Configuration of model
parameters, selection of
alternative or combined
Packaging for and
deployment in
target application.
Fig. 4. The IML workflow as a behavioural breakdown into distinct user activities. The model steering activity
is the iterative feedback-and-review cycle most commonly associated with the pure IML process. The user may
initialise or reconfigure the process by engaging in model selection and feature selection. Quality assessment
and termination assessment are depicted beside the main loop rather than within it. The intent here is to
highlight that model steering is the primary activity but that this loop may be suspended temporarily, at any
time, to undertake quality assessment and termination assessment. Upon successfully training the model to
represent their desired concept, the user engages in transfer to deploy the developed model into the target
application.
Feature selection
Fails and Olsen suggest that the need for explicit feature selection can be removed thanks to
the IML process by incorporating a very large number of features and allowing the classifier to
indirectly perform the filtering. While the feature selection activity may indeed be unnecessary in
many applications where an appropriate repository of features exist, a more generalised workflow
model for IML benefits from its inclusion.
Allowing users to select features has been found to deliver both efficiency [Raghavan et al. 2006]
and quality [Brooks et al. 2015] gains. Patel et al. suggest there is value in integrating data
collection and feature creation tools. Kim et al. [2015a] observe a desire among users to introduce
higher level features (such as code structure). The fact that human curated features are, by nature,
more interpretable [Brooks et al. 2015] may also serve to improve user understanding in other
activities in the process.
For other reasons too, the features themselves may be more relevant to users than the classification
they produce [Calderon et al. 2015]. For example, rather than identifying how sentiment towards
an administration is clustered, it may be more important to explore where and for what reasons
this sentiment occurs.
Recent research has given more focus to the potential for human involvement in feature selection
and construction. With Flock, Cheng and Bernstein show the potential for crowdsourcing to
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
facilitate novel feature generation. Aggregating crowd features achieved better performance than
just asking the crowd for a prediction or using a standard set of typical machine learning features.
The Flock interface prompts users to think of discriminatory features by presenting contrasting
samples. FeatureInsight [Brooks et al. 2015] is a tool that enables feature selection in website
classification. Users are prompted to consider new dictionary features by being shown misclassified
documents.
The studies discussed above suggest that end users are capable of, and indeed enjoy, identifying
useful features for incorporation in the training process. Designing the IML system and interface
to accommodate the feature selection activity may thus be desirable, though not always practical.
Certain data types and applications are better suited to end user feature selection than others.
Model selection
Studies in IML typically demonstrate the procedure using a machine learning technique specifically
chosen by the authors for its applicability to the target data. This approach is entirely reasonable
for application areas where the data and feature structures are known a priori or can be determined.
However, in instances where an IML process is sought but the ideal machine learning technique is
undetermined, it may be useful to allow the user to make this selection or perform a comparative
evaluation. Furthermore, if one credits the proposition that an ideal IML system be agnostic to the
underlying model and algorithm then there is value in considering model selection as an activity
the user may perform.
The combination of multiple models through ensemble methods has also proven an effective
strategy for the machine learning community. EnsembleMatrix [Talbot et al. 2009] demonstrates
an interface that allows users to create combinations of classifiers trained on different features.
It is not unreasonable to expect the user to weigh up the potential benefits and disadvantages of
different models provided these can be concisely expressed for a given domain.
The selection of the most appropriate model (or their parameters) may also be influenced by
the target application. For example, Fiebrink et al. comment in the context of gesture based
music generation that the shape and smoothness of the decision boundaries may be more important
to the user than their specific location.
It is perhaps overly optimistic to imagine an IML architecture in which the underlying learning
techniques are completely modular and easily changed. Nevertheless, supporting the model selection
activity by allowing the model to be configured by the user, even to a limited extent, can help to
reduce the burden on machine learning practitioners. If the user can experiment with multiple
different machine learning techniques within the same IML application, then the user can develop
their own, albeit potentially naïve, sense of the relative advantages and disadvantages without the
involvement of a practitioner.
Model steering
The model steering activity is the stage in the workflow where most user effort is expended and with
which the concept of IML is most traditionally associated. The majority of user focused research in
IML examines this particular activity. While engaged in the steering task, the user is seeking to train
the model to understand a given concept by iteratively refining the training data. This interaction
will typically involve some combination of correcting existing erroneous samples, assigning labels
to new samples or generating completely new samples. The emphasis, however, is generally on
providing just enough feedback per iteration to push the model in the right direction. Fails and
Olsen hypothesise that “having a very fast training algorithm is more important than strong
induction”. This is based on the assumption that users will apply an iterative strategy that will
eventually deliver the necessary predictive power.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
Fogarty et al. observe that users first focus on getting their classifier working and then
seek to improve robustness by introducing more corner cases to the training. This is comparable to
the approach followed by teachers in terms of first introducing the basic concept and then later
exploring the extensions of this concept. Porter et al. refers to the exchange between the
model and user that occurs during the model steering activity as the training dialog. The richness
and flexibility of this dialog is directly influenced by the design of the interface and the interaction
methods available. The Gesture Script application [Lü et al. 2014] provides an excellent example of
a compelling and engaging dialog that shows how user intelligence can be applied to more than
just assigning or correcting labels. In addition to improving gesture recognition performance by
providing new samples, Gesture Script allows users to create rendering scripts that describe the
underlying structure of a gesture. For example, the user can specify that an arrow is composed
of a line and a tringle-shaped head. This approach supports the synthesis of new gesture samples
that help to introduce more variation and thus greater discriminative power. The model steering
activity in Gesture Script thus incorporates multiple sub-tasks with which the user can engage and
provide input where the greatest benefit is anticipated.
While the model steering activity is normally assumed to be iterative, Kleinsmith and Gillies
 found that users will not necessarily follow an iterative strategy. A portion of the participants
in Kleinsmith and Gillies’ study performed only one or two iterations in training their character
behaviour model, and preferred to expend their effort in carefully labelling samples. This observation
highlights the fact that users may require high-level guidance on the strategy they should apply
in the task of model steering (e.g. follow an iterative approach), and indeed, it is unreasonable
to expect non-expert users to know what strategy is most appropriate. As Kleinsmith and Gillies
suggest, the interface should promote this strategy through the interaction techniques available
and the visual feedback presented.
Unfortunately users also suffer from inconsistency and boredom and this can result in changes in
their task behaviour over time. Unavoidably, the user’s perception of a concept may drift over the
duration of a task. For example, what the user might consider to be a ‘scenic’ image or a ‘local news’
article can evolve as they are exposed to more samples. Similarly, the level of expressiveness that a
user invests in the first articulation of a gesture may be radically different from their hundredth
articulation. Structured Labeling [Kulesza et al. 2014] is an attempt to address concept drift during
the training process. Kulesza et al. found that people labelling the same websites in two different
sessions separated by four weeks were only 81% consistent. Providing more structure to the labelling
task produced more consistent labelling. Cakmak and Thomaz demonstrate that automatic
or heuristic based teaching guidance can also improve the efficiency and quality of user feedback.
In Cakmak and Thomaz’s study, text-based instructions were presented to help guide the user
in selecting positive and negative samples when training their model. In applications where an
optimal training strategy can be described, these instructions can be generated algorithmically
and in response to the model state. However, even heuristic based teaching guidance was shown
to improve user performance. For example, in the experimental application of teaching a facial
expression recogniser, a heuristic for teaching an angry face might be, “When you show examples of
Angry face vary them as much as possible” [Cakmak and Thomaz 2014]. This finding suggests that
appropriate framing of the task and even relatively simple guidance in the interface can positively
influence user performance and model quality.
Tsandilas et al. introduce the concept of ‘semi-structured delayed interpretation’ of
gestures. This approach encourages gestural annotations without having to specify their meaning.
This preserves freedom of expression at gesturing time, but still allows semantic meaning to be
attached later. This approach may be very useful in situations where users experience concept drift
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
by only requiring formal specification of meaning once the concept has solidified in the user’s
Ambiguity in subjective or interpreted concepts can also be problematic. Curran et al. 
observe that inter-user variation can be high when annotators are associating subjective attributes
with images. Sarkar et al. achieve more consistent labelling by constructing the feedback
task as a set-wise comparison.
The model steering activity is the stage in the IML process at which most user effort and time is
likely to be spent. Improving the speed and concept growth at each iteration step is thus likely to
have the greatest impact on the overall efficiency and usability of the process.
Quality assessment
The Interactive Machine Learning process can be alternatively viewed as a user-driven error
minimisation loop placed around the model. The user seeks to train the model to some level of
acceptable accuracy. The quality assessment task represents the activity of evaluating the trained
system performance. Early in the process, the user may not execute this activity based on the
assumption that the concept is unlikely to have been sufficiently captured. Indeed, the feedback
provided in the sample review interface provides a proxy for system accuracy at this early stage.
After sufficient training, the user may periodically check the model quality and compare this against
some desired or pre-established threshold.
Amershi et al. [2011a] demonstrate visualisation of the current model accuracy as an interface
element present during the standard model steering task. Amershi et al. suggest that this visualisation, coupled with an ability to undo actions, allows users to experiment with different strategies
and evaluate their impact on accuracy. The quality assessment task may be interactive such as in
the method proposed by Kapoor et al. . ManiMatrix [Kapoor et al. 2010] provides a method
for visualising and controlling classification behaviour. The user can directly interact with the
confusion matrix and express preferred classification behaviour. Kapoor et al. suggest that this
approach is superior to manual tuning of numerical parameters in terms of both speed and quality.
There is, however, a risk that users may focus too much on the quality assessment activity.
Fiebrink et al. observe that users can inadvertently fall into a workflow that focuses on
optimising cross-validation accuracy as an end in itself, rather than just using it as feedback to help
refine their broader strategy. Supporting users in selecting the appropriate strategy and avoiding
overfitting in the model requires careful framing of the quality assessment activity.
Termination assessment
Limited attention has been given to the task of determining when to terminate the IML process.
While the system may provide advice on termination conditions, it seems most fitting that the user
ultimately decides when to end the process. This suggests inclusion of the termination assessment
activity within the generic workflow.
There is potentially some overlap between termination and quality assessment activities. Certainly, in some cases the termination criteria may be entirely based on accuracy targets. However,
Amershi et al. [2011a] observe that there is typically a degree of model decay between when
peak performance is achieved and when users choose to stop. Supporting the identification of this
inflection point may deliver improved performance in a comprehensive IML process.
There may, however, be alternative conditions for ending the process such as: further labelling
will deliver negligible gain, there is already sufficient confidence in the particular classifications of
value, and there is an increasing risk of overfitting. Sanchez-Cortina et al. describe a unique
approach to allowing for dynamic adjustment of the user’s workload by changing the acceptable
word error rate in speech-to-text transcription. This approach allows the user to find an acceptable
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
balance between supervision effort and recognition error. While allowing the user to configure
an acceptable word error rate does not in itself set a termination condition per se, it does offer an
interactive tool for exploration of whether further effort will yield worthwhile benefit.
Determining when to stop training under the IML process requires considerable judgment. The
user’s decision can, however, be informed by improved contextualisation of the various objectives
and constraints relevant to the given application.
The activity of deploying the trained model in the target domain is described here as transfer. In
certain applications, this task may be as trivial as pointing to a test dataset. In other applications,
however, the transfer of model functionality into practical use may be considerably more complicated. While the IML workflow should endeavour to achieve good generalisability from the
outset, this activity recognises the fact that tools are often applied in ways that cannot be predicted
at design time. Packaging the model for end use and ensuring that it generalises is important to
actually delivering an application that is useful.
Importantly, some applications such as abstrackr [Wallace et al. 2012] and the assisted claims
processing system of [Ghani and Kumar 2011] make no real distinction between training and
deployment. The model learns and becomes more helpful as its predictive power increases. Nevertheless, it is useful to consider how one might subsequently transfer such developed models to
the next context. This is indeed what Šavelka et al. explored in their reuse of their statute
classifier trained in one jurisdiction in another jurisdiction. Talbot et al. observed that a
model trained by a participant which achieved the highest-accuracy on the training set did not
generalise well to the test set due to overfitting. Arguably the transfer activity should be supported
by tools that aid in identifying and correcting such situations.
The IML system demonstrated by Ghani and Kumar highlights the fact that deployment
considerations can have significant effects on the efficiency of the process. For example, in the
claims processing system, auditors were presented the next case based on similarity rather than
confidence. This decision delivered a performance improvement by reducing the time lost to context
switching.
The transfer activity has received limited attention in the literature on IML but should be
recognised as a necessary stage in a comprehensive IML process. At the same time, it is important
to note that not all applications require a transfer activity. Several of the applications reviewed
in Section 3 do not involve an end-point or target dataset, but rather focus on the process itself.
Nevertheless, it is useful to consider the end use of trained models where appropriate and the
implications this may have on the design of the interface.
EMERGENT SOLUTION PRINCIPLES
While the value of placing machine learning functionality in the hands of non-experts is gaining
recognition, and emerging applications are enhancing user capability, there has been limited
attention given to the generalised user interface design principles for such systems. This section
seeks to consolidate observations from user studies in IML, and synthesise these with relevant
recognised HCI theory to establish some basic solution principles for interface design in IML. The
solution principles are intended to serve as guidance to interface designers tasked with constructing
effective interfaces for IML systems.
The specific interpretation and relative importance of the solution principles are likely to vary
depending upon the level of involvement expected of the user and on the complexity of the required
functionality. Compare, for example, a user seeking to instruct a content suggestion service to
obtain better recommendations, versus a user seeking to train a robot to perform some function in
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
response to a given input. This across-application variability frustrates efforts to obtain concise
and generalisable solution principles. Nevertheless, it is perhaps useful to view interactions of this
type as being a kind of pseudo-programming task. This level of abstraction provides a useful frame
for identifying the commonality.
We propose six key solution principles for the design of the IML interface:
(1) Make task goals and constraints explicit
(2) Support user understanding of model uncertainty and confidence
(3) Capture intent rather than input
(4) Provide effective data representations
(5) Exploit interactivity and promote rich interactions
(6) Engage the user
These principles cover multiple aspects across the different activities performed in the IML
workflow. They also have specific implications for the interface components described in Section 4.
Each is discussed in detail in the remainder of this section.
Make task goals and constraints explicit
Establishing clear task goals is an important part of Interactive Machine Learning for non-experts
given that the process is largely user driven. Similarly important is an understanding of what is
not possible, i.e. the constraints in the process. The iterative model refinement paradigm implies
that users work in pursuit of some desired goal state. For users to construct effective strategies in
pursuit of this goal state, it is necessary that they understand their task and its constraints.
This solution principle is largely a response to two of the key challenges for IML introduced
in Section 1: users can be imprecise and inconsistent, and training is open ended. In terms of the
first challenge, constructing explicit task goals and constraints can aid in focusing user efforts and
improving consistency. Many recommender systems exploit user input for dual purposes, i.e. a like
provides a signal of interest to a social group but may also inform predicted recommendations.
While dual-purpose input with unclear objectives may be suitable for recommender system, we
hypothesise that being explicit when requesting user input, whether singular, or multi-purpose, is
preferable. It stands to reason that when asking a user to serve as a component in a closed feedback
loop, understanding the information presented and actions required is paramount. However, too
much information can also be confusing and detrimental to performance.
If user effort and attention is considered as a resource with limited supply then it is sensible
to ensure that all expended effort is in pursuit of the goal state. However, this goal state must
be clearly defined. For example, Amershi et al. [2011a] observed that when a model reliability
metric plot was introduced to the CueFlik interface to provide feedback on quality, users began to
focus on maximising this quantity as their primary objective. Careful framing of the task goals and
awareness of the interface features that may promote or hinder this understanding is required. The
literature has explored and discussed the role that model and prediction explanations may have on
the understanding and mental models of users but there has
been less attention given to the effect that prior framing of the task may have on users. It is not
unreasonable to hypothesise that supporting user perception of the global task and constraints
may improve their ability to select model refinement actions although this should be investigated.
The second challenge revisited above (i.e. the fact that training is open ended) can also be
mitigated in part through improved user understanding of goals and constraints. Interaction with
machine learning models differs from more conventional computer interactions in that the user
may have limited direct control over the behaviour exhibited. A key limitation of machine learning
is that false positives/negatives produced are typically difficult to eradicate. For example, a user
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
may identify a suggested movie as being completely outside their category of interest despite it
possessing many attributes consistent with other favoured content. Amershi et al. note that,
“this problem occurs in all machine learning systems when the hypothesis language is insufficiently
expressive to model the true concept”. In other cases, numerous user actions may be required
before the learning model reflects a desired change [Wong et al. 2011]. An application that does
not respond in a timely manner to user input is in violation of the principles of direct manipulation
and is a potential cause of significant frustration. The degree to which a user understands their
limitations in addressing such model failings may have a significant impact on their satisfaction
with the interface and the refinement actions with which they proceed.
Without user understanding of the limitations of machine learning techniques, the process also
exposes the potential risk of overfitting. Overfitting is the construction of a model that, although
it matches to the data available, does not truly represent the phenomenon. Avoiding overfitting
while supporting continued model refinement poses a unique challenge for supporting non-expert
interaction. Expert machine learning practitioners are aware of this risk but naïve users may be
prone to over-specification. The interactive tree-based classifier demonstrated in [Ware et al. 2001]
framed the task goal in a very clear and intuitive form but lead to some users expending significant
effort to maximise classification accuracy with little real gain.
The user may in many cases not require an understanding of the global objective they are
working towards provided they understand their role in the immediate interaction task. It is unclear
what impact understanding the global task may have on user performance, however, we would
argue it is essential to effective performance in the termination assessment and transfer activities.
Support user understanding of model uncertainty and confidence
Uncertainty is an inevitable feature of data driven models in most real world applications. Correspondingly, the concepts of uncertainty and confidence cannot be removed from the IML process.
This solution principle seeks to address the fact that interacting with a model is not like interacting
with a conventional information structure (one of the key challenges highlighted in Section 1). Both
the task of steering the model as well as the ultimate application of the model to a target dataset
involve uncertainty. It is important that users are aware of this uncertainty for two reasons: 1) to
manage their expectations during interaction; and 2) to manage their expectations of final system
performance.
The concept of a probabilistic model and its limitations can be difficult to convey to non-experts
and so many applications of IML are likely to rely on simplified explanations. Users without
experience in machine learning are unlikely to comprehend the implications of working with a
probabilistic model. User studies have found that even a single outlier in a classifier can result in
significant confusion for users [Kim et al. 2015a]. Users will calibrate their trust in the model both
through individual predictions as well as the performance of the model as a whole [Ribeiro et al.
2016]. Furthermore, IML is a co-adaptive process in that both the user and model will respond to
the behaviour of the other [Gillies et al. 2016]. Establishing the right level of understanding among
users and framing the task appropriately is critical and non-trivial.
Non-experts unfamiliar with the internal behaviours of a computer program will construct their
own mental model to aid their formulation of interaction strategies. This model will be derived in
part from their past experience and knowledge. While the mental model constructed does not have
to be accurate, a poor model may have a highly detrimental effect on user performance and thus,
their perception of the effectiveness of the program [Norman 2014]. It is perhaps useful to make the
distinction between functional models that allow one to use a system versus structural models that
allow one to comprehend how and why it works. Gillies et al. [2015a] argue that users should be
aided in their construction of conceptual models in order to enhance their debugging capabilities. As
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Fogarty et al. observe, evolution of the predictive model can result in seemingly unpredictable
behaviour from the user’s perspective. Kulesza et al. investigate the impact that different
explanations have on the fidelity of the mental models constructed by end-users. The results indicate
that more detailed explanations about intelligent agents are useful if added understanding can
be leveraged by the user to improve outcomes. Sarkar proposes to exploit metamodels for
confidence (is an output correct?), command (is the understanding complete?), and complexity
(how simple was it to arrive at the output?) to augment machine learning models. Such metamodels
would capture the information that is more intuitive and relevant for communication to end-users
to support their understanding.
A number of strategies have been explored as a means to simplify the interpretation of model
behaviour. ManiMatrix [Kapoor et al. 2010] allows users to interact directly with the classifier’s
confusion matrix and thereby steer classification behaviour. Ribeiro et al. present explanations
that are locally faithful representations of considerably more complex models. This approach
supports interpretation while hiding the potentially confusing complexity underneath. Vidulin
et al. , referencing constructivist learning theory, propose constraining the construction of
decision trees to only represent relationships that are credible to the user. The use of exemplars to
support understanding of classes appears to be a promising solution that resonates with users [Kim
et al. 2015a]. As a summative view of model quality, presenting best and worst matching samples
has been shown to support more efficient model evaluation than ranking of the n best [Fogarty
et al. 2008]. ReGroup, the social network group creation tool introduced in [Amershi et al. 2012],
presents filters that were generated based on features in the model. Participants noted that these
filters provided insight on the patterns that were being exploited by the model, and thus served the
dual purpose of explaining the model as well as their intended function as an interaction element.
Uncertainty can be difficult to represent succinctly in a user interface. Sarkar et al. 
demonstrated the potential for colouration to represent confidence within their BrainCel application,
however, representing confidence through colouration in a speech recognition application [Vertanen
and Kristensson 2008] did not yield an improvement in user performance. Within the field of
information visualisation, the representation of uncertainty is a key area of investigation. In general,
the objective of uncertainty visualisation is to provide representations that aid data analysis and
decisions making [Pang et al. 1997]. It can be useful to distinguish between different forms of
uncertainty. Pang et al. describe three types of uncertainty: statistical (distribution of the
data), error (delta compared to datum) and range (interval of possible values).
Within the machine learning community there is also keen interest in representing model quality
in ways that support human understanding. The technique known as t-Distributed Stochastic
Neighbour Embedding (t-SNE) enables the visual representation of clustering models [Van der
Maaten and Hinton 2008]. Such representations are easily queried and support non-expert reasoning
on the level of confidence in the underlying model. Micallef et al. present an investigation of
explanatory methods for supporting Bayesian reasoning. The observations of this study reveal the
difficulty of the design problem in that text without numbers paired with visual aids yielded higher
performance than text with numbers and visuals.
The literature suggests that there is likely to be a close relationship between user tolerance of
error and the level of clarity in system uncertainty [Sacha et al. 2016]. The degree of error a user
will tolerate in an application is task specific . If the user understands that they are in part responsible for an erroneous output,
then they may be more forgiving in their perception of the system. Users will calibrate their trust
of a system based on an understanding of the system properties. Muir and Moray argue that
behaviours must be observable for trust to grow.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
Making informed predictions represents a key challenge for Interactive Machine Learning. This is
in contrast to more traditional programming tasks where systems are predictable and repeatable by
nature. The uncertainty in the model is of fundamental interest to expert practitioners of machine
learning. However, effectively interpreting model accuracy can be very difficult and a learnt skill in
Capture intent rather than input
Careful design of the interface may help to extract user intent from potentially noisy input actions.
This solution principle is a response to the challenge raised in Section 1 that there is uncertainty
in the relationship between user intent and user input. Reducing this uncertainty is obviously an
objective in HCI more generally, but the specifics of IML mean that confusion about user input is
particularly detrimental to the process of training a model.
Fogarty et al. note that it is impossible for an algorithm to distinguish between what the
user deems highly-relevant samples versus what are perhaps only minor inconsistencies. CueFlik
[Fogarty et al. 2008] helped mitigate this issue by displaying only the best and worst matches so
that less certain training samples were typically out of view. The user is therefore guided towards
focusing on samples that are definitely ‘good’ or definitely ‘bad’.
The study performed by Amershi et al. provides a number of potentially useful insights
related to interactivity in terms of explicit and implicit user input. The Interactive Machine Learning
application developed for building custom social networks exploits both explicit and implicit user
action. For example, a user skipping past contacts is used as an indicator that these contacts should
be labelled as negative samples. Ritter and Basu applies similar assumptions to extract
implied user intent from cursor pass over behaviour in a file selection IML application. Self et al.
 present an informative study of how careful interaction design can assist in making better
inferences about user intent from user actions. For example, Self et al. demonstrate how adding
a circular selection tool when dragging a data point primes users to think about and select other
points with which that point should be clustered.
As Porter et al. observes, “users are quite good at finding creative ways to use a small
set of (inadequate) tools to reach their objectives, and so computers must learn to exploit a more
unstructured dialog”. In other words, in circumstances where the user cannot explicitly express
their intent, they may still be able to achieve their goal by exploiting a sequence of actions. An
example of this is Gesture Script [Lü et al. 2014], which allows users to synthesise gesture samples
by drawing sub-segments and then programmatically describing how they combine together to
form a complete gesture. To accommodate the ‘creative’ ways the user may come to steer the
process, the interface designer should thus consider avoiding overly constrained functionality or
workflows.
Provide efficient data representations
An effective IML interface will enhance user perception or at least make best use of human
perception capabilities. The sub-task of reviewing sample outputs within the model steering
activity in the IML process is largely a comprehension task. Improving the speed and quality of this
operation has high impact given the iterative nature of the model steering activity. The adaptive
interaction framework [Payne and Howes 2013] further suggests that the strategy employed by
a user will be dictated by their experience, their task level goals, and their ability to process
information relevant to the task. From a user interaction perspective then, this third factor suggests
a potential lever in terms of amplifying the cognitive ability of the user that might be activated to
improve performance and hence model quality.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
Extracting information from small or simple datasets is typically achievable with standard analytic
techniques. Machine learning comes into its own when the complexity and size of the target data
would frustrate more established approaches. Consequently, end-user interaction with machine
learning must also provide ways for viewing and interacting with voluminous, multi-dimensional
and multi-modal data. Some interfaces support rapid understanding of model outputs such as the
visualisation of image regions associated with different classification predictions [Ribeiro et al.
2016]. Text classification applications may highlight words or n-grams to help the user perceive
what features are being exploited by the model [Wallace et al. 2012]. The general design objective
would appear to be to maximise user perception of the features relevant to understanding the
function of the model and any of its deficiencies, so that appropriate refinement actions can then
be selected.
Interfaces designed to support interaction with complex data will typically aim to present a
simplification of the data (e.g. clustered, hierarchically organised, subset, etc.) and/or amplify the
user’s cognitive ability (e.g. highlight relevant regions, support interaction, provide useful tools, etc.).
Visualising multidimensional data in a sensible manner can be extremely difficult and the preferred
representations may be highly data specific. This complicates efforts to generalise design principles
for representation techniques in end-user applications. Parallel coordinates is one technique for
transforming high-dimensional data into a representation with reduced dimensionality. However,
collapsing dimensions typically degrades the visual information available and prevents more subtle
patterns from being perceived. The presentation of multidimensional data may also introduce
new obstacles to user cognition such as disorientation and occlusion. Researchers in information
visualisation seek to enhance user cognition by making patterns, trends, relationships, outliers and
other correlations more immediately observable [Card et al. 1999]. Interfaces for Interactive Machine
Learning must also exploit these techniques. Stolper et al. offers four design guidelines for
dynamic visualisations in progressive analysis: 1) avoid distractions due to excessive view changes;
2) highlight where new results have appeared; 3) provide a refresh capability to add new results;
and 4) allow users to designate regions of interest and parts of the problem space to ignore.
Exploit interactivity and promote rich interactions
The user’s interactions during the IML process are what drive model development. The model
development process can thus be made more efficient by enabling users to fully express their intent
and apply their insight. This solution principle suggests that the IML interface should be maximally
interactive and should exploit rich forms of interaction where possible, for example direct sketching
on images, constructing explanations, and editing of samples.
Interaction for understanding. Supporting user interaction with machine learning algorithms and complex datasets introduces new dimensions to the typical user interface design task.
The interaction with a model rather than a distinct object makes it difficult to apply many of the
user interface design principles that are known to be effective. The principles of direct manipulation proposed by Shneiderman are well recognised among interface designers. However,
the nature of the task of building and interacting with a machine learning model may prohibit
application of such heuristics, especially for non-expert users. In response, it is necessary to foster
the construction of appropriate mental models among users that help frame this non-traditional interaction experience. Shneiderman presents a type by task taxonomy (TTT) which describes
seven basic tasks performed by users on seven data types. The framework provides guidance on
what features either help or hinder in performing different tasks on different forms of data. As an
example, the application of filters to remove uninteresting data from view must be rapidly reflected
in the display. However, as studies in IML have shown, it may take many user actions before an
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
effect in the model is observable [Wong et al. 2011]. Horvitz sought to bridge the principles
of direct manipulation and enhanced computer autonomy through what he termed mixed-initiative
interfaces. Horvitz identified twelve critical factors in ensuring effective collaboration with intelligent services. Importantly, Horvitz cautions against patching poor interface design by overusing
machine intelligence and highlights the requirement to consider the design of both components in
combination.
Interactivity may also be important at the point of understanding the sample data or inspection
of whole datasets involved in the IML process. It is widely observed that interaction supports
understanding and so interactive data exploration tools
are likely to be of value. This is particularly true for multidimensional or very large datasets that
are difficult to visualise in a single view. Carpendale provides a summary of different tasks
relevant to information visualisation and makes a distinction between low-level, detail-oriented
tasks such as associating, ranking, clustering versus high-level, cognitive tasks such as identifying
trends, causal relationships, and understanding uncertainty. Various data characteristics may
frustrate simplistic approaches to visualisation, for instance data properties such as non-linearity,
holoarchy, and internal causality.
Inevitably there will be a coupling between the data type and the most suitable representation
and interaction methods. A unique aspect of the model training task is the potential overlap in the
sample review and feedback assignment interfaces. Creating a meaningful and productive interface
that serves these dual functions requires careful design.
Make the most of the user. The ability to reverse actions appears to be a highly valued
interaction feature in IML. This observation is consistent with the ‘user control and freedom’
usability heuristic proposed by Nielsen . In constructing and refining a model, users require
the ability to retrace steps in the event that recent actions have resulted in an undesired outcome
 . Related to the ability to ‘undo’ is
the provision of a visualisation of the history of model quality. Amershi et al. demonstrated
that visualisation of model improvement or degradation is useful in guiding the non-expert user’s
efforts to refine the model.
Another interesting aspect of end-user interaction with machine learning is perception of
relevance. Users want to feel like they are contributing value and that their inputs are utilised. A
number of IML interfaces have attempted to address this issue by allowing users to label features
rather than instances, such as allowing users to select words considered representative of a document
class rather than just assigning documents to categories. This approach better exploits human
insight and appears to promote user engagement. Sun and DeJong present an augmentation
of a Support Vector Machine (SVM) that can incorporate domain knowledge to improve SVM
learning. The study does not apply domain knowledge directly extracted from domain experts but
does provide a suitable framework. The difficulty lies in elucidating that domain knowledge and
transforming it into a format that is useful to the learner.
Users do not enjoy being repeatedly asked ‘yes or no’ questions and so frustration and interruptability needs to be carefully managed. Cakmak et al. highlight that an ignorant learner asking
many questions can be perceived as annoying. To reduce user annoyance, there are a number of
potential strategies for minimising the frequency of interaction requests or minimising the impact
of individual interruptions. For example, it may be possible to reduce the frequency of interaction
requests by ensuring only questions of high relevance are posed to the user.
A novel approach suggested by Wallace et al. , in seeking to exploit the knowledge and
experience of domain experts, is to allocate classification labelling to different users depending
on the confidence of the learner. The probabilistic measures generated for a particular instance
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
may be useful in deciding whether to present that instance for review by a highly experienced user
versus a less experienced user.
The importance of interactivity in IML is further emphasised by the fact that many applications
in IML may only be feasibly evaluated by the end-users themselves [Groce et al. 2014]. A user
training a learner for a specific task must be provided with the tools to understand how well it
performs. No external methods or testing can be applied to evaluate their specific use case on their
specific dataset.
The execution speed of the learning algorithm may also have implications for interactivity. Fails
and Olsen hypothesise that fast algorithms are more important than inductive power. Versino
and Lombardi express this attribute in another way as the need to ensure computation time
at each iteration stays within human acceptable levels. These observations are consistent with
the direct manipulation concept of, “rapid incremental reversible operations whose impact on the
object of interest is immediately visible” [Shneiderman 1982]. However, certain machine learning
techniques applied on large volumes of data may unavoidably have very large execution times.
Careful design of the interface can help to mitigate the imposition on interactivity under these
circumstances.
Engage the user
An effective system will engage the user in the task being performed so that they are motivated
to achieve the desired outcomes of the IML application. This engagement, however, should not
come at the expense of excessive mental load. Early et al. suggest that presenting partial
predictions can keep users engaged by encouraging them to actively improve prediction quality.
Such feedback, even though incomplete, can be helpful in reminding the user that they are a critical
component in the process and that their activities are having an effect.
Porter et al. suggest a distinction between users of IML operating in domains where they
must be enticed for feedback versus applications such as those in science, engineering, health and
defense in which users will be inherently motivated to train a high quality model. In the latter
case, users may seek to employ highly sophisticated strategies whereas in the former case, the
objective may be to minimise imposition on the user. Although dependent upon the application,
users typically do not enjoy performing trivial labelling tasks or responding to repeated yes/no
type questions [Cakmak et al. 2010] and do seek to provide insight where it exists [Kim et al. 2015a].
Nevertheless, users exhibit bounded rationality and will satisfice based on perceived gains versus
effort [Pirolli and Card 1995]. Promoting engagement may increase the time users are willing to
invest in the refinement process with corresponding benefits in trained model quality.
Reducing the effort to both interpret outputs (see Section 6.4) and express feedback (see Section
6.5) may enhance user engagement. Summative views such as those typical in image focussed
IML systems are likely far more engaging than the comparable view in a textual data IML system.
Similarly the level of interactivity supported in the task may also serve to promote user engagement.
Interfaces such as those introduced in [Katan et al. 2015] and [Sarasua et al. 2016] allow users to
generate and demonstrate samples through physical activity.
Providing intuitive representations of progress in training a classifier, such as ModelTracker
[Amershi et al. 2015], are another potential way to allow users to engage in the task. Huang et al.
 found that users who could visualise the current predictions related to their restaurant
reviews were motivated to fix any issues.
OPEN RESEARCH PROBLEMS
There are emerging areas of investigation in Interactive Machine Learning that promise many
new and powerful applications. Many other valuable avenues of research also require attention
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
from a user interaction perspective. The following research strands are proposed based on the gaps
identified in the literature and also gaps identified through the consolidation and synthesis process
applied in preparing this article.
Priming and guiding the user
The role of the user’s mental model in the IML process has received some recent attention as has the potential for improved task guidance during training
 . These studies show that relatively simple
strategies can be applied to improve user consistency and understanding. In addition to extending
this work on guiding task level strategies at execution, further research should examine the initial
instructions and framing given to users. An improved understanding of appropriate user priming
is perhaps more likely to be generalisable across IML applications than execution related guidance.
This in turn may help highlight more concrete solution principles related to the formation of user
mental models in IML.
As more comprehensive IML processes covering the full range of activities described in Section 5
emerge, there is value in investigating the user guidance required to inform decisions on switching
between the global task activities. It is necessary that users can build effective strategies that in
some way relate the model steering activity to the broader task goals and related activities such as
model configuration and deployment.
Capturing, representing and reasoning with uncertainty
As highlighted earlier, a key aspect of prediction using a model is uncertainty. The concept of data
and prediction uncertainty is not always well understood by end users who traditionally associate
computers with precision and repeatability. Furthermore, uncertainty can be difficult to succinctly
represent visually. Micallef et al. show that non experts struggle in probabilistic reasoning
tasks, even when concise visual and textual guidance is provided. While the most appropriate
approach may differ depending on the data and application, Bayesian machine learning methods
provide a distinct advantage in their ability to incorporate the notion of uncertainty [Ghahramani
There is value in studies investigating the application of these approaches coupled with intuitive
uncertainty visualisation techniques. Horvitz’s early work on mixed-initiative interfaces applied
probabilistic models of user intention to support selection of different interface modes. Similar
methods may be appropriate for capturing uncertainty in user input. The specific advantage of a
Bayesian framework is to embed the estimation of uncertainty from the outset as well as throughout
the model components. Allowing users to view model uncertainty and its evolution may support
improved understanding and performance but care must be taken to ensure such feedback provides
genuine insight without adverse secondary effects, such as becoming a distraction or attracting
attention away from other critical aspects of the interface.
Enhancing perception, interaction and engagement via immersive environments
Holzinger and Jurisica argue for tools that are interactive and representations that support
high dimensions and multiple modalities. The recent advancement in augmented and virtual reality
head mounted displays presents new opportunities for users to interact with and explore complex
multidimensional datasets. It is reasonable to propose that more natural interaction may thus
support improved understanding and reduced perceived cost of model refinement.
The placement of a user into an immersive environment can also facilitate more natural mechanisms of discovery and learning. Gillies et al. [2015b] show the potential of full bodied interaction
as part of an IML process. The placement of users within an immersive environment is likely to
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning
have particular relevance to IML processes applied in gesture and motion recognition applications.
Immersive three-dimensional interfaces also offer additional data representation opportunities over
conventional two-dimensional displays. A further ancillary benefit is that an enjoyable immersive
experience may also improve user engagement. However, as the mass of research effort in the field
of information visualisation shows, the construction of intuitive and informative multi-dimensional
data representations is non-trivial.
Evaluating interfaces and user performance in IML
The task of evaluating user interfaces for Interactive Machine Learning requires careful consideration given the various characteristics that distinguish them from more traditional user interfaces.
In the case of a user training a model to capture their own personal concept, Groce et al. 
highlight that potentially only that particular individual can properly evaluate the quality of their
Additionally, interfaces designed for cognitively intense tasks can be difficult to evaluate due
to the longitudinal nature of analysis and learning. A key challenge for evaluating information
visualisations designed to provide enhanced cognition is the fact that insight is ‘temporally elusive’
in that a stimulus may trigger a response long after exposure [Carpendale 2008].
Gillies et al. point to different traditions for evaluation of developed methods between the
HCI and machine learning communities (i.e. user studies versus benchmark testing). Regrettably,
unlike in traditional machine learning research where alternate techniques may be repeatably
evaluated on a single dataset, a human user, once exposed to a problem as part of an IML evaluation,
cannot unlearn their experience and be retested. The HCI community may do well to establish
representative datasets, and perhaps even representative structured tasks, relevant to the specific
challenges introduced by Interactive Machine Learning. This may foster better engagement from
the broader machine learning community while at the same time support the identification of
generalisable requirements and enable comparative evaluation of interfaces.
CONCLUSIONS
Machine learning techniques are slowly creeping into the lives of non-expert users. Enabling users
to efficiently interact with such algorithms is likely to be a key design challenge in the coming
decade. Interactive Machine Learning promises new opportunities for assisting users in data
intensive processing tasks, enhancing outcomes in analytic tasks, and supporting the development
of comparatively complex functionality without explicit programming. IML is a co-adaptive process,
driven by the user, but inherently dynamic in nature as the model and user evolve together during
training. The user may adjust their strategy in response to the observed behaviour in the model,
and the model correspondingly changes but in ways that are not entirely predictable.
There are aspects of the task of training a model that make the interaction requirements distinct
from more conventional human-computer interfaces. It is important that the application of new
and exciting machine intelligence is accompanied by careful design of the user interfaces for
such applications. Research is beginning to focus more on the interface features that make such
applications effective and enjoyable to use. Studies have shown that even non-expert users want
to understand more about the models they are interacting with and how they can refine their
This article has presented a survey of prominent efforts to apply the IML process in a range of
applications. The survey illustrates that the IML approach has utility on a range of underlying
data types. Furthermore, there is a degree of commonality across implementations. A synthesis
of the literature forms the basis for the structural and behavioural IML models presented. The
interface elements identified in Section 4 provide a generalised perspective on the interface design
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2018.
John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson
problem. The workflow described in Section 5 covers the activities involved in the IML process
from feature and model selection up to transfer of the learnt model into the target application. A
consolidation of user interface related findings from the literature is presented as a set of emergent
solution principles for IML. It is hoped that this set of solution principles will provide guidance
to the interface designer in terms of both framing the IML process and developing productive
and enjoyable functionality. The preparation of this article also led to the identification of several
open problems for the field of IML. We propose four strands of investigation for advancing the
state-of-the-art.
As users are increasingly attempting to gain insights from ever larger volumes of data and more
and more user interfaces become driven by machine learning algorithms, Interactive Machine
Learning is likely to become a more central theme in user interface design. We believe that there
is value in establishing a generic model and provisional set of solution principles relevant to the
Interactive Machine Learning process. This article is an attempt to provide that foundation and it
is hoped that further efforts will refine and expand upon these concepts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Per Ola Kristensson was supported in part by a Google Faculty research award and EPSRC grants
EP/N010558/1 and EP/N014278/1. John Dudley was supported by the Trimble Fund.