Finding and Understanding Bugs in C Compilers
Xuejun Yang
John Regehr
University of Utah, School of Computing
{ jxyang, chenyang, eeide, regehr }@cs.utah.edu
Compilers should be correct. To improve the quality of C compilers,
we created Csmith, a randomized test-case generation tool, and
spent three years using it to ﬁnd compiler bugs. During this period
we reported more than 325 previously unknown bugs to compiler
developers. Every compiler we tested was found to crash and also
to silently generate wrong code when presented with valid input.
In this paper we present our compiler-testing tool and the results
of our bug-hunting study. Our ﬁrst contribution is to advance the
state of the art in compiler testing. Unlike previous tools, Csmith
generates programs that cover a large subset of C while avoiding the
undeﬁned and unspeciﬁed behaviors that would destroy its ability
to automatically ﬁnd wrong-code bugs. Our second contribution is a
collection of qualitative and quantitative results about the bugs we
have found in open-source C compilers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.5 [Software Engineering]: Testing and Debugging—testing tools; D.3.2 [Programming
Languages]: Language Classiﬁcations—C; D.3.4 [Programming
Languages]: Processors—compilers
General Terms
Languages, Reliability
compiler testing, compiler defect, automated testing,
random testing, random program generation
Introduction
The theory of compilation is well developed, and there are compiler
frameworks in which many optimizations have been proved correct.
Nevertheless, the practical art of compiler construction involves a
morass of trade-offs between compilation speed, code quality, code
debuggability, compiler modularity, compiler retargetability, and
other goals. It should be no surprise that optimizing compilers—like
all complex software systems—contain bugs.
Miscompilations often happen because optimization safety
checks are inadequate, static analyses are unsound, or transformations are ﬂawed. These bugs are out of reach for current and
future automated program-veriﬁcation tools because the speciﬁcations that need to be checked were never written down in a precise
way, if they were written down at all. Where veriﬁcation is impractical, however, other methods for improving compiler quality can
succeed. This paper reports our experience in using testing to make
C compilers better.
c⃝ACM, 2011. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here by permission
of ACM for your personal use. Not for redistribution.
The deﬁnitive version was published in Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), San Jose,
CA, Jun. 2011, 
int foo (void) {
signed char x = 1;
unsigned char y = 255;
return x > y;
Figure 1. We found a bug in the version of GCC that shipped with
Ubuntu Linux 8.04.1 for x86. At all optimization levels it compiles
this function to return 1; the correct result is 0. The Ubuntu compiler
was heavily patched; the base version of GCC did not have this bug.
We created Csmith, a randomized test-case generator that supports compiler bug-hunting using differential testing. Csmith generates a C program; a test harness then compiles the program using several compilers, runs the executables, and compares the outputs. Although this compiler-testing approach has been used before , Csmith’s test-generation techniques substantially
advance the state of the art by generating random programs that
are expressive—containing complex code using many C language
features—while also ensuring that every generated program has a
single interpretation. To have a unique interpretation, a program
must not execute any of the 191 kinds of undeﬁned behavior, nor
depend on any of the 52 kinds of unspeciﬁed behavior, that are
described in the C99 standard.
For the past three years, we have used Csmith to discover bugs
in C compilers. Our results are perhaps surprising in their extent: to
date, we have found and reported more than 325 bugs in mainstream
C compilers including GCC, LLVM, and commercial tools. Figure 1
shows a representative example. Every compiler that we have tested,
including several that are routinely used to compile safety-critical
embedded systems, has been crashed and also shown to silently
miscompile valid inputs. As measured by the responses to our bug
reports, the defects discovered by Csmith are important. Most of
the bugs we have reported against GCC and LLVM have been
ﬁxed. Twenty-ﬁve of our reported GCC bugs have been classiﬁed as
P1, the maximum, release-blocking priority for GCC defects. Our
results suggest that ﬁxed test suites—the main way that compilers
are tested—are an inadequate mechanism for quality control.
We claim that Csmith is an effective bug-ﬁnding tool in part
because it generates tests that explore atypical combinations of C
language features. Atypical code is not unimportant code, however; it is simply underrepresented in ﬁxed compiler test suites.
Developers who stray outside the well-tested paths that represent
a compiler’s “comfort zone”—for example by writing kernel code
or embedded systems code, using esoteric compiler options, or automatically generating code—can encounter bugs quite frequently.
This is a signiﬁcant problem for complex systems. Wolfe , talking about independent software vendors (ISVs) says: “An ISV with
a complex code can work around correctness, turn off the optimizer
in one or two ﬁles, and usually they have to do that for any of the
compilers they use” (emphasis ours). As another example, the front
page of the Web site for GMP, the GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library, states, “Most problems with compiling GMP these
days are due to problems not in GMP, but with the compiler.”
Improving the correctness of C compilers is a worthy goal:
C code is part of the trusted computing base for almost every modern
computer system including mission-critical ﬁnancial servers and lifecritical pacemaker ﬁrmware. Large-scale source-code veriﬁcation
efforts such as the seL4 OS kernel and Airbus’s veriﬁcation
of ﬂy-by-wire software can be undermined by an incorrect
C compiler. The need for correct compilers is ampliﬁed because
operating systems are almost always written in C and because C
is used as a portable assembly language. It is targeted by code
generators from a wide variety of high-level languages including
Matlab/Simulink, which is used to generate code for industrial
control systems.
Despite recent advances in compiler veriﬁcation, testing is still
needed. First, a veriﬁed compiler is only as good as its speciﬁcation
of the source and target language semantics, and these speciﬁcations
are themselves complex and error-prone. Second, formal veriﬁcation
seldom provides end-to-end guarantees: “details” such as parsers,
libraries, and ﬁle I/O usually remain in the trusted computing
base. This second point is illustrated by our experience in testing
CompCert , a veriﬁed C compiler. Using Csmith, we found
previously unknown bugs in unproved parts of CompCert—bugs
that cause this compiler to silently produce incorrect code.
Our goal was to discover serious, previously unknown bugs:
• in mainstream C compilers like GCC and LLVM;
• that manifest when compiling core language constructs such as
arithmetic, arrays, loops, and function calls;
• targeting ubiquitous architectures such as x86 and x86-64; and
• using mundane optimization ﬂags such as –O and –O2.
This paper reports our experience in achieving this goal. Our ﬁrst
contribution is to advance the state of the art in compiler test-case
generation, ﬁnding—as far as we know—many more previously
unknown compiler bugs than any similar effort has found. Our
second contribution is to qualitatively and quantitatively characterize
the bugs found by Csmith: What do they look like? In what parts of
the compilers are they primarily found? How are they distributed
across a range of compiler versions?
Csmith began as a fork of Randprog , an existing random
C program generator about 1,600 lines long. In earlier work, we
extended and adapted Randprog to ﬁnd bugs in C compilers’
translation of accesses to volatile-qualiﬁed objects , resulting
in a 7,000-line program. Our previous paper showed that in many
cases, these bugs could be worked around by turning volatile-object
accesses into calls to helper functions. The key observation was this:
while the rules regarding the addition, elimination, and reordering
of accesses to volatile objects are not at all like the rules governing
ordinary variable accesses in C, they are almost identical to the rules
governing function calls.
For some test programs generated by Randprog, our rewriting
procedure was insufﬁcient to correct a defect that we had found in
the C compiler. Our hypothesis was that this was always due to “regular” compiler bugs not related to the volatile qualiﬁer. To investigate
these compiler defects, we shifted our research emphasis toward
looking for generic wrong-code bugs. We turned Randprog into
Csmith, a 40,000-line C++ program for randomly generating C programs. Compared to Randprog, Csmith can generate C programs
that utilize a much wider range of C features including complex
control ﬂow and data structures such as pointers, arrays, and structs.
Most of Csmith’s complexity arises from the requirement that it
compiler 1
compiler 3
compiler 2
Figure 2. Finding bugs in three compilers using randomized differential testing
interleave static analysis with code generation in order to produce
meaningful test cases, as described below.
Randomized Differential Testing using Csmith
Random testing , also called fuzzing , is a black-box testing
method in which test inputs are generated randomly. Randomized
differential testing has the advantage that no oracle for test
results is needed. It exploits the idea that if one has multiple, deterministic implementations of the same speciﬁcation, all implementations must produce the same result from the same valid input. When
two implementations produce different outputs, one of them must
be faulty. Given three or more implementations, a tester can use
voting to heuristically determine which implementations are wrong.
Figure 2 shows how we use these ideas to ﬁnd compiler bugs.
Design Goals
Csmith has two main design goals. First and most important, every
generated program must be well formed and have a single meaning
according to the C standard. The meaning of a C program is the
sequence of side effects it performs. The principal side effect of a
Csmith-generated program is to print a value summarizing the computation performed by the program.1 This value is a checksum of the
program’s non-pointer global variables at the end of the program’s
execution. Thus, if changing the compiler or compiler options causes
the checksum emitted by a Csmith-generated program to change, a
compiler bug has been found.
The C99 language has 191 undeﬁned behaviors—e.g.,
dereferencing a null pointer or overﬂowing a signed integer—that
destroy the meaning of a program. It also has 52 unspeciﬁed
behaviors—e.g., the order of evaluation of arguments to a function—
where a compiler may choose from a set of options with no
requirement that the choice be made consistently. Programs emitted
by Csmith must avoid all of these behaviors or, in certain cases
such as argument-evaluation order, be independent of the choices
that will be made by the compiler. Many undeﬁned and unspeciﬁed
behaviors can be avoided structurally by generating programs in
such a way that problems never arise. However, a number of
important undeﬁned and unspeciﬁed behaviors are not easy to avoid
in a structural fashion. In these cases, Csmith solves the problem
using static analysis and by adding run-time checks to the generated
code. Section 2.4 describes the hazards that Csmith must avoid and
its strategies for avoiding them.
Csmith’s second design goal is to maximize expressiveness
subject to constraints imposed by the ﬁrst goal. An “expressive”
generator supports many language features and combinations of
features. Our hypothesis is that expressiveness is correlated with
bug-ﬁnding power.
1 Accesses to volatile objects are also side effects as described in the C
standard. We do not discuss these “secondary” side effects of Csmithgenerated programs further in this paper.
Csmith creates programs with the following features:
• function deﬁnitions, and global and local variable deﬁnitions
• most kinds of C expressions and statements
• control ﬂow: if/else, function calls, for loops, return,
break, continue, goto
• signed and unsigned integers of all standard widths
• arithmetic, logical, and bitwise operations on integers
• structs: nested, and with bit-ﬁelds
• arrays of and pointers to all supported types, including pointers
and arrays
• the const and volatile type qualiﬁers, including at different
levels of indirection for pointer-typed variables
The most important language features not currently supported
by Csmith are strings, dynamic memory allocation, ﬂoating-point
types, unions, recursion, and function pointers. We plan to add some
of these features to future versions of our tool.
Randomly Generating Programs
The shape of a program generated by Csmith is governed by a
grammar for a subset of C. A program is a collection of type,
variable, and function deﬁnitions; a function body is a block; a
block contains a list of declarations and a list of statements; and a
statement is an expression, control-ﬂow construct (e.g., if, return,
goto, or for), assignment, or block. Assignments are modeled
as statements—not expressions—which reﬂects the most common
idiom for assignments in C code. We leverage our grammar to
produce other idiomatic code as well: in particular, we include a
statement kind that represents a loop iterating over an array. The
grammar is implemented by a collection of hand-coded C++ classes.
Csmith maintains a global environment that holds top-level
deﬁnitions: i.e., types, global variables, and functions. The global
environment is extended as new entities are deﬁned during program
generation. To hold information relevant to the current programgeneration point, Csmith also maintains a local environment with
three primary kinds of information. First, the local environment
describes the current call chain, supporting context-sensitive pointer
analysis. Second, it contains effect information describing objects
that may have been read or written since (1) the start of the current
function, (2) the start of the current statement, and (3) the previous
sequence point.2 Third, the local environment carries points-to
facts about all in-scope pointers. These elements and their roles
in program generation are further described in Section 2.4.
Csmith begins by randomly creating a collection of struct type
declarations. For each, it randomly decides on a number of members
and the type of each member. The type of a member may be
a (possibly qualiﬁed) integral type, a bit-ﬁeld, or a previously
generated struct type.
After the preliminary step of producing type deﬁnitions, Csmith
begins to generate C program code. Csmith generates a program
top-down, starting from a single function called by main. Each step
of the program generator involves the following sub-steps:
1. Csmith randomly selects an allowable production from its grammar for the current program point. To make the choice, it consults
2 As explained in Section 3.8 of the C FAQ , “A sequence point is a
point in time at which the dust has settled and all side effects which have
been seen so far are guaranteed to be complete. The sequence points listed
in the C standard are at the end of the evaluation of a full expression (a full
expression is an expression statement, or any other expression which is not a
subexpression within any larger expression); at the ||, &&, ?:, and comma
operators; and at a function call (after the evaluation of all the arguments,
and just before the actual call).”
a probability table and a ﬁlter function speciﬁc to the current
point: there is a table/ﬁlter pair for statements, another for expressions, and so on. The table assigns a probability to each
of the alternatives, where the sum of the probabilities is one.
After choosing a production from the table, Csmith executes the
ﬁlter, which decides if the choice is acceptable in the current context. Filters enforce basic semantic restrictions (e.g., continue
can only appear within a loop), user-controllable limits (e.g.,
maximum statement depth and number of functions), and other
user-controllable options. If the ﬁlter rejects the selected production, Csmith simply loops back, making selections from the
table until the ﬁlter succeeds.
2. If the selected production requires a target—e.g., a variable or
function—then the generator randomly selects an appropriate
target or deﬁnes a new one. In essence, Csmith dynamically
constructs a probability table for the potential targets and includes an option to create a new target. Function and variable
deﬁnitions are thus created “on demand” at the time that Csmith
decides to refer to them.
3. If the selected production allows the generator to select a type,
Csmith randomly chooses one. Depending on the current context,
the choice may be restricted (e.g., while generating the operands
of an integral-typed expression) or unrestricted (e.g., while
generating the types of parameters to a new function). Random
choices are guided by the grammar, probability tables, and ﬁlters
as already described.
4. If the selected production is nonterminal, the generator recurses.
It calls a function to generate the program fragment that corresponds to the nonterminal production. More generally, Csmith
recurses for each nonterminal element of the current production:
e.g., for each subcomponent of a compound statement, or for
each parameter in a function call.
5. Csmith executes a collection of dataﬂow transfer functions. It
passes the points-to facts from the local environment to the
transfer functions, which produce a new set of points-to facts.
Csmith updates the local environment with these facts.
6. Csmith executes a collection of safety checks. If the checks
succeed, the new code fragment is committed to the generated
program. Otherwise, the fragment is dropped and any changes
to the local environment are rolled back.
When Csmith creates a call to a new function—one whose body
does not yet exist—generation of the current function is suspended
until the new function is ﬁnished. Thus, when the top-level function
has been completely generated, Csmith is ﬁnished. At that point
it pretty-prints all of the randomly generated deﬁnitions in an
appropriate order: types, globals, prototypes, and functions. Finally,
Csmith outputs a main function. The main function calls the toplevel randomly generated function, computes a checksum of the
non-pointer global variables, prints the checksum, and exits.
Safety Mechanisms
Table 1 lists the mechanisms that Csmith uses to avoid generating C
programs that execute undeﬁned behaviors or depend on unspeciﬁed
behaviors. This section provides additional detail about the hazards
that Csmith must avoid and its strategies for avoiding them.
Integer safety
More and more, compilers are aggressively exploiting the undeﬁned nature of integer behaviors such as signed
overﬂow and shift-past-bitwidth. For example, recent versions of
Intel CC, GCC, and LLVM evaluate (x+1)>x to 1 while also evaluating (INT_MAX+1) to INT_MIN. In another example, discovered
by the authors of Google’s Native Client software , routine refactoring of C code caused the expression 1<<32 to be evaluated on a
Code-Generation-
Code-Execution-
Time Solution
Time Solution
use without initialization
explicit initializers,
avoid jumping over
initializers
qualiﬁer mismatch
static analysis
inﬁnite recursion
disallow recursion
signed integer overﬂow
bounded loop vars
safe math wrappers
OOB array access
bounded loop vars
force index in bounds
unspeciﬁed eval. order
effect analysis
of function arguments
R/W and W/W conﬂicts
effect analysis
betw. sequence points
access to out-of-scope
pointer analysis
stack variable
null pointer dereference
pointer analysis
null pointer checks
Table 1. Summary of Csmith’s strategies for avoiding undeﬁned
and unspeciﬁed behaviors. When both a code-generation-time and
code-execution-time solution are listed, Csmith uses both.
platform with 32-bit integers. The compiler exploited this undeﬁned
behavior to turn a sandboxing safety check into a nop.
To keep Csmith-generated programs from executing integer
undeﬁned behaviors, we implemented a family of wrapper functions
for arithmetic operators whose (promoted) operands might overﬂow.
This was not difﬁcult, but had a few tricky aspects. For example,
the C99 standard does not explicitly identify the evaluation of
INT_MIN%-1 as being an undeﬁned behavior, but most compilers
treat it as such. The C99 standard also has very restrictive semantics
for signed left-shift: it is illegal (for implementations using 2’s
complement integers) to shift a 1-bit into or past the sign bit. Thus,
evaluating 1<<31 destroys the meaning of a C99 program on a
platform with 32-bit ints.
Several safe math libraries for C that we examined themselves execute operations with undeﬁned behavior while performing checks.
Apparently, avoiding such behavior is indeed a tricky business.
Type safety
The aspect of C’s type system that required the
most care was qualiﬁer safety: ensuring that const and volatile
qualiﬁers attached to pointers at various levels of indirection are not
removed by implicit casts. Accessing a const- or volatile-qualiﬁed
object through a non-qualiﬁed pointer results in undeﬁned behavior.
Pointer safety
Null-pointer dereferences are easy to avoid using
dynamic checks. There is, on the other hand, no portable run-time
method for detecting references to a function-scoped variable whose
lifetime has ended. (Hacks involving the stack pointer are not robust
under inlining.) Although there are obvious ways to structurally
avoid this problem, such as using a type system to ensure that a
pointer to a function-scoped variable never outlives the function, we
judged this kind of strategy to be too restrictive. Instead, Csmith
freely permits pointers to local variables to escape (e.g., into global
variables) but uses a whole-program pointer analysis to ensure that
such pointers are not dereferenced or used in comparisons once they
become invalid.
Csmith’s pointer analysis is ﬂow sensitive, ﬁeld sensitive, context
sensitive, path insensitive, and array-element insensitive. A points-to
fact is an explicit set of locations that may be referenced, and may
include two special elements: the null pointer and the invalid (outof-scope) pointer. Points-to sets containing a single element serve as
must-alias facts unless the pointed-to object is an array element.
Because Csmith does not generate programs that use the heap,
assigning names to storage locations is trivial.
Effect safety
The C99 standard states that “[t]he order of evaluation of the function designator, the actual arguments, and subexpressions within the actual arguments is unspeciﬁed.” Also, undeﬁned
behavior occurs if “[b]etween two sequence points, an object is
modiﬁed more than once, or is modiﬁed and the prior value is read
other than to determine the value to be stored.”
To avoid these problems, Csmith uses its pointer analysis to
perform a conservative interprocedural analysis and determine the
effect of every expression, statement, and function that it generates.
An effect consists of two sets: locations that may be read and
locations that may be written. Csmith ensures that no location is
both read and written, or written more than once, between any pair
of sequence points. As a special case, in an assignment, a location
can be read on the RHS and also written on the LHS.
Effects are computed, and effect safety guaranteed, incrementally.
At each sequence point, Csmith resets the current effect (i.e., mayread and may-write sets). As fragments of code are generated,
Csmith tests if the new code has a read/write or write/write conﬂict
with the current effect. If a conﬂict is detected, the new code is
thrown away and the process restarts. For example, if Csmith is
generating an expression p + func() and it happens that func may
modify p, the call to func is discarded and a new subexpression is
generated. If there is no conﬂict, the read and write sets are updated
and the process continues. Probabilistic progress is guaranteed: by
design, Csmith always has a non-zero chance of generating code
that introduces no new conﬂicts, such as a constant expression.
Array safety
Csmith uses several methods to ensure that array
indices are in bounds. First, it generates index variables that are
modiﬁed only in the “increment” parts of for loops and whose
values never exceed the bounds of the arrays being indexed. Second,
variables with arbitrary value are forced to be in bounds using the
modulo operator. Finally, as needed, Csmith emits explicit checks
against array lengths.
Initializer safety
A C program must not use an uninitialized
function-scoped variable. For the most part, initializer safety is
easy to ensure structurally by initializing variables close to where
they are declared. Gotos introduce the possibility that initializers
may be jumped over; Csmith solves this by forbidding gotos from
spanning initialization code.
Efﬁcient Global Safety
Csmith never commits to a code fragment unless it has been shown
to be safe. However, loops and function calls threaten to invalidate
previously validated code. For example, consider the following code,
in which Csmith has just added the loop back-edge at line 7.
int *p = &i;
while (...) {
The assignment through p at line 4 was safe when it was
generated. However, the newly added line 7 makes line 4 unsafe,
due to the back-edge carrying a null-valued p.
One solution to this problem is to be conservative: run the wholeprogram dataﬂow analysis before committing any new statement to
the program. This is not efﬁcient. We therefore restrict the analysis
to local scope except when function calls and loops are involved. For
a function call, the callee is re-analyzed at each call site immediately.
Csmith uses a different strategy for loops. This is because so
many statements are inside loops, and the extra calls to the dataﬂow
analysis add substantial overhead to the code generator. Csmith’s
strategy is to optimistically generate code that is locally safe. Local
safety includes running a single step of the dataﬂow engine (which
reaches a sound result when generating code not inside any loop).
The global ﬁxpoint analysis is run when a loop is closed by adding
its back-edge. If Csmith ﬁnds that the program contains unsafe
statements, it deletes code starting from the tail of the loop until
the program becomes globally safe. This strategy is about three
times faster than pessimistically running the global dataﬂow analysis
before adding every piece of code.
Design Trade-offs
Allow implementation-deﬁned behavior
An ideally portable test
program would be “strictly conforming” to the C language standard.
This means that the program’s output would be independent of all
unspeciﬁed and unspeciﬁed behaviors and, in addition, be independent of any implementation-deﬁned behavior. C99 has 114 kinds of
implementation-deﬁned behavior, and they have pervasive impact
on the behavior of real C programs. For example, the result of performing a bitwise operation on a signed integer is implementationdeﬁned, and operands to arithmetic operations are implicitly cast to
int (which has implementation-deﬁned width) before performing
the operation. We believe it is impossible to generate realistically expressive C code that retains a single interpretation across all possible
choices of implementation-deﬁned behaviors.
Programs generated by Csmith do not generate the same output
across compilers that differ in (1) the width and representation of
integers, (2) behavior when casting to a signed integer type when
the value cannot be represented in an object of the target type, and
(3) the results of bitwise operations on signed integers. In practice
there is not much diversity in how C implementations deﬁne these
behaviors. For mainstream desktop and embedded targets, there
are roughly three equivalence classes of compiler targets: those
where int is 32 bits and long is 64 bits (e.g., x86-64), those where
int and long are 32 bits (e.g., x86, ARM, and PowerPC), and
those where int is 16 bits and long is 32 bits (e.g., MSP430 and
AVR). Using Csmith, we can perform differential testing within an
equivalence class but not across classes.
No ground truth
Csmith’s programs are not self-checking: we are
unable to predict their outputs without running them. This is not a
problem when we use Csmith for randomized differential testing.
We have never seen an “interesting” split vote where randomized
differential testing of a collection of C compilers fails to produce
a clear consensus answer, nor have we seen any cases in which a
majority of tested compilers produces the same incorrect result.
(We would catch the problem by hand as part of verifying the
failure-inducing program.) In fact, we have not seen even two
unrelated compilers produce the same incorrect output for a Csmithgenerated test case. It therefore seems unlikely that all compilers
under test would produce the same incorrect output for a test case.
Of course, if that did happen we would not detect that problem; this
is an inherent limitation of differential testing without an oracle.
In summary, despite the fact that Knight and Leveson found
a substantial number of correlated errors in an experiment on Nversion programming, Csmith has yielded no evidence of correlated
failures among unrelated C compilers. Our hypothesis is that the
observed lack of correlation stems from the fact that most compiler
bugs are in passes that operate on an intermediate representation
and there is substantial diversity among IRs.
No guarantee of termination
It is not difﬁcult to generate random
programs that always terminate. However, we judged that this would
limit Csmith’s expressiveness too much: for example, it would force
loops to be highly structured. Additionally, always-terminating
tests cannot ﬁnd compiler bugs that wrongfully terminate a nonterminating program. (We have found bugs of this kind.) About
10% of the programs generated by Csmith are (apparently) nonterminating. In practice, during testing, they are easy to deal with
using timeouts.
Target middle-end bugs
Commercial test suites for C compilers are primarily aimed at checking standards conformance. Csmith, on the other hand, is mainly intended to ﬁnd bugs in
the parts of a compiler that perform transformations on an intermediate representation—the so-called “middle end” of a compiler. As a
result, we have found large numbers of middle-end bugs missed by
existing testing techniques (Section 3.6). At the same time, Csmith
is rather poor at ﬁnding gaps in standards conformance. For example,
it makes no attempt to test a compiler’s handling of trigraphs, long
identiﬁer names, or variadic functions.
Targeting the middle end has several aspects. First, all generated
programs pass the lexer, parser, and typechecker. Second, we performed substantial manual tuning of the 80 probabilities that govern
Csmith’s random choices. Our goal was to make the generated programs “look right”—to contain a balanced mix of arithmetic and
bitwise operations, of references to scalars and aggregates, of loops
and straight-line code, of single-level and multi-level indirections,
and so on. Third, Csmith speciﬁcally generates idiomatic code (e.g.,
loops that access all elements of an array) to stress-test parts of the
compiler we believe to be error-prone. Fourth, we designed Csmith
with an eye toward generating programs that exercise the constructs
of a compiler’s intermediate representation, and we decided to avoid
generating source-level diversity that is unlikely to improve the
“coverage” of a compiler’s intermediate representations. For example, since additional levels of parentheses around expressions are
stripped away early in the compilation process, we do not generate
them, nor do we generate all of C’s syntactic loop forms since they
are typically all lowered to the same IR constructs. Finally, Csmith
was designed to be fast enough that it can generate programs that
are a few tens of thousands of lines long in a few seconds. Large
programs are preferred because (empirically—see Section 3.3) they
ﬁnd more bugs. In summary, many aspects of Csmith’s design and
implementation were informed by our understanding of how modern
compilers work and how they break.
We conducted ﬁve experiments using Csmith, our random program
generator. This section summarizes our ﬁndings.
Our ﬁrst experiment was uncontrolled and unstructured: over a
three-year period, we opportunistically found and reported bugs in
a variety of C compilers. We found bugs in all the compilers we
tested—hundreds of defects, many classiﬁed as high-priority bugs.
In the second experiment, we compiled and ran one million
random programs using several years’ worth of versions of GCC
and LLVM, to understand how their robustness is evolving over time.
As measured by our tests over the programs that Csmith produces,
the quality of both compilers is generally improving. (§3.2)
Third, we evaluated Csmith’s bug-ﬁnding power as a function of
the size of the generated C programs. The largest number of bugs is
found at a surprisingly large program size: about 81 KB. (§3.3)
Fourth, we compared Csmith’s bug-ﬁnding power to that of four
previous random C program generators. Over a week, Csmith was
able to ﬁnd signiﬁcantly more distinct compiler crash errors than
previous program generators could. (§3.4)
Finally, we investigated the effect of testing random programs on
branch, function, and line coverage of the GCC and LLVM source
code. We found that these metrics did not signiﬁcantly improve
when we added randomly generated programs to the compilers’
existing test suites. Nevertheless, as shown by our other results,
Csmith-generated programs allowed us to discover bugs that are
missed by the compilers’ standard test suites. (§3.5)
We conclude the presentation of results by analyzing some of
the bugs we found in GCC and LLVM. (§3.6, §3.7)
Wrong code
Table 2. Crash and wrong-code bugs found by Csmith that manifest
when compiler optimizations are disabled (i.e., when the –O0
command-line option is used)
Opportunistic Bug Finding
We reported bugs to 11 different C compiler development teams.
Five of these compilers (GCC, LLVM, CIL, TCC, and Open64)
were open source and ﬁve were commercial products. The eleventh,
CompCert, is publicly available but not open source.
What kinds of bugs are there?
It is useful to distinguish between
errors whose symptoms manifest at compile time and those that
only manifest when the compiler’s output is executed. Compiletime bugs that we see include assertion violations or other internal
compiler errors; involuntary compiler termination due to memorysafety problems; and cases in which the compiler exhausts the RAM
or CPU time allocated to it. We say that a compile-time crash error
has occurred whenever the compiler process exits with a status other
than zero or fails to produce executable output. Errors that manifest
at run time include the computation of a wrong result; a crash or
other abnormal termination of the generated code; termination of a
program that should have executed forever; and non-termination of
a program that should have terminated. We refer to these run-time
problems as wrong-code errors. A silent wrong-code error is one
that occurs in a program that was produced without any sort of
warning from the compiler; i.e., the compiler silently miscompiled
the test program.
Experience with commercial compilers
There exist many more
commercial C compilers than we could easily test. The ones we
chose to study are fairly popular and were produced by what we
believe are some of the strongest C compiler development teams.
Csmith found wrong-code errors and crash errors in each of these
tools within a few hours of testing.
Because we are not paying customers, and because our ﬁndings
represent potential bad publicity, we did not receive a warm response
from any commercial compiler vendor. Thus, for the most part, we
simply tested these compilers until we found a few crash errors and
a few wrong-code errors, reported them, and moved on.
Experience with open-source compilers
For several reasons, the
bulk of our testing effort went towards GCC and LLVM. First and
most important, compiler testing is inherently interactive: we require
feedback from the development team in the form of bug ﬁxes.
Bugs that occur with high probability can mask tricky, one-in-amillion bugs; thus, testing proceeds most smoothly when we can
help developers rapidly destroy the easy bugs. Both the GCC and
LLVM teams were responsive to our bug reports. The LLVM team
in particular ﬁxed bugs quickly, often within a few hours and usually
within a week. The second reason we prefer dealing with opensource compilers is that their development process is transparent:
we can watch the mailing lists, participate in discussions, and see
ﬁxes as they are committed. Third, we want to help harden the
open-source development tools that we and many others use daily.
So far we have reported 79 GCC bugs and 202 LLVM bugs—the
latter ﬁgure represents about 2% of all LLVM bug reports. Most of
our reported bugs have been ﬁxed, and twenty-ﬁve of the GCC bugs
were marked by developers as P1: the maximum, release-blocking
priority for a bug. To date, we have reported 325 in total across all
tested compilers (GCC, LLVM, and others).
An error that occurs at the lowest level of optimization is
pernicious because it defeats the conventional wisdom that compiler
bugs can be avoided by turning off the optimizer. Table 2 counts
these kinds of bugs, causing both crash and wrong-code errors, that
we found using Csmith.
Testing CompCert
CompCert is a veriﬁed, optimizing compiler for a large subset of C; it targets PowerPC, ARM, and x86. We
put signiﬁcant effort into testing this compiler.
The ﬁrst silent wrong-code error that we found in CompCert was
due to a miscompilation of this function:
int bar (unsigned x) {
return -1 <= (1 && x);
CompCert 1.6 for PowerPC generates code returning 0, but the
proper result is 1 because the comparison is signed. This bug and ﬁve
others like it were in CompCert’s unveriﬁed front-end code. Partly
in response to these bug reports, the main CompCert developer
expanded the veriﬁed portion of CompCert to include C’s integer
promotions and other tricky implicit casts.
The second CompCert problem we found was illustrated by two
bugs that resulted in generation of code like this:
stwu r1, -44432(r1)
Here, a large PowerPC stack frame is being allocated. The problem
is that the 16-bit displacement ﬁeld is overﬂowed. CompCert’s
PPC semantics failed to specify a constraint on the width of this
immediate value, on the assumption that the assembler would catch
out-of-range values. In fact, this is what happened. We also found a
handful of crash errors in CompCert.
The striking thing about our CompCert results is that the middleend bugs we found in all other compilers are absent. As of early 2011,
the under-development version of CompCert is the only compiler we
have tested for which Csmith cannot ﬁnd wrong-code errors. This is
not for lack of trying: we have devoted about six CPU-years to the
task. The apparent unbreakability of CompCert supports a strong
argument that developing compiler optimizations within a proof
framework, where safety checks are explicit and machine-checked,
has tangible beneﬁts for compiler users.
Quantitative Comparison of GCC and LLVM Versions
Figure 3 shows the results of an experiment in which we compiled and ran 1,000,000 randomly generated programs using
LLVM 1.9–2.8, GCC 3. .0, and GCC 4. .0. Every program was compiled at –O0, –O1, –O2, –Os, and –O3. A test case
was considered valid if every compiler terminated (successfully
or otherwise) within ﬁve minutes and if every compiled random
program terminated (correctly or otherwise) within ﬁve seconds. All
compilers targeted x86. Running these tests took about 1.5 weeks
on 20 machines in the Utah Emulab testbed . Each machine had
one quad-core Intel Xeon E5530 processor running at 2.4 GHz.
Compile-time failures
The top row of graphs in Figure 3 shows
the observed rate of crash errors. (Note that the y-axes of these
graphs are logarithmic.) These graphs also indicate the number of
crash bugs that were ﬁxed in response to our bug reports. Both
compilers became at least three orders of magnitude less “crashy”
over the range of versions covered in this experiment. The GCC
results appear to tell a nice story: the 3.x release series increases
in quality, the 4.0.0 release regresses because it represents a major
change to GCC’s internals, and then quality again starts to improve.
The middle row of graphs in Figure 3 shows the number of
distinct assertion failures in LLVM and the number of distinct
internal compiler errors in GCC induced by our tests. These are the
numbers of code locations in LLVM and GCC at which an internal
Crash Error Rate (%)
LLVM version
4 bugs fixed
21 bugs fixed
13 bugs fixed
27 bugs fixed
26 bugs fixed
22 bugs fixed
Crash Error Rate (%)
GCC version
21 bugs fixed
11 bugs fixed
Distinct Assert Failures
LLVM version
4 bugs fixed
21 bugs fixed
13 bugs fixed
27 bugs fixed
26 bugs fixed
22 bugs fixed
Distinct Internal Compiler Errors
GCC version
21 bugs fixed
11 bugs fixed
Wrong Code Error Rate (%)
LLVM version
4 bugs fixed
16 bugs fixed
11 bugs fixed
6 bugs fixed
7 bugs fixed
11 bugs fixed
Wrong Code Error Rate (%)
GCC version
5 bugs fixed
11 bugs fixed
Figure 3. Distinct crash errors found, and rates of crash and wrong-code errors, from recent LLVM and GCC versions
consistency check failed. These graphs conservatively estimate the
number of distinct failures in these compilers, since we encountered
many segmentation faults caused by use of free memory, null-pointer
dereferences, and similar problems. We did not include these faults
in our graphed results due to the difﬁculty of mapping crashes back
to distinct causes.
It is not clear which of these two metrics of crashiness is
preferable. The rate of crashes is easy to game: we can make it
arbitrarily high by biasing Csmith to generate code triggering known
bugs, and compiler writers can reduce it to zero by eliminating
error messages and always returning a “success” status code to the
operating system. The number of distinct crashes, on the other hand,
suffers from the drawback that it depends on the quantity and style
of assertions in the compiler under test. Although GCC has more
total assertions than LLVM, LLVM has a higher density: about one
assertion per 100 lines of code, compared to one in 250 for GCC.
Run-time failures
The bottom pair of graphs in Figure 3 shows
the rate of wrong-code errors in our experiment. Unfortunately, we
8193-16384
16385-32768
32769-65536
Distinct Crash Errors
Range of Program Sizes Tested, in Tokens
Figure 4. Number of distinct crash errors found in 24 hours of
testing with Csmith-generated programs in a given size range
can only report the rate of errors, and not the number of bugs causing
them, because we do not know how to automatically map failing
tests back to the bugs that cause them. These graphs also indicate
the number of wrong-code bugs that were ﬁxed in response to our
bug reports.
Bug-Finding Performance as a Function of Test-Case Size
There are many ways in which a random test-case generator might
be “tuned” for particular goals, e.g., to focus on certain kinds
of compiler defects. We performed an experiment to answer this
question: given the goal of ﬁnding many defects quickly, should one
conﬁgure Csmith to generate small programs or large ones? Other
factors being equal, small test cases are preferable because they are
closer to being reportable to compiler developers.
Using the same compilers and optimization options that we
used for the experiments in Section 3.2, we ran our testing process
multiple times. For each run we selected a size range for test inputs,
conﬁgured Csmith to generate programs in that range,3 executed
the test process for 24 hours, and counted the distinct crash errors
found. We repeated this for various ranges of test-input sizes.
Figure 4 shows that the rate of crash-error detection varies
signiﬁcantly as a function of the sizes of the test programs produced
by Csmith. The greatest number of distinct crash errors is found
by programs containing 8 K–16 K tokens: these programs averaged
81 KB before preprocessing. The conﬁdence intervals are at 95%
and were computed based on ﬁve repetitions.
We hypothesize that larger test cases expose more compiler errors
for two reasons. First, throughput is increased because compiler startup costs are better amortized. Second, the combinatorial explosion of
feature interactions within a single large test case works in Csmith’s
favor. The decrease in bug-ﬁnding power at the largest sizes appears
to come from algorithms—in Csmith and in the compilers—that
have superlinear running time.
Bug-Finding Performance Compared to Other Tools
To evaluate Csmith’s ability to ﬁnd bugs, we compared it to four
other random program generators: the two versions of Randprog
described in Section 2 and two others described in Section 5. We ran
each generator in its default conﬁguration on one of ﬁve identical
3 Although we can tune Csmith to prefer generating larger or smaller output,
it lacks the ability to construct a test case of a speciﬁc size on demand. We
ran this experiment by precomputing seeds to Csmith’s random-number
generator that cause it to generate programs of the sizes we desired.
Cumulative Distinct Crash Errors
Testing Time (Days)
Csmith : 86 crashes
Eide08 : 33 crashes
Lindig07 : 20 crashes
McKeeman98 : 9 crashes
Turner05 : 14 crashes
Figure 5. Comparison of the ability of ﬁve random program generators to ﬁnd distinct crash errors
make check-c
make check-c & random
absolute change
make test & random
absolute change
Table 3. Augmenting the GCC and LLVM test suites with 10,000
randomly generated programs did not improve code coverage much
and otherwise-idle machines, using one CPU on each host. Each
generator repeatedly produced programs that we compiled and tested
using the same compilers and optimization options that were used
for the experiments in Section 3.2. Figure 5 plots the cumulative
number of distinct crash errors found by these program generators
during the one-week test. Csmith signiﬁcantly outperforms the other
Code Coverage
Because we ﬁnd many bugs, we hypothesized that randomly generated programs exercise large parts of the compilers that were not covered by existing test suites. To test this, we enabled code-coverage
monitoring in GCC and LLVM. We then used each compiler to
build its own test suite, and also to build its test suite plus 10,000
Csmith-generated programs. Table 3 shows that the incremental
coverage due to Csmith is so small as to be a negative result. Our
best guess is that these metrics are too shallow to capture Csmith’s
effects, and that we would generate useful additional coverage in
terms of deeper metrics such as path or value coverage.
Where Are the Bugs?
Table 4 characterizes the GCC and LLVM bugs we found by
compiler part. Tables 5 and 6 show the ten buggiest ﬁles in LLVM
and GCC as measured by our experiment in Section 3.1. Most of
the bugs we found in GCC were in the middle end: the machineindependent optimizers. LLVM is a younger compiler and our
testing shook out some front-end and back-end bugs that would
probably not be present in a more mature software base.
Middle end
Unclassiﬁed
Table 4. Distribution of bugs across compiler stages. A bug is
unclassiﬁed either because it has not yet been ﬁxed or the developer
who ﬁxed the bug did not indicate what ﬁles were changed.
C File Name
fold-const
constant folding
instruction combining
tree-ssa-pre
partial redundancy elim.
variable range propagation
tree-ssa-dce
dead code elimination
tree-ssa-reassoc
arithmetic expr. reassociation
register reloading
tree-ssa-looploop iteration counting
dead store elimination
tree-scalarscalar evolution
Other (15 ﬁles)
Total (25 ﬁles)
Table 5. Top ten buggy ﬁles in GCC
C++ File Name
Instructionmid-level instruction
SimpleRegisterregister coalescing
Coalescing
DAGCombiner
instruction combining
LoopUnswitch
loop unswitching
loop invariant code motion
LoopStrengthloop strength reduction
fast instruction selection
llvm-convert
GCC-LLVM IR conversion
ExprConstant
constant folding
JumpThreading
jump threading
Other (72 ﬁles)
Total (82 ﬁles)
Table 6. Top ten buggy ﬁles in LLVM
Examples of Wrong-Code Bugs
This section characterizes a few of the bugs that were revealed by
miscompilation of programs generated by Csmith. These bugs ﬁt
into a simple model in which optimizations are structured like this:
if (safety check) {
transformation
An optimization can fail to be semantics-preserving if the
analysis is wrong, if the safety check is insufﬁciently conservative,
or if the transformation is incorrect. The most common root cause
for bugs that we found was an incorrect safety check.
GCC Bug #1: wrong safety check4
If x is variable and c1 and
c2 are constants, the expression (x/c1)!=c2 can be proﬁtably
rewritten as (x-(c1*c2))>(c1-1), using unsigned arithmetic
to avoid problems with negative values. Prior to performing the
transformation, expressions such as c1*c2 and (c1*c2)+(c1-1)
are checked for overﬂow. If overﬂow occurs, further simpliﬁcations
can be made; for example, (x/1000000000)!=10 always evaluates
to 0 when x is a 32-bit integer. GCC falsely detected overﬂow for
some choices of constants. In the failure-inducing test case that we
discovered, (x/-1)!=1 was folded to 0. This expression should
evaluate to 1 for many values of x, such as 0.
GCC Bug #2: wrong transformation5
In C, if an argument of
type unsigned char is passed to a function with a parameter of
type int, the values seen inside the function should be in the range
0..255. We found a case in which a version of GCC inlined this kind
of function call and then sign-extended the argument rather than
zero-extending it, causing the function to see negative values of the
parameter when the function was called with arguments in the range
GCC Bug #3: wrong analysis6
We found a bug that caused GCC
to miscompile this code:
1 static int g ;
2 static int *p = &g ;
3 static int *q = &g ;
5 int foo (void) {
return g ;
The generated code returned 1 instead of 0. The problem occurred when the compiler failed to recognize that p and q are aliases;
this happened because q was mistakenly identiﬁed as a read-only
memory location, which is deﬁned not to alias a mutable location.
The wrong not-alias fact caused the store in line 7 to be marked as
dead so that a subsequent dead-store elimination pass removed it.
GCC Bug #4: wrong analysis7
A version of GCC miscompiled
this function:
1 int x = 4;
4 void foo (void) {
for (y = 1; y < 8; y += 7) {
int *p = &y;
When foo returns, y should be 11. A loop-optimization pass
determined that a temporary variable representing *p was invariant
with value x+7 and hoisted it in front of the loop, while retaining
a dataﬂow fact indicating that x+7 == y+7, a relationship that no
longer held after code motion. This incorrect fact lead GCC to
generate code leaving 8 in y, instead of 11.
4 
5 
6 
7 
LLVM Bug #1: wrong safety check8
(x==c1)||(x<c2) can be
simpliﬁed to x < c2 when c1 and c2 are constants and c1<c2.
An LLVM version incorrectly transformed (x==0)||(x<-3) to
x < -3. LLVM did a comparison between 0 and −3 in the safety
check for this optimization, but performed an unsigned comparison
rather than a signed one, leading it to incorrectly determine that the
transformation was safe.
LLVM Bug #2: wrong safety check9
(x|c1)==c2 evaluates to 0
if c1 and c2 are constants and (c1&˜c2)!=0. In other words, if any
bit that is set in c1 is unset in c2, the original expression cannot be
true. A version of LLVM contained a logic error in the safety check
for this optimization, wrongly replacing this kind of expression with
0 even when c1 was not a constant.
LLVM Bug #3: wrong safety check10
“Narrowing” is a strengthreduction optimization that can be applied to loads when only part
of an object is needed, or to stores where only part of an object is
modiﬁed. For example, at the level of the abstract machine this code
loads and stores an unsigned int:
1 unsigned y;
3 void bar (void) {
Optimizing compilers for x86 may translate bar into the following
code, which loads nothing and stores a single byte:
movb $-1, y
We found a case in which LLVM attempted to perform an
analogous narrowing operation, but a logic error caused the safety
check to succeed even when a different store modiﬁed the object
prior to the store that was the target of the narrowing transformation.
LLVM Bug #4: wrong analysis11
This code should print “5”:
1 void foo (void) {
for (x = 0; x < 5; x++) {
if (x) continue;
if (x) break;
printf("%d", x);
LLVM’s scalar evolution analysis computes properties of loop
induction variables, including the maximum number of iterations.
Line 5 of the program above caused this analysis to mistakenly
conclude that x was 1 after the loop executed.
Discussion
Are we ﬁnding bugs that matter?
One might suspect that random
testing ﬁnds bugs that do not matter in practice. Undoubtedly
this happens sometimes, but in a number of instances we have
direct conﬁrmation that Csmith is ﬁnding bugs that matter, because
bugs that we have found and reported have been independently
rediscovered and re-reported by application developers. By a very
conservative estimate—counting only the times that a compiler
8 
9 
10 
11 
developer explicitly labeled a wrong-code bug report as a duplicate
of one of ours—this has happened eight times: four times for GCC
and four for LLVM. We also have indirect conﬁrmation that our bugs
matter. The developers of open-source compilers ﬁxed almost all of
the bugs that we reported, and the GCC development team marked
25 of our bugs as P1: the maximum, release-blocking priority.
Creating reportable bugs
Reporting compiler crash bugs is easy,
but reporting wrong-code bugs is harder. Compiler developers will
(rightfully) ignore a wrong-code bug report that is based on a large
random program. Rather, a bug report must be accompanied by compelling evidence that a bug exists; in most cases the best evidence
is a small test case that is obviously miscompiled. Delta debugging automates test-case reduction, but all existing variants that
are intended for reducing C programs—such as hierarchical delta
debugging and Wilkerson’s implementation —introduce
undeﬁned behavior. The resulting programs are small but useless.
To avoid undeﬁned behavior during reduction, we rely on compiler
warnings, dynamic checkers, and manual test-case reduction. There
is substantial room for improvement.
The relationship between testing and veriﬁcation
As our Comp-
Cert results make plain, veriﬁcation does not obviate testing, but
rather complements it. Testing can provide end-to-end evidence that
numerous paths through a system work properly. Veriﬁcation, on the
other hand, typically focuses on a narrow slice of a stack of tools,
and the parts outside the slice remain in the trusted computing base.
There does not yet appear to be a nuanced understanding of the
kinds of testing, and the amount of testing effort, that are rendered
unnecessary by artifacts like CompCert and seL4 .
Toward realistic, correct compilers
Compilers must support rapid
development to cope with new optimizations, new source languages,
and new target architectures. Generated code often needs to be
resource-efﬁcient to support application developers’ goals. Finally,
compilers should generate correct code. Meeting even two of these
goals is challenging, and it is not clear how to meet all three in a
single tool. There seem to be four paths forward.
Compiler veriﬁcation. Although it is difﬁcult to imagine a
veriﬁed compiler for C++0x, due to the immense complexity of
the draft standard, CompCert is an existence proof that a veriﬁed,
optimizing C compiler is within reach. However, the burden of
veriﬁcation is signiﬁcant. CompCert still lacks a number of useful
C features and few mainstream compiler developers have the
formal veriﬁcation skills that are needed to add new language
features and optimization passes. On the other hand, projects such as
XCERT may dramatically lower the bar for working on veriﬁed
compilation.
Compiler simplicity. For non-bottleneck applications, compiler
optimization adds little end-user value. It would seem possible to
take a simple compiler such as TCC , which does not optimize
across statement boundaries, and validate it through code inspections, heavy use, and other techniques. At present, however, TCC is
much buggier than more heavily-used compilers such as GCC and
Compiler testing. We hypothesize that it is possible to gain
high conﬁdence in a complex compiler like GCC by choosing a
ﬁxed conﬁguration, disabling optimization passes whose effects are
signiﬁcantly non-local, and performing “just enough testing.” A
test plan would be sufﬁcient if all code paths through the compiler
that are used to compile an application of interest had been tested.
Clearly, a sophisticated way to abstract over paths is needed.
Equivalence checking. If equivalence checkers for machine
code could scale to large programs, veriﬁed compilers would
be largely unnecessary because one compiler’s output could be
proved equivalent to another’s. Although these tools are not likely
to scale up to multi-megabyte applications anytime soon, it should
be possible to automatically partition applications into smaller parts
so that equivalence checking can be done piecewise.
Future work
Augmenting Csmith with white-box testing techniques, where the structure of the tested system is taken into account
in a ﬁrst-class way, would be productive. This will be difﬁcult for
several reasons. First, we anticipate substantial challenges in integrating the necessary constraint-solving machinery with Csmith’s
existing logic for generating valid C programs. It is possible that we
will need to start over, next time engineering a version of Csmith in
which all constraints are explicit and declarative, rather than being
buried in a small mountain of C++. Second, the inverse problems
that must be solved to generate an input become prohibitively dif-
ﬁcult when inputs pass through a parser, particularly if the parser
contains hash tables. Godefroid et al. showed a way to solve this
problem by integrating a constraint solver with a grammar for the
language being generated. However, due to its non-local pointer and
effect analyses, the validity decision problem for programs in the
subset of C that Csmith generates is far harder than the question
of whether a program can be generated by the JavaScript grammar
used by Godefroid et al.
Related Work
Compilers have been tested using randomized methods for nearly
50 years. Boujarwah and Saleh gave a good survey in 1997.
In 1962, Sauder tested the correctness of COBOL compilers
by placing random variables in programs’ data sections. In 1970,
Hanford used a PL/1 grammar to drive the generation of random
programs. The grammar was extensible and was augmented by
“syntax generators” that could be used, for example, to ensure that
variables were declared before being used. In 1972, Purdom 
used a syntax-directed method to generate test sentences for a parser.
He gave an efﬁcient algorithm for generating short sentences from a
context-free grammar such that each production of the grammar was
used at least once, and he tested LR(1) parsers using this technique.
Burgess and Saidi designed an automatic generator of test
cases for FORTRAN compilers. The tests were designed to be selfchecking and to contain features that optimizing compilers were
known to exploit. In order to predict test cases’ results, the code
generator restricted assignment statements to be executed only once
during the execution of the sub-program or main program. These
tests found four bugs in two FORTRAN 77 compilers.
In 1998, McKeeman coined the term “differential testing.”
His work resulted in DDT, a family of program generators that
conform to the C standard at various levels, from level 1 (random
characters) to level 7 (generated code is “model conforming,” incorporating some high-level structure). DDT is more expressive than
Csmith (DDT is capable of generating all legal C programs) and it
was used to ﬁnd numerous bugs in C compilers. To our knowledge,
McKeeman’s paper contains the ﬁrst acknowledgment that it is important to avoid undeﬁned behavior in generated C programs used
for compiler testing. However, DDT avoided only a small subset
of all undeﬁned behaviors, and only then during test-case reduction, not during normal testing. Thus, it is not a suitable basis for
automatic bug-ﬁnding.
Lindig used randomly generated C programs to ﬁnd several
compiler bugs related to calling conventions. His tool, called Quest,
was specially targeted: rather than generating code with control
ﬂow and arithmetic, Quest generates code that creates complex data
structures, loads them with constant values, and passes them to a
function where assertions check the received values. Because its
tests are self-checking, Quest is not based on differential testing.
Self-checking tests are convenient, but the drawback is that Quest
is far less expressive than Csmith. Lindig used Quest to test GCC,
LCC, ICC, and a few other compilers and found 13 bugs.
Sheridan also used a random generator to ﬁnd bugs in
C compilers. A script rotated through a list of constants of the
principal arithmetic types, producing a source ﬁle that applied
various operators to pairs of constants. This tool found two bugs in
GCC, one bug in SUSE Linux’s version of GCC, and ﬁve bugs in
CodeSourcery’s version of GCC for ARM. Sheridan’s tool produces
self-checking tests. However, it is less expressive than Csmith and it
fails to avoid undeﬁned behavior such as signed overﬂow.
Zhao et al. created an automated program generator for
testing an embedded C++ compiler. Their tool allows a general test
requirement, such as which optimization to test, to be speciﬁed in a
script. The generator constructs a program template based on the test
requirement and uses it to drive further code generation. Zhao et al.
used GCC as the reference to check the compiler under test. They
reported greatly improved statement coverage in the tested modules
and found several new compiler bugs.
Conclusion
Using randomized differential testing, we found and reported hundreds of previously unknown bugs in widely used C compilers, both
commercial and open source. Many of the bugs we found cause a
compiler to emit incorrect code without any warning. Most of our reported defects have been ﬁxed, meaning that compiler implementers
found them important enough to track down, and 25 of the bugs we
reported against GCC were classiﬁed as release-blocking. All of this
evidence suggests that there is substantial room for improvement in
the state of the art for compiler quality assurance.
To create a random program generator with high bug-ﬁnding
power, the key problem we solved was the expressive generation
of C programs that are free of undeﬁned behavior and independent
of unspeciﬁed behavior. Csmith, our program generator, uses both
static analysis and dynamic checks to avoid these hazards.
The return on investment from random testing is good. Our rough
estimate—including faculty, staff, and student salaries, machines
purchased, and university overhead—is that each of the more than
325 bugs we reported cost less than $1,000 to ﬁnd. The incremental
cost of a new bug that we ﬁnd today is much lower.
Csmith is open source and available for download at
 
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Bruce Childers, David Coppit,
Chucky Ellison, Robby Findler, David Gay, Casey Klein, Gerwin
Klein, Chris Lattner, Sorin Lerner, Xavier Leroy, Bill McKeeman,
Diego Novillo, Alastair Reid, Julian Seward, Zach Tatlock, our
shepherd Atanas Rountev, and the anonymous reviewers for their
invaluable feedback on drafts of this paper. We also thank Hans
Boehm, Xavier Leroy, Michael Norrish, Bryan Turner, and the GCC
and LLVM development teams for their technical assistance in
various aspects of our work.
This research was primarily supported by an award from
DARPA’s Computer Science Study Group.