Finite Temperature Dynamical Correlations using
the Microcanonical Ensemble and the Lanczos Algorithm
M.W. Long,1 P. Prelovˇsek,2 S. El Shawish,2 J. Karadamoglou,3 and X. Zotos3
1School of Physics, Birmingham University, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, England
2Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, University of Ljubljana,
and J. Stefan Institute, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
3Institut Romand de Recherche Num´erique en Physique des Mat´eriaux (IRRMA),
EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
 
We show how to generalise the zero temperature Lanczos method for calculating dynamical correlation functions to ﬁnite temperatures. The key is the microcanonical ensemble, which allows us
to replace the involved canonical ensemble with a single appropriately chosen state; in the thermodynamic limit it provides the same physics as the canonical ensemble but with the evaluation of a
single expectation value. We can employ the same system sizes as for zero temperature, but whereas
the statistical ﬂuctuations present in small systems are prohibitive, the spectra of the largest system
sizes are surprisingly smooth. We investigate, as a test case, the spin conductivity of the spin-1/2
anisotropic Heisenberg model and in particular we present a comparison of spectra obtained by the
canonical and microcanonical ensemble methods.
INTRODUCTION
The study of lattice quantum many body systems by
the exact diagonalisation technique has proven popular
at zero temperature (T = 0) where only the ground state
is required, but it is of less use at ﬁnite temperature. The
reason can be attributed to the diﬀerent system sizes applicable, where for spin-1/2 the ground state can be found
for up to N∼30 lattice sites, but the entire spectrum can
readily be achieved for systems only up to N∼16. The
intrinsic diﬃculties associated with applying the ﬁnitesize scaling method on such small systems severely limit
ﬁnite temperature applications. At T = 0 the continued fraction technique1,2 allows accurate calculations of
dynamical correlations using only the machinery of the
Lanczos algorithm, but unfortunately this technique has
not been extended to ﬁnite T where mostly full diagonalisation has been employed. As well as direct applications of the canonical ensemble, there is also a hybrid
method which employs the canonical representation of
dynamical correlation functions but uses a Lanczos basis
to provide a set of orthogonal states3. This method allows access to larger systems than are accessible to full
diagonalisation techniques but to smaller systems than
the current proposal, which does not need details of all
the states even in the Lanczos basis. In this article we
extend the T = 0 formalism to ﬁnite temperature by
applying a microcanonical ensemble approach combined
with the Lanczos method (MCLM) that provides smooth
predictions for dynamical correlation functions at least at
high temperatures.
The physical advance is to appreciate that in the thermodynamic limit the microcanonical ensemble is equivalent to the canonical one4,5, but for ﬁnite systems this
is much easier to work with. The statistical ﬂuctuations
engendered by the microcanonical choice are a drawback
for small systems but become controllable for large systems. In practice, as the ﬁnite T calculations are much
smoother, it is more natural to contemplate applying
ﬁnite-size scaling than for their T = 0 counterparts. The
exponentially dense nature of a many particle spectrum
in the bulk is the property that smoothes our calculations, a characteristic that is lost near the ground state
where the spectrum is sparse.
Besides the computational interest of this proposal it
is worth pointing out that, to our knowledge, no studies
of the fundamental equivalence between the microcanonical and canonical ensemble for quantum dynamic correlations exist in the literature. Thus this work is a step in
numerically exploring this basic postulate of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics; clearly, analytical studies are
needed to clarify, for instance, the meaning of the microcanonical ensemble for a quantum system with dense
spectrum as an average over a single quantum state (or
a narrow window of states) and the ﬁnite size corrections
inherent in this ensemble.
THERMODYNAMIC ENSEMBLES
In this section we will discuss how an arbitrary probability distribution can be used, under reasonable assumptions, to represent the canonical ensemble in the thermodynamic limit. The choice of a (unnormalized) distribution ρ(ǫ) in the thermodynamic limit can be examined
by considering its Laplace transform,
dǫ eǫτρ(ǫ),
2πie−τǫ+f(τ),
where f(τ) controls the properties of a distribution designated by ρ(ǫ). As examples, the following choices of
f(τ) lead to,
β −τ 7→ρ(ǫ) = e−βǫ
the canonical ensemble,
ef(τ) = eλτ 7→ρ(ǫ) = δ(λ −ǫ)
the microcanonical ensemble at energy λ,
ef(τ) = eλτ+σ2(τ−β)2/2 7→ρ(ǫ) = e−(ǫ−λ)2/2σ2
the “Gaussian” ensemble at energy λ and width σ.
If we examine the partition function Zρ, then,
Zρ = T rρ(ǫ) =
2πief(τ)+ln Z(τ),
where Z(τ) is the canonical partition function. The physical idea behind the thermodynamic limit is that the partition function becomes immensely sharp when considered as a function of state space and becomes dominated
by the large number of states with the correct thermodynamics; in practice ﬂuctuating quantities can be replaced
by their thermodynamic average with negligible error.
Mathematically, an integral such as (5) may be approximated in the asymptotic thermodynamic limit using the
idea of ‘steepest descents’ with negligible error,
Zρ ∝ef(β∗)Z(β∗).
Here β∗is chosen so that,
∂τ (β∗) = −1
∂τ (β∗) = ⟨H⟩
and the average energy at the desired temperature is crucial. For the particular case of the microcanonical distribution λ = ⟨H⟩and we need to employ states whose energy is the thermodynamic average as one might naively
guess. Provided that f(τ) has only a weak dependence
on the system parameters, then the two partition functions are essentially equivalent. It is also clear that provided f(τ) has the required properties that the ‘steepest
descents’ is a good approximation, then any appropriate ensemble will provide the thermodynamic limit, for
a particular temperature. It is quite natural to employ
f(τ) = λτ + F(τ) where λ is extrinsic and F(τ) is intrinsic, in order to limit towards the microcanonical ensemble.
DYNAMICAL CORRELATIONS IN THE
MICROCANONICAL AND CANONICAL
The usually studied quantities of direct physical interest are the dynamic structure function,
dteiωt⟨Xq(t)X−q(0)⟩,
and dynamic susceptibility,
χ(q, ω) = i
dteizt⟨[Xq(t), X−q(0)]⟩,
where z = ω + iη, the angle brackets denote a canonical ensemble thermal average and the commutator plays
a central role in the linear response theory (or Kubo)
formulation of transport.
The two quantities are related by the ﬂuctuationdissipation relation,
χ′′(q, ω) = 1 −e−βω
where β = 1/kBT is the inverse temperature.
that S(q, ω) satisﬁes the symmetry relation S(−q, −ω) =
e−βωS(q, ω) while the sum-rule,
dωS(q, ω) = ⟨XqX−q⟩,
makes it natural to consider the normalised to a unit area
correlation function,
ˆS(q, ω) ≡
We have presented the dynamical correlation functions
in the canonical ensemble and now we will establish their
form in the microcanonical one. Starting from equation
(8) and employing solely the idea that our distribution
has a restricted energy λ we can generate a correlation
function s(q, ω) in the microcanonical ensemble,
⟨Xq | m⟩⟨m | X−q⟩ei(λ−ǫm)t.
Here, we have used the relation,
⟨OU(H)⟩7→⟨O⟩U(λ)
(U(H) a function of H) and a decomposition using the
eigenbasis | m⟩. The expression (13) integrates to provide,
s(q, ω) = 2π
⟨Xq | m⟩⟨m | X−q⟩δ(ω + λ −ǫm), (15)
that can be re-represented as the basic correlation in the
microcanonical ensemble,
s(q, ω) = −2 lim
η7→0 ℑ⟨Xq [z −H + λ]−1 X−q⟩.
Notice that this expression is exact in the zero temperature limit where the expectation value is to be taken over
the ground state wavefunction.
Now let us imagine that we could ﬁnd a single eigenstate at will, with an energy arbitrarily close (in the thermodynamic limit) to a target energy, λ say. It is in principle straightforward then to determine
s∗(q, ω) = −2 lim
η7→0 ℑ⟨∗| Xq [z −H + ǫ∗]−1 X−q | ∗⟩,
exactly as before, where H | ∗⟩= ǫ∗| ∗⟩is the known
eigenstate with ǫ∗7→λ. If the microcanonical ensemble
is equivalent to the canonical ensemble and if a single
eigenstate is representative of the microcanonical one,
then provided that λ = ⟨H⟩for the desired temperature,
we can expect that
s∗(q, ω) 7→S(q, ω)
in the thermodynamic limit. This amounts to the physical idea behind our calculations.
Furthermore, from (10), it follows that
χ′′(q, ω) = 1 −e−βω
and from the symmetry of S(q, ω) in the canonical ensemble we can deduce that,
s(−q, −ω) 7→βω;
this relation then provides an alternative, cross-checking
technique for determining the temperature for a particular value of λ. Although we might like to believe that
a single eigenstate corresponds to the microcanonical ensemble, based on a putative ergodicity assumption for the
eigenstate, in practice it is not possible to ﬁnd such an
eigenstate. So we relax the eigenstate hypothesis and go
back to a distribution of eigenstates close to the desired
value λ. We simply use the formalism as though we had
such an eigenstate.
THE LANCZOS METHOD
In principle we must construct a particular eigenstate
with energy λ that equals the canonical expectation value
of the energy, < H >= λ, at the desired temperature. In
practice, we employ the well known Lanczos algorithm
that is an eﬃcient way of diagonalising large Hamiltonians using as variational subspace (truncated basis) the
set of states,
| 0⟩, H | 0⟩, ..., HM1 | 0⟩
where | 0⟩is a (usually random) initial state and M1 + 1
the number of Lanczos steps. To obtain an eigenstate
close to energy λ one might expect to use the closest
eigenstate to λ in the truncated basis, but this is totally incorrect. In practice, only the states at the edge of
the spectrum converge and the other ‘eigenstates’ in the
truncated subspace have the suggested energies but are
usually far from eigenstates.
In order to apply the Lanczos method idea, one can
simply push the energetic region of interest to the edge of
the spectrum by choosing an appropriate new operator.
One natural choice is to use,
K ≡(H −λ)2
which is positive deﬁnite and pushes the eigenstates with
energy close to λ towards the minimal, zero, eigenvalue
of K. Another way to understand this technique is to
consider expanding the ground state of K, that we will
call | λ⟩, as a probability distribution over eigenstates.
Choosing λ establishes the appropriate mean for this distribution but minimising K corresponds to minimising
the variance of the distribution, and consequently localising the distribution near λ.
One can perform a Lanczos calculation based upon the
operator K or, more eﬃciently, one can evaluate the operator K (now a pentadiagonal matrix) in a previously constructed Lanczos basis using H (“L-projection” method).
Note that,
⟨(H −⟨H⟩)2⟩= ⟨(H −λ)2⟩−(⟨H⟩−λ)2 ≥0,
(the expectation value is over | λ⟩) and so a small variance
guarantees a narrow distribution of energies around λ.
In any Lanczos calculation the mathematical orthogonality between states becomes lost at some stage as
numerical errors build up.
In practice only the wellseparated converged states suﬀer from this disease and
for us these states, which are at the edge of the spectrum,
do not gain any signiﬁcant weight in the correlation functions and so do not manifest in our results. The states
at low frequency are all well behaved and maintain their
orthogonality.
It is straightforward to implement these ideas numerically, with a ‘double-Lanczos’ calculation; the ﬁrst run
through a Lanczos procedure of M1 steps is employing
the operator K starting from a random state and it is
used to ﬁnd the state | λ⟩which plays the role of the
microcanonical distribution. The second run of M2 steps
through Lanczos is made using Xq | λ⟩as the initial
state and then the resulting tridiagonal matrix can be
diagonalised to form the dynamical correlations directly
or by employing the continued fractions method which is
numerically more eﬃcient but introduces a loss of resolution.
All the analysis so far has been subject to several
caveats; ﬁrstly, that the microcanonical ensemble is
equivalent to the canonical one in the thermodynamic
limit and in the context of quantum dynamic correlations.
Secondly, that a single eigenstate is equivalent
to the microcanonical ensemble and thirdly that we can
ﬁnd such an eigenstate at will. The ﬁrst two assumptions, as we have mentioned in the introduction, should
be the focus of analytical studies as fundamental issues
of nonequibrium statistical mechanics.
Regarding the third assumption, it is clearly problematic as it is well known that although the Lanczos
method converges quite easily at the sparse edges of the
spectrum, in the denser inner regions of the spectrum,
of interest at ﬁnite temperature, it takes the Lanczos
procedure an exponentially large number of iterations to
A many-body spectrum has an exponential
number of states, e.g. for spin-1/2 the # (States)∼2N,
and for a bounded Hamiltonian the eigenstates are compressed into an energy region that grows only linearly
with system size. Although the low energy region maintains a sparse density of states, the eigenstates become
exponentially close together in the area of interest and
essentially become unattainable.
At ﬁrst sight this appears an insurmountable diﬃculty,
but in practice this issue allows the technique its success.
The ﬁrst Lanczos procedure provides a single quantum
state | λ⟩, that is not an eigenstate, but which when
decomposed in an eigenstate basis, it is represented by a
narrow distribution |an|2 around λ;
H | n⟩= ǫn | n⟩
⟨λ | H | λ⟩= λ,
gives for the expectation value of an operator O,
⟨λ | O | λ⟩=
| an |2 ⟨n | O | n⟩
man⟨m | O | n⟩.
This state, used in the evaluation of expectation values, acts as a statistical average over an energy window.
It is important to notice, that by employing a single
quantum state (not eigenstate) for evaluating an expectation value (as a substitute for a statistical average over
a narrow energy window of eigenstates), we assume that
the appearing oﬀ-diagonal terms (second term in eq.(25))
cancel each other. This assumption can be justiﬁed (and
numerically veriﬁed) by invoking a random phase decomposition of the used quantum state.
From this discussion we can expect two types of ﬂuctuations in the obtained spectra; ﬁrst, intrinsic ﬂuctuations
due to the ﬁnite size of the system, present even when
a single eigenstate is used for the evaluation of the expectation value. Second, statistical ﬂuctuations entering
by the oﬀ-diagonal terms in eq. (25) due to the use of
a single pure state that is not an eigenstate; this type of
ﬂuctuations can be reduced by averaging over orthogonal
states | λ⟩(e.g. corresponding to diﬀerent translational
symmetry k−subspaces as we will show below).
CONVERGENCE OF PROJECTION
In the following we present a test on the rate of convergence of the projection to a single quantum state with
energy close to λ. Due to the innate complexity of an
implicit scheme like Lanczos, we develop the theory of a
simpler technique brieﬂy to exhibit the ideas.
A rather simple method of numerically solving for the
ground state is by an iterative sequence of applications of
the scaled Hamiltonian. For us this amounts to iterative
applications of the operator,
where µ is chosen to be large enough so that µ2 >
(ǫn −λ)2 for the full spectrum. Repeated applications of
this operator exponentially suppresses all states except
those for which ǫn ∼λ which remain unaﬀected. We can
start out with a set of random states and then for M
applications of our operator we can build a distribution,
P M | ψ⟩θ [P] ⟨ψ | P M
(θ(P) is the step function) and if we were to perform an
average over an orthogonal basis, | ψ⟩, then this would
converge to,
ρM(H) 7→θ [P] P 2M.
Elementary analysis provides:
2πi exp [λβ −βH] (2M)!22M2µ
2M sinh x
In the limit that M 7→∞we ﬁnd that,
f(β) 7→λβ +
2(4M + 3) + O
and we converge to a narrow Gaussian probability distribution,
ρM(H) ∼exp
The width of this distribution is under our control,
⟨(H −λ)2⟩∼
4M + 3 ∼W 2N 2
where W is the natural energy scale for the model and we
see that M needs to scale with the square of the system
size N to maintain resolution.
The Lanczos method is clearly much more sophisticated and provides a much narrower distribution.
have examined the distribution obtained in a Lanczos
calculation and we ﬁnd that it is well represented by a
Gaussian distribution with a variance controlled by the
‘eigenvalue’ of K attained by the calculation. In practice this is about two orders of magnitude better in energy than the result obtained from the projection analysis (eq.(26)), which however it is analytically controllable; indeed, we ﬁnd that the Lanczos method scales as
−2 so that the intrinsic resolution, σ =
is inversely proportional to the number of iterations. The
convergence properties of the three schemes we discussed
are depicted in Figure 1 for a representative calculation
of the study that we present in the next section.
The application of the technique should now be transparent; employing a single random state, or averaging
over a sequence of orthogonal random states, one performs a ﬁrst Lanczos calculation of M1 steps to ﬁnd
the approximate ground state | λ⟩for the operator
K = (H −λ)2.
The value of λ must be pre-selected
so that λ = ⟨H⟩for the chosen temperature; several
techniques are available for reliably determining this energy versus temperature relation as the Bethe Ansatz
(for integrable systems), the ﬁnite temperature Lanczos
(FTLM)3, the Transfer Matrix Renormalization Group
(TMRG) or Quantum Monte Carlo method. The degree
of convergence can be measured using the eventual ‘eigenvalue’ of K; it plays the role of the variance of the chosen distribution and its square-root is an intrinsic energy
resolution σ. This scale, σ, can never drop below the distance to the nearest eigenvalue. For a usual size system,
FIG. 1: Convergence properties of diﬀerent Lanczos projection procedures: (i) dashed line, using eq.(26), (ii) dotted line,
using K = (H −λ)2, (iii) continuous line, “L-projection” (see
e.g. N > 16, and temperature, this limit is unattainable
but a resolution of σ ∼0.01 (⟨K⟩∼0.0001) is readily
available with a thousand or so M1 iterations.
Once one has found this state | λ⟩, that plays the role
of the state | ∗⟩, a second Lanczos projection sequence is
generated employing the state Xq | λ⟩as the initial state.
The resolution of the eventual result is controlled by the
intrinsic dependence on the microcanonical ensemble and
the degree of convergence measured by σ. This can be
seen from relation (16) as the eigenstates over which the
state | λ⟩is decomposed have a spread in energy σ with
respect to the reference energy λ.
The resolution also
depends on the convergence achieved in the 2nd Lanczos
procedure where the number of iterations M2 denotes the
ﬁnite number of poles which are used to try to represent
the dynamical correlations. At the sparse edges of the
spectrum these poles denote the eigenvalues of the system but in the bulk of the spectrum, when grouped into
bins of a given frequency width, they are fairly uniformly
spread and oﬀer a further natural energy resolution for
the calculation.
More Lanczos steps provide more poles and a ﬁner
spectral ‘grid’ for the correlation functions, until the
graininess of the real system is achieved. We have elected
to use a few thousand poles in our calculations with very
little improvement obtained by increasing this number
as we shall see. The ﬁnal resolution is self-imposed and
is the η of (16) which we choose to be of order of the
spectral grid in order to smooth our calculations.
APPLICATION ON THE SPIN-1/2
HEISENBERG MODEL
We are now in a position to test our proposed technique
and uncover its strengths and weaknesses. We have chosen to investigate the ﬁnite temperature dynamics of the
prototype spin-1/2 Heisenberg model (equivalent to the
fermionic “t −V ” model). This choice was dictated by
its central role in low dimensional quantum magnetism;
an exact solution of the thermodynamics and elementary
excitations is known using the Bethe Ansatz method6,
the spin dynamics probed by NMR is of current experimental interest7,8 and several numerical and analytical
studied have been devoted to the study of ﬁnite temperature dynamic correlations9,11,12,13,14. The Hamiltonian
is given by,
l+1), (33)
(α = x, y, z) are spin-1/2 operators on site l
and we take J as the unit of energy and frequency (¯h =
In particular, we will look at the high temperature spin
conductivity in the antiferromagnetic regime, J, ∆> 0,
for which several studies exist and some exact results are
known13. To discuss magnetic transport, we ﬁrst deﬁne
the relevant spin current, jz, by the continuity equation
of the corresponding local spin density Sz
l (provided the
total Sz component is conserved),
Thus, we obtain for the spin current jz, (that plays the
role of the operator Xq),
The real part of the “spin conductivity” σ′(ω) (corresponding to the charge conductivity of the fermionic
model) includes two parts, the Drude weight D and the
regular part σreg(ω)9,10,
σ′(ω) = 2πDδ(ω) + σreg(ω).
The regular contribution is given by,
σreg(ω) = 1 −e−βω
pn| < n|jz|m > |2δ(ω −ωmn)
Microcanonical calculations for N = 26, ∆= 2,
η = 0.02; (a) T = 0, (b) β →0.
where pn are the Boltzmann weights and ωmn = ǫm −ǫn.
To compare the presented data on the conductivity we
normalize them using the well known optical sum-rule
that in the β →0 limit takes the form,
dωσreg(ω) + 2πD = β π
The normalized conductivity, σ(ω), in this high temperature limit is given by,
n̸=m | < n|jz|m > |2δ(ω −ωmn)
that can be calculated using our microcanonical ensemble
procedure by,
σ(ω) 7→−lim
z−H+λjz | λ⟩
π⟨λ | jz2 | λ⟩
In principle this expression includes also the contribution
from the zero frequency Drude weight δ−function, but
in practice as the second Lanczos procedure cannot fully
converge, the Drude peak appears as a low frequency
contribution. As we will discuss below, sorting out this
low frequency part, in general allows us to reliably extract
the Drude weight value.
In general, we can employ the translational symmetry
of the Hamiltonian and study spectra in a given pseudomomentum k−subspace or average the results over
diﬀerent k−subspaces; in the following we typically employ M1 = 1000 and M2 = 4000 Lanczos iterations at
β →0 unless otherwise stated. In Figure 2 we compare a
zero temperature2 with an inﬁnite temperature (β →0)
calculation for a fairly large system in the k = 0 subspace.
microcanonical
microcanonical
Microcanonical versus Canonical calculations; (a)
N = 20, ∆= 0.5, η = 0.01, (b) N = 18, ∆= 1, η = 0.01.
The zero temperature calculation ﬁnds a few poles with
exact weights whereas the inﬁnite temperature calculation provides a much smoother result.
There is clear structure in the inﬁnite temperature result but also apparently some noise. To interpret this
result we must consider the issue of the veracity of the
microcanonical ensemble for such small systems namely
the extent to which the microcanonical ensemble is equivalent to the canonical one.
In Figure 3 we present a comparison, extremely encouraging, of some microcanonical calculations with the
analogous canonical ones. There is ‘noise’ in all calculations, the origin and magnitude of which we will now
discuss. The canonical calculations are essentially a direct evaluation of expression (37), where we applied a
“binning” procedure on the δ−function weights over an
energy scale of about 0.01.
The number of contributing matrix elements are of the order of the dimension
D of the Hilbert space squared, D2, e.g. 106 −108 δ−
functions, with no continuity in the weights. The results
are not smooth and the resulting intrinsic ﬂuctuations
are heavily smoothed by our binning procedure. In the
microcanonical calculations we employ our scheme, further averaging over translational symmetry k−subspaces.
Now, only of O(D) δ−functions are essentially contributing, multiplied by the number of states involved in the
decomposition of the state | λ⟩(a few thousand depending on the convergence) and the number of k−subspaces.
We could average over initial random states, but we ﬁnd
that this has only a small smoothing eﬀect, because the
underlying poles are at the same energies. Notice that
the observed ﬂuctuations are not associated with any of
our diﬀerent resolution processes which are much smaller
than the observed scale of ﬂuctuations; they are due to
the ﬁnite size of our system and thus to the eﬀective
smaller number of matrix elements contributing to the
construction of the spectra. This seemingly new problem
associated with our technique turns out to be dominant
for small system sizes; very soon however it becomes negligible as larger systems are achieved, specially considering that the dimension of Hilbert space grows exponentially fast with the system size N.
In order to assess these ﬂuctuations and simultaneously the role of our smoothing parameter η, we performed some basic calculations involving only a single
k−subspace state | λ⟩. In Figure 4 we oﬀer a comparison
of calculations involving just the poles evaluated using
the 2nd Lanczos procedure eigenstates against smoothed
versions of the same data but employing the continued
fraction technique.
The ﬂuctuations clearly decay with system size with
the ﬁnal system being surprisingly smooth.
The limitations of the smoothing process are clear, the sharper
features are slightly washed out although the ease of assessing the data makes such a smoothing advisable. The
weights for these microcanonical calculations are truly
quite continuous in comparison to the intrinsic properties
of the canonical calculation which is necessarily ragged.
Obviously for our largest calculations we are nowhere
near converged to the true spectrum which is a possible
explanation for the observed continuity.
We can now fairly safely conclude that our technique is
a viable way to calculate dynamical correlation functions
at high temperature for the same systems accessible by
the Lanczos method at T = 0. By its very nature, the
ﬁnite T correlations are much smoother and more regular
to interpret.
Our technique introduces new statistical
ﬂuctuations which make small system sizes ragged but
appear to leave large system sizes essentially unaﬀected.
Although we can now investigate ﬁnite temperature
dynamic correlations using the Lanczos method, we are
still restricted to N ∼30 for a spin-1/2 system. The key
to making useful physical deductions is the procedure of
ﬁnite-size scaling, the attempt to deduce the properties
of the inﬁnite size system using assumed properties of
the size, N, dependence. This method has been widely
and succesfully applied in the evaluation of ground state
energies or gap values using data provided by the exact
diagonalization, Lanczos or Density Matrix Renormal-
FIG. 4: Microcanonical ﬁnite-size eﬀects for ∆=2; (a) N=22,
ization Group technique. But to extract information on
ﬁnite temperature dynamic correlations one would need
to know the form of the curves before ﬁtting and scaling could take place mathematically. As it is clear from
Figure 5 this might be a challenging task considering the
statistical ﬂuctuations inherent in the spectra15; however,
from ongoing studies on other systems using this method,
we ﬁnd that the behavior of the spectra might greatly depend on the model Hamiltonian and correlations under
study (e.g. it is far more structurless for energy current
dynamic correlations). Note that the high frequency behavior is generally rather weakly size dependent while the
low frequency one is the most subtle to determine. The
last however is the most physically interesting as it determines, for instance, the diﬀusive or ballistic behavior
of the conductivity.
The basic properties of the β →0 current-current correlations are now available and so we provide in Figure 6
a few examples of the frequency dependence of the conductivity at β →0 as a function of ∆.
Although we have devoted most of our eﬀort to inﬁ-
Finite-size scaling for ∆= 2
Microcanonical ensemble evaluation of the normalized conductivity σ(ω) for β →0,
N = 28; (a) ∆= 0.5, 1.0,
(b) ∆= 2.0, 4.0
nite temperature (β →0), our technique is valid at essentially any temperature (provided that we remain at
a dense region of the spectrum).
Analysing the pure
Heisenberg model, we look at a couple of ﬁnite temperature k−averaged calculations in Figure 7. The temperature has been deduced from a least-squares ﬁt of the
s(−ω) ∼α + βmicroω
to a linear Ansatz, and although the statistical ﬂuctuations are compounded, an almost vanishing intercept
and a clear slope indicate the feasibility of the strategy. The obtained βmicro values compare favorably with
those corresponding to the canonical ensemble in the
ln[s(ω)/s(−ω)]
ln[s(ω)/s(−ω)]
Finite temperature calculations for N = 24, ∆=1,
η = 0.01; (a) s(ω), λ = −3, (b) Temperature ﬁt βmicro ≃0.14,
(c) s(ω), λ = −6, (d) Temperature ﬁt βmicro ≃0.28.
thermodynamic limit, evaluated using λ =< H >β; for
λ = −3, βmicro ∼0.14 vs. βcanonical ∼0.15, for λ = −6,
βmicro ∼0.28 vs. βcanonical ∼0.3.
Although we have compared numerical evaluation of
dynamic correlations obtained by a canonical and microcanonical method, we have yet to compare with an exact
solution. Recently even non-zero temperature dynamical
correlations have become partially accessible, with a calculation of the Drude weight for the 0 < ∆< 1 Heisenberg model at ﬁnite temperature13.
In particular, the
Drude weight in the β →0 limit is given analytically17
(π/ν −0.5 sin(2π/ν))
∆= cos(π/ν).
FIG. 8: A comparison of three ‘microcanonical’ distributions
⟨K⟩= 0.002(M1 = 500), 0.0005(M1 = 1000), 0.0012 , for N = 26 and ∆= 0.5; inset, low frequency range.
The Drude weight, strictly speaking, is deﬁned as the
weight of a zero frequency δ−function, eq.(36); it is a
particularity of the Heisenberg model that it appears as
a narrow peak at low frequencies, of the order of the
inverse lattice size16, in contrast to the fermionic “t-V”
version where it is accounted for only by the diagonal
energy elements (ω = 0).
In extracting the Drude weight by the above described
procedure we must take into account the problem caused
by the intrinsic resolution of our calculations, which is
of order σ =
⟨K⟩. Although our chosen resolution of
σ ∼0.01 is almost invisible for the smooth background,
for the Drude weight the resolution is essentially limited
by that of our ‘microcanonical’ distribution, viz σ. An
example of these ideas is provided in Figure 8, from which
it is clear that the Drude peak is the only contribution
for which the change in resolution is relevant.
calculations involve a single state and are much improved
by k−averaging, also the energy window is so small that
the individual poles in the 2nd Lanczos procedure are
visible and have been smoothed out with an η=0.005
which adds to the observed resolution. In the inset, the
scale of the conductivity clearly signals a low frequency
peak (notice the diﬀerence in scale between Figure 8 and
its inset); still in order to extract the Drude weight from
the smooth background, we must integrate the peak up
to at least as far as it is resolved and that necessitates
the inclusion of some of the background. We have elected
to err on the side of inclusion and tend to integrate past
where the Drude peak appears to become small.
In Figure 9 we oﬀer a comparison of the analytical
and numerically extracted Drude weights in the β →0
limit. The quantitative agreement is reasonably satisfactory, becoming rather poor near ∆∼1 because of our
technique for extracting the Drude weight; due to the
ﬁnite resolution of our calculation we need to sample a
ﬁnite width around ω = 0. For the case ∆= 1 there is
analytical
FIG. 9: Comparison of β →0 Drude weight, D/β; numerical
evaluation (points) vs analytical expression eq. (42) (continuous line).
no Drude weight but there does appear to be a powerlaw like divergence which we pick up in our ﬁnite window
leading to the observed corrupted behaviour.
DISCUSSION
Our investigation appears to validate the use of the
Lanczos algorithm to analyse ﬁnite temperature dynamical properties of strongly correlated systems; the crucial
step is to employ the microcanonical ensemble, which
essentially allows the thermodynamic average to be replaced by an elementary expectation value. All the simplicity of the zero temperature formalism can then be
taken over to the ﬁnite temperature calculation.
comparison of canonical with microcanonical procedures
indicates that the thermodynamic limit is reached with
quite modest system sizes and consequently there appears to be little systematic error coming from our choice
of ensemble. There are intrinsic statistical ﬂuctuations
in our calculations but these are severely curtailed by
increasing the system size and are an implicit diﬃculty
with canonical calculations too. We believe that we can
calculate the high enough temperature dynamical correlations for a ﬁnite system with an excellent tolerance.
The statistical ﬂuctuations in our results require to be
controlled if an error analysis is to be contemplated. Although we have not got analytical control, we do have
experience at various approaches to reducing the statistical ﬂuctuations. The crucial point is that, when taking
a statistical average, one should use “orthogonal” states
(| λ⟩’s decomposed into diﬀerent sets of eigenstates | n⟩).
Averaging over random starting vectors in the same subspace is not very eﬀective, even if they are originally orthogonal, because the resulting distribution involves the
same states and consequently an overlap. Performing a
k−average, over translational symmetry subspaces, is an
excellent procedure, since the states are automatically orthogonal and intellectually one is reverting back towards
the real physical statistical average. Another possibility
is to use several of the eigenstates of the ﬁrst Lanczos procedure; although the orthogonality is guaranteed, there
is an induced loss in resolution due to the larger σ’s of
the higher Lanczos states. A ﬁnal possibility is to employ the parameter λ, where the average over diﬀerent
λ’s must be limited within a window that corresponds
to the energy ﬂuctuations at the studied temperature in
the given size system. Providing that the λ’s are further
apart than the chosen σ, the orthogonality is essentially
guaranteed.
Although we believe we have access to the temperature
behaviour of ﬁnite-size systems, this does not give immediate access to the dynamics in the thermodynamic limit
because ﬁnite-size scaling must be performed; Figure 6
exhibits clear peaks of unknown form, plausible ‘cusps’
and regions where the correlations vanish. Unless we can
guess or deduce the form of these structures, ﬁnite-size
scaling appears problematic.
We should note however
from our experience, that not all models and dynamic
correlations exhibit so involved spectra; in forthcoming
works we will present analysis of charge/spin/energy current correlations for other (non-) integrable systems of
current interest (higher spin, ladder models) where the
obtained spectra are far more structrurless. Finally, besides the ﬁnite frequency behavior, our method allows the
reliable study of scalar quantities as the Drude weight.
Acknowledgments
Part of this work was done during visits of (P.P.) and
(M.L.) at IRRMA as academic guests of EPFL. J.K. and
X.Z acknowledge support by the Swiss National Foundation, the University of Fribourg and the University of
Neuchˆatel.
1 R. Haydock, V. Heine and M.J. Kelly, J. Phys. C5, 2845
2 E.R. Cagliano and C.A. Balseiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2999
3 J. Jakliˇc, P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B49, 5065 ; Adv.
Phys. 19, 1 .
4 L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, “Course of Theoretical
Physics: Statistical Mechanics”, 5, 377 (footnote), Pergamon Press, London - Paris .
5 J.L. Lebowitz, J.K. Percus and L. Verlet, Phys. Rev. 153,
250 .
6 “Quantum Inverse Scattering Method and Correlation
Functions”, V.E. Korepin, N.M. Bogoliubov and A.G. Izergin, Cambridge Univ. Press .
7 M. Takigawa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4612 .
8 K.R. Thurber et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 247202 .
9 X. Zotos and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B53, 983 .
10 X. Zotos, F. Naef and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B55 11029
11 K. Fabricius and B.M. McCoy, Phys. Rev. B57, 8340
 and references therein.
12 B.N. Narozhny, A.J. Millis and N. Andrei, Phys. Rev. B58,
2921 .
13 X. Zotos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1764 .
14 J. V. Alvarez and C. Gros, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 077203
15 The low frequency behavior of the spin-1/2 Heisenberg
model, in particular the ﬁnite-size dependence as extracted
from such a microcanonical study, will be adressed in a
forthcoming publication.
16 F. Naef and X. Zotos, J. Phys. C. 10, L183 ; F. Naef,
Ph. D. thesis no.2127, EPF-Lausanne .
17 A. Kl¨umper, private communication.
18 S. Fujimoto and N. Kawakami, J. Phys. A. 31, 465 .