Yang, Xin-She
Nature-inspired optimization algorithms. (English)
Zbl 1291.90005
Amsterdam: Elsevier (ISBN 978-0-12-416743-8/hbk; 978-0-12-416745-2/ebook). xii, 263 p. .
This book discusses standard and very recent nature-inspired optimization algorithms. It consists of 263
pages and contains 15 chapters and two appendices. The book focuses on the description of the basic
algorithms, analyzes some key components of these algorithms and discusses briefly some key steps in
their implementation. A typical chapter about a particular type of algorithm has about 10 to 15 pages.
Each chapter finishes with some references.
The first three chapters are of introductory nature. Chapter 1 gives a brief introduction to algorithms.
It describes Newton’s method, formulates optimization problems and discusses no-free lunch theorems.
This chapter finishes with some brief words about nature-inspired metaheuristics together with a short
history of these algorithms. Chapter 2 deals with the analysis of algorithms. It gives an overview of the
key components of such algorithms. In one section, ten nature-inspired algorithms are explained from an
overall point of view. On 2.5 pages, parameter tuning and control are very briefly discussed. Chapter 3
is dedicated to random walks and optimization. Among others, it presents sections dealing with random
variables, isotropic random walks, Levy distribution and Levy flights. It also discusses the importance of
randomization and explains the eagle strategy.
Chapters 4–11 deal with different types of nature-inspired optimization algorithms, where Chapters 4–7
consider meanwhile standard strategies. Chapter 4 deals with simulated annealing as one of the earliest
and most popular metaheuristics. After presenting the foundations of the metaheuristic, basic convergence
properties and its behavior in practice are discussed. Finally the idea of stochastic tunneling is explained.
Chapter 5 deals with genetic algorithms. After a brief description, the role of the genetic operators and
the choice of parameters are discussed. Then some variants of the genetic algorithm and Holland’s schema
theorem as one of the theoretical results are presented. This chapter finishes with a brief convergence
analysis. Chapter 6 discusses differential evolution as a vector-based metaheuristic algorithm introduced
by Storn and Price in 1996. For this algorithm, which is related to pattern research and genetic algorithms, again the basic algorithm, further variants, parameter choice and convergence analysis aspects
are reviewed. A separate section deals with implementation details for an unconstrained optimization
problem. Chapter 7 describes particle swarm optimization algorithms which are based on fish or bird
swarm behavior in nature and which were originally developed by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995. After
given the basic algorithm, an accelerated particle swarm algorithm is given and its implementation details
are discussed. Some convergence aspects are presented and finally a binary particle swarm algorithm is
described.
Chapters 8–11 deal with some very recently developed techniques. Chapter 8 discusses firefly algorithms
developed by Yang in 2008. It is based on the flashing patterns and behavior of fireflies. After describing
the algorithm, it is analyzed in more detail. Then nine variants are briefly mentioned. After reviewing
some firefly algorithms in applications, an attempt is made to explain why these algorithms are efficient.
Chapter 9 deals with cuckoo search developed by Yang and Deb in 2009. This algorithmic type is discussed
more in detail and some arguments are mentioned why it is so efficient. A brief mathematical analysis
of global convergence aspects is given and finally some applications are discussed. Chapter 10 deals with
bio-inspired bat algorithms. After giving some foundations about the echolocation of bats, the basic
algorithm is given and implementation details are presented. A binary bat algorithm is given and seven
variants of the standard bat algorithm are briefly mentioned. Again, an argument for the efficiency of
this type of algorithm is presented and six applications are discussed (e.g. continuous optimization, data
mining or image processing). Chapter 11 deals with flower pollination algorithms developed by Yang in
2012. They are inspired by the pollination process of flowering plants. A basic algorithm is given and
then the multi-objective case is discussed. Some numerical results and a few applications are given.
Chapter 12 presents a framework for self-tuning algorithms. It contains a section about algorithm analysis
and parameter tuning and then it presents the framework. As an illustration, a self-tuning firefly algorithm
is discussed. Chapter 13 deals with the question how to deal with constraints. In separate sections,
among others, the Lagrange multiplier method, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions, the penalty method,
Edited by FIZ Karlsruhe, the European Mathematical Society and the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities
© 2025 FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH
equality with tolerance and feasibility rules and stochastic ranking are discussed. This chapter ends with
a cuckoo search implementation. Chapter 14 discusses multi-objective optimization. After giving a brief
introduction and a discussion of Pareto optimality, separate sections present the weighted sum method,
the utility method, the ϵ-constraint method and the nondominated sorting genetic algorithm (also denoted
as NSGA-II). Chapter 15 deals with some further algorithms as well as hybrid variants. Particular sections
are devoted to ant colony algorithms, bee-inspired algorithms, harmony search and hybridizations. These
algorithms are discussed in an extremely short way since many research papers exist about these types
of algorithms.
Appendix A presents test function benchmarks for global optimization, and Appendix B gives Matlab
programs for particular types of metaheuristics. Since particularly in the last 10 years many new natureinspired strategies haven been developed, the book is a valuable reference tool to get a brief but up-to-date
insight into the current state of the research in this field.
Reviewer: Frank Werner (Magdeburg)
Research exposition (monographs, survey articles) pertaining to operations research and mathematical programming
Approximation methods and heuristics in mathematical programming
Problem solving in the context of artificial intelligence (heuristics,
search strategies, etc.)
Applications of mathematical programming
Multi-objective and goal programming
Cited in 37 Documents
Metaheuristics; Optimization problems; Simulated annealing; Genetic algorithm; Particle swarm optimization; Differential evolution; Multi-objective programming
Edited by FIZ Karlsruhe, the European Mathematical Society and the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities
© 2025 FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH