JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
Data Augmentation using Random Image Cropping
and Patching for Deep CNNs
Ryo Takahashi, Takashi Matsubara, Member, IEEE, and Kuniaki Uehara,
Abstract—Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable results in image processing tasks. However,
their high expression ability risks overﬁtting. Consequently,
data augmentation techniques have been proposed to prevent
overﬁtting while enriching datasets. Recent CNN architectures
with more parameters are rendering traditional data augmentation techniques insufﬁcient. In this study, we propose a new
data augmentation technique called random image cropping and
patching (RICAP) which randomly crops four images and patches
them to create a new training image. Moreover, RICAP mixes
the class labels of the four images, resulting in an advantage
of the soft labels. We evaluated RICAP with current state-ofthe-art CNNs (e.g., the shake-shake regularization model) by
comparison with competitive data augmentation techniques such
as cutout and mixup. RICAP achieves a new state-of-the-art test
error of 2.19% on CIFAR-10. We also conﬁrmed that deep CNNs
with RICAP achieve better results on classiﬁcation tasks using
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, an image-caption retrieval task using
Microsoft COCO, and other computer vision tasks.
Index Terms—Data Augmentation, Image Classiﬁcation, Convolutional Neural Network, Image-Caption Retrieval
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to
signiﬁcant achievement in the ﬁelds of image classiﬁcation and
image processing owing to their numerous parameters and rich
expression ability , . A recent study demonstrated that
the performance of CNNs is logarithmically proportional to the
number of training samples . Conversely, without enough
training samples, CNNs with numerous parameters have a
risk of overﬁtting because they memorize detailed features
of training images that cannot be generalized , . Since
collecting numerous samples is prohibitively costly, data augmentation methods have been commonly used , . Data
augmentation increases the variety of images by manipulating
them in several ways such as ﬂipping, resizing, and random
cropping – . Color jitter changes the brightness, contrast,
and saturation, and color translating alternates intensities of
RGB channels using principal component analysis (PCA) .
Dropout on the input layer is a common technique
that injects noise into an image by dropping pixels and a
kind of data augmentations . Unlike conventional data
augmentation techniques, dropout can disturb and mask the
features of original images. Many recent studies have proposed
new CNN architectures that have many more parameters –
 , and the above traditional data augmentation techniques
have become insufﬁcient.
Takahashi,
Matsubara,
School of System Informatics, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokko-dai, Nada,
 ,
 , and .
Conceptual explanation of the proposed random image cropping
and patching (RICAP) data augmentation. Four training images are randomly
cropped as denoted by the red shaded areas, and patched to construct a new
training image (at center). The size of the ﬁnal image is identical to that of
the original one (e.g., 32 × 32 for the CIFAR dataset ). These images are
collected from the training set of the ImageNet dataset .
Therefore, nowadays, new data augmentation techniques
have attracted increasing attention – . Cutout 
randomly masks a square region in an image at every training
step and thus changes the apparent features. Cutout is an
extension of dropout on the input layer that can achieve better
performance. Random erasing also masks a subregion in
an image like cutout. Unlike cutout, it randomly determines
whether to mask a region as well as the size and aspect ratio
of the masked region. Mixup alpha-blends two images
to form a new image, regularizing the CNN to favor simple
linear behavior in-between training images. In addition to an
increase in the variety of images, mixup behaves as soft labels
as it mixes the class labels of two images with the ratio
λ : 1 −λ . These new data augmentation techniques have
been applied to modern deep CNNs and have broken records,
demonstrating the importance of data augmentation.
In this study, as a further advancement in data augmentation,
we propose a novel method called random image cropping
and patching (RICAP). RICAP crops four training images
and patches them to construct a new training image; it selects
images and determines the cropping sizes randomly, where the
size of the ﬁnal image is identical to that of the original image.
A conceptual explanation is shown in Fig. 1. RICAP also
mixes class labels of the four images with ratios proportional
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
to the areas of the four images. Compared to mixup, RICAP
has three clear distinctions: it mixes images spatially, it uses
partial images by cropping, and it does not create features that
are absent in the original dataset except for boundary patching.
We introduce the detailed algorithm of RICAP in Section III-A and explain its conceptual contributions in Section III-D. We apply RICAP to existing deep CNNs and
evaluate them on the classiﬁcation tasks using the CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 , and ImageNet datasets in Sections IV-A,
IV-B and IV-C. The experimental results demonstrate that
RICAP outperforms existing data augmentation techniques,
In particular, RICAP achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation task. Furthermore, in
Section V-A, we visualize the region where the model focuses
attention using class activation mapping , demonstrating
that RICAP makes CNNs focus attention on various objects
and features in an image, in other words, RICAP prevents
CNNs from overﬁtting to speciﬁc features. We demonstrated
in Section V-B that the model can learn the deeper relationship
between the object and its background when a cropped region
contains no object. We describe the ablation study performed
in Section VI-A and make further comparison of RICAP
with mixup in Section VI-B. In addition, we conﬁrm that
RICAP works well for an image-caption retrieval task using
Microsoft COCO dataset in Section VII-A, person reidentiﬁcation task in Section VII-B and object detection task
in Section VII-C.
Limited preliminary results can be found in a recent conference proceeding . The improvements from the proceeding
are as follows. We modiﬁed the distribution generating boundary position from uniform distribution having two parameters
to beta distribution having one parameter. This modiﬁcation
simpliﬁed RICAP and improved the performance. By visualizing regions to which a CNN pays much attention, we
demonstrated that RICAP supports the CNN to use wider
variety of features from the same image and prevents the
overﬁtting to features of a speciﬁc region in Section V-A.
We also visualized that the CNN trained with RICAP learns
the deeper relationship between the foreground object and its
background, which is thanks to the chance of training with
cropped regions containing no objects in Section V-B. We performed the ablation study to evaluate contributions of image
mixing (cropping and patching) and label mixing of RICAP
in Section VI-A. We demonstrated the importance of image
patching in RICAP by a detailed comparison with mixup in
Section VI-B. We conﬁrmed that RICAP functions well for
image-caption retrieval task, person re-identiﬁcation task, and
object detection task in addition to the image classiﬁcation
in Sections VII-A, VII-B, and VII-C. We appended a Python
code of RICAP for reproduction in Algorithm 1.
II. RELATED WORKS
RICAP is a novel data augmentation technique and can be
applied to deep CNNs in the same manner as conventional
techniques. In addition, RICAP is related to the soft labels. In
this section, we explain related works on data augmentation
and soft labels.
A. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation increases the variety of training samples
and prevents overﬁtting , . We introduce related methods
by categorizing them into four groups; standard method, data
disrupting method, data mixing method, and auto-adjustment
1) Standard Data Augmentation Method: A deep CNN,
AlexNet , used random cropping and horizontal ﬂipping
for evaluation on the CIFAR dataset . Random cropping prevents a CNN from overﬁtting to speciﬁc features by changing
the apparent features in an image. Horizontal ﬂipping doubles
the variation in an image with speciﬁc orientations, such as
a side-view of an airplane. AlexNet also performed principal
component analysis (PCA) on a set of RGB values to alter the
intensities of the RGB channels for evaluation on the ImageNet
dataset . They added multiples of the found principal
components to each image. This type of color translation
is useful for colorful objects, such as ﬂowers. Facebook AI
Research employed another method of color translation called
color jitter for the reimplementation of ResNet available
at Color jitter randomly changes the brightness, contrast, and saturation of an
image instead of the RGB channels. These traditional data
augmentation techniques play an important role in training
deep CNNs. However, the number of parameters is evergrowing and the risk of overﬁtting is also ever-increasing as
many studies propose new network architectures – following ResNet . Therefore, data augmentation techniques
have attracted further attention.
2) Data Disrupting Method: The aforementioned standard
methods simply enrich datasets because the resultant images
are still natural. Contrary to them, some methods produce
unnatural images by disrupting images’ features. Dropout on
the input layer is a data augmentation technique 
that disturbs and masks the original information of given data
by dropping pixels. Pixel dropping functions as injection of
noise into an image . It makes the CNN robust to noisy
images and contributes to generalization rather than enriching
the dataset.
Cutout randomly masks a square region in an image at every
training step . It is an extension of dropout, where masking
of regions behaves like injected noise and makes CNNs robust
to noisy images. In addition, cutout can mask the entire main
part of an object in an image, such as the face of a cat. In this
case, CNNs need to learn other parts that are usually ignored,
such as the tail of the cat. This prevents deep CNNs from
overﬁtting to features of the main part of an object. A similar
method, random erasing, has been proposed . It also masks
a certain area of an image but has clear differences; it randomly
determines whether to mask a region as well as the size and
aspect ratio of the masked region.
3) Data Mixing Method: This is a special case of data
disrupting methods. Mixup alpha-blends two images to construct a new training image . Mixup can train deep
CNNs on convex combinations of pairs of training samples
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
and their labels, and enables deep CNNs to favor a simple
linear behavior in-between training samples. This behavior
makes the prediction conﬁdence transit linearly from one
class to another class, thus providing smoother estimation
and margin maximization. Alpha-blending not only increases
the variety of training images but also works like adversarial
perturbation . Thereby, mixup makes deep CNNs robust to
adversarial examples and stabilizes the training of generative
adversarial networks. In addition, it behaves as soft labels by
mixing class labels with the ratio λ : 1 −λ . We explain
soft labels in detail below.
4) Auto-adjustment Method: AutoAugment is a framework exploring the best hyperparameters of existing data augmentations using reinforcement learning . Hence, it is not
a data augmentation method but is an external framework. It
achieved signiﬁcant results on the CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation and
proved the importance of data augmentation for the learning
of deep CNN.
B. Soft Labels
For classiﬁcation tasks, the ground truth is typically given
as probabilities of 0 and 1, called the hard labels . A
CNN commonly employs the softmax function, which never
predicts an exact probability of 0 and 1. Thus, the CNN
continues to learn increasingly larger weight parameters and
make an unjustly high conﬁdence. Knowledge distillation 
proposed to use soft labels, which have intermediate probabilities such as 0.1 and 0.9. This method employs the predictions
of a trained CNN using the softmax function with a high
temperature to obtain the soft labels. The soft labels contain
rich information about the similarity between classes and the
ambiguity of each sample (For example, the dog class is
similar to the cat class rather than the plane class). As a
simpler approach, Szegedy et al. proposed label smoothing,
which provides the soft labels of given probabilities such as 0.9
and 0.8 . The label smoothing prevents the endless pursuit
of hard 0 and 1 probabilities for the estimated classes and
enables the weight parameters to converge to certain values
without discouraging correct classiﬁcation. Mixup provides
the soft labels of a probability equal to the α-value of the
blending, which regularizes the CNN to favor a simple linear
behavior in-between training images because mixup blends
two images at the pixel level. As a result, mixup pushes the
decision boundary away from original samples and maximizes
the margin.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Random Image Cropping and Patching (RICAP)
In this study, we propose a novel data augmentation technique called random image cropping and patching (RICAP) for
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The conceptual
explanation of RICAP is shown in Fig. 1. It consists of
three data manipulation steps. First, four images are randomly
selected from the training set. Second, the images are cropped
separately. Third, the cropped images are patched to create a
new image. Despite this simple procedure, RICAP increases
(w , h) : boundary position
Detailed explanation of RICAP. Ix and Iy are the width and height
of the original image, respectively. Four images are randomly cropped, as
denoted by the red shaded areas, and patched according to the boundary
position (w, h). The boundary position (w, h) is generated from a beta
distribution Beta(β, β), where β is a hyperparameter of RICAP. Based on
the boundary position (w, h), the cropped positions (xk, yk) are selected
such that they do not change the image size.
the variety of images drastically and prevents overﬁtting of
deep CNNs having numerous parameters.
A more speciﬁc explanation of the implementation is shown
in Fig. 2. We randomly select four images k ∈{1, 2, 3, 4} from
the training set and patch them on the upper left, upper right,
lower left, and lower right regions. Ix and Iy denote the width
and height of the original training image, respectively. (w, h)
is the boundary position which gives the size and position of
each cropped image. We choose this boundary position (w, h)
in every training step from beta distributions as below.
w = round(w′Ix),
h = round(h′Iy),
w′ ∼Beta(β, β),
h′ ∼Beta(β, β),
where β ∈(0, ∞) is a hyperparameter and round(·) is the
rounding function. Once we determine the boundary position
(w, h), we automatically obtain the cropping sizes (wk, hk)
of the images k, i.e., w1 = w3 = w, w2 = w4 = Ix −w,
h1 = h2 = h, and h3 = h4 = Iy −h. For cropping the four
images k following the sizes (wk, hk), we randomly determine
the positions (xk, yk) of the upper left corners of the cropped
xk ∼U(0, Ix −wk),
yk ∼U(0, Iy −hk).
B. Label Mixing of RICAP for Classiﬁcation
For the classiﬁcation task, the class labels of the four images
are mixed with ratios proportional to the image areas. We
deﬁne the target label c by mixing one-hot coded class labels
ck of the four patched images with ratios Wi proportional to
their areas in the new constructed image;
k∈{1,2,3,4}
Wkck for Wk = wkhk
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
where wkhk is the area of the cropped image k and IxIy is
the area of the original image.
C. Hyperparameter of RICAP
The hyperparameter β determines the distribution of boundary position. If β is large, the boundary position (w, h) tends
to be close to the center of a patched image and the target
class probabilities c often have values close to 0.25. RICAP
encounters a risk of excessive soft labeling, discouraging
correct classiﬁcation. If β is small, the boundary position
(w, h) tends to be close to the four corners of the patched
image and the target class probabilities c often have 0 or
1 probabilities. Especially, with β = 0, RICAP does not
augment images but provides original images. With β = 1.0,
the boundary position (w, h) is distributed uniformly over the
patched images. For reproduction, we provide a Python code
of RICAP for classiﬁcation in Algorithm 1 in Appendix.
D. Concept of RICAP
RICAP shares concepts with cutout, mixup, and soft labels,
and potentially overcomes their shortcomings.
Cutout masks a subregion of an image and RICAP crops
a subregion of an image. Both change the apparent features
of the image at every training step. However, masking in
cutout simply reduces the amount of available features in each
sample. Conversely, the proposed RICAP patches images, and
hence the whole region of a patched image produces features
contributing to the training.
Mixup employs an alpha-blend (i.e., blending of pixel intensity), while RICAP patches four cropped images, which can
be regarded as a spatial blend. By alpha-blending two images,
mixup generates pixel-level features that original images never
produce, drastically increasing the variety of features that
a CNN has to learn and potentially disrupting the training.
Conversely, images patched by RICAP method always produce
pixel-level features that original images also produce except
for boundary patching.
The label smoothing always provides soft labels for preventing endless pursuit of the hard probabilities. Also, mixup
provides the soft labels of a probability equal to the αvalue of the blending, leading the decision boundary away
from original samples and the margin maximization. On the
other hand, RICAP replaces the classiﬁcation task with the
occupancy estimation task by mixing the four class labels with
ratios proportional to the areas of the four cropped images.
This indicates that RICAP forces the CNN to classify each
pixel in a weakly supervised manner, and thereby, the CNN
becomes to use minor features, partial features, backgrounds,
and any other information that is often ignored. In particular,
the extreme case that the cropped area has no object is
described in Section III-E. RICAP tends to provide softer
labels than the label smoothing, so that the soft labels of
RICAP without the image patching disturbs the classiﬁcation
as shown in Section VI-A. These studies share the sense
of soft labels but their contributions are vastly different. We
summarized the works of RICAP by image mixing and label
mixing on image classiﬁcation in the Fig. 3.
overall feature
overall feature
partial feature
enrich the variety of feature learning
Comparison between classiﬁcation by usual CNN training and by
RICAP training. Based on the boundary position, image mixing and soft labels
of RICAP changes its role. In the case of the boundary position is close to
four corners, CNN learns the overall features or enjoy the beneﬁt of the soft
labels. In the case of the boundary position close to center of patched image,
RICAP replaces the classiﬁcation task with the occupancy estimation task.
This occupancy estimation forces the CNN to classify each pixel, and thereby,
the CNN becomes to use minor features, partial features, backgrounds, and
any other information that is often ignored in parallel 4 images.
E. Object Existence in Cropped Areas
When the boundary position (w, h) is close to the four corners, a cropped area becomes small and occasionally depicts
no object. For classifying natural images, we expect that a
part of the subject is basically cropped, but of course, the
cropped region could contain no object by cropping only the
background. In this case, a CNN tries to associate the background with the subject class because the CNN has to output
the posterior probability of the subject class proportional to
the area of the cropped region. Thereby, the CNN learns
the relationship between the object class and the background.
Hence, the chance of RICAP that the cropped region contains
no object does not limit the performance of the CNN but
improves it. When two classes share similar backgrounds
(e.g., planes and birds are depicted in front of the sky), the
backgrounds are associated with both classes as distinguished
from other classes. Moreover, when a cropped region is too
small to learn features, the CNN simply ignores the cropped
region and enjoys the beneﬁt of the soft labels like the label
smoothing. We will evaluate this concept in Section V-B.
F. Differences between RICAP and mixup
Before we end Section III, we summarize again the main
differences between RICAP and mixup to emphasize the
novelty of RICAP by using Fig. 4.
A main difference is the blending strategy; RICAP employs
patching (i.e., spatial blending) while mixup employs alphablending (i.e., pixel-wise blending), as shown in the left two
images in Fig. 4. To clarify this impact, we focus on the subareas surrounded by the red dotted lines. As depicted in the
upper right panel, by blending two objects, mixup’s alphablending sometimes creates local features that are absent in the
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
Comparison between images processed by RICAP and mixup.
original dataset and leads to an extremely difﬁcult recognition
task. This tendency disturbs the model training as excessive
adversarial perturbation, or at least, wastes the computational
time and model capacity. On the other hand, as depicted in the
lower right panel, RICAP’s patching (spatial blending) always
produces local features included in the original dataset. The
local features always support the model training. Of course, the
patching can create new global features by combining multiple
objects, but this tendency prevents the CNN from overﬁtting
to the existing combination of objects.
Another main difference is the cropping by RICAP. As
shown in the upper left panel, the whole bodies of a penguin
and an aircraft are still recognizable even after mixup’s alphablending because the backgrounds are simple textures. Alphablending an object with a background is insufﬁcient for
masking an object, and a CNN can focus on and overﬁt to
salient features such as penguin head or aircraft empennage.
On the other hand, RICAP’s cropping removes many parts of
an object, that is, removes many features literally. Thereby,
RICAP prevents the CNN from overﬁtting to salient features
like data disrupting methods introduced in Section II-A2. Even
when a foreground object is totally removed, the CNN is
trained to ﬁnd the relationship between the class labels and
backgrounds.
In short, mixup tends to produce too easy or too difﬁcult
tasks while RICAP works as an appropriate regularizer.
IV. EXPERIMENTS ON IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
To evaluate the performance of RICAP, we apply it to deep
CNNs and evaluate it on the classiﬁcation task in this section
A. Classiﬁcation of CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
Experimental Settings: In this section, we show the
application of RICAP to an existing deep CNN and evaluate
it on the classiﬁcation tasks of the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
datasets . CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 consist of 32 × 32
RGB images of objects in natural scenes. 50, 000 images are
used for training and 10, 000 for test. Each image is manually
assigned one of the 10 class labels in CIFAR-10 and one of
the 100 in CIFAR-100. The number of images per class is
thus reduced in CIFAR-100. Based on previous studies –
 , we normalized each channel of all images to zero mean
and unit variance as preprocessing. We also employed 4pixel padding on each side, 32 × 32 random cropping, and
random ﬂipping in the horizontal direction as conventional
data augmentation techniques.
We used a residual network called WideResNet . We
used an architecture called WideResNet 28-10, which consists
of 28 convolution layers with a widen factor of 10 and
employs dropout with a drop probability of p = 0.3 in the
intermediate layers. This architecture achieved the highest
accuracy on the CIFAR datasets in the original study .
The hyperparameters were set to be the same as those used
in the original study. Batch normalization and ReLU
activation function were used. The weight parameters
were initialized following the He algorithm . The weight
parameters were updated using the momentum SGD algorithm
with a momentum parameter of 0.9 and weight decay of 10−4
over 200 epochs with batches of 128 images. The learning rate
was initialized to 0.1, and then, it was reduced to 0.02, 0.004
and 0.0008 at the 60th, 120th and 160th epochs, respectively.
Classiﬁcation
WideResNet to explore the best value of the hyperparameter
β. Ix and Iy were 32 for the CIFAR datasets. Fig. 5 shows the
results on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. The baselines denote the
results of the WideResNet without RICAP. For both CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100, β = 0.3 resulted the best test error
rates. With an excessively large β, we obtained worse results
than the baseline, which suggests the negative inﬂuence of
excessive soft labeling. With decreasing β, the performance
converged to the baseline results. We also summarized the
results of RICAP in Table I as well as the results of competitive
methods: input dropout , cutout , random erasing ,
and mixup . Competitive results denoted by † symbols
were obtained from our experiments and the other results
were cited from the original studies. In our experiments, each
value following the ± symbol was the standard deviation over
three runs. Recall that WideResNet usually employs dropout
in intermediate layers. As the dropout data augmentation, we
added dropout to the input layer for comparison. The drop
probability was set to p = 0.2 according to the original
study . For other competitive methods, we set the hyperparameters to values with which the CNNs achieved the best
results in the original studies: cutout size 16×16 (CIFAR-10)
and 8 × 8 (CIFAR-100) for cutout and α = 1.0 for mixup.
RICAP clearly outperformed the competitive methods.
Analysis of Results: For further analysis of RICAP, we
plotted the losses and error rates in training and test phases
with and without RICAP in Fig. 6. While the commonly used
loss function for multi-class classiﬁcation is cross-entropy,
it converges to zero for hard labels but not for soft labels.
For improving visibility, we employed the Kullback-Leibler
divergence as the loss function, which provides the gradients
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
Exploration of the hyperparameter β of RICAP using the WideResNet 28-10 for a wider range of β on CIFAR-10 (left upper panel) and on CIFAR-100
(right upper panel) and for a more speciﬁc range of [0.1, 1.0] on CIFAR-10 (left lower panel) and on CIFAR-100 (right upper panel). We performed three
runs, depicting the means and standard deviations by solid lines and shaded areas, respectively. The baseline indicates the results of the WideResNet without
same as the cross-entropy loss and converges to zero for both
hard and soft labels. Also, we used the class of the cropped
image with the highest occupancy as the correct label to
calculate the training error rates for mixed images.
According to Figs. 6 (a)–(d), training losses and error
rates of WideResNet with RICAP never converge to zero and
the WideResNet continues to train. This result implies that
RICAP makes the classiﬁcation training more complicated
and hard-to-overﬁt by image and label mixing. Figs. 6 (e)
and (f) show the test losses of WideResNet at almost the
same level with and without RICAP while the test error rates
with RICAP in Figs. 6 (g) and (h) are better than baseline.
This is because RICAP prevents the endless pursuit of hard
probabilities (which could provide the zero training loss) and
overﬁtting.
B. Classiﬁcation of ImageNet
In this section, we evaluate RICAP on the classiﬁcation
task of the ImageNet dataset . ImageNet consists of 1.28
million training images and 50,000 validation images. Each
TEST ERROR RATES USING WIDERESNET ON THE CIFAR DATASET.
+ dropout (p = 0.2)
4.65 ±0.08†
21.27 ±0.19†
+ cutout (16 × 16)
3.08 ±0.16
18.41 ±0.27
+ random erasing
3.08 ±0.05
17.73 ±0.15
+ mixup (α = 1.0)
3.02 ±0.04†
17.62 ±0.25†
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
2.85 ±0.06
17.22 ±0.20
† indicates the results of our experiments.
image is given one of 1,000 class labels. We normalized
each channel of all images to zero mean and unit variance
as preprocessing. We also employed random resizing, random
224 × 224 cropping, color jitter, lighting, and random ﬂipping
in the horizontal direction following previous studies ,
To evaluate RICAP, we applied it to the WideResNet 50-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
(a) Training loss on CIFAR-10
(b) Training loss on CIFAR-100
Train Error
Train Error
(c) Training error rate on CIFAR-10
(d) Training error rate on CIFAR-100
(e) Test loss on CIFAR-10
(f) Test loss on CIFAR-100
Train Error
Train Error
(g) Test error rate on CIFAR-10
(h) Test error rate on CIFAR-100
Time-courses of training with and without RICAP. Note that we plot the Kullback-Leibler divergence as the loss function. In the case with RICAP,
we used the class of the cropped image with the highest occupancy as the correct label to calculate the training error rates for mixed images.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
SINGLE CROP TEST ERROR RATES OF THE
WIDERESNET-50-2-BOTTLENECK ON IMAGENET.
top-1 Error(%)
top-5 Error(%)
+ cutout (56 × 56)
+ mixup (α = 0.2)
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
+ cutout (56 × 56)
+ mixup (α = 0.2)
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
† indicates the results of our experiments.
2-bottleneck architecture, consisting of 50 convolution layers
using bottleneck residual blocks with a widen factor of 2 and
dropout with a drop probability of p = 0.3 in intermediate
layers . This architecture achieved the highest accuracy
on ImageNet in the original study . The hyperparameters
and other conditions were the same as those used in the
baseline study. WideResNet 50-2-bottleneck was trained using
the momentum SGD algorithm with a momentum parameter
of 0.9 and weight decay of 10−4 over 100 or 200 epochs with
batches of 256 images. The learning rate was initialized to
0.1, and then, it was reduced to 0.01, 0.001 and 0.0001 at
the 30th, 60th, and 90th-epoch, respectively, in the case of
100 epoch training. The learning rate was reduced at the 65th,
130th, and 190th-epoch, respectively, in the case of 200 epoch
training. For our RICAP, we used the hyperparameter β = 0.3
according to the results of Section. IV-A.
Table II summarizes the results of RICAP with the
WideResNet 50-2-bottleneck as well as the results of competitive methods: cutout and mixup . Competitive results
denoted by † symbols were obtained from our experiments and
the other results are cited from the original studies. We used
α = 0.2 for mixup according to the original study. Cutout did
not attempt to apply cutout to the ImageNet dataset. It used a
cutout size of 8 × 8 for the CIFAR-10, in which an image has
a size of 32×32. Since a preprocessed image in the ImageNet
dataset has a size of 224 × 224, we multiplied the cutout size
by 7 (224/32) to apply cutout to the ImageNet dataset.
RICAP clearly outperformed the baseline and competitive
methods in the case of 100 epoch training, and was superior
or competitive to the others in the case of 200 epoch training.
Compared to RICAP, cutout and mixup require a longer
training to get results better than the baseline. This is because,
as mentioned in Section III-D, cutout reduces the amount
of available features in each and mixup generates pixel-level
features that original images never produce.
Mixup requires careful adjustment of the hyperparameter;
the best hyperparameter value is α = 1.0 for the CIFAR
datasets and α = 0.2 for the ImageNet dataset. An inappropriate hyperparameter reduces performance signiﬁcantly .
On the other hand, RICAP with the hyperparameter β = 0.3
achieved signiﬁcant results in both the CIFAR and ImageNet
datasets. Furthermore, the bottom panels in Fig. 5 show the
robustness of RICAP to the hyperparameter value.
C. Classiﬁcation by Other Architectures
We also evaluated RICAP with DenseNet , the pyramidal ResNet , and the shake-shake regularization model 
on the CIFAR-10 dataset . For the DenseNet, we used
the architecture DenseNetBC 190-40; as the name implies, it
consists of 190 convolution layers using bottleneck residual
blocks with a growing rate of 40. For the pyramidal ResNet,
we used the architecture Pyramidal ResNet 272-200, which
consists of 272 convolution layers using bottleneck residual
blocks with a widening factor of 200. For the shake-shake
regularization model, we used the architecture ShakeShake
26 2×96d; this is a ResNet with 26 convolution layers and
2×96d channels with shake-shake image regularization. These
architectures achieved the best results in the original studies.
We applied data normalization and data augmentation in the
same way as Section. IV-A. The hyperparameters were the
same as those in the original studies , , .
We summarized the results in Table III. We used the hyperparameter β = 0.3 according to the results of Section. IV-A.
RICAP outperformed the competitive methods. In particular,
the shake-shake regularization model with RICAP achieved
a test error rate of 2.19%; this is a new record on the
CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation among the studies under the same
conditions , , – , 1. These results also
indicate that RICAP is applicable to various CNN architectures
and the appropriate hyperparameter does not depend on the
CNN architectures.
V. VISUALIZATION AND QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS IN
CLASSIFICATION
In this section we analyze thg effectiveness of RICAP in
detail through the visualization, ablation study and comparison
with other data augmentation methods.
A. Visualization of Feature Learning by RICAP
One of the most serious overﬁtting of a CNN arises when
classifying images according a limited set of features and
ignoring others. For example, if a CNN classiﬁes cat images
according to features of the cats’ face, it fails to classify an
image that depicts a cats’ back. Since RICAP collects and
crops four images randomly, each image provides a different
cropped region in every training step. This is expected to
support the CNN in using a wider variety of features from
the same image and to prevent the CNN from overﬁtting to
features of a speciﬁc region.
1AutoAugment achieved a further improved result by employing
additional data augmentation techniques such as shearing and adjusting their
parameters.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
TEST ERROR RATES ON CIFAR-10.
DenseNet-BC 190-40
Pyramidal ResNet 272-200
Shake-Shake 26 2x96d
3.31 ±0.08
+ dropout (p = 0.2)
+ cutout (8 × 8)
2.73 ±0.06†
2.84 ±0.05†
2.56 ±0.07
+ mixup (α = 1.0)
2.73 ±0.08†
2.57 ±0.09†
2.32 ±0.11†
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
2.69 ±0.12
2.51 ±0.02
2.19 ±0.08
† indicates the results of our experiments.
Class Activation Mapping (CAM) of WideResNet 28-10. The top row shows the input images. The middle row shows the CAM of WideResNet
28-10 without RICAP denoted as baseline. The bottom row shows the CAM of WideResNet 28-10 with RICAP.
To verify this hypothesis, we visualized the regions in which
a CNN focuses much attention using the Class Activation
Mapping (CAM) . The CAM expects a CNN to have
a global average pooling layer to obtain the spatial average
of the feature map before the ﬁnal output layer. The CAM
calculates the regional importance by projecting back the
output (typically, the correct label) to the feature map.
Fig. 7 shows the CAMs of the WideResNet 50-2-bottleneck
with and without RICAP. This model was trained in the
previous ImageNet experiments in Section IV-B. The top row
shows the input images. The middle row denoted as the
baseline shows the CAMs of WideResNet without RICAP.
WideResNet focuses attention on limited regions of objects
in the ﬁrst to sixth columns: the shell of a turtle and the
faces of animals. WideResNet focuses attention on objects in
the foreground and ignores objects in the background in the
seventh and tenth columns. The bottom row shows the CAMs
of WideResNet with RICAP. WideResNet focuses attention
on the whole bodies of animals in the ﬁrst to sixth columns
and objects in the foreground and background in the seventh to
tenth columns. These results demonstrate that RICAP prevents
the CNN from overﬁtting to speciﬁc features.
In addition, we visualized the CAMs of the WideResNet
using the images that RICAP cropped and patched in Fig. 8.
The leftmost column shows the input images. The second
to ﬁfth columns show the CAMs obtained by projecting
back the labels corresponding to the upper left, upper right,
lower left, and lower right image patches, respectively. The
CAMs demonstrated that WideResNet focuses attention on the
object corresponding to each given label correctly, even though
the depicted objects were extremely cropped. Moreover, we
conﬁrmed that WideResNet automatically learns to ignore the
boundary patching caused by RICAP and potentially becomes
robust to occlusion and cutting off.
B. Case with No Objects in Cropped Areas
RICAP does not check whether an object is in a cropped
area. In this section, we evaluate the case that the cropped
region contains no object. We prepared two WideResNets
trained with and without RICAP. We randomly chose 3 images
depicting objects in long shots as shown in the ﬁrst column
of Fig. 9. We can conﬁrm that the WideResNet trained
with RICAP pays much attention to the objects using Class
Activation Mapping (CAM) as shown in the second
column. We cropped only the backgrounds from the former
3 images and patched with other randomly chosen 3 images
using RICAP algorithm, obtaining 3 input images, as shown
in third to ﬁfth columns. Then, we fed the 3 input images to
WideResNets trained with and without RICAP and obtained
the CAMs for the classes of the background images in the
two rightmost columns. The CAMs show that the WideResNet
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
Class Activation Mapping (CAM) of WideResNet 28-10 using the images that RICAP cropped and patched. The leftmost column shows the
input images. The second to ﬁfth columns show the CAMs by projecting back the labels corresponding to the upper left, upper right, lower left, and lower
right image patches, respectively.
Class Activation Mapping (CAM) when only a background area is cropped and patched by RICAP. (leftmost column) We randomly chose
3 base images depicting objects in long shots. (second column) The CAMs conﬁrm that the WideResNet trained with RICAP pays much attention to the
objects. (third–ﬁfth columns) The backgrounds in the base images are cropped and patched with 3 other randomly chosen images. (two rightmost columns)
The CAMs obtained from the WideResNets trained with and without RICAP.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
trained with RICAP focuses only on the cropped background
images whereas the WideResNet trained without RICAP pays
attention to many subregions loosely. They demonstrate that
RICAP enabled the WideResNet to learn even the features of
backgrounds as clues to classifying images. Compared with
the case of the non-cropped images in the second column, we
can conclude that RICAP enables a CNN to pay attention to
the objects if they clearly exist and to other clues such as
backgrounds otherwise.
VI. ABLATION STUDY AND DETAILED COMPARISON
A. Ablation Study
RICAP is composed of two manipulations: image mixing
(cropping and patching) and label mixing. For image mixing,
RICAP randomly selects, crops, and patches four images to
construct a new training image. For label mixing, RICAP
mixes class labels with ratios proportional to the areas of four
images. In this section, we evaluated the contributions of these
two manipulations using WideResNet 28-10 and the CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100 datasets as in Section. IV-A. Data
normalization, data augmentation, and the hyperparameters
were also the same as those used in Section. IV-A. We chose
the hyperparameter β of RICAP from {0.1, 0.3, 1.0}. The
results are summarized in Table IV.
First, we performed image mixing without label mixing.
We used the class label of the patched image that had the
largest area as the target class label, i.e., c = ck for k =
arg maxk′∈{1,2,3,4} Wk′ instead of Eq. (1). Using only image
mixing, WideResNet achieved much better results than the
baseline but was not competitive in the case with label mixing.
Second, we performed label mixing without image mixing.
In this case, we used the boundary position to calculate
only the ratio of label mixing and we used the original
image with the largest probability as the training sample.
WideResNet achieved much worse results, demonstrating the
harmful inﬂuence of extreme soft labeling.
We conclude that both image and label mixing jointly play
an important role in RICAP.
B. Comparison with Mixup of four Images
RICAP patches four images spatially and mixes class labels
using the areas of the patched images. One can ﬁnd a similarity
between RICAP and mixup; mixup alpha-blends two images
and mixes their class labels using the alpha value. The main
difference between these two methods is that between spatially
patching and alpha-blending. Another difference is the number
of mixed images: four for RICAP and two for mixup.
Here, as a simple extension of mixup, we evaluated mixup
that mixes four images and call it 4-mixup. In this experiment,
we used the WideResNet 28-10 and the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets as in Section. IV-A. Data normalization, data
augmentation, and hyperparameters were also the same as
those used in Section. IV-A. The alpha values were chosen
in the same way as RICAP with the hyperparameter β.
TEST ERROR RATES USING WIDERESNET IN THE ABLATION STUDY.
+ mixup (α = 1.0)
3.02 ±0.04†
17.62 ±0.25†
+ RICAP (image mixing only, β = 0.1)
3.34 ±0.09
17.87 ±0.22
+ RICAP (image mixing only, β = 0.3)
3.33 ±0.10
17.95 ±0.13
+ RICAP (image mixing only, β = 1.0)
3.70 ±0.07
18.90 ±0.24
+ RICAP (label mixing only, β = 0.1)
+ RICAP (label mixing only, β = 0.3)
+ RICAP (label mixing only, β = 1.0)
+ 4 mixup (β = 0.1)
3.29 ±0.07†
17.62 ±0.21†
+ 4 mixup (β = 0.3)
3.11 ±0.05†
18.04 ±0.16†
+ 4 mixup (β = 1.0)
3.71 ±0.17†
19.57 ±0.15†
+ RICAP (β = 0.1)
3.01 ±0.15
17.39 ±0.09
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
2.85 ±0.06
17.22 ±0.20
+ RICAP (β = 1.0)
2.91 ±0.01
17.82 ±0.03
† indicates the results of our experiments.
We summarized the results in Table IV. While 4-mixup
had better results than the baseline, it had worse results than
both the original mixup and RICAP. Increasing the number
of images cannot improve the performance of mixup. This
suggests that RICAP owes its high performance not to the
number of images or to the ability to utilize four images.
VII. EXPERIMENTS ON OTHER TASKS
In this section, we evaluate RICAP on image-caption retrieval, person re-identiﬁcation, and object detection to demonstrate the generality of RICAP.
A. Evaluation on Image-Caption Retrieval
Image-Caption Retrieval: For image-caption retrieval,
the main goal is to retrieve the most relevant image for a given
caption and to retrieve the most relevant caption for a given
image. A dataset contains pairs of images in and captions cn.
An image in is considered the most relevant to the paired
caption cn and vice versa. A relevant pair (in, cn) is called
positive, and an irrelevant pair (in, cm) (m ̸= n) is called
negative. The performance is often evaluated using recall at
K (denoted as R@K) and Med r.
A common approach for image-caption retrieval is called
visual-semantic embeddings (VSE) . Typically, a CNN
encodes an image into a vector representation and a recurrent
neural network (RNN) encodes a caption to another vector
representation. The neural networks are jointly trained to build
a similarity function that gives higher scores to positive pairs
than negative pairs. VSE++ employed a ResNet152 
as the image encoder and a GRU as the caption encoder
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
and achieved remarkable results. We used VSE++ as a baseline
of our experiments.
First, we introduce the case without RICAP. An image in
is fed to the image encoder ResNet(·) and encoded to a
representation vin as
vin = ResNet(in).
A caption cn is fed to the caption encoder GRU(·) and
encoded to a representation vcn as
vcn = GRU(cn).
VSE++ S(·, ·) deﬁnes the similarity Sn between the pair
(in, cn) as
Sn = S(vin, vcn),
= S(ResNet(in), GRU(cn)).
Refer to the original study for a more detailed implementation.
Application RICAP to VSE++: With RICAP, we propose
a new training procedure for the image encoder. We randomly
selected four images im, in, io, and ip and created a new image
iricap as the cropping and patching procedure in Section. III.
iricap = RICAPimage(im, in, io, ip).
The function RICAPimage(·, ·, ·, ·) denotes the procedure
of RICAP proposed in Section III-A. The image encoder
ResNet(·) encodes the patched image iricap to a representation viricap as
viricap = ResNet(iricap).
As a paired caption representation, we obtained the average
of the relevant caption representations. The speciﬁc procedure
was as follows. We fed the paired captions cm, cn, co, and
cp individually to the caption encoder and encoded them into
the representations vcm, vcn, vco, and vcp, respectively. Next,
we averaged the caption representations vcm, vcn, vco, and vcp
with ratios proportional to the areas of the cropped images and
obtained the mixed vector vcricap as
vcricap = RICAPcaption(vcm, vcn, vco, vcp)
k={m,n,o,p} Wkvck,
k={m,n,o,p} WkGRU(ck),
where Wk is the area ratio of the image k as in Eq. (1).
Here, we used the vector representation vcricap as the one
positively paired with the vector representation viricap and
obtained the similarity Sricap between this pair. In short, we
used the following similarity to train the image encoder;
= S(viricap, vcricap),
= S(ResNet(RICAPimage(im, in, io, ip)),
RICAPcaption(GRU(cm), GRU(cn), GRU(co), GRU(cp))).
We treated the remaining vector representations vck for k /∈
{m, n, o, p} as negative pairs. Note that we used the ordinary
similarity Sn to train the caption encoder.
Experiments and Results: We used the same experimental settings as in the original study of VSE++ . We used
the Microsoft COCO dataset ; 113, 287 images for training
model and 1, 000 images for validation. We summarized the
score averaged over 5 folds of 1, 000 test images.
The ResNet was pre-trained using the ImageNet dataset,
and the ﬁnal layer was replaced with a new fully-connected
layer. For the ﬁrst 30 epochs, the layers in the ResNet except
for the ﬁnal layer were ﬁxed. The GRU and the ﬁnal layer
of the ResNet were updated using the Adam optimizer 
using a mini-batch size of 128 with the hyperparameter α =
0.0002 for the ﬁrst 15 epochs and then α = 0.00002 for the
other 15 epochs. Next, the whole model was ﬁne-tuned for the
additional 15 epochs with α = 0.00002.
Table V summarizes the results; RICAP improved the
performance of VSE++. This result demonstrated that RICAP
is directly applicable to image processing tasks other than
classiﬁcation.
B. Evaluation on Person Re-identiﬁcation
Person Re-identiﬁcation: In this section, we evaluate
RICAP with a person re-identiﬁcation task. For person reidentiﬁcation, the main goal is to retrieve images of the person
identical to a person in a given image. Deep learning methods
train a classiﬁer of persons with IDs and retrieve persons based
on the similarity in internal feature vector. ID discriminative
embedding (IDE) is commonly used baseline consisting
of deep feature extractor and classiﬁer. The performance is
often evaluated using recall at K (denoted as R@K) and mean
average precision (denoted as mAP). RICAP also handles
partial features and we evaluate RICAP with the IDE.
Application RICAP to IDE: Unlike natural images such
as images in CIFAR and ImageNet datasets, typical images
for person re-identiﬁcation are already aligned and cropped to
depict persons at the center. Hence, the absolute positions of
human parts in images are meaningful for retrieval. To adopt
RICAP to this situation, we crop each image not randomly
but considering its absolute position, that is xk is ﬁxed to 0
for k ∈{1, 3} and w for k ∈{2, 4}, and yk is ﬁxed 0 for
k ∈{1, 2} and h for k ∈{3, 4}. We call this modiﬁed RICAP
as ﬁxed image cropping and patching (FICAP) and show the
overview in above of Fig. 10. Note that the boundary position
is still determined randomly.
Experiments and Results: We used the IDE with the
experimental setting introduced as a strong baseline in the PCB
paper . A pixel intensity of each channel was normalized
as a preprocessing. As a data augmentation, training images
were randomly ﬂipped in the horizontal direction. The weight
parameters were updated using the momentum SGD algorithm
with a momentum parameter of 0.9 and weight decay of
10−4 over 60 epochs with batches of 64 images. The learning
rate was initialized to 0.1, and then, it was reduced to 0.01
at the 40th epochs. The backbone model was the 50 layer
ResNet pre-trained on ImageNet. We used the Market1501 dataset , consisting of 32, 668 images of 1, 501
identities shoot by 6 cameras. 12, 936 images of 751 identities
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
RESULTS OF IMAGE-CAPTION RETRIEVAL USING MICROSOFT COCO.
Caption Retrieval
Image Retrieval
+ RICAP (β = 0.3)
Conceptual explanation of the proposed ﬁxed image cropping and
patching (FICAP) data augmentation. For application of RICAP to person
re-identiﬁcation task, we replaced the random cropping with ﬁxed cropping
because of the feature vector matching for image-to-image retrieval.
RESULTS OF PERSON RE-IDENTIFICATION ON MARKET-1501.
IDE + FICAP (β = 0.1)
IDE + FICAP (β = 0.3)
were used for training and 19, 732 images of 750 identities
were used for test. Table VI summarizes the experimental
results, where we cited the results of IDE from the PCB
paper for fair comparison. The result demonstrates that
FICAP improved the identiﬁcation performance of the IDE,
indicating the generality of FICAP.
As a further analysis, we implemented FICAP on the stateof-the-art method, PCB, as summarized in the Table VII. We
employed PCB + RPP model, which is the model of the
RESULTS OF PERSON RE-IDENTIFICATION ON MARKET-1501.
PCB + RPP + FICAP (β = 0.1)
PCB + RPP + FICAP (β = 0.3)
highest performance in the PCB paper . PCB divides
an image into six subparts horizontally and evaluates the
similarity summed over the subparts. We applied FICAP to
each subpart, resulting in 24 patches per person, and found
that the performance was degraded. The same went for the
case that the number of patches per subpart was reduced to
two as summarized in the Table VII. This can be because
the image cropping and patching by FICAP conﬂicts with the
image division by PCB and each patch becomes too small to be
recognized. While RICAP and FICAP are general approaches,
they are not compatible with methods which already divide
images into many subparts.
C. Evaluation on Object Detection
Object Detection: In this section, we evaluate RICAP on
an object detection task. The main goal is to detect the objects
and their position from a given image. A training image depicts
multiple objects with their class information and bounding
boxes. Each bounding box consists of center coordinates,
width and height. Models have to learn and inference these
information; object detection is more complicated than imagelevel classiﬁcation. The performance is often evaluated using
mean average precision (mAP) and inference time. YOLO 
is an end-to-end model achieving faster inference than previous methods. YOLO was updated to version 3 (YOLOv3) 
by the original authors, and we used it as a baseline of our
experiments.
Application RICAP to YOLOv3: In the object detection,
we cannot mix the bounding box labels even if the object
is cropped and patched because they are learned using mean
squared loss. Hence, in this case, we only performed the
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
Detection examples of MS-COCO test images by the baseline YOLOv3 (top row) and a TOLOv3 trained with RICAP (bottom row). Without
RICAP, a zebra hidden in a tree was detected as two different objects in the left image, side-by-side buses were not detected in the middle image, and a horse
tail was misdetected as the dog in the right image, respectively. RICAP solved these issues, indicating that RICAP makes YOLOv3 be robust to the occlusion.
random cropping and patching for input image. When the
object is cropped, we corrected the coordinates, width, and
height of bounding box based on the cropped region. By this
change, models cannot obtain the beneﬁt of soft labels, but
they can learn and detect of partial features thanks to RICAP.
Experiments and Results: We used the Microsoft COCO
dataset for object detection. 117, 248 images are used for
training and 5, 000 for test. Each object in image is manually
aligned the bounding box and assigned one of 80 class labels.
We resized all training and test images to 416 × 416.
We performed OpenCV-based data augmentation (https://
opencv.org/). The weight parameters were updated using the
Adam optimizer over 100 epochs with a mini-batch size
of 16. The learning rate was initialized to 0.001. The backbone
model was the DarkNet-53 pre-trained on ImageNet, which is
used as the basic backbone in the original study.
Table VIII summarizes the experimental results. We evaluated the hyperparameter values β = 0.3 and 1.0 fo RICAP.
In addition to mAP, we also show precisions and recalls.
The results demonstrate that RICAP improved the detection
performance. Fig. 11 demonstrates difference in detection
behavior between YOLOv3 without and with RICAP. Without
RICAP, a zebra hidden in a tree was detected as two different
objects in the left image, side-by-side buses were not detected
in the middle image, and a horse tail was misdetected as the
dog in the right image, respectively. RICAP solved these issues
as shown in images in the bottom row, indicating that RICAP
makes YOLOv3 be robust to the occlusion.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a novel data augmentation
method called random image cropping and patching (RICAP)
TABLE VIII
RESULTS OF OBJECT DETECTION USING MICROSOFT COCO.
YOLOv3 + RICAP (β = 0.3)
YOLOv3 + RICAP (β = 1.0)
to improve the accuracy of the image classiﬁcation. RICAP selects four training images randomly, crops them randomly, and
patches them to construct a new training image. Experimental
results demonstrated that RICAP improves the classiﬁcation
accuracy of various network architectures for various datasets
by increasing the variety of training images and preventing
overﬁtting. The visualization results demonstrated that RICAP
prevents deep CNNs from overﬁtting to the most apparent
features. The results of the image-caption retrieval task demonstrated that RICAP is applicable to image processing tasks
other than classiﬁcation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was partially supported by the MIC/SCOPE
#172107101.