HAL Id: hal-04848132
 
Submitted on 19 Dec 2024
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Representations and lived experiences of sexual health in
women with lung cancer: a qualitative study (SHe-CLu)
Louise Zanni, Cécile Flahault, Kristopher Lamore, Mihaela Aldea, Léonor
To cite this version:
Louise Zanni, Cécile Flahault, Kristopher Lamore, Mihaela Aldea, Léonor Fasse. Representations and
lived experiences of sexual health in women with lung cancer: a qualitative study (SHe-CLu). IPOS
2023, Aug 2023, Milan, Italy. pp.77 - 101, ￿10.1191/1478088706qp063oa￿. ￿hal-04848132￿
Representations and lived experiences of sexual health in
women with lung cancer: a qualitative study (SHe-CLu)
Louise Zanni1, Cécile Flahault1,2, Kristopher Lamore1,3, Mihaela Aldea4 & Léonor Fasse1,2
 
1. Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Processus de Santé (LPPS), Université Paris Cité, France
2. Psycho-oncology unit, Gustave Roussy, France
3. Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 9193 - SCALab - Sciences Cognitives et Sciences Affectives, F 59000 Lille, France
4. Department of Oncology Medicine, Gustave Roussy, France
5Braun, V., & Clarke, V. . Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
 
4Flynn, K. E., Jeffery, D. D., Keefe, F. J., Porter, L. S., Shelby, R. A., Fawzy, M. R., Gosselin, T. K., Reeve, B. B., & Weinfurt, K. P. . Sexual
functioning along the cancer continuum: Focus group results from the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information
System (PROMIS®). Psycho-Oncology, 20(4), Article 4. 
1Institut National du Cancer. . Panorama des cancers en France – Edition 2022.
 
2Lindau, S. T., Surawska, H., Paice, J., & Baron, S. R. . Communication about sexuality and intimacy in couples affected by lung cancer and
their clinical-care providers. Psycho-Oncology, 20(2), Article 2. 
3Reese, J. B., Shelby, R. A., & Abernethy, A. P. . Sexual concerns in lung cancer patients: An examination of predictors and moderating
effects of age and gender. Supportive Care in Cancer: Official Journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer,
19(1), Article 1. 
AIMS & METHODS:
Lung cancer is the 3rd most common cancer in France.1
↗incidence in women :
+5% per year between 2010
Medical treatment in cancer
deterioration in sexual
American women report :
o loss of stamina
o shortness of breath
o body changes
o early menopause
o problems with sexual
response & desire
o reduced orgasm4
The aim is to document how women with lung cancer perceive and
experience their sexuality to better understand their daily lives and
refine their support.
1 focus group (n=2)
3 questions regarding :
o their definition of
o the impact of cancer
on their sexuality
o their experience of
solitary sex
Diagnosed:
1 y., 10 m.
Diagnosed:
2 y., 10 m.
DISCUSSION:
Sexuality of women with lung cancer is
undermined. They report significant
changes in their bodies and a breakdown
in their intimate relationships. They feel
the need to discuss it, but there are few
places within the hospital setting to
address this issue.
The limitations of this study include
the extremely small number of
participants and their lack of
diversity. This prevents data
saturation and only allows for a
preliminary response to the issue
addressed in our study.
Implementing
discussion groups on
this subject could be a
solution to address the
loneliness experienced
by patients.
Continued exploration of this
subject among diverse patient
profiles and integration into
broader research can provide
valuable insights and
connections to related issues.
Limitations:
Clinical implications:
Research implications:
680 codes in 8 themes and 31 sub-themes have been identified. These following themes were explored in relation to our research
"Yes, really, I don’t
see... My body doesn't have its place,
well, there - on the D-day - in a sexual
act, you know. [...] No, I won't go down
that path, you know, I do everything
to avoid going down
that path."
Sexuality in the context of
Definition of sexuality: consensual and shared pleasure, crucial in general life
Difficult experience of loss of sexual desire
Different effects based on treatments and their toxicities.
Fear of sexual function and desire not returning after the illness
Importance of discussing sexuality, a taboo subject, in the care journey
The relationship with the
Supportive partner
"Normal" couple sexuality: a sexuality involving both partners
Tension within the couple regarding this matter, primarily from the patients rather
than the partners
Conflicting desires and avoidance of situations that may lead to sexual intimacy
Change in body image
Weight gain and swelling that retrigger old insecurities
Port-a-cath (PAC): a constant reminder of cancer and its contact evokes disgust
Premature aging
Loss or undermining of identity: no longer accepting oneself, unable to look at oneself
in the mirror or in the shower
Relevance of support
Focus group setting as a support to address sexuality
Importance of support groups in providing a safe space to finally discuss sexuality and
"I avoid it, it’s true
that I avoid the moment of going to
bed. Honestly, I avoid it... Whereas
before, it happened naturally... But now,
well, I really wait until he's asleep
to go to bed."
"I see all these [...] mothers
of children my age, but I don't actually
look like them! Everyone has their own life
journey, that's evident... but yeah, I don't
look like what I had in mind [...]
for myself at that age.”
you have an interest
in it, but I also saw the
benefit of meeting Paula
and potentially meeting
others at the
Hospital."
”Also, to know if
there are other
people like