Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology
© Experimental Psychology Society 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/17470218231162546
qjep.sagepub.com
The gregarious nature of human existence permeates
through every social interaction. Such nature is not only
manifested in verbal communication but, more intriguingly, via nonverbal means: A simple look in the eyes
could reveal a wealth of information regarding a person’s
intention and modulate
another person’s attention .
Moreover, these characteristics are not restricted to eye
gaze because other social cues, such as finger-pointing,
also exhibit similar effects . One
of the widely studied phenomena in social cueing is the
orienting of attention. Granted that attention is a loaded
term , orienting of attention generally refers to “the alignment of some
internal mechanisms with an external sensory input source
that results in the preferential processing of that input”
 . In the context of visual perception, this phenomenon corresponds to when the observer orients to or
prioritises certain visual cues in their visual field. The
evaluation of orienting of attention has commonly relied
on various implicit measures, such as changes in response
accuracy and reaction time (RTs; Frischen, Bayliss, &
Social gaze cueing elicits facilitatory and
inhibitory effects on movement execution
when the model might act on an object
Xiaoye Michael Wang1
, April Karlinsky2, Merryn D Constable3,
Samantha EA Gregory4 and Timothy N Welsh1
Social cues, such as eye gaze and pointing fingers, can increase the prioritisation of specific locations for cognitive
processing. A previous study using a manual reaching task showed that, although both gaze and pointing cues altered
target prioritisation (reaction times [RTs]), only pointing cues affected action execution (trajectory deviations). These
differential effects of gaze and pointing cues on action execution could be because the gaze cue was conveyed through
a disembodied head; hence, the model lacked the potential for a body part (i.e., hands) to interact with the target. In
the present study, the image of a male gaze model, whose gaze direction coincided with two potential target locations,
was centrally presented. The model either had his arms and hands extended underneath the potential target locations,
indicating the potential to act on the targets (Experiment 1), or had his arms crossed in front of his chest, indicating
the absence of potential to act (Experiment 2). Participants reached to a target that followed a nonpredictive gaze cue
at one of three stimulus onset asynchronies. RTs and reach trajectories of the movements to cued and uncued targets
were analysed. RTs showed a facilitation effect for both experiments, whereas trajectory analysis revealed facilitatory
and inhibitory effects, but only in Experiment 1 when the model could potentially act on the targets. The results of this
study suggested that when the gaze model had the potential to interact with the cued target location, the model’s gaze
affected not only target prioritisation but also movement execution.
Visual attention; social cue; gaze perception; inhibition of return; goal-directed movements
Received: 17 October 2022; revised: 8 February 2023; accepted: 16 February 2023
1Faculty of Kinesiology & Physical Education, Centre for Motor
Control, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
2Department of Kinesiology, California State University, San
Bernardino, San Bernardino, CA, USA
3Department of Psychology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
4Department of Psychology, University of Salford, Salford, UK
Corresponding author:
Xiaoye Michael Wang, Centre for Motor Control, Faculty of
Kinesiology & Physical Education, University of Toronto, 55 Harbord St,
M5S 2W6, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Email: 
1162546 QJP0010.1177/17470218231162546Quarterly Journal of Experimental PsychologyWang et al.
research-article2023
Original Article
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 00(0)
Tipper, 2007). The present study examines the effect of
visual cueing on the observers’ attention and action planning and execution in an upper-limb reaching task.
The orienting of attention is commonly assessed
through the spatial-cueing paradigm, in which participants
are instructed to respond to the appearance of a target at
one of two potential locations with a key press. This paradigm commonly entails a nonpredictive cue (e.g., a peripherally presented blinking light, a centrally presented arrow,
or a shift in a centrally presented model’s eye gaze) being
presented prior to the target at or directed towards one of
the potential target locations. The key feature of the stimuli
is that the cue is non-predictive (e.g., the cue may appear
on the right, but the target could randomly appear on the
left or right) such that there is no top-down advantage for
the observer to orient attention based on the cue. Results of
the studies, however, have shown that this nonpredictive
cue could affect the processing of the visual target, which
is commonly reflected through differences in participants’
RTs to the target as a function of the relative locations of
the cue and the target. Cued targets are those that are presented at a location consistent with the cue (i.e., the same
location associated with the cue), whereas uncued targets
are those that are presented at a location that is not consistent with the cue (i.e., a different location from the cue).
Generally, two types of effects are expected depending
on the temporal separation between the cue and target
onset (stimulus onset asynchrony, or SOA). First, RTs
could be shorter for the cued targets than for the uncued
targets at short SOAs (e.g., <200 ms) when there is little
time difference between the onset of the cue and the onset
of the target. This facilitation effect is thought to occur
because the cue led to the short-term prioritisation of the
cued location, increasing the efficiency with which the target is processed relative to targets at other uncued locations. Second, RTs for the cued targets are actually longer
than for the uncued targets when there is a longer time
(e.g., >300 ms) between the onset of the cue and the onset
of the target. These longer RTs are thought to emerge
because, as time elapses and no target appears, the shortterm prioritisation coding decreases and is replaced by an
inhibitory coding activated at the location of the cue. This
inhibitory coding subsequently hinders or decreases the
efficiency of processing of a target that then appears at the
location relative to other uncued locations. In a nonsocial
context, this inhibitory aftereffect has been termed inhibition of return .
For centrally presented gaze cues, the facilitation effects
are typically observed at shorter SOAs, with peak facilitation effects appearing between 100 and 300 ms. Interstingly,
these facilitation effects persist at longer SOAs, even present between 700 and 1000 ms SOAs . Moreover,
despite the pronounced facilitation effect, RT-based IOR is
rarely observed with centrally presented gaze cues without
sophisticated experimental manipulations . Therefore,
given these different patterns of RTs, the relationship
between mechanisms activated by social gaze cues and
peripheral and central cues remains unclear.
Most existing research on the orienting of attention in
social cueing uses tasks requiring discrete button presses
and, as such, has only been able to examine RTs and/or
response accuracy in choice tasks. Deviating from this
tradition, Yoxon et al. used an upper-limb reaching task to examine the facilitatory and inhibitory effects
of gaze cues on attention and action execution. Upperlimb reaching movements were employed because the
characteristics of these movements can provide additional insight into how the central nervous system represents the excitation or inhibition of responses generated
by the cue during response selection and decision-making . Adopted from the classical spatial-cueing paradigm, Yoxon et  al. presented
two potential target locations flanking an image of either
a model’s disembodied head (Experiments 1 and 2) or a
disembodied pointed finger (Experiment 3). The centrally presented cueing model provided a nonpredictive
gaze or pointing cue to one of the potential target locations and the target was presented following one of the
many SOAs (from 100 to 2400 ms). Participants were
asked to ignore the cue and use their index finger to rapidly reach to and touch the target. The authors evaluated
the effects of the cue and SOAs on RTs (measured as the
time interval from the onset of the target to the movement initiation) and the initial movement angle (IMA) of
the reaching movement (calculated as the absolute angle
between the principal axis [an imaginary central line
from the home position to the midpoint between the two
target locations] and the movement trajectory at 20% of
the reach). While RTs may reflect location prioritisation,
IMAs reflect action planning. If the gaze cue exerts a
facilitation effect on action planning (i.e., the cue activates a response that would lead the participant to interact with the cue), then IMAs should be smaller when
moving to an uncued target than when moving to a cued
target because the cue may have activated a response to
the cued location that would interfere or combine with
the subsequent response to the target, leading to a more
central response trajectory. If the gaze cue leads to the
activation of an inhibitory mechanism on the response to
the cue, then IMAs should be larger on uncued than cued
target trials because this inhibitory mechanism might
reduce the representation of the response to the cue to
below baseline levels, leading to a more peripheral
response trajectory away from the location of the cue.
Such patterns of trajectory deviations have been shown
Wang et al.
in rapid aiming responses following peripheral sudden
onset cues , the centrally
presented model head remained fixated on the target until
the end of the participant’s reaching movement. In contrast, in Experiment 2, the gaze cue only lasted for 150 ms
before the eyes of the model returned to a neutral gaze
direction. In both Experiments 1 and 2, RTs revealed a
facilitation effect consistent with previous gaze cueing literature—a persistent facilitation effect without the emergence of an inhibition effect, even at long SOAs . Interestingly,
despite the facilitation effects in RT, there were no differences in IMA between movements to cued or uncued targets. These findings suggest that the gaze cue only affects
attention, but not action planning. In Experiment 3, Yoxon
and colleagues presented a pointing finger that remained
directed towards one of the target locations throughout the
SOA period (similar to the gaze cues in Experiment 1).
The data revealed a facilitation effect in both RTs and
IMAs, suggesting that the pointing cue also affects action
planning. Based on the overall pattern of results, the
authors reasoned that eye gaze and finger-pointing cues
are processed differently and that the hand cues may have
a more prominent role or direct influence on the salience
of objects and locations for motor control.
The differences in the patterns of trajectory deviations
between the eye gaze and pointing cues could be attributed
to the compatibility between the cue and the effector
involved in the task . In the case of Yoxon
et al. , the finger-pointing cue is similar to the hand
used in the manual aiming task, allowing the cue to become
salient to the attention/action system that underlies the
aiming movement, which consequently affected the movement planning and execution. Taken a step further, this
conjecture implies that if the model which provides the cue
manifests the potential to interact with the target locations
through the same effectors as the participant uses in the
response, the salience of the cue to the underlying attention/action system should remain. If this is the case, then a
similar facilitation effect in the effector-based measurement (trajectory) as in the attention-based measurement
(RT) should emerge. In a more concrete sense, predictions
based on this reasoning could be that the gaze cue should
elicit a similar facilitation effect in trajectories as the pointing cue only when the gaze cue model has the potential to
interact with the target with the hands. Borrowed from the
nomenclature of Gibson’s affordance theory , this potential is referred to as act-ability, or the ability to act on an object.
The present study examines the effect of act-ability of
the gaze cue model on attention and movement planning
and execution in a manual reaching task. In Experiment 1,
a male’s upper body was presented with his arms extending outwards with the hands placed below the potential
target locations. If the model’s potential to interact with the
target creates the conditions to enable his gaze cue to affect
the action system, then eye gaze cues in this condition
should lead to a facilitation effect on not only the participants’ RTs, but also their reach trajectories. In Experiment
2, the same model was presented but his arms were crossed
in front of his chest, removing his potential to interact with
the target. If act-ability is the key feature that leads to activation of the motor system by the gaze cues, then there
should be a facilitation effect in movement trajectories in
Experiment 1 when the hands of the model are near the
targets, but not in the movement trajectories in Experiment
2 when the arms of the model are crossed. If the mere presence of a body and the arms of a model is sufficient to lead
to motor system activation by the gaze cues (i.e., regardless of the model’s act-ability), then facilitation effects in
RTs and trajectories should be observed in both
Experiments 1 and 2. The finding of trajectory deviations
in Experiment 2 might suggest that the absence of trajectory deviations in Experiments 1 and 2 of Yoxon et  al.
 may have been the result of the eye gaze cue being
presented in a disembodied head.
Experiment 1
Participants.  Twenty adults (13 females and 7 males), aged
between 19 and 46, participated in this experiment. All
participants were right-handed with normal or correctedto-normal vision. Participants provided full and informed
consent. All procedures were approved and were consistent with the standards of the University of Toronto
Research Ethics Board. Based on the effect size reported
in Yoxon et al. showed that a sample size of 20 is sufficient to
detect the facilitation effect in movement trajectories.
Stimuli and apparatus.  The stimuli were presented on an
Acer GD235HZ 24-inch monitor with a 1920 × 1080 resolution and 60 Hz refresh rate. The monitor was slanted at
approximately 20° from the table facing the participant to
ensure comfort during the experiment. The experiment
was implemented in MATLAB (the Mathworks Inc.) using
the Psychtoolbox-3 . The experimental setup was similar to that in
Yoxon et al. . For each trial, a home position (a blue
circle with a 1.5 cm diameter) would appear 1 cm above
the bottom edge of the screen, along with two unfilled blue
squares (2 cm per side) as placeholders for the target. The
blue squares were 28 cm horizontally from each other and
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 00(0)
25 cm diagonally from the home position. An image of a
young adult male was used as the cue model, placed
between the two target placeholders. The male extended
his arms out with hands opened and facing upwards, placed
directly beneath the two placeholders as if he was ready to
catch or grab them (Figure 1 top). Every object was displayed against a light grey background. During each trial,
the movement of participants’ right index finger was
tracked using an opto-electric motion tracking system
(Optotrak, Northern Digital Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) with an infrared-emitting diode (IRED) that records
three-dimensional (3D) coordinates at a 250 Hz sampling
frequency.
Procedure and design.  After providing their full informed
consent, participants were guided into a testing room and
sat comfortably in front of the table with the slanted monitor. The experimenter would attach the IRED onto the participants’ right index finger. Prior to the experiment,
participants were instructed to perform a screen calibration
procedure, where they would sequentially reach to each
corner of the screen. The end positions of each reach were
recorded to derive the 3D orientation of the screen, measured in the same reference frame as the subsequent aiming
movements. During data analysis, each participant’s screen
calibration data were used to transform their respective
reaching trajectories (see Data analysis for details).
Figure 1 (top) shows the timeline of a single trial. At the
start of a trial, participants were presented with an image
of the model with the eyes directed towards the participant. The participants placed their right index finger on the
home position. After 1000 ms, the model’s gaze direction
shifted to the left or right, towards the location of one of
the target placeholders, and remained there for the rest of
the trial. After a variable SOA (100, 350, or 850 ms), one
of the unfilled squares turned solid (the target). Participants
were instructed to reach to the solid target square as
quickly as they could. The model’s gaze direction and the
target location were independent of each other. Participants
were informed of this nonpredictive gaze cue and were
instructed to fixate on the male model prior to the target
onset. Positions of the participants’ index finger were
recorded using Optotrak for 1,500 ms starting from the
moment the target was presented. Participants were
instructed to hold their finger at the target location until the
1,500 ms data collection window was completed.
Given the two target locations (left and right) and two
gaze directions (left and right), the target could either be
Figure 1.  A schematic illustration of the experimental setup and timeline for a single trial in Experiments 1 (top) and 2 (bottom).
Participants put their right index finger on the blue circle (home position) at the beginning of each trial. After 1,000 ms, the model
would shift his gaze to one of the potential target locations. Following one of the stimulus onset asynchronies (SOA), one of the
squares would turn solid, indicating that it was the target, and participants needed to reach to it as quickly as they could.
Wang et al.
cued (both the target location and gaze direction were the
same) or uncued (the target location and gaze direction
were opposite). Combined with three SOAs (100, 350, and
850 ms), there were 12 unique trial types (2 target locations
× 2 gaze directions × 3 SOAs), which were treated as a
block. Trials within each block were presented in a random
order. Each block was repeated for 16 times, resulting in
192 trials. The first block was used as training and was not
included in the analysis. The entire experiment took about
45 min to complete.
Data analysis.  Data analysis was performed using a custom
Python movement analysis package and was divided into
the following steps.
Spatial Calibration.  Given the screen surface was at an
approximately 20° angle, each trajectory was first rotated
back to the transverse plane (Figure 2 Spatial Calibration).
With the four reference screen corners ,
the surface norm, n , for the best-fitting plane was derived
using singular value decomposition 
for detailed steps). Given the experiment’s coordinate system, the rotation can be expressed using an axis-angle representation:
Where i and j are the unit vectors in the x (frontal axis)
and y (longitudinal axis) directions, respectively. This rotation was applied to each trajectory, producing a reach with
x- and z-axes, or the frontal and sagittal axes, as the primary directions.
Preprocessing.  Missing data due to marker occlusion
from each trajectory were replaced using linear interpolation with the interp1d function from SciPy . The locations of the missing data were recorded for
visual inspection in a subsequent step. Then, a second-order
low-pass Butterworth filter (250 Hz sampling frequency,
10 Hz cutoff frequency) was applied to each trajectory
dimension. Velocity along each axis was calculated using a
central difference method and was smoothed using the same
Butterworth filter. Subsequently, the Pythagorean of the two
primary movement axes, x and z, was computed to identify
the movement onset and termination time (Figure 2 Preprocessing). With a 50 mm/s threshold, movement initiation and termination were defined as the moment when the
velocity exceeded and dropped below the threshold, respectively. In the case where there were several segments that
satisfied the movement criteria (e.g., false starts), we chose
the longest movement segment to distinguish the actual
movement from unnecessary movements incurred before or
after the actual reach. RT is the time between the target onset
and movement initiation, whereas movement time (MT) is
the time between the movement initiation and termination.
Trials with RTs smaller than 100 ms (anticipation errors) or
greater than 1000 ms, or MTs greater than 1000 ms were
removed (a total of 20 trials, or 0.56% of all data).
After identifying the movement segment, trials with
missing data were visually inspected to ensure that (1) the
missing data occurred outside the movement segment, and
(2) there were no more than 15 consecutive missing data
points (equivalent to 60 ms) within the movement. Trials
with more than 15 consecutive missing data points within
the movement segment were discarded to ensure that the
linear interpolation did not introduce artefacts to the trajectory. A total of 34 trials, or 0.94% of the entire data set,
were discarded.
One of the key challenges to statistically compare reach
trajectories between conditions is normalisation. As
Gallivan and Chapman reasoned, normalisation
based on temporal re-sampling (i.e., re-sampling an equal
amount of points within evenly spaced fractions of the
total MT) may introduce artefacts in the results as the temporal aspect of the movement may covary with experimental manipulation. To address this issue, each dimension of
each trajectory was parameterized using a third-order
B-spline with Python’s SciPy
library . The resulting B-spline function maps points of the trajectory onto their respective time
stamps within a given MT. Using the parameterized trajectory, each trajectory coordinate was sampled using 100
evenly spaced time stamps between movement initiation
and termination. This approach retains the temporal
aspects of each reach while producing an equal number of
data points across different trajectories, enabling spatial
averaging. Finally, the fitted trajectories were centred at
the origin and the x-coordinates of the trajectory corresponding to the target on the left were inverted so that all
movements were directed to the positive x direction.
Trajectory Analysis.  To extract useful information from
the fitted trajectories, trajectories were compiled and averaged for each unique combination of participant, target
location, and cue location (Figure 2 Trajectory Analysis).
The mean trajectories were also parameterized using the
B-spline method. The goal of this trajectory analysis was to
investigate whether there were spatial deviations between
the average trajectories corresponding to the cued and
uncued targets. Given the experimental setup, the x-axis
(lateral direction) was of interest because this axis could
reveal the bias towards or away from the target in the movement trajectory. Regardless of the target location (due to the
earlier sign inversion), the x values of movements that are
biased towards the target should be greater than those of
movements that are biased away from the target. Therefore,
comparisons of the x values between the cued and uncued
targets should uncover any facilitatory and/or inhibitory
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 00(0)
effect in the movement. To this end, the area between the
x-coordinates of the cued and uncued targets was computed for each target location and each participant. With
the trajectory centred at the origin, the area between the
x-coordinates and x = 0 was numerically integrated between
every 20% of the reach (0%–20%, 20%–40%, etc.) using
the built-in integration method in SciPy’s BSpline function for the cued and uncued targets, respectively. Then, the
Figure 2.  Data Analysis Procedure. Spatial calibration: The four corners of the screen (blue dots) were used to derive the
best-fitting plane (blue surface), which was then used to rotate the reach trajectory so that its primary directions were along the x-
and z-axes. Preprocessing: A 50 mm/s threshold was applied to the Pythagorean of the velocity along the two primary directions
(x- and z-axes) to determine the movement initiation (green dotted line) and termination (red dotted line) times. Subsequently,
a third-order B-spline was applied to the coordinates of each axis to parameterize the reach trajectories. The black points were
based on the original trajectory data whereas the red points were sampled from the B-spline function. Trajectory Analysis: Each
trajectory starts at the home position (filled blue circle) and ends at one of the target positions (blue, unfilled squares). Trajectories
from each participant within each unique combination of conditions (per target location and per gaze direction) were compiled
and averaged. The cued (green) and uncued (red) average trajectories corresponding to the same target location were compared,
where the B-spline function was integrated to identify the area between their respective x trajectories.
Wang et al.
area for the uncued target was subtracted from that for the
cued target to derive the area between the two curves. If the
gaze cue had a facilitatory effect on the aiming movement,
the cued area should be larger than the uncued, resulting in
a positive area between the two curves. Alternatively, an
inhibitory effect would result in a negative area.
Statistical analysis.  Repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was conducted on MT and RT with two withinsubject factors, SOA (3 levels: 100, 350, and 850 ms) and
target (two levels: cued, uncued) using R’s ez package
 . Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were
applied to factors that did not satisfy the sphericity assumption and are indicated by the decimal values in the reported
degrees of freedom. For significant effects, post hoc simple contrasts with Tukey’s corrections were calculated to
determine the source of the effect. Another repeated measures ANOVA was conducted on trajectory areas with SOA
(3 levels: 100, 350, and 850 ms) and trajectory segments (5
levels: 0%–20%, . . ., 80%–100%) as two within-subject
factors. Because the comparison between the trajectory
areas with 0 would indicate any facilitatory and/or inhibitory effect, a series of one-sample t-tests comparing each
segment’s area with 0 was also conducted and their corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are reported.
Reaction time.  A repeated measures ANOVA showed
significant
F(1.69,32.02) = 73.41, p
, and target,
Figure 3.  Reaction time (left; asterisks indicate significant difference between the cued and uncued targets at a specific SOA) and
area between the average cued and uncued trajectories (right; asterisks indicate significant difference from 0) for Experiments 1 and
2. Error bars represent the 95% CIs. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.
their interaction, F
1 73 32 88
Figure 3 shows the mean RTs for different conditions. Post
hoc comparisons showed that RTs were shorter for the cued
trials than for the uncued trials (mean difference
For SOA, RTs for the 100 ms SOA were significantly larger
than those for the 350 ms SOA (mean difference
and there was a difference between the 350 ms and 850 ms
SOAs that approached conventional levels of statistical significance mean difference = 8.04 ms, SE = 3.54,
). Finally, the significant
interaction revealed the modulating effect of SOA on the
facilitation effect of the social gaze cue. At 100 and 350 ms
SOAs, the cued trials had significantly shorter RTs than the
uncued trials (100 ms:mean difference = –10.36 ms,
350 ms: mean
difference
= –0.90), whereas there was no difference between cued and
uncued trials at the 850 ms SOA (mean difference =
Movement time.  There were no significant effects of SOA,
, target, F (1,19) = 0.75,
, or their interaction, F(2,38) = 1.91,
Trajectory area.  ANOVA did not show any significant main
effects, SOA:
1 79 34 02
trajectory segment: F(1.82,34.62) = 0.38, p = .66,
. There was, however, a significant interaction,
4 34 82 55
. As Figure 3
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 00(0)
shows, at the 100 ms SOA, none of the trajectory segments
were significantly different from 0, indicating a lack of
facilitatory or inhibitory effect of the gaze cue on movement execution. At the 350 ms SOA, the trajectory area
was significantly greater than 0 at 60%–80% of the trajectory, t
, CI = [3.20, 29.88],
indicating a bias towards the target for the cued trials as
compared to uncued trials at around the middle-to-end portion of the reach, or a facilitatory effect. At the 850 ms
SOA, the trajectory area was significantly smaller than 0,
[-28.85, -2.77]; 80%–100%: t(39) = -2.86, p= .007,
, CI = [-32.52, -5.58], which indicates movements with larger horizontal deviations to the uncued target trials compared to cued target trials, or an inhibitory
Discussion
This experiment revealed two main findings. First, RTs
were shorter for the cued targets than the uncued targets at
short SOAs (100 and 350 ms), but not at long SOAs
(850 ms). This finding in RT is consistent with results from
previous studies , both in terms of the timing
 and magnitude (between
10 and 20 ms of RT difference). This finding is slightly different from what was reported in Experiment 1 of Yoxon
et al. , where they did not find the modulating effect
of SOAs on RTs (i.e., the interaction between target and
SOA was not statistically significant). Using the same
task, the only difference between the Yoxon et al. setup
and that of the current experiment is that Yoxon et al. only
showed a person’s disembodied head instead of his entire
upper body with upper limbs. This difference potentially
indicates that, in the context of goal-directed actions,
social gaze cues would elicit facilitation effects and such
effects would diminish as SOA increased. Critically, the
emergence of such effects is contingent upon whether the
gaze cue model also has a body and the potential to interact
with the target in the same way that the participants might
interact with it, that is, act-ability.
Second, and more interestingly, although the social
gaze cue did not affect the temporal characteristics of the
movement (MT), trajectory analysis showed that the gaze
cue did affect the movement’s spatial characteristics. A
facilitatory effect was observed at 350 ms SOA (with trajectories deviating towards the location of the cue on
uncued target trials), and an inhibitory effect was observed
at 850 ms during the second half of the reach (with trajectories deviating away from the location of the cue on
uncued target trials). As Welsh and Weeks suggested, deviations between the cued and uncued trials during the initial portion of the movement reflect an effect of
gaze cue on action planning, whereas deviations during the
later portion of the movement reflect an effect on action
execution and motor control. Yoxon et  al. only
examined the spatial characteristics of the movement at
exactly 20% of the movement, while the current study
looked at segments throughout the entire trajectory. This
more thorough approach revealed that the social gaze cue
had a facilitatory effect on movement execution when the
SOA was short (350 ms), but the effect turned inhibitory
when the SOA was long (850 ms). The crossover from
facilitation to inhibition occurred between the 350 and
850 ms SOAs, which is consistent with previous findings
on the IOR for a review). More critically,
the inhibitory effect only manifested in movement execution, but not in movement planning (indicated by a lack of
effect during the initial portion of the trajectory) or attention (indicated by a lack of effect in RT). In sum, the results
of the present study indicate that gaze cues may impact
action planning if the model that presents the social gaze
cues appears able to interact with the potential target
locations.
Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that introducing act-ability, or the
potential to interact with the targets, to the gaze cue model
elicits activation of the motor system with varying degrees
of facilitation effects in RT as a function of SOA, as well
as facilitatory and inhibitory effects in movement execution (trajectories) across different SOAs. Unique to
Experiment 1 was the presence of the model’s torso and
limbs because the model formed a pose suggesting that the
model was prepared to interact with the targets. Compared
to the disembodied head used in Yoxon et al. , the
effect of act-ability could be confounded with the presence
of the model’s torso and upper limbs. In other words, the
effects in Experiment 1 could be attributed to the presence
of the model’s upper body (as opposed to a disembodied
head) instead of his potential to interact with the targets
(the pose of his arms). In Experiment 2, the same model
was used, but with his arms crossed in front of his chest,
which ensured that the arms were still visible, but controlled for the model’s perceived ability to interact with the
targets. If the results from Experiment 1 were attributed to
act-ability, the facilitatory and inhibitory effects in the trajectory analysis would disappear in the current experiment. Alternatively, if they were attributed to the presence
of the upper body, then results from the two experiments
should be comparable. Nonetheless, the effects of the cue
and SOA on RTs were still expected.
Participants.  Twenty adults (13 females and 7 males), aged
between 18 and 34, participated in this study. All participants
Wang et al.
were right-hand dominant with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and none had participated in Experiment 1. They
all provided full and informed consent. All procedures were
approved and were consistent with the standards of the University of Toronto Research Ethics Board. Based on the effect
size reported in Experiment 1 (ηp
for the interaction
between SOA and trajectory segment), an a priori power
analysis using G*Power showed that
a sample size of 20 is sufficient to detect the facilitatory and
inhibitory effects in trajectory area between reaches towards
the cued and uncued targets.
Stimuli and apparatus.  The stimuli and apparatus for
Experiment 2 were identical to those of Experiment 1,
except the same young adult male model had his arms
crossed in front of his chest (Figure 1 bottom).
Procedure and design.  The procedure and design for Experiment 2 were identical to those of Experiment 1, where
there were 16 blocks of 12 trials (2 target locations × 2
gaze directions × 3 SOAs), for a total of 192 trials, with
the first 12 trials used as practice and not included in the
subsequent data analysis.
Data analysis.  The analysis protocols for Experiment 2
were identical to those of Experiment 1. Seventy-nine (79)
trials (2.19% of the total trials) were removed due to the
marker’s loss of tracking and another 14 trials (0.39%)
were removed because their RTs were smaller than 100 ms
or greater than 1000 ms, or their MT was greater than
Reaction time.  A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a
significant main effect of SOA, F(1.56, 30.28) =
, and of target, F(1,19) =
. There was also a significant
interaction, F
1 28 24 26
Figure 3 shows, RTs were shorter for cued targets than for
uncued targets (mean difference = –7.86 ms, SE = 1.92,
). For SOAs, RTs for the
100 ms SOA were significantly greater than those for the
350 ms SOA mean difference = 28.79 ms, SE = 3.18,
), and the difference in
RTs between the 350 ms and 850 ms SOAs was also significant (mean difference = 6.84 ms, SE =2.73, t(19)
). For the interaction effect, the
cued RTs were only smaller than the uncued RTs when the
SOA was 100 ms and 350 ms— 100 ms: mean difference =
8.72 ms, SE =2.19, t=(19) =
350 ms: mean difference = 14.61 ms, SE = 3.57, t(19)
difference =
Movement time.  ANOVA showed that there was a significant main effect of SOA, F(1.98,37.63) = 4.81,
, and of target, F(1,19) = 5.85, p = .26
significant
interaction,
1 92 36 52
. Post hoc analysis showed that MTs were significantly smaller for the
cued targets than for the uncued targets, mean
difference
= –0.54. For the factor of SOA, there was no difference in
MTs between the 100 ms and 350 ms SOAs, mean
difference
–0.27, but MTs for the 850 ms SOA were significantly
greater than those for the 350 ms SOA, mean
difference
Trajectory area.  Initially, Grubbs’ two-sided test for outliers
with 95% CIs showed that there were 10 outlier segments
(out of 600; or 1.67%), which were removed from the analysis. The ANOVA did not show any significant main
effects, SOA: F
; trajectory segment:
1 95 37 09
nor a significant interaction, F (4.07,77.41) = 0.13,
. As Figure 3 suggests, one-sampled
t-tests did not show any trajectory segments being significantly different from 0.
Discussion
Participants in Experiment 2 were presented with a gaze
model with his arms crossed in front of his chest, eliminating his potential to interact with the potential target (i.e.,
act-ability). Two main findings were reported. First, RT
analysis revealed a facilitation effect of the gaze cue on
participants’ attention during a manual reaching task.
Specifically, RTs for the cued target were shorter than
those for the uncued target when the SOA was relatively
short, at 100 and 350 ms, and this difference disappeared at
the longer SOA, at 850 ms. This finding is congruent with
what was reported in Experiment 1, suggesting the importance of the torso and upper limbs in eliciting the facilitation effect. Second, trajectory area analysis did not show
any significant effects for any SOA. This finding is consistent with the earlier prediction where the social gaze cue
does not affect motor execution when the cueing model
does not have the potential or ability to interact with the
General discussion
The current study investigated the underlying mechanisms
of social cueing on movement execution. Following the
approach of an earlier study , the present study used an upper-limb reaching task to evaluate the
facilitatory and inhibitory effects of a non-predictive gaze
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 00(0)
cue on attention and motor control. Unlike Yoxon et al.,
which presented the social gaze cue via a disembodied
head, participants in the current study were presented with
the entire upper body of a gaze cue model that either had
the potential to interact with the target (Experiment 1) or
not (Experiment 2). Both temporal (RT and MT) and spatial (trajectory area) characteristics of the movement were
evaluated. For the temporal characteristics, both experiments showed a modulating effect of the SOA on RTs for
the cued and uncued targets, where RTs for the cued targets
were shorter than the uncued targets when the SOA was
relatively short (100 and 350 ms). RTs on cued and uncued
target trials were not different at a longer SOA (850 ms).
Analysis of the spatial characteristics of the movement
revealed something more intriguing—a facilitation effect
at the 350 ms SOA and an inhibitory effect at the 850 ms
SOA that emerged at around the middle-to-end portion of
the movement. This pattern emerged in Experiment 1
when the hands of the model were near the targets, but not
in Experiment 2 when the hands of the model were not
near the targets. This contrast implies that social gaze cues
may have a context-dependent influence on movement
execution, where the act-ability of the model may produce
gaze cues that lead to motor system activation.
Recall that Yoxon et al. found differing effects
of gaze cues (from a disembodied head) and finger-pointing cues on movement planning and execution. Specifically,
although gaze and finger-pointing cues led to changes in
RTs, only finger-pointing cues affected reach trajectories.
The current study provided the gaze model with the potential to interact with the target. Doing so mitigated the discrepancy between the head-only and finger-only stimuli
and produced similar results in the reach trajectory as
those reported in the finger-only experiment of Yoxon
et al. This overall set of findings implies that a gaze cue
that is made more socially- or action-relevant (via the presence of implied action) may be crucial in enabling the gaze
cue’s effect on motor execution and control. Consistent
with this idea, Chen et  al. compared the cueing
effect of a pointing finger with that of a pointing foot.
Whereas the hand cue elicited the facilitation effect, the
foot cue did not. In a social setting, directional cues are
normally conveyed through hands, not feet. Therefore, the
effect of directional social cues on attention and movement
execution should also be contingent upon the social relevance of the cue itself: The addition of the gaze cue model’s torso and upper limbs, especially when the hands have
the potential to interact with the target, also contributed to
the enhanced social relevance of the cue.
The intricate interaction among motor planning and
execution, social perception, and attention could potentially be related to the interaction between different visual
pathways. In addition to the ventral (perception) and dorsal (action) pathways that emerge from early visual centres, Pitcher and Ungerleider suggested the
existence of a third visual pathway dedicated to the
dynamic aspect of social perception for a review on the neural substrates that contribute to the shared-attention system). In
terms of connectivity, this new pathway is hypothesised to
start at the early visual cortex (V1) and project to the
medial temporal area (V5/MT) before ending at the superior temporal sulcus (STS). The human STS has been
shown to respond to various types of visual stimuli that are
social in nature, such as biological motion , human voice ,
language , and, more relevantly, eye
gaze . These
findings suggest the potential role that the STS plays in
establishing the gaze cueing effect. Furthermore, the
involvement of the motion selective area V5/MT is also
crucial for the present discussion. Because the majority of
the cells in V5/MT are directionally selective (DS), it is
considered to be specialised in visual motion for a review). Gilaie-Dotan suggested that
V5/MT, along with the medial superior temporal (MST)
area, utilises the non-hierarchical connections to propagate
relevant visual information to other brain areas, including
those of the dorsal pathway that are responsible for visually guided reaching .
Combining the knowledge of STS and the hypothesised
third, dynamic social pathway with that of V5/MT, the
implication of results from the current study becomes
apparent. As the current study revealed, gaze cues could
indeed affect movement execution. The mediating effect of
the temporal offset between the gaze cue and target onsets
on movement execution is consistent with the implied relationship between the dorsal and the dynamic social pathways. The common information processing component,
V5/MT, could have contributed to the relationship between
gaze cues (dynamic social pathway) and movement execution (dorsal pathway). Because the movement deviations
due to the gaze cue occur at the later portion of the reach, it
is likely that the information processed through the dynamic
social pathway is projected to the dorsal pathway. The
motor system, therefore, utilises both the direct input from
V5/MT and the input from the dynamic social pathway.
Because of the neural processing delay, the influence of the
dynamic social pathway may not emerge until during the
later stage of action execution.
It should be noted here that a potential limitation of the
current study is the between-subject design for Experiments
1 and 2. This design was adopted to avoid any carry-over
effects that may incur in a within-subject design—presenting participants with the same gaze model with and without act-ability in the same session may produce unwarranted
bias in either condition (but more critically could lead participants to intuit that the model without act-ability [in the
hands-crossed condition] could potentially act on the
object). Furthermore, key predictions for the present study
Wang et al.
focused on the presence (Experiment 1) or absence
(Experiment 2) of trajectory deviations, rather than on
potential relative differences in the magnitude of any trajectory deviations. Given the design and critical predictions, RT and trajectory comparisons were performed
between conditions (cued vs. uncued trials) within the
same experiment. Such within-experiment comparisons
are sufficient to reveal the presence and absence of the
facilitatory and inhibitory effects in target prioritisation
and action planning and execution. Future studies may
consider adopting a within-subject design to provide an
alternative approach to testing the hypotheses.
Finally, the results from the current study are consistent
with calls for a shift in the methodology through which one
should investigate the spatial cueing effect . As mentioned in the
Introduction, orienting of attention has been commonly
studied using the spatial-cueing paradigm, which involves
measurements such as RT using tasks such as button pressing or eye tracking . However, in the context of social cueing
under a more naturalistic setting, gaze cues tend to be associated with action execution. Because of the potential link
between social perception and motor control, adopting an
action-based evaluation method could yield more insights
into the effects of social gaze cues from a functional perspective. In conclusion, the present study established a connection between social gaze cue and movement execution,
where allowing the gaze cue model to have the potential to
interact with the target enabled the social gaze cue to influence movement execution.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Goran Perkic for being the gaze cue
model and Jacob Burgess in assisting to collect part of the data
for this study. We would also like to thank Luis Jiménez and
another reviewer for their thoughtful comments during the review
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Xiaoye Michael Wang