Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Neural Correlates of High-Gamma Oscillations (60–200 Hz)
in Macaque Local Field Potentials and Their Potential
Implications in Electrocorticography
Supratim Ray,1 Nathan E. Crone,2 Ernst Niebur,3 Piotr J. Franaszczuk,2 and Steven S. Hsiao3
1Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 2Department of Neurology,
The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-7247, and 3Department of Neuroscience, Zanvyl Krieger Mind/Brain Institute, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218
Recent studies using electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings in humans have shown that functional activation of cortex is associated
with an increase in power in the high-gamma frequency range (60–200 Hz). Here we investigate the neural correlates of this highgamma activity in local field potential (LFP). Single units and LFP were recorded with microelectrodes from the hand region of macaque
secondary somatosensory cortex while vibrotactile stimuli of varying intensities were presented to the hand. We found that high-gamma
power in the LFP was strongly correlated with the average firing rate recorded by the microelectrodes, both temporally and on a
trial-by-trial basis. In comparison, the correlation between firing rate and low-gamma power (40–80 Hz) was much smaller. To explore
the potential effects of neuronal firing on ECoG, we developed a model to estimate ECoG power generated by different firing patterns of
theunderlyingcorticalpopulationandstudiedhowECoGpowervarieswithchangesinfiringrateversusthedegreeofsynchronousfiring
betweenneuronsinthepopulation.Bothanincreaseinfiringrateandneuronalsynchronyincreasedhigh-gammapowerinthesimulated
ECoG data. However, ECoG high-gamma activity was much more sensitive to increases in neuronal synchrony than firing rate.
Key words: secondary somatosensory cortex; gamma; high-gamma; local field potential; ECoG; synchrony
Introduction
Several EEG and local field potential (LFP) studies have indicated
that signal power in the gamma frequency range (30–80 Hz)
increases during a variety of cognitive tasks . Although most studies of gamma oscillations initially emphasized frequencies 40 Hz, electrocorticographic recordings
(ECoG) in patients undergoing epilepsy surgery have suggested
that functional activation of cortex is perhaps more consistently
associated with a broadband increase in signal power at higher
frequencies, typically 60 Hz and extending up to 200 Hz and
beyond . These “high-gamma” responses have
been observed in a variety of functional domains, including motor , auditory , visual
 , language , and attention . However, the relationship between these
high-frequency gamma oscillations and the firing properties of
the neural population remains unclear. Here we investigate this
relationship in the LFP that measures the activity of a small population of neurons near the microelectrode, and in a model of
ECoG that simulates the average activity of a much larger number
(500,000) of neurons.
In a previous study , we measured the correlation between spikes and oscillations in the LFP recorded in
secondary somatosensory cortex (SII) of awake macaque monkeys, and we found that spikes were tightly correlated with oscillations in the high-gamma range. Based on those results, we hypothesize here that LFP high-gamma activity represents the
average firing of neurons near the microelectrode from which the
LFP activity is recorded, weighted according to their distance
from the electrode. We test this hypothesis by studying the covariations of population firing and LFP high-gamma over time,
as well as trial-by-trial covariations in these two quantities. We
show that the two quantities are tightly correlated.
If LFP high-gamma activity is a measure of neural firing of the
population near the microelectrode, ECoG high-gamma activity
should be an indicator of the firing properties of the entire neural
population under the ECoG electrode. However, for such a large
network of neurons, the temporal pattern of firing (in particular,
neural synchronization) may be important. We develop a model
to estimate ECoG high-gamma power under different firing rate
profiles of the neural population and compare the increase in
Received June 20, 2008; revised Sept. 16, 2008; accepted Sept. 21, 2008.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R01-NS18787 (S.S.H.), R01-NS40596 (N.E.C.,
E.N., P.J.F.), 5R01EY016281-02 (E.N.), R01-NS34086 (S.S.H.), and NS43188-01A1 (E.N., S.S.H.). We thank Stefan
Mihalas and Veit Stuphorn for their helpful comments, Paul Fitzgerald for his extensive help in data collection, and
Justin Killebrew and Frank Dammann for technical support. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable suggestions.
CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoSupratimRay,DepartmentofNeurobiology,HarvardMedicalSchooland
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 201 Goldenson, 220 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail:
 .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2848-08.2008
Copyright © 2008 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/08/2811526-11$15.00/0
11526 • The Journal of Neuroscience, November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536
high-gamma activity attributable to an increase in population
firing rate versus an increase in synchronization. Although both
increases in firing rate and synchrony lead to an increase in highgamma power in the simulated data, the effect of a 10-fold increase in firing rate is matched by that of a small (1%) increase
in synchrony. Thus, ECoG high-gamma activity is likely more
sensitive to synchronous firing in the underlying cortical neural
population than to the underlying firing rate.
Materials and Methods
The experimental design, recording setup and some of the analysis methods are described in detail in the study by Ray et al. . Here, we
describe them briefly.
Animals and animal behavior. Single-unit recordings were obtained
from secondary somatosensory cortex in two macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta, one female, 4–6 kg). The monkeys were water restricted
and received most of their daily water during the experiment. They were
trained to sit quietly in a primate chair during the experiment with their
hands supinated and restrained. Water rewards were given at pseudorandom intervals during the experiment to keep the animals awake and alert.
All procedures and experimental protocols complied with the guidelines
of the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care and Use Committee and
the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Experimental design. Tactile stimuli were delivered perpendicular to
the skin through a probe on the distal pad of the second or third digits
(D2 or D3) by a vibratory stimulator (Mini-shaker, model 4810; Bru¨el &
Kjær). The Mini-shaker stimulator produced a sinusoidal vibration,
which was presented for 1 s, with an interstimulus interval of 1.2 s. Three
different stimulus frequencies (50, 100, and 200 Hz) and four different
amplitudes (in the ratio 1:2:5:10 and denoted by G1, G2, G5, and G10
throughout this study) were used, with 50 trials per frequency and amplitude combination. Stimuli were presented in a pseudorandom order.
Stimulus amplitude at the lowest amplitude (G1) was approximately five
times higher than the perceptual threshold (on average 5, 3, and 0.8 m
at 50, 100 and 200 Hz, respectively). Mini-shaker movements were monitored using an accelerometer (Type 8636C5; Kistler Instrument) and the
corresponding displacement amplitudes were computed by double integration of the acceleration. In this study, only the results for stimulus
frequency of 50 Hz are shown because SA1 (slowly adapting) and RA
(rapidly adapting) receptors found in the periphery respond more
strongly to stimulus frequencies at or below 50 Hz. Similar results were
obtained at other stimulus frequencies.
Recordings. Stainless steel recording cylinders were placed surgically
on each hemisphere over SII using aseptic procedures under sodium
pentobarbital anesthesia (25 mg/kg, i.v., initial dose plus 5–15 mg/kg/hr,
i.v.). Neural recordings were started not earlier than 1 week after surgery,
to allow sufficient time for recovery. Neural activity was recorded using
seven platinum-iridium extracellular microelectrodes spaced 400 m
apart and driven by a Reitboeck microdrive .
The signals from the seven channels were amplified by a headstage amplifier (10) and divided into two streams for the collection of LFP and
spikes, respectively. One of the streams was amplified (100) and filtered
(0.3–300 Hz, 6 dB/octave) using Grass amplifiers (Model 15 LT with
12A54 Quad amplifiers; Grass-Telefactor/Astro-Med). The second input
stream was bandpass filtered (500–1000 Hz), amplified (10 to 100),
and spikes were isolated using a window amplitude discriminator. Only
neurons whose action potentials were well isolated from noise were selected for analysis. As a control, to ensure that the observed activity was
not an artifact, we repeated the experiment for several neurons after
taking the stimulator off the finger. For such trials, all stimulus-related
activity disappeared.
Two hundred and three neurons were recorded from three hemispheres (55 and 71 neurons from hemispheres 1 and 2, respectively, of
monkey 1; and 77 neurons from one hemisphere in monkey 2).
Time-frequency analysis. Time-frequency analysis was performed using the matching pursuit (MP) algorithm . MP
is an iterative procedure to decompose a signal as a linear combination of
members of a specified family of functions gn, which are usually chosen
to be sine-modulated Gaussians, i.e., Gabor functions or “Gabor atoms,”
because they give the best compromise between frequency and time resolution. In this algorithm, a large overcomplete dictionary of Gabor
atoms is first created. In the first iteration the atom g0 which best describes the signal f(t) (i.e., has the largest inner product with it) is chosen
from the dictionary and its projection onto the signal is subtracted from it.
The procedure is repeated iteratively with the residual replacing the signal.
Thus,duringeachofthesubsequentiterations,thewaveformgnismatched
to the signal residue Rnf, which is the residue left after subtracting the results
of previous iterations. Mathematical details of this method are presented in
Ray et al., 2008b. Time-frequency plots were obtained by calculating the
Wigner distribution of individual atoms and taking the weighted sum . We have made the software used for MP computation
online at 
The LFP was originally sampled at 5 kHz and then down-sampled to 1
kHz. Matching pursuit was performed on signals of 2048 bins (0.523–
1.524 s at 1 ms resolution, where zero denotes the time of stimulus onset),
yielding a 2048  2048 array of time-frequency values . This was
further down-sampled by a factor of 8 (the mean of every 8  8 pixels was
taken as one time-frequency bin), yielding a time resolution of 8 ms and a
frequency resolution of 2 Hz. For the study of temporal variations in
power, no down-sampling was performed so that time resolution was 1 ms.
Noise and stimulus artifact removal. With MP, line noise (60 Hz and
harmonics) are represented by long atoms (spread parallel to the time
axis) concentrated 60 Hz and its harmonics. Similarly, a sinusoidal
stimulus artifact is represented by long atoms concentrated at the stimulus frequency and harmonics. Such atoms were excluded from the analysis to eliminate these artifacts. This procedure is more powerful than
traditional filtering because at least some of the energy at 60 Hz that has
a physiological origin is preserved. For example, a short burst of activity,
which MP represents as an atom localized in time but spread in frequency, will not be excluded from analysis.
For each neuron, noisy trials were eliminated before analysis by visual
inspection and window discrimination of the filtered LFP. For each stimulus frequency and amplitude combination, between 25 and 50 trials
were analyzed (on average, 3 trials of 50 were eliminated).
Selection and classification of neurons. We tested whether the firing
rates and signal power were stable over time to ensure that the results
were not biased by a change in the level of alertness/attention of the
monkey over the recording period. Using regression analysis, we selected
141 neurons for which firing rates and gamma power were stable for the
entire recording duration . These neurons were categorized into three categories based on their firing rate profiles: Excited
(for which the firing rate increased after stimulus onset; 78 neurons),
Inhibited (firing rate decreased after stimulus onset; 21 neurons), and
Not-Driven (no change in firing rate; 42 neurons). In this report we use
the Excited population to study temporal and trial-by-trial correlations
between population firing rate and signal power in different frequency
Frequency bands. The term “gamma band” is used here to describe the
broad frequency range between 40 and 200 Hz. We analyzed the frequency band between 60 and 150 Hz (called the “high-gamma” band)
because the spike-triggered average had prominent power in this range
 . Additionally, we also performed the analysis on the
traditional “low-gamma” frequency band between 40 and 80 Hz, and in
the beta frequency range (16–24 Hz) where we observed a consistent
decrease in power after stimulus onset. For low and high-gamma power,
several different frequency ranges were used (80–150 Hz and 60–200 Hz
for high-gamma, 40–60 Hz for low-gamma) and very similar results
were obtained.
Cross-correlation analysis. We adopted the method used by Womelsdorf et al. based on Spearman-rank correlation to compute the
cross-correlation between mean normalized firing rates and mean normalized power in different frequency bands. As a measure of the crosscorrelation at time lag L, we computed the Spearman-rank correlation
between the power between 0 and 200 ms and the firing rates from L to L
 200 ms :11526–11536 • 11527
thus we obtained 200 data pairs). This method is approximate because
the power and rate values are not independent across time. However, the
Spearman rank correlation analysis avoids assumptions about the underlying distributions . We obtained crosscorrelation functions for time lags L between 100 and 100 ms. Because
the time lag of the rate changes was defined relative to the power changes,
a peak at negative time lag indicates that firing rate changes precede
power changes.
ECoG data modeling. We estimated the change in high-gamma power
in the ECoG signal that is due to changes in firing rate or synchronization
in the underlying neural population. Most of the power recorded by the
ECoG electrode is due to synaptic activity , so the
contribution of the action potentials is small and limited to the higher
frequencies only. However, here we were specifically interested in the
contribution of action potentials and their time-locked LFP components, and thus limited the analysis to the effect of neuronal firing on the
ECoG activity.
Suppose a microelectrode records the activity of a neuron as shown in
supplemental Figure 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental
material. This neuron is at a distance R from the dura (and hence from
the ECoG electrode). When the neuron fires an action potential, the
microelectrode records the extracellular action potential waveform (t)
(which is estimated by the spike-triggered average), whereas the ECoG
electrode records the potential (t). The problem is to find a relationship
between (t) and (t). Because a complete characterization of (t) with
respect to (t) is extremely difficult, we make a series of approximations
to model a relationship between the two. The overall potential due to all
the underlying neurons is then computed using linear superposition. The
approximations are explained below.
Passive recording system. The presence of the ECoG electrode influences the electric field generated by the neuronal population. Because the
conductance of the electrode is extremely high (ECoG electrodes are
typically made of platinum-iridium) compared with the brain tissue, it
constrains the entire cortical surface (on which it is placed) to have the
same potential. To compute this potential, first the induced charge on the
metal electrode must be computed (the induced charge will develop to
keep the potential the same over the entire area of the electrode). In
general, the solution depends on a number of factors, including the position of the current source (neuron) with respect to the electrode, the
dimensions of the electrode, the geometry of the neuron, as well as the
input impedance of the recording system. This problem is extremely
difficult to solve for the entire neural population. Thus, we approximate
the potential of the ECoG electrode by a point recording contact situated
directly above the current source (for example, for the neuron shown in
supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, we assume that the recording contact is at a distance R from the
soma and situated vertically above the neuron).
Current source localization. To compute the potential recorded at any
distance from the neuron, first the distribution of the currents must be
computed. These current sources and sinks are generated because of the
synaptic activity (for example, opening of sodium channels will create a
local current sink). Once an action potential is generated, it propagates
along the axon as well as the dendrites, creating a distribution of local
sources and sinks. However, detailed numerical calculations have shown
that the currents at/near the soma are typically much larger than the
currents in the dendrites, whereas the contribution of the myelinated
part of the axon to the extracellular potential is negligible . Furthermore, the potential decays quickly below the level of detection as the microelectrode moves away from the soma . Thus, the main contributions to the recorded potentials are due to
currents generated close to the soma, and we therefore assume that in all
the microelectrode recordings, the electrode is situated close to the soma.
Gold further showed that for microelectrodes close to the soma,
the temporal profile of the potential and of the current sources is very
similar. This is expected, because given a point source I in an unbounded
and isotropic volume conductor, the corresponding potential at a distance r is given by
where  is the extracellular resistivity. Thus, I(t) is proportional to (t)
(both have the same shape).
Current source distribution. If the potential recorded by a microelectrode is considered to be due to a point current source at the soma, the
potential will decrease as 1/r from the current source (Eq. 1). However,
once the action potential is initiated at the axon initial segment, the
charge imbalance depolarizes the nearby membrane (which allows the
action potential to propagate). The fall-off of the potential with distance
is critically dependent on the spatial distribution of these local current
sources and sinks. For example, the spatial distribution of currents can be
approximated by a current sink flanked on each side by a current source,
i.e., a triphasic current source distribution . In general, the resulting potential has a multipole expansion with
a leading 1/r 2 term (and if the triphasic current source is perfectly symmetric, a leading 1/r 3 term). Omitting higher terms of the multipole
expansion, we approximate the effect of the spatial distribution of currents on the potential by using the following equation:
where n is an exponent between 1 and 3. Here, n 1 represents a point
source (no redistribution of charge), n 2 a dipole (two equal and
opposite current sources), and n 3 represents the quadrupole moment,
e.g., resulting from an instantaneous symmetric distribution of charge
into a point sink of I/2 flanked by two point sources of –I/4. The simulations are performed for different values of n. Equation 2 is another approximation because in general the extracellular potential (t) and the
current source I(t) may be related in a complicated way that may depend
on a variety of factors, like redistribution of charge along the membrane
(the trans-membrane current), the contribution of the current sources in
the dendrites and so on. It must be noted that regardless of the rate of
decay of the potential with distance, the shape of the extracellular action
potential is preserved, because at lower frequencies (at least up to the
high-gamma range) the brain acts like a purely resistive medium and the
conductivity is not frequency dependent . Therefore, we relate the ECoG potential (t) with the extracellular action potential (t) using the following equation:
where R is the distance between the ECoG electrode and the soma. The
constant C incorporates several factors like the distance between the
soma and the microelectrode, the conductivity of the medium, size of the
soma, and the orientation of the current sources, whereas the exponent n
incorporates, approximately, the spatial distribution of the charge along
the membrane near the axon initial segment. From linear superposition,
the overall ECoG potential due to a population of N neurons (with the
soma of the k th neuron located at a distance Rk from the ECoG electrode)
is given by
Spatial distribution of neurons. The somatosensory cortex has an overall thickness of 2 mm . The contribution of cortical
neurons to the ECoG potential depends on a variety of factors such as
their type, density, orientation, size and pattern of interconnections.
Layer 1 (the molecular layer) mainly contains the apical dendritic extensions of the cells in layers 2/3 or axonic connections from other columns
and only a few neuronal cell bodies. Pyramidal cells are found in Layers
2/3 as well as Layer 5, whereas Layer 4 has prominent spiny stellate
neurons that receive input from thalamic neurons. It is unclear how the
size or the type of a neuron affects the potential observed at the ECoG
electrode. Gold et al. showed that the potential depends on the
11528 • J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
size, but not on the type of neuron or the extent of dendritic arborization.
However, an important criterion seems to be the conductance of ion
channels. As an approximation, we ignore the laminar differences and
assume that the neurons beneath the ECoG electrodes form a homogeneous population. Most commonly used ECoG electrodes have a diameter of 4 mm with an exposed surface of diameter 2.3 mm. The density of
neurons in human cortex is 10 5/mm 2; the ECoG electrode with an
exposed area of 2.3 mm diameter will thus have 500,000 neurons under
it. We assume that these neurons are situated at depths between 0.2 and
2 mm (i.e., they are uniformly distributed between Layers 2 through 6).
The diversity in cell size/type/conductivity/orientation is incorporated
by varying the coefficient C in equation 4 randomly between 0 and 1
(uniformly distributed).
In summary, we make the following assumptions to estimate the
ECoG potential ((t)) from the microelectrode action potentials ((t),
obtained by taking the mean spike-triggered average of the excited population in the early stimulus period):
The ECoG electrode does not influence the electric field generated by
the neurons.
The microelectrode is close enough to the soma such that only the
currents in the soma influence the potential (t). This makes the current
source proportional to the potential (Eq. 1).
The effect of current distribution in the dendrites and axon is modeled
by assuming that the potential drops off as 1/rn, where n is between 1 and
3. The value of n is critically dependent on the spatial distribution of
charge, n 1 corresponds to no distribution of charge (just a point
current source at the soma), whereas n 3 corresponds to a perfect
instantaneous redistribution into a sink of size I/2 flanked by two symmetric sources of size I/4. Higher terms in the multipole expansion are
The laminar differences are ignored, and the differences in cell size,
type, orientation, conductivity and density are incorporated using a single variable (C; Eq. 4) that is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
In supplemental Discussion 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, we address some of these assumptions in detail and
discuss experimental and computation strategies to improve the model.
Temporal dynamics of firing rate and LFP power
To test the hypothesis that LFP high-gamma power is tightly
coupled with the average firing rate of the neural population near
the microelectrode, we compared the temporal dynamics of the
mean time-frequency power changes with
respect to a baseline period (200 to 50
ms, where 0 indicates stimulus onset) in
the LFP of the “Excited” population (see
Material and Methods for details) with the
mean firing rates of this population. Figure
1A shows the time-frequency energy difference plot for the Excited population at a
stimulus amplitude of G10, as well as the
firing rate of the Excited population. Both
low- and high-gamma power increased
with an increase in firing rate. To quantify
these results, we first normalized the firing
rate of each neuron by dividing it by the
maximum firing rate for that neuron.
These normalized firing rates were then
averaged across the Excited population to
obtain the mean normalized firing rates.
Similarly, we computed the mean normalized power in the following three different
frequency bands: beta (16–24), lowgamma (40–80 Hz), and high-gamma
(60–150 Hz). Figure 1B shows the percentage of change in normalized firing
rates from baseline firing rates as well as
the percentage of change in normalized LFP power from baseline
power, for the high-gamma (top), low-gamma (middle), and
beta (bottom) frequency bands. We observed a strong correlation
between the high-gamma power and firing rates curves, suggesting a close and possibly causal relationship. Low-gamma power
also increased after stimulus onset, but the increase was smaller
(scale in Fig. 1B is different for different frequency bands) and
stayed constant for a longer duration. The decrease in beta power
started at the same time as, or slightly after, the firing rate started
to increase. The results were similar when the analysis was repeated without normalization of firing rates or power.
To test whether the changes in firing rate preceded the changes
in power in Figure 1B, we computed the cross-correlation between mean normalized firing rates and mean normalized LFP
power (see Materials and Methods). Figure 2 shows the crosscorrelations between the normalized firing rates and normalized
high-gamma (left), low-gamma (middle) and beta (right) power,
for the four stimulus amplitudes. The time periods at which the
cross-correlation was significant (Spearman rank test, p
Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons) are denoted by
horizontal lines at the bottom of each plot. We observed a strong
correlation of firing rates with high-gamma power, with a correlation coefficient of 0.92 at the highest stimulus amplitude (G10).
Except for the smallest stimulus amplitude (for which the crosscorrelation was much smaller), the peak of the cross-correlation
between firing rates and high-gamma power occurred at negative
latencies (6, 3, and 4 ms for G2, G5, and G10, respectively).
This indicated that changes in firing rates preceded changes in
power, and the time lags were consistent with the lags reported
previously [Ray et al. , their Fig. 6C]. The crosscorrelation values between firing rates and low-gamma power
were much smaller (Fig. 2, middle). The peak occurred at a positive time lag (18 ms for G10), showing that low-gamma power
increases before the increase in firing rate.
We also observed a strong correlation between firing rates and
beta power. As shown in Figure 1B, bottom, beta power begins to
decrease 40 ms before the firing rate reaches its maximum
value, and correspondingly the cross-correlation shows a peak at
TemporaldynamicsoffiringratesandLFPoscillations.A,Time-frequencyplotofthechangeoftheLFPpowerrelative
to baseline (in dB), plotted along with the firing rate of the Excited population at the highest stimulus intensity (overlaid black
curve). Time t 0 indicates stimulus onset. The blue, magenta, and red vertical bars on the right edge of the plot indicate the
frequencyrangesforbeta,low-gamma,andhigh-gammapower,respectively.B,Changeinnormalizedfiringrates(blacktraces)
plotted along with the change in normalized power in the high-gamma (red, top), low-gamma (magenta, middle), and beta
(blue, bottom) frequency ranges.
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536 • 11529
40 ms at G10 (black trace). The lowest
level of beta power, however, is reached
after the firing rate peaks.
Trial-by-trial analysis
If the firing rates and LFP power in a frequency band are related to each other, they
should covary on a trial-by-trial basis. To
test this hypothesis, we computed the
Spearman rank coefficient between the firing rates and LFP power recorded from
individual sites. However, although the
LFP represents the contribution of several
neurons near the microelectrode, the firing rate is recorded for an individual neuron (often the one closest to the microelectrode so that the action potential can be
easily isolated). As a result, these correlations are expected to be smaller than the
temporal correlations that were computed
between the average firing rates and LFP
power of the Excited population.
The analysis was performed on 72 Excited neurons from which we had recorded at least 40 trials for
each stimulus amplitude condition. The mean firing rates and
power in the “early stimulus period,” defined in the interval 50–
200 ms post stimulus, were used because the firing rates were
much higher in this period and there was more variability across
trials. Figure 3 shows the histogram of the Spearman rank correlation between the firing rates and high-gamma (left), lowgamma (middle), and beta (right) power, computed for each
neuron (i.e., the correlation was computed for 40 data points for
each stimulus amplitude). We found a positive correlation between high-gamma power and firing rates, so that the histograms
shown in the left panel of Figure 3 were shifted toward the right
side of the origin. The neurons for which the correlation coefficient was significant ( p
0.05) are shown in black (31, 28, 26,
and 26 neurons of the 72 studied were significant for stimulus
intensity of G1, G2, G5, and G10 when no Bonferroni correction
was applied. Because the variability across trials was high at individual sites, only 4, 6, 3, and 5 neurons were significant after
Bonferroni correction for G1, G2, G5, and G10, respectively). For
low-gamma or beta, the correlation coefficients were much
smaller. Only 12, 12, 8, and 9 (0, 3, 0, 1 after Bonferroni correction) neurons had significant correlations for the low-gamma
(middle), and only 8, 7, 6, 5 (none after Bonferroni correction)
neurons were significant for beta power (right). Because the beta
suppression began only after 200 ms, we recomputed the correlation after taking the average power between 250 and 500 ms.
Similar results were found (9, 5, 2, and 2 neurons were significant
for G1, G2, G5 and G10, respectively; only 1 neuron at G2 was
significant after Bonferroni correction).
Although these correlations were small when computed for
individual neurons (40 data points per stimulus amplitude), the
results were highly statistically significant when the correlations
were computed for the entire dataset of all neurons and all trials
(i.e., when computed over 40  72 2880 data points). To
account for the variability between neurons recorded from different sessions, the firing rates and power for each neuron were
normalized by dividing by the maximum firing rate/power for
the entire set of trials for any of the four stimulus amplitudes.
After normalization, for each neuron we obtained 160 data points
(40 data points for each stimulus amplitude), with a maximum
value of unity. These data points were then analyzed separately
for each of the four stimulus amplitudes (72  40 2880 data
points for each amplitude) (supplemental Fig. 2, available at
www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). We then performed a regression analysis to test for a possible relationship
between normalized firing rates and normalized power. The p
values of the slope between rate versus high-gamma were highly
significant (slopes: 0.23, 0.22, 0.14, and 0.17; p values
10 43, 10 21, and 10 28 for G1, G2, G5 and G10, respectively).
Even for low-gamma, the p values were highly significant (slopes:
0.16, 0.12, 0.10, and 0.10; p values: 10 17, 4.2  10 14, 2.1 
10 11 and 8.5  10 13). For rate versus beta power, the slopes
were 0.02, 0.02, 0.06 and 0.05, and p values were 0.34, 0.25, 9.6 
10 6 and 3.4  10 4 when the power was computed between 50
and 200 ms post stimulus. We were concerned that the significant
correlations at G5 and G10 were artifacts of the phase-locked
activity (Fig. 1A, the red-orange spot at low frequency), and we
computed the power also between 250 and 500 ms, when beta
power suppression was more evident. In this case, the slopes were
0.006, 0.003, 0.002, and 0.023, and p values were 0.77, 0.86, 0.85,
The results obtained from trial-by-trial variability analysis,
although computed under some approximations, are consistent
with the results obtained from the temporal correlation analysis
that showed that high-gamma power is much more tightly correlated with the firing properties of the neural population than
low-gamma or beta power. These results are consistent with our
previous finding that each action potential is tightly coupled to
LFP activity in the high-gamma range , because
in that case an increase in firing rate would lead to a corresponding increase in high-gamma power generated by the neural population near the microelectrode.
Next, we studied the neural correlates of high-gamma activity
when recorded at a higher level of integration, as in ECoG recordings in humans, which typically record from 500,000 neurons.
For such recordings, the temporal structure of firing in the population may be important. As mentioned earlier, both an increase
in the firing rate and an increase in synchrony in a population of
neurons could theoretically lead to an increase in high-gamma
activity. To compare the effects of these two aspects of neural
Cross-correlation analysis between the normalized firing rates and normalized high-gamma (left), low-gamma
(middle), and beta (right) power, for the four stimulus amplitudes (indicated by different colors). The time periods at which the
cross-correlation is significant (Spearman rank test, p
0.05, Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons) are denoted by
horizontal lines at the bottom of each plot. Negative latencies indicate that changes in firing rates preceded changes in power.
Triangles indicate the time when the cross-correlation is highest.
11530 • J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
activity on ECoG high-gamma power, we developed a model to
estimate ECoG potential under different assumptions about the
firing patterns of the underlying neural population (see Materials
and Methods). The results are described in the next section.
Modeling of ECoG data
Figure 4A shows the results for a population of N 10 5 model
neurons that fired randomly with a constant firing rate (following
a Poisson distribution), which was varied between 10 and 100
spikes/s (top row). The model exponent (n in Eq. 2) was set to 2.
The corresponding simulated ECoG signals are shown in the
middle row, and the time-frequency spectra of the ECoG (average of 50 simulated trials) are shown in the bottom row. Figure
4B shows the same results for a population of 10 5 neurons in
which a subpopulation of neurons fired synchronously while the
firing rate remained constant at 10 spikes/s. The percentage of
neurons that fired synchronously was increased from 0 to 5%
(from left to right). A comparison of the high-gamma power
under these two conditions (Fig. 4C) showed that the increase in
ECoG high-gamma power that was obtained from a large increase in firing rate could be obtained by a small increase in
synchronization. For example, an increase in high-gamma power
due to a 10-fold increase in firing rate is the same as that caused by
a 2% increase in synchronization. Figure 4D shows the percentage of synchronously firing neurons that was required to explain
a 10-fold increase in firing rate in the asynchronous population,
as a function of the neural population and the model exponent
(Eq. 2). For a population of 5  10 5 neurons,
1% synchronization was required to achieve the same increase in high-gamma
as generated by a 10-fold increase in firing rate, for all tested
values of the model exponent. These results are in agreement with
theoretical arguments suggesting that the ratio of activity of a
coherent subpopulation of size M and an incoherent subpopulation of size L is M/
L (the ratio of power,
approximated by the square of the amplitude, is thus M 2/L). In
Appendix 1, we use a simple argument based on the variance in
firing rate to show that for a neural population of size N, the
ECoG power for the asynchronous condition is proportional to N,
whereas for the synchronous condition it is proportional to N2.
Figure 4B shows the effect of a particular type of synchronization, where a fraction of neurons fired with perfect synchrony
although the remaining population was asynchronous. Next, we
considered a population of neurons in which any two spike trains
have a correlation coefficient of  .
Figure 5A shows the increase in high-gamma power as the correlation coefficient is increased from 0 to 0.00045, whereas Figure
5B shows the correlation coefficient required to achieve the same
increase in high-gamma as generated by a 10-fold increase in
firing rate under different model parameters. Figure 5, A and B,
are thus analogous to Figure 4, C and D, with the percentage
synchronization replaced by the correlation coefficient. Thus, an
increase in high-gamma due to a 10-fold increase in firing rate in
a population of independently firing neurons is equivalent to an
increase in the pairwise correlation coefficient from zero (independent firing) to
0.0004. Experimental measurement of this
level of synchrony in a population would be difficult using singleunit pairwise cross-correlation measures because the correlation
values would be very small. High-gamma activity could be a better and more robust marker of synchronization in large networks
of neurons. This is further elaborated in Discussion.
To directly compare the effects of rate and synchrony on
ECoG high-gamma power, an experimental paradigm would
have to be designed in which firing rate and synchrony/correlation could be varied independently of each other. However, these
quantities are usually correlated with each other . Studies of selective attention provide a partial solution,
because in such studies a substantial increase in pairwise syn-
HistogramsofSpearmanrankcorrelationvaluesbetweenfiringratesandLFPpowerforindividualneuronsintheExcitedpopulation.Powerwascomputedforthreefrequencybands
(as in Fig. 1) and four stimulus intensities (as in Fig. 2). Neurons for which the correlation was significant ( p
0.05, Spearman rank test) are shown in black. Gray triangle indicates the mean
correlation for the entire Excited population.
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536 • 11531
chrony has been reported with only a
modest increase in firing rate . In supplemental Discussion 1,
available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, we combine the results
from a previous human attention study
using ECoG and the
present monkey LFP study to determine
the increase in firing rate required to explain the increase in ECoG high-gamma
because of attention. We show that the increase in firing rate must be unreasonably
high (much larger than the increase observed in comparable neurophysiological
studies of attention) to explain the results.
This comparison supports the idea that attention enhances the synchronization between neurons, and that ECoG highgamma
synchrony.
Discussion
We studied the relationship between high-gamma activity and
neuronal firing at the level of local field potentials which reflect
the activity of a small population of neurons near a microelectrode, and developed a simple model to explore the relative contributions of an increase in firing rate versus synchrony on ECoG
data, which records the activity of a large population (10 5) of
neurons. There are two main findings. First, we show that LFP
high-gamma power is tightly correlated with the instantaneous
firing rate of the neural population near the recording electrode.
Second, using a model to estimate the ECoG signals arising from
different population firing parameters, we show that both an
increase in firing rate and synchrony lead to an increase in ECoG
high-gamma power. However, increases in ECoG high-gamma
ECoGmodelingresults.ForplotsA–C,thetotalnumberofneuronsis10 5andthemodelexponent(ninEq.2)is2.A,Toprowshowsexamplerasterplotsofsimulatedspiketrainswith
randomfiring(arepresentativesetof50spiketrainsisshown).The10panelscorrespondto10differentsimulationsforwhichthefiringratewasfixedbetween10and100spikes/s.Thenumbers
ontopofthepanelindicatethetheoreticalfiringrateinspikes/s.Theinstantaneousfiringrate(computedfromtherasters)isshowninred.ThemiddlerowshowsthesimulatedECoGsignalforeach
simulation.Thebottomrowshowsthetime-frequencypowerspectrum(indB)oftheECoG(50simulationsliketheoneshowninthetopwereaveraged,consistentwiththenumberoftrialsaveraged
in LFP data and a previous ECoG study). B, Same panel configuration as in A; the simulated spike trains all have a mean fixed firing rate of 10 spikes/s, but a subpopulation of the neurons fire in
synchrony. The percentage of synchronously firing neurons increase from 0 to 5% from left to right (indicated by the numbers on top of the panel). C, High-gamma power (60–150 Hz) for the
simulationswithincreasingfiringrate(red)andincreasingsynchronization(black).D,Thesynchronizationstrengthrequiredtomatchthehigh-gammapowerofarandomlyfiringpopulationwith
a firing rate of 100 spikes/s, for different values of N (size of the neural population; colored lines as labeled in legend) as a function of the model exponent.
Comparison of power for random firing versus correlated firing. A, High-gamma power of a randomly firing population of 10 5 neurons with model exponent (n in Eq. 2) set to 2 (red trace) as the firing rate increases from 10 to 100 spikes/s,
superimposedwiththehigh-gammapowerofthesamepopulationofneuronsfiringwithacorrelationcoefficientthatincreases
from0to0.00045(withfiringratefixedat10spikes/s).B,Correlationcoefficientrequiredtomatchthehigh-gammapowerofa
randomly firing population with a firing rate of 100 spikes/s, for different values of N (size of the neural population) and model
11532 • J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
activity because of a large increase (10-fold) in population firing
rate can be matched by a small increase (1%) in neuronal firing
synchrony. Thus, while at the level of LFP, high-gamma activity
may only reflect the firing rate of the neural population near the
microelectrode, at a larger level of integration such as ECoG, it is
possibly an index of neural synchrony in the underlying cortical
population.
Significance of high-gamma oscillations
Our results are consistent with a growing number of LFP studies
suggesting a link between high-gamma oscillations and spiking
activity . The observed correlation between high-gamma power and population
spiking activity in our study is much stronger than in earlier
work. One reason could be due to the use of matching pursuit for
generating the time-frequency spectrum, because the Gabor
function dictionaries used in MP provide the best time-frequency
resolution possible in agreement with the uncertainty principle,
and consequently provide an excellent description of the timefrequency properties of nonstationary signals. In supplemental
Discussion 3, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental
material, we compare the performance of MP versus traditional
methods such as Fourier Transform for the representation of
highly nonstationary LFP signals. The multiscale decomposition
of MP allows sharp transients in the LFP signal (likely because of
spiking activity) to be represented by functions that have a narrow temporal support, rather than oscillatory functions with a
temporal support of hundreds of milliseconds (typical in methods such as Short Time Fourier Transform/Multi-tapering). Further details can be found in Ray et al., 2008b.
Other than these LFP studies, high-gamma power augmentation has been observed consistently in a large number of ECoG
studies in a variety of functional domains, including motor
 , visual , auditory , somatosensory , and language cortices . In addition, high-gamma activity is
modulated during selective attention , working memory , and recognition memory . Furthermore, a number of noninvasive studies
using either scalp EEG or magnetoencephalography have reported gamma responses
that include, or are restricted to, high-gamma frequencies. The
seeming ubiquity of high-gamma responses during cortical activation, as well as their high degree of specificity for the expected
location, timing, and stimulus-selectivity of cortical activation,
suggests that high-gamma activity constitutes a universal index of
cortical processing. This is not surprising given its close relationship to neuronal spiking.
Our results suggest a crucial role for high-gamma activity in
linking the signals observed in microelectrode studies with signals obtained from macroelectrode studies, such as intracranial
EEG studies in humans. LFPs are thought to represent the synaptic activity of a few thousand neurons, depending on the tip diameter used for the recording . Whereas
lower frequency activity in the LFP may be due to the activity of a
larger population, higher frequencies typically reflect a smaller
population . Indeed, frequencies greater than
300 Hz are probably dominated by the currents associated with
action potentials . In this respect, it is not surprising that high-frequency activity is tightly coupled to the firing
of a few neurons. More surprising is the range of frequencies that
are correlated with spiking activity; we show that power in a
frequency range as low as 60–200 Hz is tightly coupled to the
firing rates of a small population of neurons. The higher frequency components of LFPs have a greater relative contribution
from action potentials, whereas the size of the neural population
(that generates the activity at that frequency) decreases with increasing frequency . The high-gamma frequency
range (60–200 Hz) appears to be well suited for studying the
spiking activity of a relatively small population of neurons in LFP
recordings.
Furthermore, our modeling analysis shows that an increase in
cross-correlation of as low as 10 4 over a large population of
neurons may lead to a large increase in high-gamma power. An
increase of this magnitude would be very difficult to detect using
single unit measures with analysis methods such as pairwise
cross-correlation. This may explain why, although there are several studies showing an increase in synchronization at the level of
multi units or LFP with selective attention , fewer studies have
reported an increase in synchrony at the level of single units
 . The cross-correlation values reported by
Steinmetz et al. were very small but were shown to be
significant. High-gamma activity may be a more reliable and robust
reflection
synchronization
crosscorrelation, especially when recorded at a high level of neural
integration like subdural ECoG. However, whereas our modeling
study shows the relative effects of increases in firing rate and spike
synchrony in large populations of neurons, these are ‘idealized’
results aimed to reinforce the theoretical results developed in the
appendix. These modeling results are obtained under a series of
assumptions and must be complemented by neurophysiological
studies before the relative roles of rates and synchrony can be
unequivocally determined. In supplemental Discussion 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, we address
some of the limitations of the model in further detail, and discuss
possible experiments that can address some of the concerns.
Low-gamma versus high-gamma activity
Several functional mechanisms have been suggested for lowgamma oscillations, such as an increase in single unit synchronization , controlling the communication channels between input
and output neural assemblies , and setting a temporal reference frame so that latency or rank-ordering of spike times with respect to the gamma
cycle can carry information . Furthermore, these
gamma oscillations have been observed during several higher
cortical processes such as selective attention , sensorimotor integration , binding of
distributed representations , working memory , associative learning , and conscious perception .
The results presented in this study are not inconsistent with
any of these suggested roles of gamma oscillations. However, our
results point to an alternative hypothesis regarding the physiological origin of low-gamma oscillations. Just as an increase in
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536 • 11533
high-gamma could be attributable to an increase in spike synchronization within the neural population, an increase in lowgamma power could be attributable to an increase in synchronization in synaptic inputs, because synaptic activity is correlated
with the low-gamma frequency range . This is consistent with our
finding that low-gamma power increases before the increase in
firing rate (Fig. 1B, middle panel). Thus, while high-gamma
power could be a neural correlate of synchronized output of the
cortex, low-gamma power could be a correlate of synchronized
input to the cortex. Although these hypotheses suggest no “functional” role of low- and high-gamma oscillations, these oscillations could nevertheless reflect ongoing neural processes related
to dynamic cortical functions.
Regardless of whether high-gamma oscillations play any role
in cortical processing, our results suggest that high-gamma activity in electrophysiological recordings of a large population (like
ECoG) could be a useful indicator of the firing dynamics of the
neural population whose activity is being recorded. This key finding could potentially be used to characterize the nature of neural
processing used in different cognitive tasks, in particular,
whether the information is carried entirely by the mean rate of
action potentials (a rate code) or whether the precise occurrence
times of action potentials also carries information (a temporal
code). For example, in supplemental Discussion 1, available at
www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, we argue that an
increase in ECoG high-gamma power attributable to attention is
better explained by increases in neural synchrony than by firing
rate. Similar studies using ECoG and other invasive techniques,
e.g., microelectrode recordings, are expected to enhance our understanding of the role of gamma oscillations during different
cognitive tasks and the nature of cortical processing associated
with these oscillations.
Appendix 1
In this appendix, we try to estimate the high-gamma power in
ECoG using simple mathematical arguments. Although both an
increase in firing rate and an increase in synchrony in the neural
population may lead to an increase in high-gamma activity in
ECoG, previous theoretical studies have suggested that for a large
population of neurons (like the one recorded by the ECoG electrode), the ratio of activity recorded from a coherent subpopulation of size M versus that from an incoherent subpopulation of
size N, is M/
N . For instance, for a population of 10 5 neurons (the typical size of a macrocolumn; the
ECoG data generally represent a much larger population), even if
only 1% of the population is synchronized, the activity of this
synchronized subpopulation will be 10 3/
10 5 (approximately
three times more) than that of the incoherent subpopulation.
A crude measure of the ECoG high-gamma activity is the local
fluctuation (SD) in population firing rate, which prevents highgamma oscillations from canceling each other out. ECoG highgamma power (proportional to the square of the activity) will
thus be proportional to the variance in the firing rate. We compute the variance in firing rate under the following three conditions described in the study: (1) The entire population fires asynchronously; (2) A fraction ( ) of the population fires in perfect
synchrony, whereas the remaining population fires asynchronously; (3) the firing rates in the population are correlated such
that any two spike trains have a correlation coefficient of .
Let the size of the population be N, with a firing probability of
p in a bin of size
t. Let X be the number of spikes in this bin. We
estimate the variance Var(X) under the three conditions mentioned above. Let q 1p.
Case 1: Asynchronous firing. X  Binomial(N,p); Var(X)
Thus, the power increases linearly with N.
Case 2: A fraction of neurons fire synchronously.
Let X1 be the total number of spikes from the synchronous population (of size N ). X1  (N )Binomial(1,p) (i.e., either N or 0
with probability p and q, respectively).
Let X2 be the total number of spikes from the asynchronous
population (of size N(1 )). X2  Binomial(N(1 ),p); X X1
 X2; Var(X) Var(X1)  Var(X2) (the two random variables
are independent); (N 2 2)pq  N(1 )pq. For large values of
N, the second term is negligible. The power increases as N 2, consistent with the earlier theoretical arguments.
Case 3: Any two spike trains have a correlation coefficient of .
Such a population of neurons can be constructed by first randomly generating N  1 spike trains, setting the N  1 th as a
reference spike train, and then switching, with probability
the state of a time bin in each of these spike trains to the reference
spike train .
 and q 1p. Suppose N1 states get switched.
Then N1  Binomial(N,c). Suppose the state of this bin in the
reference spike train is Z. Then Z  Binomial(1,p). Let Y be the
number of spikes obtained from the remaining N–N1 spike trains
(whose state has not been switched). Then Y  Binomial(N–
N1,p). X N1.Z  Y; Var(X) E(var(X/N1))  var(E(X/N1))
(law of total variance).
First term:
EvarX/N1  
PN1  kvarX/N1  k.
But var(X/N1 k) var(kZ) var(Y),
where Y  B(N–k,p); k 2pq  (Nk)pq.
EvarX/N1  pq
PN  kk2
Second term: var(E(X/N1)).
EX/N1  
PN1  k EX/N1  k  
PN1  kkp
kp  Np,
so that var(E(X/N1)) 0;
thus, Var(X) pq(N 2  N(1)).
These simple mathematical derivations are consistent with the
11534 • J. Neurosci., November 5, 2008 • 28(45):11526–11536
Ray et al. • Neural Correlates of High-Gamma
results shown in Figures 4C and 5A. The power increases linearly
with the firing rate (p) for the asynchronous case in Figure 4C
(red line), increases as 2 for the synchronous case (black line),
and increases linearly with  in Figure 5A (black line).