ff14SB: Improving the accuracy of protein side chain and
backbone parameters from ff99SB
James A. Maier†,§, Carmenza Martinez‡,§, Koushik Kasavajhala‡,§, Lauren Wickstrom†,
Kevin E. Hauser‡,§, and Carlos Simmerling*,†,‡,§
†Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
‡Department of Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
§Laufer Center for Physical and Quantitative Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
Molecular mechanics is powerful for its speed in atomistic simulations, but an accurate force field
is required. The Amber ff99SB force field improved protein secondary structure balance and
dynamics from earlier force fields like ff99, but weaknesses in side chain rotamer and backbone
secondary structure preferences have been identified. Here, we performed a complete refit of all
amino acid side chain dihedral parameters, which had been carried over from ff94. The training set
of conformations included multidimensional dihedral scans designed to improve transferability of
the parameters. Improvement in all amino acids was obtained as compared to ff99SB. Parameters
were also generated for alternate protonation states of ionizable side chains. Average errors in
relative energies of pairs of conformations were under 1.0 kcal/mol as compared to QM, reduced
35% from ff99SB. We also took the opportunity to make empirical adjustments to the protein
backbone dihedral parameters as compared to ff99SB. Multiple small adjustments of φ and ψ
parameters were tested against NMR scalar coupling data and secondary structure content for
short peptides. The best results were obtained from a physically motivated adjustment to the φ
rotational profile that compensates for lack of ff99SB QM training data in the β-ppII transition
region. Together, these backbone and side chain modifications (hereafter called ff14SB) not only
better reproduced their benchmarks, but improved secondary structure content in small peptides,
and reproduction of NMR χ1 scalar coupling measurements for proteins in solution. We also
discuss the Amber ff12SB parameter set, a preliminary version of ff14SB that includes most of its
improvements.
TOC figure
*Corresponding Author: , Phone: +1 (631) 632-5424. Fax: +1 (631) 632-5405.
†Present Addresses: Dr. Lauren Wickstrom is currently Assistant Professor at the Borough of Manhattan Community College of The
City University of New York.
Supporting Information. Force field parameter files, additional information about structure generation and filtration, and fitting of
new side chain dihedral parameters, analysis of side chain scalar coupling convergence, NOE violations divided into backbonebackbone, backbone-side chain, and side chain-side chain restraints, testing of the AMBER12-bundled ff12SB in comparison with
ff14SB presented in the main text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at 
Author Contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
 
J Chem Theory Comput. 2015 August 11; 11(8): 3696–3713. doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
force field; molecular mechanics; molecular dynamics; MD; ff99SB; ff12SB; ff14SB; AMBER;
protein folding
Introduction
Computational studies of biopolymers such as proteins have become commonplace,
supplementing experimental information with models that provide simultaneous resolution
in time, space and energy. The results, however, strongly depend on the accuracy of the
computed energies and forces. The constant chemical topology prescribed by molecular
mechanics (MM) leads to dramatically enhanced efficiency over quantum mechanics (QM).
As wide application of even the most approximate quantum methods to solvated
biomolecular simulations remains computationally prohibitive, development of accurate
force fields is a critical problem for in silico biomolecular studies. Polarizable force fields1
in principle should be more accurate than fixed charge force fields, but for many systems of
interest current fixed-charged models may provide results that are comparably reasonable in
aqueous solution to polarizable contemporaries2. This is particularly important as these
fixed-charge models also typically have lower computational overhead, allowing for
improvements to the conformational sampling that often limits comparison to experiment.
We believe that there is still room for improvement in fixed-charge biomolecular MM force
fields. Such optimization is the focus of this work, where we focus on improving accuracy
where needed most, without adding additional computational complexity over the widely
used ff99SB model3.
ff99SB uses the functional form and many of the parameters derived in ff944 and ff995,
largely associated with the Amber software6. A key difference in these force fields is the
parameters in Fourier series adjusting energy profiles for rotation around bonds. These
corrections account for key orbital effects or weaknesses in other terms like 1B4 non-bonded
interactions, typically the last step in fitting force field parameters. A key assumption in
these force fields is that the dihedral corrections are uncoupled, and thus have no explicit
dependence on values of neighboring dihedrals. In ff94, “generic”’ torsions applying to all
sets of four atoms around a bond between two atom types (using a wildcard for the outer 2
atoms) were fit to a set of experimental small molecule barrier heights. In ff995, multipleperiodicity specific torsional parameters applicable to protein side chains were fit to a larger
set of small molecules.
An important component of protein force fields is the “backbone” dihedral parameters that
can alter secondary structure preferences. ff94 and ff99SB leverage unique corrections to
multiple sets of 4 atom dihedral terms around φ and ψ, describing the multiple combinations
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
of atoms bonded to the central 2 atoms. In ff94, the baseline backbone dihedral profile for φ
(C–N–Cα–C) and ψ (N–Cα–C–N) dihedral corrections were fit to glycine dipeptide
conformation energies from QM. Then, the influence of the side chain was added to other
amino acids by fitting parameters for the so-called φ′ (C–N–Cα–Cβ) and ψ′ (Cβ–Cα–C–N)
based on alanine dipeptide QM conformational energies. Importantly, the φ′ and ψ′ were fit
as a correction on top of the φ and ψ parameters that had already been fit to glycine. Thus all
amino acids except glycine had 2 full sets of “backbone” dihedral contributions, one using
only backbone atoms and a second correction set using the Cβ atom. The ubiquity of force
fields based on ff94 shows its overall effectiveness, despite specific weaknesses in
performance for proteins, such as exaggerated helical propensity3. With ff99SB3, protein
backbone dihedrals were refit by expanding upon the methods used in ff94 and ff99. A
larger set of alanine tetrapeptide conformations was used in fitting φ′ and ψ′, as well as
introducing glycine tetrapeptide conformations for fitting φ and ψ. The relative energies of
conformations control populations and barriers in an MM model, and thus they were used as
the direct targets in parameter optimization. The conformations were limited to local minima
because of computational expense, but the fitting struck a balance of secondary structure
suitable for a range of systems3, 7. ff99SB became widely adopted in the simulation
community, and thus the same approach of conformation pair energy fitting is used in the
present work for optimization of side chain dihedral parameters.
Limitations in ff99SB
Limitations in models often only become apparent after extensive use and testing. One
advantage of the wide adoption of ff99SB is that trends in the weaknesses were noted, in
contrast to single anecdotal failures for which the cause may be difficult to determine, or
unknown weaknesses in force fields that are not widely distributed.
Most notably, rotamer preferences for several side chains were observed to be less accurate
than others8. This likely arose since ff99SB inherited amino acid side chain dihedral
parameters from ff99, which were derived against a limited set of relative energies for small
organic compounds5. The transferability of energy correction parameters for small
molecules with relatively simple energy landscapes to amino acids may be an issue. The
atoms in the amino acids typically have different partial atomic charges than the reference
compounds, as well as more complex coupling to neighboring fragments. Due to recent
increases in computational power, more extensive calculations (including full rotational
energy profiles rather than selected stable conformations) can now be used to train side
chain parameters directly against QM data on complete amino acids8–9.
Several studies noted room for improvement in the secondary structure preferences of
ff99SB, and this is also investigated here. After ff99SB was published, solution scalar
coupling data for short peptides10 became available, against which ff99SB and other force
fields were compared11, and the potential for improvement was discussed11a. NMR scalar
coupling constants, especially three-bond scalar 3J couplings, are particularly relevant for
evaluation of dihedral distributions, as 3J couplings measure spin-spin interactions across
three bonds. This allows one to utilize the simple Karplus relation12—a third order cosine
series—to convert directly from dihedral angles to scalar couplings. In practice, however, the
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Karplus relation fails to account for other features that may affect scalar coupling, such as
bond length or angle, or neighboring spin systems. Recent DFT calculations suggest that
nearly all peptide backbone scalar couplings may in fact depend on both φ and ψ, for
example13. Furthermore, scalar couplings calculated by a Karplus relation are sensitive to
which empirical Karplus parameters are used11a, 11b. It also has been suggested that helical
structures are not stable enough in ff99SB11b, 11c, 14.
We hypothesize that two potential weaknesses in the ff99SB backbone parameter fitting
strategy may be the dominant factors limiting accuracy: (1) the lack of backbone fitting data
outside gas-phase minima and (2) using pre-polarized MM partial charges intended for
aqueous solution simulations while fitting dihedral parameters against gas-phase QM data.
Limiting the backbone parameter training to gas-phase local minima left potentially arbitrary
energies for transition barriers or, importantly, in regions that become minima in solution or
in the complex landscape of the protein interior. Additionally, the additive ff99SB model
employs HF/6-31G* RESP partial atomic charges15 that overestimate gas-phase dipoles by a
similar amount as obtained in water models such as TIP3P16, thus approximating the
polarization expected in aqueous solution15. However, subsequent refitting of dihedral
energy profiles to more accurate gas-phase energies calculated at the MP2 level results in
dihedral parameters that may partially counteract the contribution of implicit polarization
effects on the rotational energy profiles. Thus empirical corrections may provide additional
benefit in reproducing experiments in water. While an alternative strategy to account for
solvation effects in a more consistent way might be to develop an entirely new charge
model17, the original ff94 RESP charge model4, 15 developed by Peter Kollman has been
extensively tested, and retaining it also maintains compatibility with many other parameter
sets such as those modeling nucleic acids and carbohydrates18. Likewise, refitting the entire
backbone dihedral profile rather than just minima would potentially lose the advantage of
extensive studies7, 11a, 11b, 19 evaluating ff99SB’s strengths and weaknesses. Here, we
investigate the simpler strategy of developing a small empirical adjustment to the ff99SB
backbone parameters to improve reproduction of the experimental data in solution.
We show below that ff14SB, the combination of ff99SB with these new QM-based side
chain dihedral parameters and a small empirical adjustment to the backbone φ energy
profile, improves upon ff99SB in ensemble distributions for short polyalanine conformations
(backbone scalar couplings), protein side chains (χ1 scalar couplings), and secondary
structure balance for peptides adopting α-helical and β-hairpin conformations, while
maintaining the quality of ff99SB local dynamics (Lipari-Szabo S2 order parameters).
Recently, we also showed that updating the side chain parameters with those reported here
results in a model that is able to accurately fold a wide variety of protein topologies up to
nearly 100 amino acids20. It has also been shown that ff14SB maintains the crystal lattice
and protein conformations of triclinic lysozyme better than ff99SB, ff14ipq, or
CHARMM3621. We recommend use of ff14SB for protein simulations in Amber as well as
in other biomolecular simulation software.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fitting Strategy and Goals
Side chains
For the side chain update, we focus on improving the aspects that we feel are most likely to
be the greatest weaknesses in the current model. Several recent reports of force field training
have focused on application of more accurate quantum theory3, 8–9, 22. Although the level of
theory is certainly important, we feel that focusing on the conformational diversity and
consistency in the training data set is more likely to improve the model. In principle,
dihedral parameters account for orbital effects missing in a classical model for bond rotation,
but in practice also serve as empirical corrections for all differences between the QM and
MM models, including lack of charge polarization changes during rotation, as well as
dihedral-dependent errors in other (bond, angle, and nonbonded) terms in the force field. As
a result, the appropriate correction needed to match the MM torsion rotation energy profile
to that obtained using QM may differ depending on chemical or conformational context,
such as backbone conformation or other side chain torsions. In most biomolecular MM force
fields, however, each rotatable bond is described by parameters that are independent of the
conformation of the rest of the molecule (though exceptions exist where a subset of dihedral
pairs are explicitly coupled, such as the CHARMM CMAP23). As a result, while the net
energy profile for rotating about a given bond will likely depend on other dihedrals (through
steric effects, for example), the lack of explicit coupling in dihedral parameters limits the
parameters to an implicit account for any coupling missing in the classical model. Therefore,
it is important that the structures used for dihedral fitting include neighboring regions of the
molecule where the parameters will be used. It is paramount to include conformational
variety in those regions to avoid implicit coupling to a limited subset of their phase space,
for example, a single rotamer or backbone conformation. In the present case, this led us to
follow previous work8–9 and use complete amino acids in the QM calculations for the side
chain training data, as opposed to the small organic compounds used in ff995 and carried
over to ff99SB. It is also crucial to ensure that the appropriate molecular degrees of freedom
are consistent between the QM and MM, whereas other degrees of freedom may need to be
optimized for each model. Thus we explored different restraints and optimization schemes.
Furthermore, implicit coupling was incorporated by fitting a single set of dihedral
parameters using a large set of conformations that included multidimensional scans of all
side chain χ rotatable bonds, with both α and β backbone conformations for the dipeptide.
Thus, while the model lacks explicit coupling, the correction parameters for each dihedral
are optimized in a mean field of extensive conformational variability for the remainder of the
molecule. In a recent revision of a small number of ff99SB side chain torsions that were
identified by comparison of rotamer preferences in a helical context against the PDB,
training against quantum mechanics energies for conformations with extended backbone
improved χ1 rotamer preferences in β-rich proteins. However, while two of four amino acids
showed considerable improvement in the helical test case, the other two showed more
modest reduction in errors8. Our goal is to derive parameters that are transferable across
chemical and conformational diversity, thus we explicitly included dipeptide conformations
with both α and β backbone when sampling side chain rotational profiles. Given the
weaknesses associated with scalar couplings, we did not fit to side chain scalar coupling
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
data, but used them only to evaluate results of parameter changes that were fit using QM.
This differentiates our approach from CHARMM369, for example, where side chain
parameters were finally adjusted to better reproduce χ1 scalar couplings.
Another choice concerns the importance of conformational diversity in the side chain
rotamer training set. One option is to scan each dihedral rotamer separately, but as discussed
above, this approach can fail to incorporate coupling needed in the correction terms, and
may provide parameters that work well for some rotamer combinations, but fail for others
that were absent in the training data. Since including coupling via multidimensional scans
can generate large numbers of conformations, one option to reduce the size of the training
set is to include only minima. However, the exact locations of side chain χ minima can
depend on backbone conformation, solvent, and packing with nearby residues. We thus
decided to sample side chain conformations via full two-dimensional scans for the thirteen
amino acids (counting different protonation states for Asp and His) with two side chain
dihedrals (Table S1). For larger amino acids, conformational diversity was generated via
symmetry considerations or dynamics simulations (described below). Because positions of
minima may change in the context of a more complex system, and because energies for
transitions may be relevant, each point in these scans was considered equally important as
compared to weighting data points by their energy. As side chain preferences are coupled to
the backbone24, we performed these scans at both α (φ,ψ = −60°, −45°) and β (−135°, 135°)
backbone conformations. Although additional backbone conformations could be employed,
we considered only the archetypal α and β secondary structures due to computational cost. A
separate ppII conformation (−75°, 150°) was not included, as the interaction of the side
chain with the N-terminal peptide group is comparable in ppII and α conformations, while
the interaction of the side chain with the C-terminal peptide is comparable in ppII and β
conformations, thus these interactions are represented in the two backbone conformations
already included in our set.
Our fitting targets for the side chains were gas-phase ab initio energies, as in ff99SB. To
accommodate the 15082 dipeptide conformations in our training set, we employed a
relatively modest level of theory, with geometries calculated at HF/6-31G* and single point
energies calculated at MP2/6-31+G**. Given the fundamental approximations, such as
additivity, fixed partial charges, r−12 repulsion, and harmonic bond and angle vibrations, we
do not expect the quantum theory to be the limiting factor in improving our model and
focused on increasing the conformational diversity in the training set.
Additional choices that must be made relate to the generation of the QM and MM energies
for conformations in the training set. First, we investigated what restraints to use in potential
energy surface scans. Restraining the 4-atom set defining each χ dihedral, as well as those
for φ and ψ, is natural given the goal of scanning combinations. Less obvious is whether
other dihedral restraints should be included for the rotatable bond being scanned, such as
those sharing the same 2 atoms defining the central bond, but varying the outer atoms. For
example, the restraint for χ1 in Val is defined using N-Cα-Cβ-Cγ1, but the dihedral N-Cα-
Cβ-Cγ2 could either be restrained or allowed to freely optimize in the presence of the χ1
restraint. Another choice is whether (and how strongly) to restrain other parts of the
molecule, such as methyl rotations, or the peptide ω rotation. Next, given the fundamental
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
differences in QM and MM models, and weakness in MM description of energetics beyond
dihedral profiles, we investigated whether to optimize geometries once—calculating
molecular mechanical energies of quantum mechanical structures—or to re-optimize the QM
structures with the MM model prior to comparing energies. The energies could be calculated
for identical structures, for example the quantum mechanical structures. An advantage of
this approach is that all coordinates and non-bonded distances would be identical.
Alternatively, energies could be compared for structures optimized with the corresponding
method (i.e. MM energies for MM-optimized structures). The MM model may not
reproduce small changes in bond and angle geometries for different rotamers in the QM
model, and the stiffness of the MM quadratic function could result in these differences
making large contributions to the errors in relative energies of conformation pairs that could
be relaxed with MM re-optimization (or dynamics), thus focusing the resulting energy
profile on the rotamer changes rather than MM covalent structure approximations.
Like several other MM force fields, the Amber-related models have traditionally used atom
types to apply a small number of bond, angle and dihedral parameters to similar fragments
in different amino acids. Ideally, the parameters would be highly transferable, and show
accuracy for a variety of contexts. This approach reduces the number of parameters needed,
but also limits the accuracy of the model as the implicit coupling we seek is worsened when
the parameters are averaged over too great a variety of neighboring functional groups that
can influence charge distribution. More specifically, the dihedral parameters are added to the
energy calculated using the 1–4 electrostatics, but the partial charges are atom-specific and
need not be the same for atoms with the same atom type. Yet, many sets of four atoms in the
amino acid backbone and side chains shared the same atom types (and therefore the same
dihedral corrections) with each other and also with nucleic acids in ff99SB. To overcome
this, new atom types were created when needed to improve specificity. For example,
asparagine χ2 (Cα-Cβ-Cγ-Nδ), glutamine χ3 (Cβ-Cγ-Cδ-Nɛ), and ψ′ (Cβ-Cα-C-N) all shared
atom types CT-CT-C -N, and therefore the same dihedral corrections applied to all three
bonds. Here, additional atom types were created to allow independent adjustment of
backbone parameters and different side chain parameters. A new atom type for the α carbon
(CX) was created to separate main chain, χ1, χ2, and other χ parameters, as the backbone
and side chain were corrected separately. Where cross-referencing simulation data and errors
fitting quantum energies suggested that solving corrections for particular amino acids
together led to inaccuracies that solving separately would alleviate, additional atom types
were also introduced to segregate them. Within the side chains, atom types 2C and 3C were
developed for carbons bound to two or three heavy atoms, respectively, more thoroughly
describing branched amino acids while isolating the revisions to amino acids (and
preventing application to nucleic acids, which was possible in previous models). The CO
atom type was introduced to distinguish carboxylate carbon from other carbonyl carbons.
The C8 atom type was added for arginine and lysine sp3 carbons, to distinguish them from
glutamate, glutamine, and methionine. Each side chain atom type was added only if it had
some chemical justification, allowed better reproduction of both quantum mechanics fitting
targets, and improved dynamic properties, to verify that additional parameters are
appropriate. Tables S1 and S2 provide atom types for all atoms in the amino acids.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Another goal of this work is to develop empirical adjustments to the dihedral parameters in
order to improve secondary structure balance, and agreement with NMR scalar coupling
data for short peptides in solution. Particularly, HN–Hα scalar couplings calculated from the
MD ensemble were too high11a, suggesting too much sampling in the region between β and
ppII, where the Karplus curve suggests coupling constant values greater than the values
observed in the NMR experiments (Figure 1A). Despite this region being a formal barrier
region, and therefore not represented by the minimized ff99SB training set conformations
(Figure 1A), free energy profiles for alanine dipeptide suggest that the barrier is low enough
that population of the region can contribute significantly to the ensemble averaged coupling
constant at 300K (Figure 1B). It seems reasonable that the optimized ff99SB energy profile
may have been too low in this region yet still provided a good fit to the training data that
lacked structures in the transition region. Rather than attempting to generate additional
unminimized training data and refitting the entire backbone dihedral profile, we took the
approach of developing a small empirical correction aimed at reducing the population in the
transition region in order to improve the correspondence between the simulations and
experiments. Importantly, while much of the rest of the force field (and certainly the other
dihedral parameters) was fit to physics-based, QM data, this backbone dihedral adjustment is
an empirical correction based on data obtained from simulations carried out in TIP3P
explicit water. Therefore, transferability of this correction term to other implicit or explicit
solvent models may need evaluation prior to production use.
We therefore developed modifications to φ′ and ψ′ torsional parameters to specifically
address agreement between NMR and MD for short alanine peptides (see Supporting
Information for complete details). We hypothesized that the main problem is that the β-ppII
barrier is too low due to lack of fitting data, but as described below, we tested alternative
strategies as well. Some modifications raise the barriers between β and ppII basins or
between ppII and α basins. Other modifications stabilize ppII and α relative to β or stabilize
α relative to β and ppII to account for the solvation inconsistencies described above (since
aqueous solvation stabilizes the α-helical macrodipole). All pairs of individual φ and ψ
modifications were combined and tested. To isolate backbone errors from side chain
refitting, we continued to use alanine as a model system, and evaluated thirty candidate force
fields against Ala5 scalar couplings. Besides decoupling the backbone and side chain, Ala5 is
small, facilitating generation of precise conformational ensembles in explicit water, with
error bars smaller than the differences resulting from changing the backbone parameters.
Such reduction of precision errors to lower than the accuracy errors is crucial for quantitative
force field validation. Scalar couplings were evaluated using multiple sets of Karplus
parameters to seek consensus. But due to the limitations discussed above, evaluation of these
coupling constants gives a qualitative guide to force field quality; we use this to filter
parameters sets for more extensive (and computationally expensive) testing on larger
systems. One potential strength of our approach is that we do not fit to scalar couplings
directly (particularly since the values depend on the Karplus parameters selected), but use
them to select a limited set among many physically-motivated empirical modifications. This
differs from recent work that has focused on modifying a single torsional term to reproduce
solution measurements directly11c, 26 or deriving coupled corrections against protein
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
chemical shifts27. We also desired parameters that were transferable between short
disordered peptides (such as Ala5) and larger peptides with propensity to adopt stable
secondary structure. This puts our approach between that of Nerenberg and Head-Gordon26
and those of Best and Hummer11c, and Li and Brüschweiler27.
Potential limitations in our approach
We retain many of the approximations present in ff99SB, such as weaknesses in the
harmonic description of covalent bonds and angles, as well as the 6–12 Lennard-Jones
function. We also retained the same 1–4 nonbonded scaling factors employed with ff99SB.
We refit all side chain dihedral parameters except the “generic” terms applied to nonpolar
hydrogens, which were left at the values from ff99. We continue to assume that backbone
corrections for alanine are appropriate for all amino acids except glycine, and that explicit
coupling between dihedral pairs can be neglected. For going beyond the fine-tuning applied
here, this might not be the case, and per-residue, explicitly coupled backbone corrections
may provide better accuracy. We also assume that comparing to scalar couplings by Karplus
relations is rigorous enough to identify the best force field candidates for further screening.
This naturally depends on errors in the approximate and empirical Karplus parameters or the
experimentally measured scalar couplings. We additionally assume that gas-phase
comparison against MP2/6-31+G**//HF/6-31G* quantum energies is sufficient to improve
the side chain parameters. A brief test on aspartate conformations spaced every 60° indicated
that our chosen level of theory agrees with MP2/aug-cc-pVTZ to within less than 0.3
kcal/mol average normalized error3 (ANE, described below) for both α and β backbone
conformations. Ultimately, improving the level of theory or adding solvent in QM may
alleviate some errors or inconsistencies in this approach. These assumptions, however,
allowed us to overhaul the side chain dihedral parameters that had been carried over from
ff94, in the context of the RESP charge model used in many force fields, and also to further
refine the ff99SB protein backbone parameters.
Backbone dihedral empirical adjustment
Backbone parameter modifications were based on conformational ensembles for Ala3 in
TIP3P explicit water at 300 K that we published previously11a. These ensembles were used
to predict shifts in populations with dihedral parameter modification, and to predict the
resulting change in ensemble-averaged scalar coupling values. A grid with 5° spacing was
generated for both φ and ψ dihedral angles and calculated the normalized population and
relative free energy of each grid bin using the ff99SB simulation ensemble. Next, the
expected J value contribution for each grid bin was calculated using the population and
Karplus parameters28. A spreadsheet was used to calculate ff99SB dihedral energies for each
grid bin, as well as dihedral energies calculated with a Fourier series with altered amplitudes
for backbone dihedrals. For each grid bin, the free energy was reweighted by the difference
between the energies calculated using ff99SB and modified dihedral parameters. These
altered free energies for the bins were converted to normalized populations, and then back to
expected J values using the Karplus curve. Thus the potential impact on the agreement
between simulated and measured 3J(HNHα) from candidate dihedral parameter amplitude
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
adjustments could be interactively estimated. The details of each modification to phase,
periodicity and amplitude are provided in Tables S5 and S6, and the rationale for each
change is discussed in the Supporting Information.
Side chain dihedral training
Dipeptide structure generation—Acetyl and N-methyl capped dipeptides of the natural
amino acids, except proline, alanine, and glycine, were built using LEaP29 at α (−60°, −45°)
and β (−135°, 135°) backbone conformations.
was explored by rotating in 10° increments,
re-optimizing at each step, or by high temperature simulation (described in Results).
Quantum mechanics optimizations were performed with RHF/6-31G*. Scanned residues
were optimized using GAMESS (US)30 with default options. Optimization continued until
the RMS gradient was less than 1.0 × 10−4 Hartree Bohr−1, with an initial trust radius of 0.1
Bohr that could then adjust between 0.05 and 0.5 Bohr. Minimization proceeded by the
quadratic approximation. Residues sampled by high temperature simulations were optimized
using Gaussian9831 with VTight convergence criteria. Quantum mechanics energies for
training data were calculated with MP2/6-31+G**. Molecular mechanics re-optimizations
were performed in the gas phase with ff99SB for a maximum of 1.0 × 107 cycles or until the
RMS gradient was less than 1.0 × 10−4 kcal mol−1 Å−1, with a non-bonded cutoff of 99.0 Å
and initial step size of 10−4. Dihedral restraint force constants were 2.0 × 105 kcal mol−1
rad−2. Minimization employed 10 steps of steepest descent followed by conjugate gradient.
Molecular mechanics energies were calculated from the last step of ff99SB minimization.
Dipeptide energy calculations
Generating conformational diversity in the training set: To maximize transferability of
the parameters, multidimensional structure scans were employed to generate conformational
diversity. For smaller side chains, grid scans in dihedral space were used to generate side
chain variety, including both α and β backbone conformations for each side chain rotamer.
Grid scans were generated for Val in one dimension, as it only has χ1, at an interval of 10°.
Grids were generated for Asp−, Asn, Cys, Phe, His (δ-, ɛ-, and doubly-protonated), Ile, Leu,
Ser, Thr, and Trp in two dimensions, as they have χ1 and χ2, at intervals of 20°, yielding 324
structures per amino acid.
We were unable to exhaustively explore side chain conformational space side chains with
more than two rotatable bonds. Tyrosine has 3 rotatable χ bonds, but dihedral space is
reduced as 180° rotation of either the phenol (χ2) or of the hydroxyl produce the same effect
when accounting for symmetry of the ring. We therefore fully scanned each tyrosine
dihedral when the other two were at a stable rotamer defined as any instance of that value in
the rotamer library for this amino acid, rounded to the nearest 10° and limiting χ2 to (−90°,
90°] to account for symmetry. Stable rotamers for the hydroxyl, not in the rotamer library,
were inferred from the QM energy profiles discussed above. Stable rotamers were 180° or
±60° for χ1, ±30° or 90° for χ2, and 0° or 180° for the hydroxyl. Conformations were
generated using a full scan for each dihedral (at 20° increments), repeated for every
combination of stable rotamer values for the other two dihedrals. As protonated aspartate has
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
nearly the same dihedrals as Tyr (χ1, χ2 and hydroxyl), it was scanned in the same manner,
but without χ2 restriction because aspartate does not have the same symmetry properties.
Cysteine presents a special case, as it can form disulfide bonds that bridge two amino acids.
In addition to developing parameters for reduced Cys (no disulfide), a pair of Cys dipeptides
with a disulfide bond was employed to scan the S-S energy profile. However, a disulfide
between CysA and CysB has a total of five dihedrals: χ1A, χ2A, χSS, χ2B, and χ1B. As full
sampling across five dihedrals is clearly intractable, conformation space was reduced by
applying the same χ1 / χ2 values to both dipeptides. Using this symmetry, a two-dimensional
scan was performed for all χ1 / χ2 combinations using 20° spacing; this scan was repeated
with χSS restrained to 180°, ±60°, or ±90° (five 2D scans). Separately, the χSS profile was
scanned with 20° spacing using χ1 of 180° or ±60° and χ2 of 180° or ±60° (nine 1D scans
total). As with the other amino acids, the entire procedure was repeated with the backbone in
α and β conformations; here, both dipeptides adopted the same backbone conformation.
The remaining side chains, Arg+, Gln, Glu (protonated), Glu−,Lys+, and Met, have at least
three side chain dihedrals (Table S1). Rather than performing a grid search, MD simulations
were used to generate diverse conformations of these side chains. Each dipeptide was
simulated twice, with α or β backbone restraints, for 100 ns each. To overcome kinetic traps,
these simulations were performed at 500 K and the dielectric was set to 4r. Next, a diverse
subset was generated by mapping each conformation to a multidimensional grid spaced 10°
in each χ. The five lowest energy conformations at each grid point were saved. From each
simulation grid, five hundred structures were randomly selected (comparable to the number
generated by the grid procedure described above for Tyr). Because the longer, more flexible
side chains of these amino acids can adopt conformations with strong interactions between
backbone and side chain, conformations where we suspected the in vacuo MM description
may produce fitting artifacts were excluded, using electrostatic and distance cutoffs defined
in the Supporting Information.
Objective function for parameter optimization: As in ff99SB, the errors in relative
energies between all pairs of conformations were evaluated to alleviate the bias of a single,
potentially arbitrary reference conformation. We first defined the relative energy error (REE)
between a single pair of conformations i and j:
where EQM,i and EMM,i are the quantum and molecular mechanics energies of conformation
i. EMM is calculated either as ff99SB, or, during parameter search as the ff99SB energy with
the dihedral energy replaced using the candidate dihedral parameters, Eff_new:
Where the sum is taken over all side chain rotatable bonds χ.
is the sum of dihedral
energy contributions of Nχ 4-atom sets around each rotatable bond, excluding those
containing nonpolar hydrogens (Table S2), which remained at the values from ff99SB. For
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
each dihedral, the periodicity n=1–4 Fourier series contributions with amplitude
were summed:
We note that this equation is consistent with the Amber standard and lacks a factor of 1/2,
and thus the true range of the energy for each term is twice Vffχ. The fitting was limited to
the fourth order term in each correction, consistent with ff99SB. Test fits using more terms
resulted in noisier corrections without significantly improving fit quality (data not shown).
To focus the energy differences on side chain rotamer profiles, comparisons between
structures pairs with different backbone conformations, or of different amino acids, were
excluded. Alternate protonation states for ionizable amino acids were summed separately.
For each amino acid, in either α or β backbone conformation, the magnitudes of REE over
all pairs of N side chain conformations were summed, dividing by the number of pairs to
obtain the average absolute error (AAE, as defined in Hornak et al.3) for this amino acid, in
a given protonation state, in a specific backbone conformation:
The average of the AAEs for each residue and backbone conformation was minimized by
adjusting the amplitude and phase parameters for all terms in Eqn. 3. Formally, optimization
was performed by minimizing the objective function:
where nprofiles is the number of AAE profiles, resulting in a normalized O value that
represents the error in energy differences for conformation pairs, averaged over all backbone
contexts, amino acids and protonation states.
The parameters for all non-hydrogen dihedrals in the protein side chains describing rotation
around single bonds, as well as hydroxyl or sulfhydryl torsions are presented in Table S2. As
discussed above, our structure training set was designed to include amino acid conformation
pairs with simultaneous changes to more than one rotatable bond, thus necessitating
concurrent optimization of parameters for multiple dihedrals (rather than the simpler
approach32 of scanning parameter space one rotatable bond at a time). This enables the
optimized energy corrections for each rotatable bond to incorporate implicit coupling to
nearby conformational diversity. Furthermore, the presence of similar local structure (as
described by atom types) in multiple amino acids often led to the requirement for fitting
parameters using data from all amino acids where that functionality exists. This provides
parameters that implicitly account for nearby chemical diversity, as opposed to training in a
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
single amino acid and use in others. As a result of these two design factors, the parameter
space for optimization is considerable.
To reduce problem size and accelerate convergence, amino acids were separated into the
solving groups listed in Table S3 based on shared dihedral atom types, and a separate
objective function (Equation 6) was constructed for each of the solving groups. Specific
tables of dihedrals in each solving group are provided in Table S2. As each group shares no
four-atom dihedrals with other groups, the full parameter space could be partitioned, with
each solving group providing all conformations and energies necessary for separate
optimization of each parameter subset. Optimized values of the objective function for each
solving group are provided in Table S3.
Our goal was to use the AAEs to optimize a single set of parameters that minimizes the REE
for multiple backbone conformations. However, the AAE for α and β are averages over all
side chain pairs, while the ability of the optimization procedure to maximize transferability
hinges on the backbone dependence of the QM-MM energy error for pairs of side chain
conformations. Greater similarity of REEs among backbone conformations would indicate a
better likelihood of being able to optimize a single set of parameters that is transferable
among said backbone conformations. To quantify this, we subtracted the β REE from the α
REE for each pair i,j of side chain conformations, averaging the magnitudes of these
differences to obtain the intrinsic backbone dependence (BBD):
Where the same notation is used as defined for Eqn. 4. We note that the BBD does not report
on how well the QM and MM energies match, only on whether the differences are consistent
as the backbone conformation changes. Thus BBD for each amino acid is a measure of the
ultimate ability of side chain dihedral parameters to match QM data in the absence of
explicit coupling between backbone and side chain par ameters; any difference cannot be
corrected with side chain dihedral parameters.
The ANEs were minimized using a genetic algorithm to perturb the amplitudes V and phase
shifts γ in Eqn. 3. Full details are provided in the Supporting Information, but the procedure
is briefly outlined here. Two populations each for ff99SB, zeroed force field parameters, and
random force field parameters were generated with 63 individuals, and evolved
independently. For the first 200000 generations, the amplitude was allowed to be perturbed
by any value between −0.5 and 0.5 kcal/mol. Then, to focus the search, amplitude changes
were restricted to 0.002 kcal/mol for another 100000 generations and then 0.001 kcal/mol
until an ff99SB-initialized population found the same solution as populations starting with
zero or random force field parameters. Phase shifts were restricted to 0° or 180° to produce
parameters applicable for alternate enantiomers.
Simulation protocols
Initial helical conformations were defined as all amino acids having (φ, ψ)=(−60°, −40°).
Initial extended conformations were defined as all (φ, ψ)=(180°, 180°). Native
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
conformations, as appropriate, were defined for each system as below. Explicit solvation was
achieved with truncated octahedra of TIP3P water16 with a minimum 8.0 Å buffer between
solute atoms and box boundary. All structures were built via the LEaP module of
Ambertools. Except where otherwise indicated, equilibration was performed with a weakcoupling (Berendsen) thermostat33 and barostat targeted to 1 bar with isotropic position
scaling as follows. With 100 kcal mol−1 Å−2 positional restraints on protein heavy atoms,
structures were minimized for up to 10000 cycles and then heated at constant volume from
100 K to 300 K over 100 ps, followed by another 100 ps at 300 K. The pressure was
equilibrated for 100 ps and then 250 ps with time constants of 100 fs and then 500 fs on
coupling of pressure and temperature to 1 bar and 300 K, and 100 kcal mol−1 Å−2 and then
10 kcal mol−1 Å−2 Cartesian positional restraints on protein heavy atoms. The system was
again minimized, with 10 kcal mol−1 Å−2 force constant Cartesian restraints on only the
protein main chain N, Cα, and C for up to 10000 cycles. Three 100 ps simulations with
temperature and pressure time constants of 500 fs were performed, with backbone restraints
of 10 kcal mol−1 Å−2, 1 kcal mol−1 Å−2, and then 0.1 kcal mol−1 Å−2. Finally, the system
was simulated unrestrained with pressure and temperature time constants of 1 ps for 500 ps
with a 2 fs time step, removing center-of-mass translation and rotation every picosecond.
SHAKE34 was performed on all bonds including hydrogen with the AMBER default
tolerance of 10−5 Å for NVT and 10−6 Å for NVE. Non-bonded interactions were calculated
directly up to 8 Å. Beyond 8 Å, electrostatic interactions were treated with cubic spline
switching and the particle-mesh Ewald approximation35 in explicit solvent, with direct sum
tolerances of 10−5 for NVT or 10−6 for NVE. A continuum model correction for energy and
pressure was applied to long-range van der Waals interactions. The production timesteps
were 2 fs for NVT and 1 fs for NVE.
System-specific details
Ala5: Ala5 was simulated with protonated N- and C-termini under NVT conditions. 891
water molecules were used to solvate the system. Equilibration was performed as
previously11a. The structures were saved every 20ps. mod1ψ, mod2ψ, mod3ψ, mod4ψ,
mod1φ, mod1φ1ψ, mod1φ2ψ, mod1φ3ψ, mod1φ4ψ, mod2φ, mod2φ1ψ, mod2φ2ψ,
mod2φ3ψ, mod2φ4ψ, mod3φ, mod3φ1ψ, mod3φ3ψ, mod3φ4ψ, mod4φ, mod4φ1ψ,
mod4φ3ψ, and mod5φ3ψ were run for 160 ns. ff99SB, mod3φ2ψ, mod4φ2ψ, mod4φ4ψ,
mod5φ, mod5φ1ψ, and mod5φ2ψ were run for 320 ns. mod5φ4ψ was run for 480 ns.
Helices: Simulations were performed for two helical peptide systems: a hydrogen bond
surrogate peptide (HBSP) and K19. The HBSP sequence denoted 3a by Wang et al.36 (Ac-
GQVARQLAEIY-NH2) was chosen, as it had the greatest measured helical content36. HBSP
has a covalently pre-organized α turn, with the O of the first CO and the H of the NH of
residue 5 substituted by carbons, with a covalent single bond between the substituted
carbons. Modeling of this covalent modification was approximated by a harmonic distance
restraint between the CO of the acetyl cap and the NH of A5 with force constant 100 kcal
mol−1 Å−2. This restraint was chosen as it well reproduced the distribution of hydrogen bond
distances present in a crystal structure of aquaporin (PDB ID: 3ZOJ37) . For K19, we chose the sequence Ac-GGG(KAAAA)3K-NH2, consistent with
previous work38.
HBSP and K19 were solvated with 2643 and 3427 TIP3P water molecules, respectively, and
simulated for 1.6 μs in the NVT ensemble. Each system had two independent runs. Initial
structures were either all helical (as defined in Initial Structures) or semi-extended
conformations. The HBSP semi-extended conformation was built with the first five residues
helical to satisfy the covalent modification in the experiment, with the remaining residues
extended. The K19 semi-extended conformation was a random coil conformation extracted
from simulation using ff99SB in which helical content was absent.
Cln025: As a model system to carry out initial tests of secondary structure balance, we
turned to CLN025, an engineered fast-folding hairpin that is a thermally optimized variant of
Chignolin39. CLN025 contains N- and C-terminal glycine-to-tyrosine substitutions from
Chignolin. Thus the CLN025 sequence was YYDPETGTWY. The native conformation was
chosen as the fifth conformation in the NMR ensemble39b, as that conformation was closest
to the average of the NMR ensemble.
Proteins: We simulated four folded proteins for comparison of dynamic properties to NMR.
First was the third Igg-binding domain of protein G (GB3). The native structure was defined
as a liquid crystal NMR structure (PDB ID: 1P7E40). Second was the bovine pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor (BPTI). The native structure was defined as a joint neutron/X-ray
diffraction structure (PDB ID: 5PTI41). Third was ubiquitin (Ubq), with the native structure
defined as a crystal structure (PDB ID: 1UBQ42). Fourth was hen egg white lysozyme
(HEWL), with the native structure defined as a crystal structure (PDB ID: 6LYT43). Owing
to their larger size, the proteins were equilibrated as above, but with the unrestrained step
extended to a full nanosecond, rather than 500 ps.
Calculation of NMR observables: Scalar couplings were calculated from simulations using
Karplus relations12. Backbone scalar couplings were calculated as by Best et al.11b: using
the Orig parameters25, 44 also used by Graf et al.10 and the DFT1 and DFT2 parameters from
Case et al.45. Side chain scalar couplings were calculated using Ile, Thr, and Val C/N-Cγ
Karplus parameters from Chou et al.46, and Perez et al. Karplus parameters47 for all other χ1
scalar couplings. Backbone NH Lipari-Szabo S2 order parameters were calculated using the
iRED method48 via cpptraj49.
NOE reproduction in CLN025 was evaluated by computing r−6 for all interproton vectors
and comparing
of each vector with the NOE-based restraints published by Honda et
al.39b, downloaded from the BMRB50. For ambiguous restraints, contributions from each
proton pair to the NOE were summed51. For each force field we generated two ensembles,
one combining structures from the 4 initially folded simulations and the other combining the
4 initially extended simulations. These were used to calculate NOE deviations, with the
difference between ensembles from different initial structures used to quantify precision.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Calculation of helical content: When comparing to CD (as for HBSP), helical content was
defined as the fraction of residues in α-helix (H) or 3–10 helix (G) as defined by DSSP52 as
implemented in cpptraj49, with simulation averages calculated for the whole trajectory.
DSSP is used for comparison to CD, since both are sensitive to formation of complete
helical turns, rather than local backbone dihedral angles. When comparing to CSDs (as for
K19), helical content was defined based on the Ramachandran surface, as done previously38,
with the α basin encompassing φ ∈ [−90°, −30°] and ψ ∈ [−77°, −17°]. HBSP helical
content included all amino acids, whereas K19 helical content was averaged over residues
8,10,11,12,16, and 17 to correspond to experimental helical measurements.38
Hairpin clustering, etc: First, representative structures were extracted from each simulation
to make the cluster analysis tractable, selecting frames spaced every 5 ns. For each 5 μs
trajectory, this selected 1000 frames, yielding 16000 total frames for the two force fields,
two initial structures, and four independent simulations for each force field and initial
structure. The combined trajectories were clustered together to allow direct comparison of
clusters between them. Clusters were formed using the hierarchical/agglomerative algorithm
implemented in cpptraj49, with a 3 Å cutoff. The mask included all non-symmetric atoms to
avoid the need to account for differences between clusters arising from symmetry. Thus
atom names N, Cα, C, H, O, Cβ, Cγ, Cγ2, Cζ, Oγ1, Hγ1, Oη, Hη, all tryptophan nonhydrogens, and proline Cδ were included in the cluster analysis. Finally, the counts of each
cluster were divided into four quarters representing each force field and initial structure.
Hence, each cluster count accounts for four independent simulations with each force field/
initial structure combination. The average values for each force field were computed, and the
difference across initial structures was used to calculate uncertainties for each force field.
Further Methods details are provided in the Supporting Information.
Reproduction of Ala5 NMR scalar coupling data is improved
We tested ff99SB and 29 backbone parameter modifications (Figure 2) by simulating Ala5 in
explicit water, with each combination of φ and ψ modifications. We calculated scalar
couplings from each ensemble using the Orig, DFT1, and DFT2 parameters used by Best et
al.11b and us11a previously25, 45. We quantified the deviations between simulations and NMR
using Best et al.’s χ2 metric11b:
where σi is the estimated systematic error in experimental constant i. The χ2 for each force
field, according to each set of Karplus parameters, are provided in Tables 1–3. Consistent
with our previous report11a, our starting point of ff99SB had χ2 of 1.89±0.09, 1.45±0.04, and
1.70±0.09 according to Orig, DFT1, and DFT2 parameters, respectively (error bars are from
independent simulations using different initial structures). Two modified force fields
achieved χ2 less than 1.0, both with the Orig parameters—mod1φ had a χ2 of 0.89±0.04 and
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
mod1φ2ψ had χ2 = 0.93±0.02. Significantly, none of the force fields tested by Best et al. had
achieved χ2 values under 1.0.11b The mod1φ and mod1φ2ψ modifications also improved
DFT2-based χ2 to 1.22±0.03 (comparable to 1.2 reported for C36 using DFT2-based
parameters9) and 1.41±0.06, but actually worsened agreement according to DFT1
parameters. In fact, none of the modifications improved agreement via the DFT1 parameters.
Potential sensitivity of Karplus parameter derivation to peptide length may be a relevant
discrepancy between Ala5 and the DFT1 parameters trained against Ac–Ala–Nme26. The
force field best reproducing Ala5 scalar couplings with the DFT2 parameters is mod3φ, with
χ2 of 1.11±0.01, once again improved compared to all of the force fields tested by Best et
al.11b and slightly improved relative to C36.9
We selected parameter combinations for further testing in larger systems according to the
best performing in each Karplus parameter set —mod1φ for Orig, ff99SB for DFT1, and
mod3φ for DFT2. We also carried over mod1φ2ψ because it achieved χ2 < 1.0 with Orig and
was nearly within error bars of the performance with mod1φ; this also allowed us to include
a ψ modification in further testing. While results for some other parameter sets are very
close when considering uncertainties, we needed to limit the number of combinations carried
over to testing of converged ensembles for larger systems in explicit water.
Side chain rotamer energies show improved match to QM data and better transferability
between backbone conformations
Whereas the initial tests of backbone parameter improvement focused on the highly flexible
alanine, testing with systems exhibiting more well-defined structural propensity requires use
of sequences that include side chains with rotatable bonds. Therefore, we next derived new
side chain parameters to provide a more accurate model for testing the impact of the
backbone parameter changes.
An important question is how to define EQM,i and EMM,i used for calculating REE in Eqn. 1.
As discussed above, restraints could be applied to dihedrals other than the specific 4-atom
set defining the φ, ψ, and χ rotatable bonds. We tested several choices, including restraining
only the 4-atom sets defining φ, ψ, and χ, as well as restraining all possible 4-atom dihedrals,
or restraining all dihedrals in the backbone but only the defining dihedrals in the side chains
(see Table S1 for dihedral classifications). We also tested the impact of MM re-optimization
of QM geometries. As discussed above, these choices in the generation and comparison of
structures can introduce artifacts in the energy profiles that hamper parameter optimization
and weaken transferability. We evaluated the impact of these choices by calculating the
intrinsic BBD as well as the AAE for various restraint and structure optimization options,
using ff99SB as a baseline MM model. Restraining all possible backbone dihedrals and reoptimizing the QM structure with MM before calculating energy yielded both the lowest
AAE (2.55±0.09 kcal mol−1 for Asp and 1.98±0.01 kcal mol−1 for Asn, error bars reflect
difference between α and β backbone context) and lowest BBD (1.35±0.01 kcal mol−1 for
Asp and 1.42±0.03 kcal mol−1 for Asn). Thus we restrained all possible backbone dihedrals
and re-optimized QM structures with MM when building our training set. Further analysis of
different options can be found in the Supporting Information.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
As discussed in Methods, each solving group was optimized separately (values for each
solving group are provided in Table S3), but here we average the individual objective
function O values, weighted by the number of profiles, to facilitate their comparison
between different parameter sets. The resulting O values quantify the magnitude of error in
energy differences for conformation pairs, averaged over all amino acids and backbone
conformations. In ff99SB, O was 1.52 kcal mol−1, while O for the final optimization
parameter set was 0.98 kcal mol−1. This 35% improvement is decomposed by residue and by
backbone conformation in Figure 3, and the distribution of all pair energy errors (REEs) is
shown in Table S4. All of the amino acids with errors larger than 2 kcal/mol in ff99SB
(tyrosine and protonated or deprotonated aspartic acid) were significantly improved with the
new parameters. In addition to improvement for the ILDN residues previously addressed by
Lindorff-Larsen et al.8, we observed better agreement with the QM training data for every
residue compared to ff99SB. The only profile that didn’t improve was α-backbone Phe, in
which the initial ff99SB error was close to the average final AAE, limiting the potential for
improvement. It is remarkable to see that the optimization procedure was able to find a
solution that simultaneously improved performance for all amino acids, and with little
resulting backbone dependence.
Although we noted improvement in the reproduction of QM results for Arg and Lys side
chains (Figure 3), further testing of the type discussed later in this article showed that scalar
coupling agreement was slightly worsened by application of the new Arg and Lys
parameters. Given the risk of overfitting for amino acids with four side chain dihedrals,
especially given the ability of these side chains to form hydrogen bonds with the backbone
that may affect the fitting, we decided that arginine and lysine may need a stronger effort,
with more conformations, perhaps with implicit solvent at the QM stage. We therefore
decided not to include the refit parameters for Arg and Lys in the final ff14SB parameter set
or in the further testing discussed below.
We refer to the combination of ff99SB with new side chain dihedral parameters as
ff14SBonlysc; adding the updated backbone parameters (discussed below) will result in the
ff14SB model. Although it is promising that the ff14SBonlysc parameters show improved
reproduction of the QM data, several caveats apply. First, the performance in Figure 4
measures the ability of the parameters to reproduce energies for structures that were used in
the training shown above, but not for the other force fields, thus better performance on the
training data is expected. Second, closely reproducing gas-phase QM data does not
guarantee reliable simulation properties53. As discussed above, it is possible that training
against gas-phase QM data might counteract some of the influence of the “pre-polarized”
partial charges in our model, potentially worsening performance for simulations in aqueous
solution. Thus we followed the training against QM data with more rigorous testing in
solution simulations, with comparison to experiments also in solution.
Testing Strategy
The fitting just presented rests on several key assumptions that raise important questions.
One question is whether the backbone corrections that reproduce Ala5 scalar couplings
through empirical Karplus equations will improve secondary structure balance in larger
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
systems with more complex (and well-defined) structure than Ala5. Since the computational
cost is greater for these longer peptides, and transition rates are slower between more stable
minima, we utilized small test systems when possible. To test the impact of the backbone
parameter changes on secondary structure balance, we first simulated several peptides that
adopt modest amounts of helical structure, comparing results from simulation and
experiment. Since we did not want to increase helical stability at the cost of destabilizing β
structures, we also simulated a short β-hairpin system to evaluate the ability of the force field
to provide balance in sequence-dependent secondary structure content. These peptides have
more complex side chains than alanine, thus some of the tests also incorporated the updated
side chain parameters described above.
A second question is whether the diversity and planned backbone-independence of our side
chain training set will improve side chain rotamer preferences for proteins in solution,
despite training against in vacuo dipeptide energies at a modest level of QM theory. To
investigate the accuracy of side chain rotamer sampling, we compared against χ1 scalar
couplings for a set of folded proteins including GB3, ubiquitin, lysozyme, and BPTI
(collated by Lindorff-Larsen et al.8, 25, 46, 54). Importantly, we considered the performance
of the new model relative to ff99SB and ff99SB-ILDN8 (ff99SB with new (I)le, (L)eu, Asp
(D), and As(n) parameters) in different secondary structure contexts, to evaluate whether
inclusion of multiple dipeptide backbone conformations in side chain training improved
transferability between different backbone conformations in proteins. We also tested the
benefit of re-optimizing parameters for side chains other than ILDN.
These side chain parameter evaluations are subject to all the caveats of scalar couplings
outlined in Fitting Strategy. In fact, many reported experimental scalar couplings lie outside
the range of the relevant Karplus curves, suggesting that reproducing the experimental
observations using these curves would be impossible regardless of the ensemble of
conformations sampled in simulation. In these cases, we adjusted the target value by
adopting the value on the Karplus curve lying closest to the experimental value; otherwise,
the experimental value was used as the target:
Additionally, because H-H scalar couplings reporting on some residues have a much larger
range than C-C scalar couplings reporting on others, deviations were normalized by the
magnitude of the Karplus curve range. The errors are summarized in terms of the average
normalized error ANE:
The resulting metric is more intuitive than average error, as 0 indicates best possible
agreement, while 1 indicates maximum deviation.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
In the peptides and proteins tested here, backbone and side chain dihedrals are coupled to
each other within and between residues, making it difficult to determine exactly why a
particular scalar coupling may disagree with experiment (assuming the error is not because
of the experimental measurement or the Karplus curve). Likewise, this hinders ascribing
credit for improvement to any specific backbone or side chain update. To help aid in the
decomposition, we therefore tested helical content in a model peptide with just backbone
parameter updates, and then introduced the side chain modifications. For protein side chains,
we tested χ1 scalar couplings with just side chain modifications and then introduced
backbone updates, to help isolate the effects of intended and secondary changes. On the
other hand, this dihedral coupling can mean that χ1 scalar couplings implicitly report on
backbone, χ2 or χ3 torsions; thus reproducing χ1 data may suggest reasonable accuracy in
other parameters as well.
Lastly, after testing whether ff14SB achieves its design goals of improving secondary
structure balance and side chain dynamics, we tested the final combination of backbone and
side chain improvements on folded proteins to ensure that the new force field maintained
reasonably accurate protein order parameter reproduction as reported previously for
ff99SB3. We calculated backbone NH order parameters using the same simulations used to
analyze χ1 scalar couplings.
Testing Results
Helical stability is improved
For testing helical propensity, we employed the hydrogen bond surrogate peptide (HBSP) of
Arora and colleagues36, 55. With a covalently pre-organized nucleus that avoids the limiting
entropic cost of helix initiation, experiments indicate the presence of significant helical
content despite the short length of only 10 amino acids, providing an ideal initial model
system. A covalent link replaces what would be the first helical hydrogen bond between
residues 1 and 5, but we wanted to avoid introducing additional new parameters other than
those described above. We created a model for the HBSP by including only natural amino
acids, but using a H-bond distance restraint as an analog for the covalent bond used in
experiments (see Methods and Supporting Information); the sequence was otherwise the
same in order to allow comparison of helix propagation propensity. We generated ensembles
for the system using the backbone parameter modifications that performed well for the Ala5
scalar couplings, as discussed above, and compared helical content calculated with DSSP to
that from experiment. Wang et al. reported ~46% helical content in PBS55c, but due to the
potential for aggregation in that experiment, we followed the suggestion56 of the authors and
used the value of 70.13% helical content in 10% TFE, adjusted downward by ~ 5–10% to
obtain an estimate in water of ~ 65%.
Simulations with ff99SB exhibited 0.17±0.01 fraction helix (Table 4; uncertainties represent
data from independent runs), compared with the 0.65 target value discussed above. The
mod1φ correction, which had the lowest Ala5 χ2 among all parameter sets, tripled the helical
content to 0.51±0.01. Adding the mod2ψ correction, mod1φ2ψ, yielded 0.72±0.01 helical
content. This number is somewhat higher than experiment, suggesting that this ψ
modification, introduced to improve helical stability, may do so too strongly. This is notable
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
because the results show that improvements in helical content are already achieved through
modification of only the φ energy profile, which was designed to improve Ala5 scalar
couplings. The other parameter set that was carried over from the Ala5 test, mod3φ, showed
a more modest improvement relative to ff99SB, with 0.26 ± 0.01 fraction helix.
Since HBSP contains non-Ala amino acids, we next combined these backbone adjustments
with the new side chain parameters discussed above (ff14SBonlysc). When combined with
mod1φ, we obtained a further increase in HBSP helical content, with 0.60±0.1 helix
(compared to the experimental estimate of 0.65). Adding the new side chain parameters to
mod1φ2ψ and mod3φ resulted in 0.79±0.01 and 0.46±0.01helix, respectively; in both cases
the fractions were again higher than obtained with the backbone adjustments alone. Indeed,
simply updating the side chain parameters for the ff99SB backbone parameters
(ff14SBonlysc) nearly doubled the helical content to 0.26±0.02. Previous studies have
modified the ff99SB backbone parameters to quantitatively match experimental
observations11c, 27. Our data suggests that doing so, without considering side chain errors,
could lead to a non-transferable cancellation of error between side chain and backbone
effects; updating side chain parameters in those models may actually worsen agreement with
experiment.
Although reproduction of Ala5 scalar couplings and HBSP helicity is promising, we also
performed tests on a longer peptide without covalent modification, the K19 Baldwin-type
peptide that we had simulated previously in implicit solvent38. For this peptide sequence,
none of the side chain parameters differ from those in ff99SB. K19 simulations with ff99SB
produced very low helical content (average of 0.08±0.01 for residues with measured CSDs,
see Methods), in disagreement with the experimental estimate of 0.31 (Table 4). With
mod1φ, K19 helical content was significantly improved at 0.26±0.05. Moreover,
examination of per-residue helicity for amino acids with measured CSDs (Figure S4) shows
that the largest difference between the error bar range from mod1φ MD and the experimental
value is 3% (absolute error). The other backbone modifications did not perform as well as
mod1φ, with trends similar to those obtained for HBSP; use of mod1φ2ψ resulted in too
much helix (0.87±0.03), while mod3φ resulted in small improvement over ff99SB
(0.10±0.01).
Overall, mod1φ has three advantages: it was physically motivated based on analysis of the
ff99SB training data, it provides the best reproduction of Ala5 scalar coupling data among
the combinations that we tested, and when combined with the QM-based side chain
parameters the helical content also reasonably matches experiment for two different systems.
mod1φ was thus selected as the backbone parameter update for ff14SB.
Testing hairpin stability and structure
We next tested whether the improvement in helical content was obtained at the cost of less
accurate performance on β systems. As a model system to carry out initial tests of secondary
structure balance, we turned to CLN02539, an engineered fast-folding hairpin that is a
thermally optimized variant of Chignolin39. CLN025 contains N- and C-terminal glycine-totyrosine substitutions from Chignolin, which already possesses one tyrosine and one
tryptophan. The presence of four aromatic side chains in a short peptide suggests the
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
potential for strong sensitivity of observed stability to accurate treatment of side chain
conformational energy profiles, as well as of hydrophobicity. The system also presents a
challenge due to the relatively slow folding of β-sheets compared to the helical systems
(although estimates of 100 ns for CLN025 were obtained from T-jump IR experiments), and
obtaining precise measures of population may be difficult. Still, use of CLN025 as a model
presents a reasonable route to obtaining a qualitative view of whether ff14SB’s increased
helical propensity also compromises β stability.
For each of ff99SB and ff14SB, we performed four MD runs starting from the NMR-based
structure closest to the ensemble average, and four additional runs starting from fully linear
structures to quantify convergence. We compared simulation snapshots against the initial
NMR structure using all non-symmetric atoms (Figure 4). We also performed cluster
analysis on the combined trajectories from both force fields so that the influence of force
field on cluster populations could be directly compared. Simulations with ff99SB
predominantly sampled structures within cluster 0 at around 3 Å RMSD (59±10%), or
within cluster 1 at around 4.8 Å RMSD (34±9%; all error bars were calculated from the
difference between initially extended/hairpin ensembles). Compared to ff99SB, the ff14SB
simulations sampled cluster 0 with similar frequency (57±14%), but sampled cluster 1 much
less than ff99SB (5±3%), though the comparisons are somewhat qualitative due to the
uncertainties. Instead, the ff14SB simulations are more diverse when unfolded, sampling
structures ranging from 4 Å to just over 9 Å RMSD. ff99SB simulations sampled 194
clusters with non-zero frequency, whereas ff14SB simulations sampled 843.
Inspection of the second major cluster of ff99SB (cluster 1, blue in Figure 4) reveals a
hairpin with shift of the C-terminal strand one residue out of phase relative to the N-terminal
strand (representative structures for clusters 0 and 1 are shown together with the NMRderived structure in Figure S5). The populations suggest that ff14SB destabilizes this
alternate conformation, although the populations are not well converged; however the
difference is also qualitatively apparent in observing that this cluster is significantly sampled
in 6 of 8 ff99SB simulations, but only 2–3 of 8 ff14SB simulations, with typically shorter
persistence time than with ff99SB (Figure 4). Whether the ff14SB parameter changes favor
the native-like cluster over the alternate cluster can be probed by decomposing the dihedral
energies of each cluster according to each force field. In particular, we evaluated how the
difference in energies of the two main clusters depends on the force field:
Analysis using Eqn. 10 indicates that the dihedral changes in ff14SB favor the native cluster
over the alternate by 2.9 kcal mol−1 relative to ff99SB. Further decomposition of this
difference suggests that parameter changes applied to Asp3 χ2 favor this native structure by
1.2 kcal mol−1, and then φ modifications favor the native structure by 0.5 kcal mol−1 in the
backbone of Glu5. This is especially promising because the same modifications also
improved agreement with experiment for the helical systems.
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Although it may appear desirable for ff14SB to favor the native conformation more than in
ff99SB, presence of a similar strand-shifted structured in the simulated ensemble for the
Chignolin hairpin was reported to improve agreement of simulations with experimental
NOEs for that system57. We therefore calculated distances corresponding to NOEs from our
CLN025 simulations, using the ‘naïve’ approach58 that was used for Chignolin57. The sum
of all NOE deviations was 2.8±0.2 Å for ff99SB and 2.1±0.4 Å for ff14SB. Furthermore,
NOE agreement is better for ff99SB native run 3, which sampled only the native cluster,
than for ff99SB native runs 1 and 4 or extended runs 2 through four, which sampled
comparable amounts of the two clusters (Table S7). This suggests that in our simulations of
CLN025, reduction in population of the non-native hairpin improves agreement with
experiment. Although no definitive conclusions can be drawn about improvements of ff14SB
based on these simulations alone, the simulations together with energy analysis suggest that
ff14SB is at least as reasonable as ff99SB at hairpin modeling, and thus the desirable
increase in α-helical content with ff14SB did not worsen β-hairpin simulation accuracy.
Agreement with side chain NMR scalar couplings is improved with ff14SB
In addition to indirectly testing side chains sampling accuracy in the context of overall
conformational propensities, it is appropriate to evaluate side chain parameter changes more
directly by comparing to experimental measures of side chain dynamics. We therefore
simulated GB3, ubiquitin, lysozyme, and bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) to
compare against experimental scalar couplings aggregated by Lindorff-Larsen et
al.8, 25, 46, 54.
We tested ff99SB and ff99SB-ILDN as references, ff14SB which includes the backbone and
side chain parameter updates described above, and also ff14SBonlysc, which includes the
side chain updates described above while retaining the ff99SB φ and ψ parameters. This
allows us to partially deconvolute the influence of improvements to the side chain and
backbone. Simulations of each protein were carried out using each force field, and the ANE
(Eqn. 9) was calculated for each amino acid where experimental data is available (Figure 5).
The average error was 0.160±0.004 with ff99SB, 0.129±0.003 with ff99SB-ILDN,
0.127±0.003 with ff14SBonlysc, and 0.129±0.003 with ff14SB. The average figures were
within statistical uncertainty for ff99SB-ILDN, ff14SBonlysc, and ff14SB, which show
measurable improvement over ff99SB. Not surprisingly for these stably folded proteins,
there is little difference between ff14SB and ff14SBonlysc, suggesting that the improvement
over ff99SB observed in this test is largely due to side chain parameter updates.
All of the variants significantly improved upon ff99SB in average, however the specific
improvements of each force field differed. For example, the errors obtained using ff14SB
(ff99SB-ILDN values given in parentheses after ff14SB values) in isoleucine, leucine,
aspartate, and asparagine—the four residues modified by ff99SB-ILDN—were 0.11±0.01
(0.091±0.005), 0.16±0.02 (0.13±0.01), 0.111±0.009 (0.16±0.02), and 0.12±0.02
(0.154±0.009), respectively—slightly improved in 2 cases, and slightly worsened in 2
As discussed above, ff99SB-ILDN was fit using β backbone conformations, while our fitting
procedure was designed to improve side chain energetics for multiple backbone
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
conformations. We investigated whether explicit inclusion of dipeptide α backbone
conformations for QM calculations in the gas phase was successfully translated to
improvement in scalar couplings of helical residues in larger proteins. We performed further
fitting, simulations and analysis in order to gain insight into the impact of these choices in
the quality of reproduction of experimental data, with an aim toward guiding future
optimization efforts. We found that the choice of restraints during the QM and MM
optimizations played an important role, which became more important when only a single
backbone conformation was used during fitting of side chain parameters (see Supporting
Information for more details). Overall, the results suggest that more careful consideration of
these issues should be a factor in future force field efforts, as these measures can impact
performance of simulations using the resulting parameters. These choices include how finely
geometric changes outside the scan region are controlled, what level of variation in this
geometry is desirable between QM and MM energy evaluations, and how these decisions are
affected by intentional inclusion of diversity in neighboring regions.
We analyzed residues refit by both ff99SB-ILDN and ff14SB that matched the following
criteria: in a helix, solvent-exposed and therefore likely to represent the intrinsic preferences
of the amino acid, and experimentally characterized by χ1 scalar couplings. Only three
residues fit these criteria, N35 of GB3, D32 of ubiquitin, and N97 of lysozyme. Of the three,
all are better reproduced with ff14SB than ff99SB-ILDN, with ANEs for N35, D32 and N93
of 0.11±0.03/0.22±0.09 (ff14SB/ff99SB-ILDN), 0.15±0.04/0.47±0.02, and
0.16±0.02/0.31±0.04, respectively (although the N35 differences are within uncertainty
ranges). We investigated these results further, and found that differences at the level of the
QM and MM energy calculations are likely responsible for these differences, and that the
ability to accurately predict quantum mechanics training energies correlates with
reproduction of χ1 scalar couplings. See the Supporting Information for detailed analysis.
High quality of backbone dynamics in the native state is maintained
We also evaluated the ability of ff14SB to reproduce local dynamics in well-folded proteins
as measured by backbone NH S2 Lipari-Szabo order parameters. We calculated NH order
parameters from the same simulations used for side chain scalar coupling evaluation. This
calculation was performed using iRED, which does not require separability of local and
global motions48. For this analysis, we averaged iRED results calculated for windows of
length 5 times the tumbling correlation time (τC), as has been suggested to best reproduce
the model-free S2 order parameters59. This analysis was also repeated with window lengths
found in previous publications, to facilitate comparison of results (see Supporting
Information). The iRED-calculated order parameters, shown in Figure 6, are comparable
among the different force fields, as indicated by low RMSD between simulation results. The
greatest differences among simulations occurs for GB3, where the calculated ff99SB-ILDN
and ff14SB order parameters differ by 0.05 RMSD. With ff14SB, order parameters are
slightly improved with lysozyme (0.055±0.004 RMSD against NMR60, versus 0.07±0.01 for
ff99SB and 0.065±0.004 for ff99SB-ILDN), and slightly worsened with GB3 (0.08±0.01
RMSD against NMR61, versus 0.060±0.005 for ff99SB and 0.061±0.004 for ff99SB-ILDN),
though the statistical significance of these differences is limited. Meanwhile, ubiquitin S2
RMSDs were between 0.045 and 0.050 against NMR62 with all three force fields. We
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
conclude that the high quality order parameter reproduction previously reported for ff99SB3
is maintained with ff14SB. There are, however, subtle differences worth noting.
Firstly, loop 4 in lysozyme is better reproduced with ff14SB on average (0.09±0.05 RMSD
against NMR versus 0.15±0.06 and 0.14±0.04 for ff99SB and ff99SB-ILDN). As with the
overall S2 RMSDs, these differences are not highly statistically significant. But it is
interesting that L4 connects two helices, and thus enhanced rigidity could stem from our
goals of improving helical stability. On the other hand, the first hairpin in GB3 is reproduced
with ff14SB less well on average (0.12±0.02 RMSD for residues 1–20 versus 0.08±0.01 for
both ff99SB and ff99SB-ILDN). Although the RMSDs considered don’t vary largely when
considering uncertainties, ff14SB may model the stability of some hairpins slightly less
accurately. Evaluating whether ff14SB reproduces S2 across different secondary structures
more equitably in the general case would require a more comprehensive examination.
Nonetheless, the differences between force fields are not very significant. Thus, although
ff14SB may slightly improve modeling of helical regions, yet may slightly worsen modeling
of hairpins, we conclude that ff14SB maintained ff99SB’s excellent order parameter
reproduction overall.
Conclusion
The weaknesses of ff99SB addressed in this work are the less than ideal agreement with
polyalanine scalar couplings, helical propensity, and side chain preferences. We tackled the
former two weaknesses with the best of an array of empirical tweaks to the backbone
potentials (here denoted mod1phi) and the latter by de novo fitting against a backboneindependent MP2 training set. The successor to ff99SB, ff14SB, augmented helical content
of HBSP and K19 and improved side chain rotamer distributions as suggested by scalar
couplings, while maintaining the reasonable reproduction of order parameters and hairpin
structure characteristic of ff99SB. Interestingly, we were able to continue to improve the
force field in solution by training against an in vacuo quantum mechanics benchmark, with
performance that is similar between α and β contexts when compared against QM or against
NMR scalar couplings. The ubiquity of ff14SB improvements and more thorough
description of potential limitations will require further testing than possible here. But based
on the benchmark reported, we recommend ff14SB for the simulation of proteins and
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful suggestions from David Green.
Funding Sources
The authors acknowledge funding from the NIH (GM061678 and GM107104) and support from Henry and Marsha
Laufer. This work is also supported by an NSF Petascale Computational Resource (PRAC) Award from the
National Science Foundation (OCI-1036208).
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
ABBREVIATIONS
force field 99 Stony Brook
force field 14 Stony Brook
nuclear magnetic resonance
circular dichroism
chemical shift deviation(s)
isotropic reorientational eigenmode dynamics
third immunoglobin-binding domain of protein G
bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor
hydrogen bond surrogate peptide
quantum mechanics
molecular mechanics
molecular dynamics
replica exchange MD
Møller-Plesset Perturbation Theory of the Second Order
Hartree-Fock
restricted Hartree-Fock
electrostatic potential
average absolute error
backbone dependence
average normalized error
correction map
protein data bank
root mean square
relative energy error
“original” Karplus parameters
density functional theory-based Karplus parameters, derived from Ala1
density functional theory-based Karplus parameters, derived from Ala2
nuclear overhauser effect
Maier et al.
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Biological Magnetic Resonance Bank
isoleucine, leucine, aspartate, and asparagine
polyproline helix, type II
ac-G3(KAAAA)3K-NH2
ff14SBonlysc
ff99SB with the updated ff14SB side chain corrections
root mean squared deviations