J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
DOI 10.1007/s11265-013-0835-2
Extending the Generalised Pareto Distribution for Novelty
Detection in High-Dimensional Spaces
David A. Clifton · Lei Clifton · Samuel Hugueny ·
Lionel Tarassenko
Received: 14 October 2012 / Revised: 25 April 2013 / Accepted: 21 July 2013 / Published online: 16 August 2013
© The Author(s) 2013. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Novelty detection involves the construction of a
“model of normality”, and then classifies test data as being
either “normal” or “abnormal” with respect to that model.
For this reason, it is often termed one-class classification.
The approach is suitable for cases in which examples of
“normal” behaviour are commonly available, but in which
cases of “abnormal” data are comparatively rare. When performing novelty detection, we are typically most interested
in the tails of the normal model, because it is in these tails
that a decision boundary between “normal” and “abnormal”
areas of data space usually lies. Extreme value statistics provides an appropriate theoretical framework for modelling
the tails of univariate (or low-dimensional) distributions,
using the generalised Pareto distribution (GPD), which can
be demonstrated to be the limiting distribution for data
occurring within the tails of most practically-encountered
probability distributions. This paper provides an extension
of the GPD, allowing the modelling of probability distributions of arbitrarily high dimension, such as occurs when
using complex, multimodel, multivariate distributions for
performing novelty detection in most real-life cases. We
demonstrate our extension to the GPD using examples
This work was supported by the NIHR Biomedical Research
Centre, Oxford; the EPSRC LSI Doctoral Training Centre,
Oxford; and the Centre of Excellence in Personalised Healthcare
funded by the Wellcome Trust and EPSRC under grant number
WT 088877/Z/09/Z.
D. A. Clifton () · L. Clifton · S. Hugueny · L. Tarassenko
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Engineering
Science,University of Oxford,Old Road Campus, Roosevelt Drive,
Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK
e-mail: 
from patient physiological monitoring, in which we have
acquired data from hospital patients in large clinical studies
of high-acuity wards, and in which we wish to determine
“abnormal” patient data, such that early warning of patient
physiological deterioration may be provided.
Keywords Novelty detection · Extreme value theory ·
Patient monitoring · Biomedical engineering
1 Introduction
Novelty detection has become a popular method for performing inference in datasets acquired from systems in
which there are many examples of “normal” behaviour, but
relatively few examples of “abnormal” behaviour. This situation typically arises in condition monitoring, in which
we wish to determine the “health” of a complex system,
such as a jet engine or a human patient. The novelty detection approach can also be appropriate when the “abnormal”
modes of behaviour are poorly-understood, as often arises
when there is significant variability between systems; for
example, jet engines of the same class may have very different vibration profiles (with “rough” and “smooth” engines),
while human patient physiology can vary according to
age, demographic background, genetic factors, etc. In such
cases, it can be productive to model the “normal” behaviour
of a system (sometimes based on data acquired across a
population of example systems of the same type), and then
detect deviations from normal behaviour.
It is for this reason that novelty detection is sometimes
termed one-class classification, where there is no explicit
model for “abnormal” modes of behaviour because they are
too poorly understood, and may vary significantly between
systems. Novelty detection, where we wish to identify
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
“novel” examples that have not been seen before (i.e., abnormalities), shares many similarities with anomaly detection;
in the latter, we similarly wish to detect “abnormal” data,
but these may not necessarily be entirely novel - a training
set, from which a “normal” model is to be constructed, may
contain outliers and other anomalies.
Classification tasks can be separated into generative or
a discriminative approaches. In the former we can identify probabilistic structures for the K classes {Ci}K
i=1, which
may be modelled with pdfs f (x|Ci), x ∈Rn over the ndimensional data space, and from which we may then define
a decision boundary on the level sets of f. It is common
in novelty detection, for example, to classify test data x as
being “abnormal” if f (x|C0) < κ, for some pre-defined
threshold κ, and where the model of normality1 is referred
to as C0. Popular examples of generative methods include
the use of finite or infinite mixture models or hidden Markov models . These approaches use most of the
training data in an attempt to determine its underlying structure, assuming, as their name suggests, that the data were
generated from that structure.
In the discriminative approach, it is conventionally
argued that the aim of novelty detection is to detect abnormalities, and that therefore the decision boundary is of
fundamental importance: there is no need to estimate the
class density f (x|C0), and that we attempt “never to solve a
problem that is more general than the one we actually need
to solve” . Discriminative algorithms model the decision
boundary f (C0|x) directly, and no generative assumption
is made. Examples of algorithms in this class include various formulations of the one-class support vector machine
(SVM) . In practice, this often means that the
decision boundary is defined in terms of a subset of the
training data, comprising those examples that exist in what
would (by a generative method) be considered the “tail” of
the normal model.
The advantage of the generative approach is that its algorithms are typically probabilistic, because a generative data
distribution has been constructed. This brings with it all of
the advantages of a probabilistic inference system, including
the possibility of coping with noise, artefact, and incompleteness in a principled manner (perhaps by marginalisation, if a Bayesian framework is used). The advantage of
the discriminative approach is that fewer assumptions have
been made about the data, and that classification accuracy is
often higher than can be achieved with generative methods.
1Novelty detection is arguably a hypothesis test, in which the null
hypothesis is that test data are drawn from some model of normality,
1.1 Between Generative and Discriminative
An appealing compromise exists between the generative
approach (using all of the training data to discover class distribution structure) and the discriminative approach (using
only those data that lie close to the edge of the region of
support of the “normal” data) to novelty detection. The socalled peaks-over-threshold (POT) approach, described in
more detail in the next section, is defined for univariate
data, and assumes that there is some underlying generative model from which the training data were generated, but
that only those data above some high threshold u ∈R (or
below some low threshold) are of particular interest. This
is used in financial problems, for example, in which we
wish to model the distribution of “extremely large” insurance claims, or in flood prediction, in which we wish to
model the distribution of “extremely large” water levels. If
the threshold is placed at a sufficiently “extreme” location
on the univariate axis, then it has been shown that the distribution of the data beyond that threshold (the “peaks over
threshold”) tends towards the generalised Pareto distribution
The work described by this paper extends the GPD
to data spaces of arbitrary dimensionality, allowing us to
model the distribution of probability distributions describing “normal” data in real-world cases, such as in the
“health” monitoring of complex systems. The classical univariate POT formulation is described in Section 2, with
our GPD extension then introduced in Section 3. Validation
is described in Section 4, with discussion and concluding
remarks in Section 5.
2 Introduction to Extreme Value Theory
Extreme value theory (EVT) aims to model the distribution
of data that are “extreme” in magnitude, such as the incidence of earthquakes of extremely large magnitude or the
occurrence of rainfall levels of extremely small magnitude.
The interested reader is referred to the standard introductory
texts for EVT, which mainly come from the statistics literature , but which have also generated attention
within the engineering literature . Special cases
of EVT are also much beloved in the reliability field, when
considering the life expectancy of components and systems
The essence of EVT is to model “extreme” data in an ndimensional data space X ∈Rn, where some training data
exist in a region of high support which may be estimated
by a pdf fX : Rn →R+. Essentially, this is an attempt to
perform principled extrapolation into areas of the data space
for which very few examples are available. As noted previously, EVT is limited to (most usually) uni- or bivariate
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
data spaces, with data spaces of small n being possibly considered using methods such as those involving estimation of
copulae .
2.1 The Generalised Extreme Value Distribution
The basis of EVT is the Fisher-Tippett theorem , a limit
theorem which states that if we have a series of random variables (rvs) {Xi}m
i=1 which are i.i.d. according to
some non-degenerate distribution function2 (df) FX, then
their maximum tends to a known form HY as m →∞,
which is the generalised extreme value distribution (GEV):
−(1 + ξy)−1/ξ
exp {−exp(−y)}
where y = (x −c)/d is termed the reduced variate, with
location and scale parameters c and d, respectively, and
where ξ is a shape parameter. The cases ξ < 0, ξ = 0, and
ξ > 0 give the Fr´echet, Gumbel, and Weibull distributions
for maxima, respectively, which are:
1 (y) = exp(−exp(−y))
 exp (−(−y)α) if y ≤0
for shape parameter α ∈R+. These are the limit distributions for the maxima of exponential, heavy-tailed, and
light-tailed distributions, respectively. The Weibull is that
distribution typically used to estimate the distribution of
component lifetimes in reliability theory .
The GEV and its subclasses have been used for novelty detection , where it was used to set a decision
boundary (or novelty threshold) on a pdf fX, and which is
therefore a method that falls into the category of generative
methods described previously.
2.2 Peaks Over Threshold
This paper is concerned with the POT method of EVT,
which considers exceedances over (or shortfalls under)
some extremal threshold u ∈Rn, where typically n = 1 or
is some small number of dimensions . Assuming that the
maximum of a set of rvs {Yi} is “well-behaved” (formally,
its distribution tends towards the GEV (1) in the limit; i.e., it
is non-degenerate), then it may be shown that the df of
2A degenerate df assigns all probability mass to a single point in the
data space.
the exceedances Yi > u tends towards a known form, which
is the GPD:
1 −(1 + ξ y−ν
β )−1/ξ if ξ ̸= 0
1 −exp(−y−ν
where ν, β, and ξ are location, scale, and shape parameters,
respectively. Using (5), we obtain the probability P (Y −
u | Y > u) = Ge
Y, which merely states that the exceedances
of the r.v. Y are GPD in distribution (and where we continue
to drop subscripts on distributions for clarity).
The POT method is surprisingly general: as long as our
data are non-degenerate in distribution (as is always the
case in realistic machine learning and signal processing
tasks),they fall into the “domain of attraction” of the GPD.
The GPD must, therefore, be a distribution that can take
many shapes such that it can be the limiting distribution for
exceedances for all non-degenerate distributions. Figure 1
confirms this by showing the pdfs ge
Y(x|ξ, β, ν) corresponding to df Ge
Y for varying values of the shape parameter ξ.
The figure shows that the GPD is flexible according to
its shape parameter ξ, where we have fixed the values of the
location parameter ν = 0 and the scale parameter β = 1.
We can see that the GPD can characterise the distribution
of tails where the original pdf fX is, for example, many of
those that we would typically wish to consider in real data
analysis problems:
a heavy-tailed distribution, such as the Student’s t distribution (ξ > 0);
the exponential distribution (ξ = 0);
a light-tailed distribution, such as the Gaussian distribution (−0.5 < ξ < 0); or
distributions with compact support (ξ ≤−0.5).
and where the latter set of compact distributions have support given by [0, β/ξ]. This allows the GPD to represent
the tails of the uniform distribution (ξ = −1) and the triangular distribution (ξ = −0.5). Monotonically increasing
g(x | ξ,β,ν), β = 1, ν = 0
Figure 1 The GPD ge
Y(x|ξ, β, ν) for varying ξ, with β = 1 and
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
distributions with compact support also fall into the domain
of attraction of the GPD, such as the Beta distribution
The majority of the literature on the GPD is concerned
with accurate estimation of the three parameters ξ, β, and
ν. It is often the case that the latter can be set to ν = 0 if an
appropriate normalisation is applied to the data, as will be
demonstrated later. Careful consideration must also be given
to the value of the threshold u, “exceedances” beyond which
are those modelled by the GPD. A bias-variance trade-off is
apparent in the selection of u:
If we set u to be highly “extreme” (i.e., far from the
support of the underlying distribution fX, and hence far
into the tails of fX), then the resulting tail data will be
very well-fit by the GPD. This is because the GPD is
the limiting distribution as |u| →∞, and so, as u made
more extreme, so the GPD better fits the tail data X =
{x|fX(x) > u} in the case of threshold “exceedances”
in the upper tail of fX, or X = {x|fX(x) < u} in the
case of threshold “shortfalls” in the lower tail.3 (For
simplicity of description, the remainder of this section
will consider a threshold placed in the upper tail of fX,
and hence exceedances of u). This better fit of the GPD
to the tail data corresponds to decreased bias. However, this effect comes at the price of increased variance:
there are fewer tail data in set X for more extreme values of u, because the threshold is more extreme. This
means that any resulting parameter estimates from that
small number of tail data are likely to be inaccurate with
respect to “true” values, and hence the variance will
increase when new observations are considered.
Conversely, if we set u to be less “extreme” (i.e., close
to the support of the underlying distribution fX, and
hence not far into the tails of fX), then there will be a
large number of exceedances in set X. This will result
in less variance, because the resulting parameter estimates will not change as much as if X contained fewer
data. However, the price is increased bias, because as
u becomes less extreme, the GPD will not describe the
resulting tail data.
3 A Multivariate Extension for the GPD
In most cases of interest that we face in practice, the data
cannot be described using univariate distributions, which
motivates the multivariate extension to the GPD described
in this section.
3The terms “exceedances” and “shortfalls” are commonly used in the
EVT literature.
Conventional statistical approaches to tackling a higherdimensional dataset would attempt to estimate the dependence structure between univariate marginal distributions.
This could be performed using a copula , which is a df C
defined over the dfs of marginal distributions C : [0 1]n →
[0 1]. That is, we consider our high-dimensional data space
to be a unit cube over the n marginal distributions, and the
copula is that df which takes the n-dimensional unit cube as
its input. The copula approach is useful in that it fully specifies the dependence between random variables; it is this
precision which is, perhaps unsurprisingly, its major limitation, in that it is seldom applied to high-dimensional data
Alternatives to copulae include estimate the dependence
structure between the extremes of each margin (rather
than the margins themselves), as is often performed when
attempting to extend EVT to bi- or trivariate data spaces
 . For example, a jet engine condition monitoring dataset
could comprise n = 50 dimensions or more, where
copula estimation or dependence estimation is not feasible.
3.1 The Probability Image Space
We wish to form a GPD over the tails of a distribution
fX, where fX : X →Y for (potentially highly multivariate) data space X ∈Rn, and where Y is the corresponding
probability image space Y ∈R+; that is, we have the output of the pdf which may take probability densities in the
range Y ∈[0 ymax], for some maximum probability density
ymax = sup(fX). If fX is a unimodal pdf, then ymax is simply the modal probability density. We restrict our analysis to
non-compact distributions, such as mixtures of exponential
kernel functions and other tailed distributions.
In general, fX may be inconvenient to analyse, as we
have made no assumptions about its structure; it could, for
example, comprise many modes. The exemplar distribution
that we will consider in our patient monitoring case study
is a mixture distribution with 400 component distributions,
for example. The intuition of our method is to avoid explicitly defining a GPD over the tails of fX in the n-dimensional
data space X, but to equivalently define a GPD over the tails
of the univariate probability image space Y.
To construct this univariate equivalent form, we must first
define a df over the probability image space Y, which we
will call GY:
Definition 1 ∀y ∈Y, let GY(y) =
Y ([0,y]) fX(x)dx.
To understand the definition, we note that this is actually
a distribution over level sets on the probability density fX.
To assign a value of probability mass GY(y) to a level set
of probability density value y, we integrate fX between the
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
level set fX = y and the level set fX = 0. Equivalently, we
could say that we are integrating the pdf fX over all those
values x in the data space that correspond to probability densities fX(x) ≤y. This set of all values x with fX(x) ≤y is
the set f −1
([0 y]), also known as the pre-image of the set
of probability densities [0 y]. That is, it is the set of values x
in the data space which have corresponding densities [0 y].
Here we have used the inverse function f −1
which is injective and surjective, but not bijective because
many points x in data space X can take the same value of
probability density y ∈Y. This suggests that while closed
forms for GY may exist under certain circumstances (unimodality and radial symmetry, to be discussed later), they
will not exist in the general case.
A typical df GY will take values GY(y) = 0 when y = 0,
and then increase to GY(y) = 1 as y increases from y = 0
to its maximum value, y = ymax. Figure 2 shows examples
for the cases in which f is the standard Gaussian distribution with n = 3 and n = 7 dimensions, and where we
have performed numerical experiments by generating samples from f. It may be seen that the empirical df GY(y)
increases as y increases to ymax. It may also be seen that,
as dimensionality n increases, the value of ymax decreases
from ymax = (2π)−1/3 = 0.0635 when n = 3 to ymax =
(2π)−1/7 = 0.0016 when n = 7. The (unnormalised)
Empirical g(y)
Empirical g(y)
Figure 2 (Unnormalised) empirical pdf gY(y) (shown in blue) over
probability densities y = f (x) when f is a standard Gaussian distribution of dimension (a) n = 3 and (b) n = 7, when a set of N = 105 data
were randomly generated from f. The corresponding empirical distribution GY(y) (shown in red) is given for comparison. Note that, for
clarity, the dfs GY(y) : Y →[0 1] have been scaled to occupy the
same range on the vertical axis as the empirical pdfs gY(y) : Y →R+.
empirical distributions are shown in the figures, where it
may be seen that increasing dimensionality causes samples
generated from f to take decreasing probability density values y. This latter effect is expected, due to the fact that the
pdf must integrate to unit volume; as the dimensionality of
the data space increases, the unit (hyper)volume under the
pdf must be spread over those larger dimensionalities of
space, resulting in lower overall densities.
Given the above definition of GY, we may see that
another interpretation is that GY(y) is the probability of a
single random sample x generated from fX having a probability density fX(x) ≤y. As y increases from 0 to the modal
value ymax, then the probability of generating a sample
with a lower value of probability density increases. When
y = ymax, then a random sample generated from fX will
definitely have a lower (or equal) probability density to the
modal value ymax, and so GY(ymax) = 1.
3.2 A GPD in the Probability Image Space
We may now use the distribution GY over the probability
image space Y to examine the tail behaviour of the underlying pdf fX, which is our goal. We are interested in points x
in the data space X which are in some sense “extreme”, and
where we will define the notion of “extreme” in terms of the
We can use the POT convergence theorem of ,
Definition 2 Let u ∈Y be a threshold in the probability
image space of some df FX, with associated pdf fX. Let
GY and therefore gY be the df and pdf that are defined over
the probability image space Y. The tail of GY(y) is in the
domain of attraction of the GPD Ge
Y given by (5) for y ∈
[0 u] as u →0.
This definition effectively allows us to treat “extreme”
data as being those that are shortfalls beneath threshold u in
the probability image space, which is intuitively appealing:
“extreme” data are those points x in data space X that our
model fX considers to be improbable.
We emphasise for clarity that in definition 2, the function
GY is the df defined over the whole probability image space
Y, as shown by the red lines in Fig. 2 by contrast, the function Ge
Y is the GPD whose domain of attraction contains the
tail of GY for values of y ≤u, examples of which were
shown in Fig. 1.
Definition 2 differs from the conventional definition
described earlier, where “extremal” data are those with particularly large or small absolute magnitude. We observe
that our definition is a general case of the conventional
magnitude-based definition: while data with particularly
large or small magnitudes will be assigned low probability
density by most dfs FX 74:323–339
according to our definition), we also allow points with
non-extreme absolute magnitudes to be classified as being
“extreme”, as long as they are sufficiently improbable with
respect to FX. For a multimodal df FX, this could mean that
points points falling between two distinct modes are deemed
“extreme”, because they are highly improbable. Most significantly, our definition permits the use of high-dimensional
data spaces X, in which it may not be appropriate to restrict
“extreme” data to being only those of particularly large
or small magnitude in one or more of their margins. For
example, in the case of human physiological monitoring,
small increases in patient respiration rate combined with
small decreases in blood-oxygen saturation may not be
large in magnitude (and hence not classified as “extreme”
by conventional EVT), but may nonetheless be extremely
improbable with respect to a training set of normal patient
physiology. In fact, this combination is typically indicative of failing respiratory function: the respiration rate (and
heart rate) often increase to try to counteract a falling
blood-oxygen level.
It is definition 2 that allows us to consider the method
as combining, in some sense, the motivations for the generative and discriminative methods of novelty detection: we
have a probabilistic construction, and can, if desired, use
the GPD for generation of synthetic “extremal” data and for
determining the confidence in our output; we also are interested only in those data beyond the threshold u, and so will
estimate the parameters of our GPD using only that subset
of the training data which are those extremal, “abnormal”
examples available to us.
3.3 Investigation using Synthetic Data
We now consider the proposed method using an example
bivariate pdf fX, shown in Fig. 3a. Here, the distribution
may be seen to be multimodal, with two obvious modes.
In fact, the pdf is a mixture of eight Gaussian components,
each with different covariance matrices.
We then generated N
= 105 sample points {xi}N
from fX and determined the corresponding set of probability densities {yi}N
fX(xi). The empirical distribution gY over the {yi} is shown in Fig. 3b, where
it may be seen that ymax
0.33, giving the univariate probability image space Y ∈[0 0.33]
for this example. It may be seen from gY that there
is a peak occurring at y
0.16, which corresponds
to the height (i.e., modal probability density y) of the
lower of the two modes in the pdf fX
We have selected an example threshold u in the probability image space Y at u = 0.015, which is shown by the
red line in Fig. 3b. Points x with corresponding probability
densities fX(x) falling above u are considered to be particularly “normal” points in data space X; conversely, points
with y = fX(x) ≤u are considered to be “tail data”, and
will be used to fit the parameters of a GPD, Ge
We emphasise that the “tail data” {x : fX(x) ≤u} are
not necessarily all to be classified as being “abnormal”
data, in the novelty detection sense: they are merely those
data who fall in the tail fX (and hence in the tail of GY)
according to our selection of threshold u, and which will,
according to definition 2, have a df that is in the domain
of attraction of the GPD Ge
Y in the univariate probability
image space Y. These “tail data” (or “shortfalls beneath
adapt the parlence of conventional univariate EVT to our
multivariate
Fig. 3a, and are found by using the inverse mapping
{x|x ∈f −1
Y (y), y ≤u}.
Having selected a threshold u ∈Y, we may now show
the same threshold as a level set on fX. This is intuitive:
our threshold describes the tails of the pdf in data space X,
and so our corresponding GPD over the tail of the univariate probability image space Y should be expected to form a
non-trivial (potentially disjoint) distribution over level sets
in the tails of fX in the data space X.
We now need to estimate the parameters of a GPD using
the tail data identified above. By defining a threshold at an
example value u = 0.015, our GPD will necessarily have
compact support Ge
Y ∈[0 0.015], and so, the discussion
in Section 2, the shape parameter ξ ≤−0.5. As we saw
previously, this subset of GPDs will have compact support
[0 β/ξ], and so β/ξ = u = 0.015. We therefore need only
consider fitting fitting ξ to our data, and the scale parameter
β will follow as β = ξu. Furthermore, the codomain of
our GPD is already located at y = 0, and so the location
parameter of the GPD for our novelty detection detection
formulation will be ν = 0.
The maximum likelihood method of was used to
determine the value of ξ from our set of tail data, which has
previously been found to be robust for a range of univariate
datasets . We may determine the quality-of-fit of the
resulting GPD using a quantile-quantile (QQ) plot, as shown
in Fig. 4a. Here, the tail data {y | y ≤u} are plotted on the
horizontal axis, while the vertical axis plots the pdf inverse
from the GPD (ge
Y)−1(pi), using percentiles {pi}100
i=1; i.e.,
percentile pn = n/100. On a QQ plot, a perfectly-fitted
model should correspond to the line y = x, such that predictions from the model (vertical axis) match the training data
(horizontal axis), which may be seen to be approximately
the case for our example pdf fX.
Finally, with our GPD defined over the univariate probability image space, we can now define an extended GPD in
the data space as follows:
Definition 3 Let Ge
Y(y|ξ, β, ν) be the GPD that describes
the distribution of those data y in the probability image
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
Figure 3 a Example bivariate
pdf fX, with an extremal
threshold u (red line) and data
(white dots). b Corresponding
pdf gY over probability image
space Y with threshold u (red
line). Note that the thresholds in
both plots correspond.
space Y that are shortfalls beneath threshold u, such that
P (y −u | abs(y −u)). Then we define an
extended GPD f e
X : X →R+ over the data space X using
Y (fX(x)).
To determine the constant of proportionality f e
Y (fX(x)), where Z−1 is sometimes termed the
partition function, we need to be able to integrate fX
over the the (possibly disconnected) regions of data
space X for which {x | fX(x)
u}, which is
not possible in the case of general fX
may be performed for some special cases, such as
when fX is multivariate Gaussian. This is considered in
Section 3.4.
An example is shown in Fig. 4b, in which we have performed numerical integration in order to determine Z−1 in
order to determine the value of log f e
X(x). The figure shows
φ(x) = 1 −log f e
X(x) for the purposes of visualisation,
such that regions of data space that are more extreme with
respect to the extended GPD take higher values of φ(x). For
higher dimensionality n, this procedure is impractical, and
we recommend that the GPD is used straightforwardly in the
probability image space Y, as given in definition 2, rather
than mapping it back into the data space X, as given in definition 3. This latter approach will be demonstrated in our
case study, in Section 4.
3.4 Closed Forms
For some classes of pdf fX, the distribution in the probability image space GY is known in closed form. For example,
we have previously shown that for the n-dimensional
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
Figure 4 a QQ plot comparing
the actual tail data {y | y ≤u}
with the inverse of the GPD
Y)−1(pi) for quantiles
i=1. b The extended GPD
φ(x) = 1 −log f e
X(x) defined
over data space X.
(a) QQ plot for GY
(b) The extended GPD
φ (x ) = 1 −log f X(x ) in X
multivariate Gaussian case fX(x) = N(x | μ, ), x ∈Rn
for any n ∈R+, the closed form is
GY,2p(y) = y
−2 log(y C2p)
GY,2p+1(y) = y
−2 log(y C2p+1)
−log(y C2p+1)
for all p ∈N∗, where
2p| |1/2 2k(p −1)!
(p −1 −k)!
2p+1| |1/2
(2p −1)!(p −k)!
2k−1(p −1)!(2p −2k)!.
and where Cn = (2π)n/2| |1/2 is the normalising constant
(or partition function) and
n = (2π)n/2
(n/2) is the total solid
angle subtended by the unit sphere in Rn.
In such cases where the closed form for GY is known,
the inverse G−1
may be used to map the GPD Ge
probability image space back into the data space, to give
the extended GPD f e
X in closed form in X. The closedform solution for the multivariate Gaussian case was derived
in derived in because of the analytical convenience
of working with the Gaussian, exploiting its radial symmetry; the above equations were specified in terms of
the Mahalanobis distance about the mode of effectively
making the problem univariate in (Mahalanobis) radius.
This approach could similarly be taken for other taken for
other unimodal, multivariate probability distributions that
are specified radially, which remains future work. There are
many algorithms within the field of machine learning for
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
which the Gaussian kernel is used, which makes the above
formulation particularly useful.
Proceeding with our extended GPD Ge
Y for the case when
fX is multivariate Gaussian, we can define the GPD as a distribution F e
X over contours in the data space X with closed
X(x) = 1 −Ge
where (11) has used the definition of the GPD in (5) with
location parameter ν = 0, as is the case for our novelty detection formulation. In (13), we have used the radial
definition of the multivariate Gaussian N(μ, ), such that
M(x) = (x −μ)⊤ −1(x −μ) is the Mahalanobis radius
of x with respect to the n-dimensional Gaussian, and Cn =
(2π)n/2| |1/2 is the Gaussian partition function as before.
4 Case Study: Patient Vital-Sign Monitoring
An interesting feature of the conventional (univariate) POT
method of EVT is that it models the behaviour of any
available tail observations explicitly, rather than extrapolating from a model constructed using the non-extreme
“normal” data, as does conventional EVT based on the generalised extreme value distribution (GEV). This is advantageous, because tail observations are comparatively rare
with respect to the quantity of non-extreme “normal” data,
and thus an estimate of the pdf fX will be biased towards
accurately representing the distribution of the more numerous non-extreme “normal” data. The POT method typically
considers exceedances of an extremal u which are assumed
to occur at times according to a Poisson point process
 . Therefore, as Therefore, as described in Section 1, the
POT method may be informally considered to be a compromise between relying on the entire dataset (as typically
occurs with a probabilistic generative method), and relying on those data close to the decision boundary between
classes (as typically occurs with a discriminative sparse
kernel threshold u.
Our proposed multivariate extension to the POT method
can therefore benefit from the same advantages, and this
section demonstrates the application of our method to novelty detection in large datasets of patient vital signs.
4.1 A Model from Clinical Practice
Previous work has resulted in construction of a pdf fX(x) :
R4 →R+ constructed from a training set of vital sign data
(of approximately 3,500 hours in total duration) acquired
from 150 “normal”, stable patients in certain high-risk
groups of the Oxford University Hospital NHS Trust .
This pdf is a mixture obtained using K = 400 Gaussian kernel centres, which was then used to assign novelty scores z(x) = −log fX(x) to data. Test data were
deemed to be “abnormal” if they exceeded some fixed
threshold on the novelty score z(x) > κz. The value of
the threshold κz was determined by minimising the falsepositive and false-negative classification rates with respect
to previously-unseen “normal” and “abnormal” validation
data, respectively.
The resulting system has proven successful in reducing
the incidence of physiological deterioration in acutely-ill
hospital patients when used to alert clinical staff of “abnormal” patient vital signs during a subsequent clinical trial at
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Centre (UPMC) . We will use our multivariate extension to the GPD to
explore the tail behaviour of the model fX with respect to
the dataset acquired during the clinical trial at the UPMC.
4.2 Investigating the Extended GPD
The UPMC dataset comprises over 18,000 hours of vitalsign data, collected from 332 high-risk adult patients .
The dataset contains measurements of heart rate, respiratory
rate, blood-oxygen saturation (acquired at a sampling interval of τs ≈20 secs) and systolic blood pressure (acquired
at τs ≈30 minutes, which was subsequently up-sampled to
the sampling rate of the other three vital signs).
Two subsets of the dataset were identified:
Set Ca, containing periods of patient data deemed to
be indicative of “abnormal” patient condition by clinical experts. This set comprises data from 44 patients, of
approximately 43 hours in total duration.
Set Cn, containing data from all those patients for whom
no “abnormal” event was deemed to have occurred, of
approximately 16,000 hours in total duration.
The goal of physiological monitoring is to identify those
patients in “abnormal” set Ca as early as possible so that
clinicians may be brought to the bedside, while not generating false alarms when presented with data from patients in
“normal” set Cn.
Before formulating our extended GPD for this model
fX, we first investigate the probability image space Y,
which is shown in Fig. 5. It may be seen that the complex multi-modal pdf results complex behaviour of gY in the
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
probability image space, particularly in the range of probability densities corresponding to the most “normal” patient
data, y > 1.5 × 10−3. However, in the tails of see the usual
decaying-exponential behaviour that one would expect for
the tails of a mixture of Gaussian distributions, observed far
from the complex hull formed from their modes. It may be
seen that the novelty used in clinical practice at u = κy falls
far into the tail of the distribution, such that the tail is likely
is likely to be well-fitted by the GPD.
Following , we aim to find the GPD df for the tail
Y(u −y) = GY(u)Ge
Y(y), which states that the distribution of tail data Ge
Y(u −y) is some version of the GPD
Y(y) scaled by a factor GY(u). A natural estimator for this
factor GY(u) is given by the empirical df
ˆGY(u) = 1
I{yi<u} = Nu
where I is the indicator function, which counts the number
Nu of tail data {yi} falling beneath the threshold u. This,
with (5), leads immediately to the resulting estimator
GY (u −y) = Nu
In this illustration of our extension of the GPD to multivariate data, we consider the threshold u = κy, where
κy ∈Y is that threshold that corresponds to the location
in the probability image space of the threshold κz on the
original patient vital-sign model fX. That is, all probability
density values {y ∈Y | y < κy} are isomorphic to novelty
scores z(x) > κz, because ∀x ∈X, z(x) = z
allowing us to map from probability densities y to novelty
scores z(x). Therefore, because all these points {x} exceed
the novelty threshold κz in the original original algorithm,
they would therefore all be classified as being “abnormal”
with respect to the model respect to the model therefore
represents an “extremal” threshold, and indeed the quantile
on fX (i.e., ¯GY, the survival function of GY) that corresponds to κz is approximately ¯GY = 0.985, as may be seen
in Fig. 5, where we see that there is little probability mass
existing in the tail of gY below the threshold u. This quantile
0.985 is traditionally considered as being sufficiently considered as being sufficiently extreme (i.e., close to 1) for the
assumption to hold that the tail distribution lies within the
domain of attraction of the GPD .
4.3 Fitting the Extended GPD
We investigate the variation in maximum likelihood estimates of the shape parameter ξ over a range of threshold
values u, in keeping with best practice for determining the
sensitivity of ξ to choices of u. Figure 6a shows |ξ| varying over a range of very small values for u > 3 × 10−5,
where it be seen that the estimate is stable until the threshold is moved into the most extreme tail u ≤3 × 10−5 of of
the probability image space Y. This is expected behaviour,
because there are fewer extreme data available as the threshold is decreased in Y, and eventually we are modelling a tail
so extreme that parameter estimates become highly unreliable, and ξ rapidly takes unstable values as u < 3 × 10−5.
However, we require only a value of ξ that is stable over the
majority of the tail region, and Fig. 6 shows that ξ →0 as
u increases to the right of the plot.
A similar investigation for the stability of the scale
parameter β over a range of threshold values u indicates that
β varies approximately linearly with u, as is expected: by
Figure 5 Empirical pdf gY
over the probability image space
for an existing model of normal
fX patient physiology used in
clinical practice, obtained using
N = 105 data generated from
fX. A threshold u is shown as a
vertical dashed line,
corresponding to κy used as a
novelty threshold in clinical
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
Threshold, u
Threshold, u
(b) Detail of ξ
Figure 6 Plots of the maximum likelihood estimate for shape parameter ξ with changing threshold u, showing (a) ξ over a large range of
thresholds, and (b) detail of ξ for a small range of values. Note that |ξ|
has been shown in the plots. 1 standard error in the estimation is shown
by the shaded area.
increasing u, we are directly increasing the support of the
Y in the probability image space as [0 u] = [0 β/ξ],
described previously, and hence β ∝u, as seen in Fig. 7.
A final check of the suitability of the GPD for modelling
the tails of our complex multivariate distribution fX is to
consider the mean excess. We define an excess beyond (i.e.,
below) the threshold to be the quantity u −y, the empirical
distribution of which is shown in Fig. 8a. Here it may be
seen that many excesses are small (i.e., close to the threshold
Threshold, u
Figure 7 Plots of the maximum likelihood estimate for scale parameter β with changing threshold u. 1 standard error in the estimation is
shown by the shaded area.
u), but that there is a significant number of excesses that
exist very far from the threshold u, shown in the figure as
the rightmost peak. It is this peak i the most extremal data
that caused the unstable behaviour in values of ξ when u
was set to be very small, as previously seen in Fig. 6a. In
patient physiological data, this peak corresponds to periods
of extreme and prolonged physiological derangement .
Following , we use the mean excess function en(u)
over all N data:
eN(u) = E(y −u | Y < u)
i=1(yi −u)I{yi<u}
i=1I{yi<u}
where I is the indicator function, and so eN(u) is the sum of
excesses beyond u, divided by the number of exceedances.
This is the expected value of an exceedance, given that an
exceedance has occurred.
If the tail is in the domain of attraction of the GPD, then
it may be shown that:
e(u) = β + ξu
and hence the mean excesses e(u) for a truly GPD tail will
be linear in u. We check the linearity of the mean excesses
as shown in Fig. 8b, which shows that the mean excess
decreases linearly with excess (u −y) for our complex
model, and hence the GPD is appropriate for modelling the
4.4 Evaluating the Fit
The suitability of this threshold u is shown by the fit of the
GPD to the “normal” tail observations from Cn in the QQ
plot shown in Fig. 9a, where it may be seen that the GPD
and the Cn tail observations observations differ only in the
left-hand tail of this tail-plot, corresponding to the extremes
of this extremal dataset. It is recognised in the literature that
the “extremes of the extremal data” will diverge from the
distribution given by parameters estimated over the majority of the extremal range . While these extremes of the
extremal data will be closely fit by a GPD (they are further into the asymptotic attractor of the GPD as u →0 in
this case), the variance of the estimates of the parameters
for that GPD increases, as described previously. described
previously. Noting that the entire set of tail observations
are already extremal with respect to the would all be classified as examples of “abnormal” patient physiology by
the original algorithm in , with respect to the model
fX. Therefore, an alert of the vital-sign monitoring system
would occur for every point {x}, even though many of these
data are extreme-but-normal; i.e., they come from set Cn,
which contains patients with no physiological deterioration,
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
Figure 8 a Empirical
distribution of excesses (u −y)
beyond threshold u. b Mean
excess plot.
Excess, u − y
(a) Excesses beyond threshold
Excess (u − y)
Mean Excess
(b) Mean excess
and for whom any alert of the monitoring system will be a
false alert. monitoring system will be a false alert.
The fit of the GPD to the majority of this range, as shown
in the figure, is appropriate. We emphasise that while these
data are extreme, they are “normal” in that they derive from
stable patients in set Cn for whom we wish no alert of the
monitoring system to be generated.
Figure 9a also shows that the distribution of the tail observations acquired from unstable, “abnormal” patients in set
Ca is significantly different to this GPD, suggesting that we
can discriminate between the two cases: the extreme-butnormal data (from Cn), and the extreme-and-abnormal data
(from Ca).
4.5 The Disadvantages of Extrapolation
Figure 9b illustrates why the proposed approach provides
an advantage over existing techniques. As noted previously,
existing methods assume strong dependence
on the model of normality, fX, and typically extrapolate
into the tail areas of data space based on fX (which was
constructed using entirely normal data).
The figure shows (in blue) the tail observations corresponding to fX; i.e., the distribution of tail observations
i=1 corresponding to a set of generated data {xi}N
fX, N = 106. If it were appropriate to extrapolate from
the model of normality fX into the tails, then the blue line
should closely match the tail model given by the GPD,
which is the true limiting distribution in the tail.
However, it may be seen from the figure that these
synthetically-generated tail observations (in blue), which
are distributed according to the model fX using (15), are
significantly different in distribution to the actual tail
observations of “normal” patient data, Cn (shown in green).
The GPD fitted to the tails of the model (shown by the
green dashed line) is correspondingly different to the GPD
fitted to the actual tail observations of patient data (shown
by the blue dashed line). Therefore, we may conclude that
(perhaps unsurprisingly) the model of normality fX does
not exhibit the desired tail behaviour; that is, the model of
normal patient physiology does not accurately model the
tails of the distribution, where physiology tends to be more
“abnormal”.
4.6 Advantages of the Extended GPD
The GPD extended to be defined over a probability image
space makes the implicit assumption that observed data are
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
Figure 9 a QQ plot showing fit
between the GPD (dashed line)
and extreme-but-normal
observations from set Cn, with
extreme-and-abnormal
observations from set Ca shown
for comparison. b Pdfs of actual
extreme-but-normal tail
observations (Cn), tail
observations expected by the
model (i.e., synthetic data
generated from fX), and
extreme-and-abnormal tail
observations (Ca), with GPDs
fitted to the “normal” and model
observations (dashed lines).
(a) QQ plot for tail observations
log G(y | y < u)
(b) Tail pdfs
i.i.d. with respect to the pdf fX. If the assumption holds,
then the exceedances of the extreme threshold u follow a
Poisson point process . To check the validity of this
assumption, we can consider the occurrence of records in
the dataset.
Adapting the exceedances-over-threshold case from 
to our shortfalls-under-threshold case in our novelty detection formulation, we define:
Definition 4 A record in our probability image space Y
occurs at point index i = 1 . . . N if yi < mi−1 where
mi−1 = min (y1, . . . , yi−1) is the minimum of all previous data. We assume that y1, which is the probability
density of the first point in the dataset y1 = fX(x1), is the
first record.
We use the record-counting process to determine the
index Ni at which the ith record occurred:
Ni = 1 + i
k=2I{yk<mk−1}
It may then be shown that if the data are i.i.d., then
var[Ni] = i
and that, remarkably,
i→∞(E[Ni] −log i) = γ
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
for Euler’s constant γ = 0.5772 . . . We can therefore compare the expected number of records from (21), having
variance (22), at index Ni from the counting process of the
truly i.i.d. series to the actual observed number of records
from the probability image space Y of our dataset.
This is shown in Fig. 10, where we compare the expected
number of records from an i.i.d. series on the horizontal
axis to the actual observed number of records at that same
index Ni in the dataset. Figure 10a shows the case for a
set of N = 105 synthetic data, generated from fX. By definition, these data are i.i.d. with respect to fX. It may be
seen that the occurrence of records in this truly i.i.d. synthetic dataset occur at approximately the place in the dataset
that we would expect them to occur: thin line shows the
expected number of record at the data index Ni where each
observed record actually occurred, and occurred, and the
thin line (with its variance shown as the shaded background)
is close to the line y = x (shown by the thick line). This
indicates that the expectations and actual observations occur
at approximately the same rate, as one would hope because
the synthetic data are i.i.d. by definition.
Figure 10b shows the case for normal patient data, from
set Cn. Here, it may be seen that more records are being
actually observed than would be expected from a truly i.i.d
set of data. For example, when we observe the 20th record
(on the horizontal axis) we are expecting only to have seen
12.3 records (±3.3 records). This suggests that the normal
patient data contain more extremal data than a truly i.i.d.
Figure 10c shows the case for abnormal patient data,
from set Ca, where it may be seen that the abnormal data are
similarly generating more records than would be expected
from a truly i.i.d. series. E.g., when the 6th record occurs
(on the horizontal axis), we would expect to have seen only
3.6 records (±1.4 records) if the process were i.i.d. In fact,
we actually observe 4 records at Ni = 21, quite close to the
start of the dataset.
From this we may conclude that the i.i.d. assumption is
too strong for our realistic dataset, which is unsurprising:
patient data are susceptible to varying dynamical behaviour
as the physiological condition of the patient changes. However, despite the fact that the i.i.d. assumption does not hold,
it has been shown previously that the GPD, extended over
the probability image space Y, is an accurate description of
the distribution of tail data - as has been shown both in terms
of mean excess, in Fig. 8b, and QQ difference, in Fig. 9a.
This suggests that our extended GPD approach is robust to
non-i.i.d. behaviour, which is a significant advantage compared with conventional methods that rely solely on the pdf
fX to perform novelty detection. That is, even though the
i.i.d. assumption may not hold, and hence the statistics of
the data are not accurately described by fX, they have been
shown to be accurately described by the extended GPD.
Of particular interest, it may be seen that the extended
GPD corresponding to the extreme-but-normal data (shown
in green in the figure) differ considerably from that corresponding to the extreme-and-abnormal patient data (shown
in red). This result therefore suggests a method of discriminating between tail observations from “normal” patients”
and tail observations from truly “abnormal” patients, all of
which would have simply been classified “abnormal” by a
conventional density-thresholding technique, because all of
these observations lie in the tails of the model fX, beyond
its threshold κz.
This effectively offers the potential advantage of being
able to push the classification decision beyond the
Expected records
Observed records
(a) Records for synthetic data
Expected records
Observed records
(b) Records for normal data C
Expected records
Observed records
(b) Records for abnormal data
Figure 10 Plots showing actual number of observed records (horizontal axis) against the expected occurrence of records (vertical axis) after
observing the same number of data. For each value on the horizontal axis, the expected number of records (and one standard deviation)
are shown by the thin line (and shaded background). The thick line
y = x is shown in each case, corresponding to the number of actuallyobserved records occurring at the same time as the expected number
of records. Datasets used in each plot are (a) N = 105 synthetic data
generated from (and hence i.i.d. according to) fX, (b) normal data, Cn,
and (c) abnormal data, Ca.
J Sign Process Syst 74:323–339
conventional decision threshold κZ, and separate the
extreme-but-normal from the extreme-and-abnormal.
5 Concluding Discussion
We have shown that the tails of an arbitrary pdf f↶tend
to the GPD in the probability image space corresponding to
the pdf. This results directly in a GPD over the level sets in
the pdf fX, defining a complex distribution in the original
data space X which we refer to as the extended GPD.
We have described how our extended GPD can model
the tails of pdfs in data space X ∈Rn of any dimension.
We assume some model of normality fX to obtain a mapping into the probability image space Y corresponding to
fX. However, unlike previous approaches, we then directly
model any available actual tail observations, rather than
extrapolating into extremal regions of Rn based on a model
of model of normality as has been previously performed.
We directly fit a model to any available extreme-butnormal observations, rather than assuming that the model
fX applies throughout the tail regions. This is advantageous
because fX is biased towards fitting the mass of observations that are “normal” in the training set (assuming that
tail observations are less frequently observed than “normal”
observations, as is typical in most practical applications).
This direct modelling of tail observations is in keeping with
the spirit of the univariate approaches in the POT literature,
in which the tails are modelled with a GPD while the nonextremal data may be modelled with a different distribution
 .
We have demonstrated that, for a large example dataset of
patient vital signs, there is a significant difference between
that which the model fX tells us we should expect in
the tails (the blue line in Fig. 9b), and the distribution of
our actual extreme-but-normal tail observations (from set
Cn). This is to be expected, as it is unlikely that extremal
“normal” patient physiology is distributed similarly to the
mass of “normal” patient physiology that occurs nearer the
modes of fX. This confirms that we should not extrapolate from fX into its tails, and that we should instead
model the tails directly. Our method allows us to represent
accurately those extremal data that are available, rather
than relying on extrapolation from our model of “normal”
physiology.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated the robustness of our
method to non-i.i.d. data. Whereas existing methods require
that the data are i.i.d. according to the pdf fX (an assumption
that we have shown does not hold for our realistic example),
our method based on the extended GPD accurately describes
the statistics of the tail data, even when the i.i.d. assumption
does not hold (as is the case for most realistic datasets, with
non-trivial dynamics).
5.1 Separating Extreme-but-Normal from Extremeand-Abnormal
In addition, the proposed method allows us to venture
out beyond the conventional boundary between “normal”
and “abnormal” regions of data space, and to take into
the account (using our example of patient vital-sign monitoring) that there is a significant quantity of observations
from stable, normal patients beyond that boundary (the
extreme-but-normal data), which we would like to separate from observations from truly abnormal patients (the
extreme-and-abnormal data), who require clinical attention.
The value of the threshold u ∈Y in our illustration was
selected to coincide with an existing decision threshold that
is used in clinical practice. The selection of u is a selection over a univariate rv, and so any of the standard methods
from the literature on univariate EVT for selecting the value
of u may be employed, such as plots, mean-excess plots,
etc. While there is typically a region of Y in which u
results in stable estimates of the GPD shape parameter ξ,
making such univariate explorative techniques useful, useful, there is scope for Bayesian estimation of this threshold,
for which the interested reader is directed to the surveys
 , which are mostly based on non-deterministic
approximations, such as those involving MCMC.
5.2 Future Work
We have provided a formulation for a distribution over the
level sets in the tails of an arbitrary distribution fX, and
have demonstrated the method using a mixture of Gaussian
distributions, with parameters obtained using maximum
likelihood methods from the EVT literature. Extensions of
this work could use the proposed method to model the tails
of so-called Bayesian mixture models, in which the parameters of the mixture (including the number K of mixture
distributions) are set using variational Bayesian methods , or other deterministic approximations.
Acknowledgments
DC was supported by the Wellcome Trust and
EPSRC under grant number WT 088877/Z/09/Z; LC was supported by
the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre Programme, Oxford. SH was
supported by the EPSRC LSI Doctoral Training Centre, Oxford.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s)
and the source are credited.