Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
Josef Urban · Piotr Rudnicki · GeoﬀSutcliﬀe
the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later
Abstract This paper describes the Automated Reasoning for Mizar (MizAR) service,
which integrates several automated reasoning, artiﬁcial intelligence, and presentation tools with Mizar and its authoring environment. The service provides ATP
assistance to Mizar authors in ﬁnding and explaining proofs, and oﬀers generation
of Mizar problems as challenges to ATP systems. The service is based on a sound
translation from the Mizar language to that of ﬁrst-order ATP systems, and relies
on the recent progress in application of ATP systems in large theories containing
tens of thousands of available facts. We present the main features of MizAR services, followed by an account of initial experiments in ﬁnding proofs with the ATP
assistance. Our initial experience indicates that the tool oﬀers substantial help in
exploring the Mizar library and in preparing new Mizar articles.
1 Motivation and System Overview
Computer supported formal mathematics is becoming better known, widely
used and experimented with. Projects like FlySpeck and veriﬁcation of tiny
(but real) operating systems are stimulating the development of interactive
veriﬁcation tools and interactive theorem provers (ITPs). Linked to this is the
development of strong automated theorem proving (ATP) systems, used either
independently to solve hard problems in suitable domains, or integrated with interactive tools. Such integrations have motivated recent research in the context of
automated reasoning in large theories .
The Mizar project1 is a long-term eﬀort to collaboratively develop a formal computerized system representing important mathematical knowledge. The project is
Josef Urban, funded by NWO grants MathWiki and Knowledge-based Automated Reasoning
Radboud University, Nijmegen
Piotr Rudnicki, supported by a NSERC grant
University of Alberta
GeoﬀSutcliﬀe
University of Miami
1 . See for introductory information on Mizar. For the rest of the paper
we assume at least superﬁcial familiarity with Mizar.
Josef Urban et al.
focused on building the Mizar Mathematical Library (MML) – a collection of mathematical ‘articles’ formalized and mechanically veriﬁed with the Mizar system. MML
is the largest such library among similar projects.
This paper introduces the Automated Reasoning for Mizar (MizAR) service,
which attaches several automated reasoning and presentation tools to the Mizar
system. MizAR runs in the context of the MML expressed in the Mizar language – a
language oriented toward mathematicians. An inspiration for MizAR is the established SystemOnTPTP ATP service , which uses the simpler TPTP language for
expressing proving tasks. SystemOnTPTP provides a framework for ﬁnding proofs
with many ﬁrst-order ATP systems, oﬀers various forms of proof presentation,
supports discovery of new lemmas and independent proof veriﬁcation. The MizAR
service links to and re-uses parts of SystemOnTPTP. MizAR comprises the following
main functionalities:
– Fast server-based veriﬁcation of Mizar articles, and their HTML-based disambiguation linked to the whole cross-linked HTMLized MML– see Section 2.
– Generation of ATP problems in TPTP format for theorems and inferences in
a given article, and invoking automated provers on them – see Sections 3, 4.
– Searching for useful premises for Mizar lemmas and inference steps – see Sections 5, 6.
The ﬁrst version of the MizAR service was deployed in 2008 on a server of the
Automated Reasoning Group in Prague. As of 2011 the service is independently
hosted on two mid-range multi-core servers in Nijmegen2 and in Edmonton3. A way
for newcomers to explore MizAR is to use a web browser with an existing simple
MML article, e.g., the CARD 1 article4 about cardinal numbers from the MML.
More experienced Mizar users will typically interact with the service by launching
commands from the Mizar Emacs authoring interface . Some of the commands
keep the communication fully in the Emacs session, while other commands oﬀer a
browser-based interaction.
2 Server-based Veriﬁcation and HTMLization
The Mizar veriﬁer acts as a compiler-like batch processor, verifying an entire article
in one pass and reporting errors. The process of checking a whole article can be
quite time-consuming for longer and more complex articles. In the omni-presence
of the fast internet, there are several advantages of remote server-based veriﬁcation of Mizar articles: (i) no need for a local installation of the entire system; (ii)
browser-based access for simple tasks; (iii) large numbers of faster CPUs on the
servers, oﬀering great speedups through parallelization . A dedicated serverbased installation can also support modiﬁed, enhanced, or experimental versions
of the veriﬁer. For instance, an enhanced version of the veriﬁer is useful when
translating Mizar to ATP formats, and the Mizar parallelizer requires some Linux
tools that might not be available on other platforms.5 An online service can also
2 
3 
4 
5 As of 2011, Mizar is distributed for eight architectures, some of them targeted at PDAs.
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
easily include multiple versions of the Mizar library. This opens a path toward a
wiki-like collaborative environment for formalizing mathematics in Mizar .
Mizar articles are written as text ﬁles according to the Mizar syntax, but their
semantics is deﬁned by the veriﬁer in the context of the MML. Discovering all semantic details of such a formal article by hand from its raw textual form can be a
challenging task, because of overloaded notation that is so common in mathematical practice. Fortunately, the internal format of MML is XML based , which
can be automatically turned into an annotated HTML presentation. The HTML
presentation, while close to the original text of the Mizar article, oﬀers assistance
in semantic browsing both through the MML as well as displaying semantics of an
article still in development. Such assistance includes displaying the current goal
(thesis) computed by the veriﬁer at each point of a proof, disambiguation of overloaded mathematical symbols through hyperlinks, and explicit display of formulae
hidden behind certain keywords announcing properties (such as projectivity, commutativity, antisymmetry, etc.) of constructors. The HTML presentation of Mizar
texts forms the backbone to which other MizAR services are linked.
3 Translation to ATP Formats and Integrating ATP systems
MizAR provides access to ATP systems in the context of the large body of mathematics in the MML. The library is ﬁrst translated into the MPTP (Mizar Problems
for Theorem Provers) intermediate format , and then translated into the TPTP
format that is the standard for many ATP systems. Complete static versions of
the MML in the MPTP and TPTP formats are also stored on the MizAR server,
and used for on-demand conversion of MML items (theorems, deﬁnitions, formulae
encoding implicit Mizar type, etc.) into ATP problems in various usage scenarios.
The conversion of MML items into MPTP and then into TPTP format requires
a quite complex installation and setup (including SWI Prolog, Unix utilities, special XSL style sheets, the MML in the MPTP format, etc.) and therefore is better
suited for processing on a dedicated server.
The HTMLization of an article and the generation of ATP problems are independent processes, and they constitute separate services that can run in parallel in
diﬀerent CPUs. For example, a call for ATP help issued from the Emacs interface
would trigger only fast ATP processing, responding directly to Emacs. Notation
disambiguation and proof explanation tasks would typically also trigger HTML
processing, possibly linking additional ATP and explanation services (running on
the translated article) to the HTML presentation.
The ﬁrst version of MizAR used the E and SPASS provers by default, with an
option to export the generated problems to the dozens of ATP systems and model
ﬁnders available through the SystemOnTPTP interface. In 2010, the default ATP
was changed to Vampire, motivated by its improved behavior on Mizar/MPTP
problems, by its general compliance with the TPTP format, and particularly because of the direct integration of the SInE premise selection method .6 A recent
comparison of Vampire with the E and SPASS ATP systems on the set of all
theorems from MML version 1011 is summarized in Table 1. This comparison is
based on the SMALL versions of the MML problems, in which only the premises
6 This changes quickly: a fast SInE algorithm has been recently added also to the E prover.
Josef Urban et al.
explicitly provided by Mizar authors (plus some general implicit background facts)
are used for constructing the problems. In this mode Vampire solves 20109 problems out of 51424 within a 30s CPU time limit per problem, which is signiﬁcantly
better than (untuned) E, solving 16191 of the problems. For more details and
statistics of other usage scenarios, see . The ATP systems are typically run
(possibly in parallel) with diﬀerent premise selections (even if some of them do
their own premise selection internally), depending on the usage scenario. Some of
the scenarios are explained below.
Table 1 Evaluation of E, SPASS, and Vampire on all MML SMALL problems in 30s
description
countersatisﬁable
timeout or memory out
Vampire 0.6
4 Solving Problems with the Use of the Whole MML
An obvious use-case of MizAR is when a new conjecture is attacked with the
help of the whole MML library, containing about a hundred thousand premises.
While there are several complementary AI approaches to premise selection, and
experimenting with them is interesting and potentially very rewarding, the default
method for this use-case is the Mizar-tuned Vampire/SInE system, which is capable
of loading the whole translated MML and selecting promising premises in seconds.
When a user asks the service to solve a problem using the whole MML, the
service creates a TPTP problem for the task by including the ﬁle containing the
whole translated MML (available statically on the server in TPTP format), and
adding all the propositions from the current article that are available before the
proposition for which a proof is sought. Other (typically leaner) premise selections
can be created in parallel by analogous mechanisms, producing several versions
of the problem that are handed over to the ATP systems in parallel. The current
implementation uses four diﬀerent premise selections: (i) using the full library, (ii)
using only premises from the articles imported by the current one, (iii) using only
premises from the current article, and (iv) using only the premises explicitly given
by the user for the problem. As noted above, the current choice is to use only
Vampire/SInE, and parallelize with respect to the diﬀerent premise selections.
This is rather accidental: arbitrary (parallel) combinations of ATP systems and
premise selection methods are possible, and limited only by the time limit and the
number of free CPUs on the server.
As soon as a proof is found by at least one of the methods in the current pool,
the TPTP output is searched for the necessary axioms, and they are presented to
the user either in HTML or in Emacs (see below).
5 ATP-supported Authoring in Emacs
Even though MizAR is a web-based service in the spirit of SystemOnTPTP, this
does not mean that it requires a browser to use. The above mentioned whole-library
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
solving functionality is available directly from the Emacs authoring environment
for Mizar , providing fast authoring support without any need for switching to
a browser. The implementation uses the Emacs Lisp url module and a http-post
request sent directly to the MizAR server. This communication channel also allows
other remote functions, in particular it is possible to call MizAR only for remote
(parallelized) veriﬁcation using the raw speed of the server.
A basic use of MizAR is illustrated by the following example. Inference steps
are presented to the Mizar-veriﬁer by stating the goal followed by the keyword ‘by’
with a list of premises. For example,
A: x in L ...
D: {x} c= L by A, ZFMISC_1:37;
where the label ZFMISC 1:37 refers to a fact imported from MML.7 Finding the
necessary references requires detailed knowledge of MML, and in more complicated
cases it is a time-consuming process. With MizAR available, is is possible to try
ﬁnd suﬃcient premises (like ZFMISC 1:37) by invoking the service with typing ‘by;’
after the goal for which assistance is desired. The query is posted to the MizAR
server while the Emacs buﬀer changes to
A: x in L ...
D: {x} c= L ; :: ATP asked ...
This communication is asynchronous, allowing multiple queries. The ATP answer
is provided within seconds, depending on preset time limits and the server’s load.
The premises used in the ATP solution are used to replace the original “by;’’ (or
a failure is reported). In this example the result is
A: x in L ...
D: {x} c= L by A,ENUMSET1:69,ZFMISC_1:37;
after which (still in Emacs) the standard Mizar utility relprem that detects unnecessary premises in an inference can be invoked. In this example relprem detects that
ENUMSET1:69 is unnecessary, and its removal yields the inference step that started
this example.
The above example is an inference step taken from a proof of a very simple
theorem in the SCMYCIEL article 
theorem Sub3:
for G being SimpleGraph, L being set, x being set
st x in L & x in Vertices G
holds x in Vertices (G SubgraphInducedBy L)
Proving the whole theorem is too hard for the ATP service at the moment, and
calling MizAR fails with the message: Sub3: ... Unsolved. As an alternative, the
following obvious intermediate proof steps can be tried.
 
for the exact statement of ZFMISC 1:37 in MML version 7.11.07 4.160.1126 . For other
theorems cited in this paper, replace the article name and theorem number accordingly. For
deﬁnitions, replace ‘T’ by ‘D’.
Josef Urban et al.
let G be SimpleGraph, L be set, x be set such that
A: x in L and
B: x in Vertices G;
C: {x} in G ;
D: {x} c= L ;
E: {x} in (G SubgraphInducedBy L) ;
thus x in Vertices (G SubgraphInducedBy L) ;
None of the sentences labeled C, D, E or the proof conclusion are obvious to Mizar.
Again, ATP systems can be used by replacing semicolons with ‘by;’. The replies
from ATP come almost immediately, with the ﬁnal result as follows.
C: {x} in G by B,SCMYCIEL:5;
D: {x} c= L by A,ENUMSET1:69,ZFMISC_1:37;
E: {x} in (G SubgraphInducedBy L) by C,D,BOOLE:7,SCMYCIEL:14;
thus x in Vertices (G SubgraphInducedBy L) by SCMYCIEL:func 5,E,BOOLE:7,SCMYCIEL:5;
Such replies from the ATP often need some post-editing to satisfy the Mizar
– Some references returned by the ATP service, like SCMYCIEL:func 5, mention
typing items, which are implicit8 to Mizar and cannot be explicitly referred to.
– Some references, like BOOLE:7, encode Mizar automations (called requirements),
i.e., theorems added automatically to proof search by Mizar. They typically do
not have to be used explicitly in Mizar because their automated use is switched
on by a global directive.
– Some references are spurious for the Mizar veriﬁer (caused by the non-minimized
ATP proof search) and they can be removed, e.g. ENUMSET1:69 above. Some
reference minimization can be done with the relprem utility.
– The article is named SCMYCIEL, and references to lemmas from this article use
this name. These references have to be renamed to the corresponding local
Most of this post-editing can be automated. Note that studying the references
found by the ATP is instructive as the automated service sometimes (particularly
with a large library) ﬁnds solutions quite diﬀerent from what the author had in
mind. After the post-editing, the ﬁnal result accepted by the Mizar veriﬁer is:
C: {x} in G by B,Vertices0;
D: {x} c= L by A,ZFMISC_1:37;
E: {x} in (G SubgraphInducedBy L) by C,D;
thus x in Vertices (G SubgraphInducedBy L) by E,Vertices0;
An initial evaluation of this authoring assistance is provided below, in Section 7.
6 Access from HTML
ATP and other services can be called from the MizAR web interface, which is
similar to that of SystemOnTPTP. The services can be invoked also from the HTML
presentation of the user’s article, created either through the web interface or by
8 The rich Mizar type system becomes explicit when translated to untyped ﬁrst-order logic.
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
launching a web browser directly from Emacs. The HTML presentation contains
links to the ATP services that are associated with the Mizar keywords ‘by’ and
‘from’, indicating logical justiﬁcation in Mizar. Consider for example, the Mizar
justiﬁcation
hence ( f is one-to-one & proj1 f = X & proj2 f = A )
by A1, A2, WELLORD1:def 7, WELLORD2:16, WELLORD2:def 1;
in the last line of the proof of theorem Th4 in the CARD 1 article. Such justiﬁcations
may involve many implicit Mizar facts and mechanisms that make the raw Mizar
text hard to understand. The process of translation to TPTP reveals all this
implicit information and the ATP proofs can show explicitly how this information
is used. For the Mizar justiﬁcation above, clicking on the ‘by’ keyword calls the
default ATP system on the corresponding ATP problem. If a proof is found, the
interface is refreshed with an explanation box that includes a list of the references
used in the proof. In this case the references shown to the user are
dt_c2_6__mtest_1, dt_k2_wellord1, dt_k1_wellord2, dt_c5_6__mtest_1,
e7_6__mtest_1, e2_6__mtest_1, t16_wellord2, d1_wellord2, e8_6__mtest_1,
e6_6__mtest_1, d7_wellord1,
These references are reported using the MPTP syntax and are linked dynamically
to the corresponding places in the article’s HTML or in the HTML-ized MML. Note
that the ATP proof reports more references than in the original Mizar inference.
The extra references are mainly typing statements used implicitly by Mizar.
A byproduct of this ATP explanation feature is the cross-veriﬁcation of Mizar
atomic inferences. With a recent version of MPTP and the strong ATP systems available at the time, over 99% of Mizar atomic inferences could be crossveriﬁed . Such functionality is valuable as a debugging tool for Mizar developers,
and also for the developers of the MPTP translation layer.
Another interactive mode of use is for generating problems and ﬁnding proofs
that are too hard for the Mizar checker, and experimenting with the ATP strength
in the mathematician-oriented Mizar language instead of having to encode the
problems directly in the low-level TPTP language. Users can do this within MizAR
by providing a set of premises on the right-hand side of the ‘by’ keyword and letting
ATP systems try to ﬁnd a proof. If the default ATP systems are not successful,
the user can use the links and icons in the explanation box to inspect the ATP
problem, and launch the SystemOnTPTP interface to try the ATP systems available
there. In a similar way, one can use ATP systems and model ﬁnders for detecting
countersatisﬁability of Mizar-formulated problems.
It is hard to enumerate all the ITP-ATP use-cases that are possible through
MizAR. For instance, the user might prefer to use a SAT solver (for attacking propositional problems), instantiation-based systems like iProver (strong in eﬀectively
propositional problems), or to experiment with SMT solvers. A reliable ITP-to-
ATP translation saves the developers of ITPs a large amount of work by allowing
them to be always on top of the state-of-the-art in ATP research. Similarly, a link
from the ITP user interface to an ATP user interface saves the developers of ITP
user interfaces (in this case the ﬁrst author) years of work done by the developers
of ATP user interfaces. While a basic direct implementation makes sense in both of
these cases, fully reimplementing every new ATP method (or user interface to it)
inside ITPs and their interfaces can hardly catch up with the rapid development
of ATP systems and their interfaces.
Josef Urban et al.
A special kind of service that is particular to ITPs with large libraries is premise
selection based on (possibly expensive) AI-based preprocessing of the libraries. If
no ATP system can ﬁnd a proof for a MizAR-generated ATP problem, ﬁnding
relevant premises from MML can help. When ATP fails to ﬁnd a proof, the ‘Suggest
hints’ link can be used to ask MizAR to suggest a set of potential premises. This
invokes a Bayesian advisor that has been trained on the whole MML (i.e., on all of
the proofs in it). See for the details of how such machine learning is organized
in the context of a large deductive repository like MML, and for detailed statistics
on how it improves existing premise selection methods. This service is very fast,
taking typically less than a second. The hints are again HTML-ized and inserted
into an explanation box, as shown in Figure 1. A similar hint function is accessible
also from the Emacs mode.
Fig. 1 Explanation box oﬀering hints
7 Initial evaluation of the ATP-supported authoring
In January 2011 the second author was developing a new formalization of simple
graphs as 1-dimensional simplicial complexes. The goal of the article was to develop enough theory to prove the construction of the Mycielskian of a graph. This
construction was used by Mycielski to prove existence of triangle-free graphs
with arbitrarily large chromatic number.
7.1 Axiom debugging
The MizAR service was used on a Mizar article that was in an early stage of
development, such that even the formalization of basic deﬁnitions was still not
ironed out. Only very basic notions of set theory are used in the article: empty
set, singleton, ordered and unordered pairs, union of a family of sets, subset, ﬁnite
set, cardinality of a ﬁnite set, partition of a set, Cartesian product, basic properties
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
of relations and functions, and not much more. It was of interest to see how the
MizAR service performs under such conditions, since the Mizar library contains
thousands of facts using only these basic notions.
An initial surprise came when the ATP was able to prove almost anything. It
turned out that the following statement:
theorem SG1:
for G being SimpleGraph holds {} in G @proof end;
was to blame.9 While developing a new formalization we frequently state similar,
simple facts in a top-down manner, and leave them unproven while focusing on
more interesting pieces. We had carelessly stated that {} is in every simple graph,
even in an empty graph. With an easy contradiction derivable from the axioms, a
(refutational) ATP can justify anything. After correcting this to:
theorem SG1:
for G being non empty SimpleGraph holds {} in G @proof end;
the ATP was still surprisingly successful. A similar unproven statement
theorem SG0:
for G being SimpleGraph holds G = { {} } \/ Vertices G \/ Edges G @proof end;
turns out to be false, as it fails when G is empty. The presence of this unproven
fact allowed the ATP to prove many other facts in a rather unexpected way. This
was again corrected by requiring G in SG0 to be nonempty and later led us to revise
the deﬁnition of SimpleGraph. Thus, the ATP helped to straighten out the basic
deﬁnitions before we did more proofs that we deemed interesting, but which would
have been based on unproven, contradictory lemmas about empty graphs.
7.2 Deciphering ATP proofs
There are times when ATP manages to ﬁnd a proof for a fact that is worth including in the MML as an exportable (reusable) item. Such items are marked theorem
in Mizar. Here is an example
theorem Aux1a:
for x, X being set holds not [x,X] in X
for which the ATP returns the following list of premises:
by ENUMSET1:69,ZFMISC_1:12,ZFMISC_1:38,TARSKI:def 5,ORDINAL1:3;
Even though this is very far from deep ATP proofs, the example shows that
it may be a bit of a challenge to convert the resolution proof found by ATP into
a sequence of inference steps that are understandable to humans and acceptable
by the Mizar veriﬁer. After examining the ATP proof we constructed a detailed
justiﬁcation by hand, using the proof construct.
theorem Aux1a:
for x, X being set holds not [x,X] in X
let x, X be set such that
A: [x,X] in X;
B: [x,X] = { {x,X}, {x} } by TARSKI:def 5;
C: {x,X} in { {x,X}, {x} } by ZFMISC_1:38;
D: X in {x,X} by ZFMISC_1:38;
thus contradiction by A, B, C, D, ORDINAL1:3;
9 The @proof syntax tells Mizar to skip checking of such proof block.
Josef Urban et al.
Later a more natural proof of this little fact was found, directly using the
deﬁnition of an unordered pair. Directing the ATP to use premises prefered by the
user would be an interesting future research.
7.3 Overall ATP eﬃciency and experience
Of the few hundred non-trivial inferences that were tried in the SCMYCIEL article,
ATP managed to solve around 40%, which, is surprisingly close to the success
rate of Sledgehammer on non-trivial goals . On the other hand, ATP can reprove 86% of the inferences if it is told which premises were used by humans.
This means that more precise narrowing of potential premises is a vital issue for
the ATP service, which could particularly beneﬁt from learning from the large
number of previous proofs . As mentioned in Section 6, an earlier experiment
using several ATP systems has shown that with smarter premise selection more
than 99% of atomic inferences can be re-proved .10 The interactive ATP service
helped in several ways:
– ATP managed to directly prove some lemmas that require a structured proof
for the Mizar veriﬁer. This is not a big surprise, as the Mizar veriﬁer uses only
pattern matching and very limited resolution. The feedback from the ATP
system was quite helpful, as it is much easier to write a detailed proof when
one knows the facts that suﬃce for the proof.
– ATP turned out to be a search tool in a rather unexpected way. More than
once the ATP system indicated that a local lemma had been formed, from
which the given formula followed in one step, while we were about to write
several inference steps.
– ATP systems found proofs quite diﬀerent from what the user had in mind.
Sometimes it found large sets of premises when some small collection of premises
suﬃced. The converse also happened.
– When the ATP system ﬁnds a proof, it returns all Mizar items that it used. The
feedback also includes those Mizar items that are tacitly processed by the veri-
ﬁer, and they cannot be referenced in a Mizar text. This feedback information
led us to a better understanding of the task at hand.
8 Conclusions, Related and Future Work
The MizAR service allows authors to use a number of auxiliary tools on Mizar articles. The use-cases range from using HTMLization to disambiguate complicated
Mizar texts, using ATP systems to ﬁnd new proofs, explaining Mizar inferences,
and ﬁnding counterexamples, to using AI-based techniques for proof advice. The
system features both a web and an Emacs interface, allowing ﬂexible switching
between reading and exploration mode and authoring mode.
Related work goes back at least to Dahn’s work in 90’s on ILF and its Mizarto-ATP bridge, Harrison’s and Hurd’s work on Meson and Metis used in
HOL (Light), and the recent work by Paulson et al. on linking Isabelle/HOL
10 Precisely, 99.8% atomic inferences (6751 out of 6765) were re-proved automatically. The
14 remaining problems were also proved by ATPs after manual premise selection.
ATP and Presentation Service for Mizar Formalizations
with ATP systems. A detailed comparison of systems bridging ITP with ATP
systems is beyond the scope of this paper.
There are many directions for future work in this setting, some of them mentioned above. Several versions of the MML are now present on the servers in text,
HTML, MPTP, and TPTP formats, but are not directly editable by the users.
Giving the user the ability to edit the supporting MML leads in the direction of
formal mathematical wikis, with all the interesting persistence, versioning, linking, user-authentication, and dependency problems to solve. Merging the current
Mizar wiki development with the services presented here is obvious future work.
This should form a rich collaborative platform for formal mathematics, with a
large number of services providing strong automated support, and exposing the
functionalities that make formal mathematics so interesting. We foresee a large
amount of work on making the system stronger, more attractive and responsive.
– We would like to speed up all MizAR services through more parallel processing
once the necessary hardware is available.
– There seems to be no end to improving techniques for hint selection in large
libraries. We consider such techniques crucial to the success of bridging ITP
and ATP systems.
– There is an urgent need for converting the very verbose (typically refutational)
proofs found by ATP systems into structured and simple to check proofs.11
As ATP systems are getting stronger and more useful for ﬁnding proofs, this
problem is becoming more pressing.
Our initial experience with the interactive ATP service for Mizar authors is
encouraging. Despite very large library context, we get decent automated help
both in ﬁnding justiﬁcation for proof steps, as well as in ‘debugging’ the conceptual
framework of a new formalization.