Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 5180 - 5197
May 22-27, 2022 c⃝2022 Association for Computational Linguistics
Beyond Goldfish Memory∗: Long-Term Open-Domain Conversation
Arthur Szlam
Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research
New York, NY
{jingxu23,aszlam,jase}@fb.com
Despite recent improvements in open-domain
dialogue models, state-of-the-art models are
trained and evaluated on short conversations
with little context. In contrast, the long-term
conversation setting has hardly been studied.
In this work we collect and release a humanhuman dataset consisting of multiple chat sessions whereby the speaking partners learn
about each other’s interests and discuss the
things they have learnt from past sessions. We
show how existing models trained on existing
datasets perform poorly in this long-term conversation setting in both automatic and human
evaluations, and we study long-context models
that can perform much better. In particular, we
find retrieval-augmented methods and methods
with an ability to summarize and recall previous conversations outperform the standard
encoder-decoder architectures currently considered state-of-the-art.
Introduction
Improvements in the ability to train large neural
language models, together with the availability of
larger and higher quality dialogue datasets, are
spurring the development of increasingly convincing open-domain dialogue models .
Unfortunately, a major aspect missing from the current state of the art is that human conversations
can take place over long time frames, whereas
the currently used systems suffer in this setting.
Commonly used training and evaluation resources
– while large in terms of number of training examples – include only short conversations, typically
between 2-15 turns, consisting of a single conversational session. Perhaps for that reason, the current
state-of-the-art models such as Meena and BlenderBot employ Transformers with token truncation
lengths of only the 128 most recent tokens, and
∗We use this term colloquially, see Agranoff et al. 
for evidence of goldfish long-term memory.
are clearly incapable of incorporating long-term
conversational context. Consequently, it is unclear
how well these models will perform on long or
multi-session open-domain conversations. In contrast, a successfully deployed bot will engage in
many conversations over a length of time, as capturing organic user interest will garner continual
reengagement from returning users. Long-term
open-domain communication gives the opportunity
for the conversation to develop and even improve
with time as the model has more context and more
understanding of that specific user’s interests. However current models, due to context truncation, will
never use this information.
In this work we study methods for long-term
open-domain conversation. As to the best of our
knowledge no public domain task exists to study
such methods, we collect and release1 a new English dataset, entitled Multi-Session Chat (MSC)
that consists of human-human crowdworker chats
over 5 sessions, with each session consisting of
up to 14 utterances, where the conversationalists
reengage after a number of hours or days and continue chatting. Previous sessions are annotated
with summaries of important personal points that
may be useful in further conversations. When reengaging, conversationalists often address existing
knowledge about their partner to continue the conversation in a way that focuses and deepens the
discussions on their known shared interests, or explores new ones given what they already know.
We study the performance of two long-context
conversational architectures on this task:
retrieval-augmented generative models ; and (ii) a proposed read-write memory-based model that summarizes and stores conversation on the fly. We
show that both techniques outperform conventional
encoder-decoder Transformers, and that training
1Dataset, model weights and code for this entire project
will be made available upon acceptance.
models on our new task give long-term conversational abilities that existing state-of-the-art models lack, as shown in both automatic metrics and
human evaluations. We provide extensive experiments and ablations that study the reasons behind
these improvements.
Related Work
A relatively large and growing number of either natural or crowdsourced datasets have been collected
and used in open-domain dialogue research. These
datasets focus on the vast array of different skills
required by a dialogue agent, but conversations
lengths are typically short. Recent state-of-the-art
open-domain dialogue agents have utilized Daily
Dialogue , PersonaChat , Empathetic Dialogues , Wizard of Wikipedia 
and Pushshift.io Reddit ;
see Huang et al. for a review of other
datasets. The number of conversational turns in
these datasets is in the range of 2-15 turns, we
provide statistics of some of these datasets in Table 2. We note there also exist some other kinds of
dialogue datasets, e.g. from fantasy role-playing
 and TV shows as well .
Crowdsourcing long conversations is difficult due
to both the expense and the difficulty of employing crowdworkers for long lengths of time due to
so called Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) being
typically of a short duration – only “a few minutes”
 . While organic long conversations regularly transpire on the internet, e.g.
on messaging platforms, these are proprietary, and
privacy concerns make public release implausible.
Several existing datasets explore the use of personal knowledge used as context to dialogue, which
can be seen as a short, simple memory provided
to the bot. In Mazaré et al. such personas
were extracted from Reddit and used to train agents.
In Zhang et al. personas were first crowdsourced, and speakers were asked to play those
roles. Other works have considered encoding personas into vector-based weights .
In this work, we explore summarizing the longterm conversations that occur in order to store useful information about them. Summarization is a
rich field where the vast majority of work focuses
on summarizing documents , for
example summarizing in order to predict other relevant information , while there
is some work on dialogue as well .
Standard Transformers have a fixed context
length which due to the all-vs-all self-attention
mechanism becomes inefficient when it is too large.
Consequently, many existing pre-trained models
have short token truncation lengths, e.g. 128 tokens, as in BlenderBot and
Meena , or 1024 tokens,
as in BART . A number of
approaches have been proposed to ameliorate this
issue. Long-context Transformers consider ways to
speed up the self-attention mechanism and
retrieval-augmented methods consider ways to select the pertinent parts of the context to consider
 which can also be related to earlier
neural QA methods .
Multi-Session Chat
To conduct research on long-term conversations,
we require data to both train on and to evaluate
models. We consider the natural case where two
speakers chat online in a series of sessions as is for
example common on messaging platforms. Each
chat session consists of 6-7 turns for each speaker.
Then, after a certain amount of (simulated) time
has transpired, typically hours or days, the speakers resume chatting, either continuing to talk about
the previous subject, bringing up some other subject from their past shared history, or sparking up
conversation on a new topic. We consider this
multi-session long conversation setup, and name
our dataset Multi-Session Chat (MSC).
Data Collection
To build our publicly available
dataset we employ crowdworkers. We provide
screenshots of the task, and details of quality control via onboarding, crowdworker co-rating, and
automatic evaluation procedures in Appendix B.
Crowdworkers are asked to play a role,
rather than speaking about their own personality,
which helps mitigate privacy concerns, and ensures
diversity even if the same crowdworker conducts
multiple conversations. In addition to the crowdworkers being specifically told to play the role, they
are also told not to discuss aspects of their real profiles or indeed any personally identifiable informa-
Table 1: Data statistics of our MULTI-SESSION CHAT dataset. Speakers converse across sessions, each of which is
a short focused conversation, with subsequent sessions picking up the conversation again hours or days later. We
show the number of episodes, utterances (utts) and response summaries for each session.
Utterances
Utterances
per Episode
per Episode
Pushshift.io Reddit
PersonaChat 
Wiz. of Wikipedia 
Daily Dialog 
Empathetic Dialog 
MULTI-SESSION CHAT (1-3)
MULTI-SESSION CHAT (1-4)
Table 2: Comparison of the training data statistics of the MULTI-SESSION CHAT (MSC) dataset compared to other
open-domain datasets. We show MSC in two categories: episodes with 3 or 4 sessions, named (1-3) or (1-4).
tion. The role is provided as a series of sentences
describing characteristics, events and opinions of
the character they are playing. We use the 1,155
personas crowdsourced from Zhang et al. ,
validation and test use separate personas from the
ones used in the training set.
For the first chat session we use the
PERSONACHAT dataset , which
already involves short conversations where two
speakers get to know each other for the first time.
We note that these conversations rarely go beyond
the superficial stage because speakers simply do
not have enough turns to discuss any topic deeply.
Sessions 2, 3, 4, . . .
For subsequent sessions, we
first select a random amount of (simulated) time
that has elapsed since the previous session, chosen to be either 1-7 hours or 1-7 days, as ideally
speakers would reengage within that timeframe.
We ask the crowdworkers to play the same roles
that were played in the previous session, acting
as if that amount of time has transpired. We note
these crowdworkers may not be the same ones that
played those characters in previous sessions, but
will be playing the same roles: this makes the task
tractable in a crowdworking frameworking where
jobs are typically short, and matching pairs over
a long duration would be infeasible. We instruct
the workers to “chitchat with another worker for 6
turns, as if you were catching up since last time you
two spoke.” and that “When you expand the topic,
make sure it makes sense with the personal details
already mentioned.”, i.e. emphasizing that not only
must they play their role, but also pay attention to
previous interactions with the other speaker.
Session Lengths
We collect two lengths of training conversation: 4000 episodes with 3 sessions,
and 1001 episodes with 4 sessions. For the validation and test data, the sessions extend up to 5
sessions, giving us a way to measure long-context
session performance that extends beyond the training set distribution.
Conversation Summaries (Extended Personas)
We give crowdworkers access to all previous dialogues between the two conversational roles (for
the role they are playing, and their partner’s role).
However, as the conversation gets longer, this becomes infeasible to read and digest within a limited
amount of time. Therefore, between each session,
including after session 1, we run a separate crowdworker task in which conversations are summarized
into important points, which are much shorter than
the full dialogues themselves. We then show previous dialogues, along with these summaries, as the
primary reference for subsequent session dialogues.
As these summaries were collected in order to store
the important points pertinent to either one or the
other speaker, they can also be seen to function as
extensions of the original given personas. As the
two speakers continue to converse they create more
depth to those characters.
Dataset Examples
Two dataset examples, which
consist of four sessions each, along with example
summary annotations, are given in Appendix C
(provided in the Appendix due to their length).
Dataset Statistics
Statistics of the multi-session
chat dataset are given in Table 1 and a comparison
with other standard open-domain dialogue datasets
is given in Table 2. We can see that the number
of training utterances per episode is larger than
other datasets (last column of Table 2). Our multisession training chats that last 4 sessions have an
average of ∼53 utterances in a full conversation
(over all sessions), while our validation and test
chats over 5 sessions have an average of ∼66 utterances. In contrast, other standard datasets are in
the range of 2.6-14.7 utterances on average. This
brings challenges in open-domain dialogue modeling due to the large context size, e.g. an average of
1614 tokens as tokenized by the BlenderBot BPE
dictionary , where the Transformer used in that work has a truncation length of
128. Further information on the dataset including
analysis of its quality is given in Appendix B.
Modeling Multi-Session Chat
Transformer Encoder-Decoders
The most straight-forward approach for modeling
dialogue using our new task is simply to use a large
language model as is standard in open-domain dialogue, i.e. an encoder-decoder Transformer as in
the Meena and Blender-
Bot systems. We consider
using the BST 2.7B parameter model from Blender-
Bot as an initial pre-trained model, which we then
fine-tune on the Multi-Session Chat task.
Encoder Truncation
As BST 2.7B has a truncation of 128 tokens in the encoder, we consider
extending this to a larger input. To do this, we
extend its available positional encodings from 128
to 512 or 1024 tokens as we fine-tune the whole
network on the downstream task. We add new positional embeddings to be trained such that the existing ones (the first 128 most recent tokens) do not
change from before. We then evaluate the impact
of these choices in order to select the best model.
Retrieval-Augmentation
A popular technique when dealing with a large collection of text, only some of which is relevant, is to
use a retrieval-augmented Transformer. A retrieval
system is used to search over a text collection, and
select some of it to be included in the final encoding
which is attended to by the Transformer decoder.
The RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) approach utilizes a
neural-retriever-in-the-loop which is itself a second
Transformer. Documents to be retrieved are stored
in an approximate nearest-neighbor FAISS index
 , and a DPR (Dense Passage
Retrieval) Transformer biencoder model is used to score document-context
pairs in order to rank them based on their match,
where the base DPR model is pre-trained on QA
data pairs. The DPR model is thus used to both
retrieve from the FAISS index, and then score the
top N candidates. The entire system is trained
end-to-end so that retrieval is optimized to help
improve generation. This setup was shown to work
for dialogue in particular in Shuster et al. .
FiD and FiD-RAG
We also consider the Fusionin-Decoder (FiD) , another method that has been shown to perform well.
In this approach, the pre-trained retriever is used
directly: each of the top N documents returned is
prepended to the context and encoded separately
by the encoder, and finally all the results are concatenated. The decoder then attends to these encodings to produce a final response. We consider
the pre-trained retriever to either be standard pretrained DPR, or the RAG-trained retriever, called
FiD-RAG .
Retriever and Documents
In this work the set
of passages in the memory is not large enough to
require a FAISS index, but it is large enough that
retrieval may be useful. We thus store for every
item in the memory the vector encoding by the
DPR model (whereas in the FAISS approach this
dense vector is approximated instead). Then given
a dialogue context, we score each memory using
the bi-encoder, and use the top N for generation.
In our case, the memories consist of dialog utterances from the history of the conversation. We
consider the chunk (document) size as a hyperparameter and try either encoding utterances as separate documents, or else whole sessions (or session
summaries) as documents. The latter (whole se-
Pre-Train Model
Truncation
Sessions 1-4
Trunc% (S4)
With no previous session context
With previous session dialogue context
With previous session summary context
Table 3: Comparison of different context truncation lengths and context types when training on MULTI-
SESSION CHAT. We show validation perplexity for various models across different sessions, and percent of tokens
truncated for session 4 (last column).
Session Openings
Model Context
No Session History
Dialogue History
Gold Summary
Gold Summary (without time features)
Gold Summary (partner’s only)
Gold Summary (self only)
Predicted Summary
Table 4: Summaries vs. Dialogue Context Performance when training on MULTI-SESSION CHAT, reporting
validation perplexity, using a BST 2.7B-1024 pre-trained model with MSC fine-tuning. Note that the last row in this
Table corresponds to the SumMem-MSC 2.7B (truncate 1024) row in Table 15 in the Appendix.
sions) worked better, and we report those in the
final results. For N we try values 3, 5 and 6, and
also choose the best for each method according to
the validation set.
Summarization Memory-Augmentation
The retrieval-augmentation models described in
the previous section retrieve from the set of past
dialogues. Simply storing historical text in the
memory in their raw form is a simple approach
that is often used elsewhere in the literature, e.g.
in question answering or knowledge-grounded dialogue. However, those approaches have two potential drawbacks: (i) there is a lot of context to store,
and hence retrieve from; (ii) no processing has been
done on that content, so the reading, retrieving and
combining operations required to generate an answer leave a lot of work for the model to do. We
therefore propose instead a novel memory augmentation that first summarizes pertinent knowledge
and only stores that in an attempt to solve both
The procedure involves two main components:
1. An encoder-decoder abstractive summarizer
that takes as input the dialogue history, and
outputs a summary of new pertinent information contained in the last dialogue turn, or
“no-summary” if there is no new information
found. When found, the summarized knowledge is added to the long-term memory.
2. A memory-augmented generator that takes the
dialogue context and access to the long-term
memory, and generates the next response.
For (1) we can use the human annotated data
from our newly collected MSC task to know what
summaries to generate (see section 3 and Figure 1
in the Appendix).
We thus train a supervised
encoder-decoder model to produce summaries.
For (2) we can use the same systems as presented in subsection 4.2 to both retrieve from the
summarization memories, and to finally generate
an appropriate response. That is, we store the summaries in documents and retrieve them using either
RAG, FiD or FiD-RAG.
Session Openings
Model Context
Gold summary
Predicted Summary (sampling 5%)
Predicted Summary (sampling 25%)
Predicted Summary (sampling 50%)
Predicted Summary (sampling 100%)
Table 5: Predicted Summaries when subsampling the no-summary class on MULTI-SESSION CHAT, reporting
validation perplexity, using a BST 2.7B-1024 pre-trained model with MSC fine-tuning. The last column shows the
sparsity of the summarizations (how often a summary line is generated), which can be controlled by subsampling
the no-summary class at training time. Subsampling gives better results and closer sparsity levels to the original
human annotated data.
Training Data
Sessions 1+2
Sessions 1+2+3
Sessions 1+2+3+4
Table 6: Varying the Number of Training Sessions
when training on MULTI-SESSION CHAT, reporting validation perplexity, using a BST 2.7B-1024 pre-trained
model with MSC using gold summaries.
Experiments
Using session dialogue context
We compare different context types in Table 3, evaluating over
sessions 1-4. We observe an improvement in perplexity when incorporating the dialogue history
from previous chat sessions, compared to no session context, for all sessions after the first one, and
for all context lengths – with larger context lengths
giving better improvement. This shows that our human conversationalists do use previous sessions to
make dialogue more salient in successive sessions
as this is reflected in the collected human-human
dataset – and that our models are able to utilize this
information well when training on this data.
Using session summary context
We also show
performance of using gold session summary contexts, as annotated by crowdworkers, in Table 3. As
the summaries include salient points, they are potentially more informative than dialogue context for
a generative model. We find perplexities improve
when using summaries compared to using dialogue
context (or no context at all) over all sessions after
the first one, and for all context lengths, although
the improvements are not large. This shows that
conversation summaries are potentially useful for
dialogue generation in the long-context case.
Comparing performance on session openings
Session openings in the MSC dataset look quite
different to other dialogue datasets that do not have
a session format. This is because they involve an
opening message that is intended to reengage the
other speaker after a period of time, using known information that has been exchanged between speakers. In Table 4 we compare models that use different context types on only these opening responses.
In this case we find much more pronounced perplexity differences between no session context history, dialogue history or summary context history.
For example, we see around around 2 perplexity
points difference between using or not using previous session context. We show examples of opening
session generations in Appendix C. We observe
that opening messages are categorically different
to other conversation turns, typically involving a
statement or question given knowledge of shared interests contained in the long-context. This explains
why collection of our new dataset is so important
for this goal, as reflected in perplexity improvements. That is, they indicate that our new task will
likely help improve multi-session conversational
engagement with users compared to existing training schemes.
Comparing different context lengths
in Table 3 changing the context length of a Transformer can impact the performance in our task.
With no previous session context, improvements
are minimal for sessions 2 onwards. However, using session dialogue or summary contexts we do
see improvements with larger lengths of 512 or
1024 tokens, compared to 128. The last column of
Table 3 shows the percentage of responses where
the input to the Transformer is truncated for session
4, for each truncation length. One can see that using summaries can be beneficial as they are shorter,
Session Openings
BST 2.7B 
MSC 2.7B (truncate 128)
MSC 2.7B (truncate 1024)
MSC 2.7B (RAG)
MSC 2.7B (FiD)
MSC 2.7B (FiD-RAG)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (truncate 1024)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (RAG)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (FiD)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (FiD-RAG)
Table 7: Test perplexity across sessions for our retrieval- and memory-augmented models (bottom two blocks)
compared to several encoder-decoder baselines (top three rows).
meaning they are truncated less often, which can
thus also help performance.
Summary context performance
We can ablate
the summary model training data to understand its
impact further, results of which are given in Table 4.
We see that removing the time feature (indicating
how long ago the previous session occurred) only
has minimal effect. Removing either the partner
or self summary (and keeping the other one), on
the other hand, has a larger effect in both cases,
where keeping the self summary is slightly more
important. Keeping both features is best. These
differences, as before, are magnified when looking
at session opening performance.
Predicted summary models
We train models
to predict dialogue summaries, and use predicted
summaries of previous sessions as context (instead
of the full dialogue history or the gold summary).
The training data for predicting summaries consists
of, for each turn, either a summarizing sentence
or the no_summary label. As 42% of turns have
the no_summary label, this can be overexpressed
in the model at beam decoding time2, we therefore
experiment with sampling this label only K% of
the time during training in Table 5. Example predictions (for the 5% sampling model) are shown
in Figure 1. We find that subsampling gives better results and closer sparsity levels to the original
human annotated data (e.g., with K = 25%). We
compare predicted summaries with K = 5% sampling to other methods of modeling long-context in
Table 4. We observe results that are between using
a standard dialogue history (predicted summaries
are slightly better), and using gold summaries (predicted summaries are not as good).
2We use a beam size of 3 and minimum beam length 10
with no context blocking.
Varying the number of training sessions
vary the amount of available training sessions from
1-4, with results reported in Table 6. We observe
large gains when using more than one training session compared to only one (around 1.5 perplexity
points), again justifying the construction of our
MSC training data. The gains however decrease
with the number of available sessions, e.g. between
having 1-3 training sessions vs. 1-4 only gives a
0.03 perplexity gain averaged across sessions. The
gain even on session 4 is not that large despite the
1-4 training data being in-distribution, whereas 1-3
is not, in addition to 1-4 having more training data.
Retrieval-augmentation model
Comparison of
our retrieval-augmented methods are given in Table 7, training on MSC using the BST 2.7B model
as pre-training, hence called MSC 2.7B (RAG),
(FiD) or (FiD-RAG), depending on the augmentation method. These methods are compared to
the existing BlenderBot model (BST 2.7B), or
training with MSC with no augmentation (MSC
2.7B with different dialogue history context truncation lengths). We find that all three retrieval
augmentation methods, when using the session
level-document size as retrieval documents, can
effectively use retrieval to extend the conversation history length. We see a large performance
improvement over the existing BlenderBot model
or a truncation of 128 of the MSC 2.7B model.
Performance improvements over MSC 2.7B with
a truncation length of 1024 are minimal, but the
retrieval-augmented models are guaranteed to have
a memory that essentially never forgets the conversation, no matter how long it gets, whereas the
truncation model does not.
Summary memory model variants
compare the summary memory models, whereby
# Annotated
other’s topic
BST 2.7B 
MSC 2.7B (truncate 128)
MSC 2.7B (truncate 1024)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (RAG)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (FiD)
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (FiD-RAG)
Table 8: Human Evaluation Results. Performance of various models measured during conversations with
crowdworkers. Engaging response and final rating numbers in bold are statistically significant compared to BST
2.7B (p-value < 0.05) using a t-test. See subsection 5.1 and Appendix B for more details.
previous dialogue history is summarized before being stored in the model’s long-term memory, called
SumMem-MSC 2.7B. We use the RAG, FiD, or
RAG-FiD methods to retrieve from that memory,
or we compare to a fixed memory of 1024 tokens
that is truncated, resulting in four different methods that we compare. Results are given in Table 7.
While improvements are small, we see the same
patterns as for the retrieval-augmented methods
that SumMem-MSC 2.7B FiD-RAG is better than
FiD which is in turn better than RAG, with FiD and
FiD-RAG better than truncation at session openings. Moreover, all SumMem-MSC models outperform their retrieval-augmented model counterparts
MSC 2.7B (RAG/FiD/FiD-RAG). SumMem-MSC
2.7B (FiD-RAG) thus provides the best results out
of all methods tested in this work.
Further Detailed Automatic Metrics
Our analysis so far measured perplexity. We report more
automatic metrics (F1 and BLEU) in Appendix A,
which yield similar conclusions.
Human Evaluation
We perform a human evaluation using crowdworkers. The conversations begin with two randomly
chosen personas from the validation set, and one is
assigned to the crowdworker who is asked to play
that role. We select the conversation to be the 5th
session that these two speakers will converse, and
make available the summary of the previous 4 sessions. We ask the crowdworkers to have a natural
conversation, where they will also evaluate their
partner’s responses for conversational attributes,
in particular whether they reference knowledge of
their own or the other speaker’s persona (or topics
they discussed) from previous sessions, from the
current session, or neither. On each turn of the
conversation the crowdworker is asked to check
all attribute boxes that apply. A screenshot can be
found in Figure 6 in the Appendix showing the UI.
Each conversation consists of 15 messages (7 from
the human, 8 from the bot). At the end of the conversation, an additional question collects an overall
engagingness score (out of 5) for their speaking
The results are given in Table 8. We find that
MSC-trained models outperform BlenderBot (BST
2.7B) in terms of both per-turn engaging responses
and final ratings. Further, our summarization memory models (all three variants RAG, FiD and FiD-
RAG) outperform encoder-decoders with different
levels of truncation of the dialogue history (MSC
2.7B with truncate 128 and 1024). For example,
SumMem-MSC 2.7B (RAG) achieves an engaging
response rate of 62.1% and final rating of 3.65,
compared to BlenderBot’s 53.0% and 3.14 and
MSC 2.7B (truncate 1024)’s 54.2% and 3.47. For
all MSC models, while rates of referencing their
own topics are not particularly increased, we do
observe increased rates of referencing partner topics from previous sessions, with higher rates for
the summarization memory models. For example,
33.8% for SumMem-MSC 2.7B (RAG) compared
to BlenderBot’s 14.5%. This is likely an important
reason why human raters feel the summarization
memory models are more engaging.
Conclusion
We have shown that existing dialogue models, both
in terms of training data and models trained, fail to
conduct long-term conversations adequately. Our
work investigates recent model architectures to
ameliorate this issue, and collects a new crowdsourced task, Multi-Session Chat to both train and
evaluate these models. We show, in terms of both
automatic metrics and human evaluations, that
these long-context dialogue modeling approaches
outperform the previous systems.
Future work
should investigate further improvements to architectures for the long-context dialogue setting.
Ethical Considerations
The dialogue models we use in this work utilize
large language models, and therefore have similar
concerns as in other work, in particular concerns
about toxic language, bias and other issues during language generation . For
open-domain dialogue in particular, see Xu et al.
 ; Dinan et al. for reviews of the literature and evaluation of recent methods that try to
mitigate these safety issues.
Our work focuses on models with long-term
memory and open-domain conversations wherein
speakers may divulge personal interests. We remark that, during data collection, crowdworkers
were specifically playing roles with given personality traits, not talking about themselves, and hence
not identifying any personal information. During
conversations with our trained models, the models
will store information they learn from the exchange.
In contrast to current standard language models,
our models have the capability of storing this in
the long-term. This information is stored in the
memory of the model, private to the individual’s
conversation, and hence is not shared with anyone