ESE: Efﬁcient Speech Recognition Engine
with Sparse LSTM on FPGA
Song Han1,2, Junlong Kang2, Huizi Mao1,2, Yiming Hu2,3, Xin Li2, Yubin Li2, Dongliang Xie2
Hong Luo2, Song Yao2, Yu Wang2,3, Huazhong Yang3 and William J. Dally1,4
1 Stanford University, 2 DeePhi Tech, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 NVIDIA
1 {songhan,dally}@stanford.edu, 2 , 3 
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) is widely used in speech
recognition. In order to achieve higher prediction accuracy,
machine learning scientists have built increasingly larger models.
Such large models are both computation and memory intensive. Deploying such bulky models results in high
power consumption and leads to a high total cost of ownership (TCO) for a data center.
To speedup prediction and make it energy eﬃcient, we
ﬁrst propose a load-balance-aware pruning method that can
compress the LSTM model size by 20× (10× from pruning
and 2× from quantization) with negligible loss of prediction
accuracy. Also we proposed load-balance-aware pruning to
ensure high hardware utilization. Next, we propose a scheduler that encodes and partitions the compressed model to
multiple PEs for parallelism and schedules the complicated
LSTM data ﬂow. Finally, we design a hardware architecture
named ESE that works directly on the sparse LSTM model.
Implemented on Xilinx XCKU060 FPGA running at 200MHz,
ESE has a performance of 282 GOPS working directly on the
sparse LSTM network, corresponding to 2.52 TOPS on the
dense one, and processes a full LSTM for speech recognition with a power dissipation of 41 Watts. Evaluated on the
LSTM for speech recognition benchmark, ESE is 43× and
3× faster than Core i7 5930k CPU and Pascal Titan X GPU
implementations. It achieves 40× and 11.5× higher energy
eﬃciency compared with the CPU and GPU respectively.
Deep Learning; Speech Recognition; Model Compression;
Hardware Acceleration; Software-Hardware Co-Design; FPGA
INTRODUCTION
Deep neural network is widely used for speech recognition . Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) are two popular types of recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) used for speech recognition. In this
work, we evaluated the most complex one: LSTM . A
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
FPGA ’17, February 22 - 24, 2017, Monterey, CA, USA
c⃝2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4354-1/17/02...$15.00
DOI: 
Accelerated
Compression
Quantization
Conventional
Figure 1: Proposed eﬃcient DNN deployment ﬂow:
model compression+accelerated inference.
LSTM Model
Compression
20x smaller
similar accuracy
Scheduling
relative-indexed
blocked CSC
Acceleration
3x speedup
11.5x lower energy
Figure 2: ESE optimizes LSTM computation across
algorithm, software and hardware stack.
similar methodology could be easily applied to other types
of recurrent neural networks.
Despite its high prediction accuracy, LSTM is hard to deploy because of its high computation complexity and memory footprint, leading to high power consumption. Memory
reference consumes more than two orders of magnitude more
energy than ALU operations, thus we focus on optimizing
the memory footprint.
To reduce the memory footprint, we design a novel method
to optimize across the algorithm, software and hardware
stack: we ﬁrst optimize the algorithm by compressing the
LSTM model to 5% of it’s original size (10% density and
2× narrower weights) while retaining similar accuracy; then
we develop a software mapping strategy to represent the
compressed model in a hardware-friendly way; ﬁnally we design specialized hardware to work directly on the compressed
LSTM model.
The proposed ﬂow for eﬃcient deep learning inference
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
It shows a new paradigm for ef-
ﬁcient deep learning inference, from Training=>Inference,
to Training=>Compression=>Accelerated Inference, which
has advantage of faster inference speed and energy eﬃciency
 
compared with the conventional method. Using LSTM as a
case study for the proposed paradigm, the design ﬂow is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
The main contributions of this work are
1. We present an eﬀective model compression algorithm
for LSTM, which is composed of pruning and quantization. We highlight our load-balance-aware pruning
and automatic ﬂow for dynamic-precision data quantization.
2. The recurrent nature of RNN and LSTM produces
complicated data dependency, which is more challenging than feedforward neural nets. We design a scheduler that can eﬃciently schedule the complex LSTM
operations with memory reference overlapped with computation.
3. The irregular computation pattern after compression
posed a challenge to hardware.
We design a hardware architecture that can work directly on the sparse
model. ESE achieves high eﬃciency by load balancing
and partitioning both the computation and storage.
ESE also supports processing multiple user’s speech
data concurrently.
4. We present an in-depth study of the LSTM and speech
recognition system and optimize across the algorithm,
software, hardware boundary. We jointly analyze the
trade-oﬀbetween prediction accuracy and prediction
BACKGROUND
Speech recognition is the process of converting speech
signals to a sequence of words.
As shown in Fig. 3, the
speech recognition system contains the front-end and backend units, where the front-end unit is used for extracting features from speech signals, and the back-end unit processes
the features and converts speech to text. The back-end includes an acoustic model (AM), language model (LM), and
decoder. Here, the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network is used in the acoustic model.
The feature vectors extracted from the front-end unit are
processed by the acoustic model; then the decoder uses both
acoustic and language models to generate the sequence of
words by maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimation, which can be described as
W = arg max
P(W|X) = arg max
P(X|W)P(W)
where for the given feature vector X = X1X2 . . . Xn, the
goal of speech recognition is to ﬁnd the word sequence ˆ
W1W2 . . . Wm with maximum posterior probability P(W|X).
Because X is ﬁxed, the above equation can be rewritten as
W = arg max
P(X|W)P(W)
where P(X|W) and P(W) are the probabilities computed
by acoustic and language models shown respectively in Fig. 3
In modern speech recognition system, LSTM architecture
is often used in large-scale acoustic modeling and for computing acoustic output probabilities.
LSTM is the most
computation and memory intensive part of the speech recognition pipeline. Thus we focus on accelerating the LSTM.
Extraction
Figure 3: The speech recognition pipeline.
takes more than 90% of the total execution time in
the whole computation pipeline.
Figure 4: Data ﬂow of the LSTM model.
The LSTM architecture is shown in Fig. 4, which is the
same as the standard LSTM implementation . LSTM is
one type of RNN, where the input at time T depends on
the output at T −1.
Compared to the traditional RNN,
LSTM contains special memory blocks in the recurrent hidden layer. The memory cells with self-connections in memory blocks can store the temporal state of the network.
The memory blocks also contain special multiplicative units
called gates: input gate, output gate and forget gate. As in
Fig. 4, the input gate i controls the ﬂow of input activations
into the memory cell. The output gate o controls the output
ﬂow into the rest of the network. The forget gate f scales
the internal state of the cell before adding it as input to the
cell, which can adaptively forget the cell’s memory.
An LSTM network accepts an input sequence x = (x1; . . . ; xT ),
and computes an output sequence y = (y1; . . . ; yT ) by using
the following equations iteratively from t = 1 to T:
it = σ(Wixxt + Wiryt−1 + Wicct−1 + bi)
ft = σ(Wfxxt + Wfryt−1 + Wfcct−1 + bf)
gt = σ(Wcxxt + Wcryt−1 + bc)
ot = σ(Woxxt + Woryt−1 + Wocct + bo)
yt = Wymmt
Here the big O dot operator means element-wise multiplication, the W terms denote weight matrices (e.g. Wix is the
matrix of weights from the input to the input gate), and
Wic, Wfc, Woc are diagonal weight matrices for peephole
connections. The b terms denote bias vectors, while σ is the
logistic sigmoid function. The symbols i, f, o, c and m are
respectively the input gate, forget gate, output gate, cell activation vectors and cell output activation vectors, and all
of which are the same size. The symbols g and h are the cell
input and cell output activation functions.
MODEL COMPRESSION
It has been widely observed that deep neural networks
usually have a lot of redundancy .
Getting rid of
the redundancy doesn’t hurt prediction accuracy. From the
hardware perspective, model compression is critical for saving the computation as well as the memory footprint, which
means lower latency and better energy eﬃciency. We’ll discuss two steps of model compression that consist of pruning
and quantization in the next three subsections.
In the pruning phase we ﬁrst train the model to learn
which weights are necessary, then prune away weights that
are not contributing to the prediction accuracy; ﬁnally, we
retrain the model given the sparsity constraint. The process
is the same as . In step two, the saliency of the weight
is determined by the weight’s absolute value: if the weight’s
absolute value is smaller than a threshold, then we prune
it away. The pruning threshold is empirical: pruning too
much will hurt the accuracy while pruning at the right level
Our pruning experiments are performed on the Kaldi speech
recognition toolkit . The trade-oﬀcurve of the percentage of parameters pruned away and phone error rate (PER)
is shown in Fig.6. The LSTM is evaluated on the TIMIT
dataset . Not until we prune away more than 93% of parameters did the PER begin to increase dramatically. We
further experimented on a proprietary dataset that is much
larger: it has 1000 hours of training speech data, 100 hours
of validation speech data, and 10 hours of test speech data.
We ﬁnd that we can prune away 90% of the parameters without hurting word error rate (WER), which aligns with our
result on the TIMIT dataset. In our later discussions, we
use 10% density (90% sparsity).
Load Balance-Aware Pruning
On top of the basic deep compression method, we highlight our practical design considerations for hardware eﬃciency. To execute sparse matrix multiplication in parallel,
we propose the load-balance-aware pruning method, which
is very critical for better load balancing and higher utilization on the hardware.
Pruning could lead to a potential problem of unbalanced
non-zero weights distribution. The workload imbalance over
PEs may cause a gap between the real performance and peak
performance. This problem is further addressed in Section 4.
Load-balance-aware pruning is designed to solve this problem and obtain hardware-friendly sparse network, which produces the same sparsity ratio among all the submatrices.
During pruning, we make eﬀorts to avoid the scenario when
the density of one submatrix is 5% while the other is 15%.
Although the overall density is about 10%, the submatrix
with a density of 5% has to wait for the other one with more
computation, which leads to idle cycles. Load-balance-aware
pruning assigns the same sparsity quota to submatrices, thus
ensures an even distribution of non-zero weights.
Unbalanced
0 w4,2 w4,3
Overall: 5 cycles
Overall: 3 cycles
Figure 5: Load Balance Aware Pruning and its Beneﬁt for Parallel Processing
10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Phone Error Rate
Parameters Pruned Away
with load balance
without load balance
Accuracy curve of load-balance-aware
pruning and original pruning.
In Fig. 5, the matrix is divided into four colors, and each
color belongs to a PE for parallel processing.
With conventional pruning, PE0 might have ﬁve non-zero weights
while PE3 may have only one. The total processing time is
restricted to the longest one, which is ﬁve cycles. With loadbalance-aware pruning, all PEs have three non-zero weights;
thus only three cycles are necessary to carry out the operation. Both cases have the same non-zero weights in total,
but load-balance-aware pruning needs fewer cycles. The difference of prediction accuracy with/without load-balanceaware pruning is very small, as shown in Fig. 6. There is
some noise around 70% sparsity, so we focused our experiments around 90% sparsity, which is the sweet spot. We
ﬁnd the performance is very similar.
To show that load-balance-aware pruning still obtains comparable prediction accuracy, we compare it with original
pruning on the TIMIT dataset. As demonstrated in Fig.6,
the accuracy margin between two methods is within the variance of pruning process itself.
Weight and Activation Quantization
We further compressed the model by quantizing 32bit
ﬂoating point weights into 12bit integer.
We used linear
quantization strategy on both the weights and activations.
In the weight quantization phase, the dynamic ranges of
weights for all matrices in each LSTM layer are analyzed
ﬁrst, then the length of the fractional part is initialized to
avoid data overﬂow.
Table 1: Weight Quantization under diﬀerent Bits.
Weight Matrices1
W gifo x2 -4.9285
W gifo r2 -0.6909
1 Only weights in LSTM layers are qunantized.
2 In Kaldi, Wcx, Wix, Wfx, Wox are saved together as W gifo x,
and so does W gifo r mean.
Table 2: Activation Function Lookup Table.
Activation
sampling range
sampling points
Sigmoid Input
Tanh Input
The activation quantization phase aims to ﬁgure out the
optimal solution to the activation functions and the intermediate results. We built lookup tables and use linear interpolation for the activation functions, such as sigmoid and
tanh, and analyze the dynamic range of their inputs to decide the sampling strategies. We also investigated the minimum amount of bits to maintain the accuracy.
We explored diﬀerent data quantization strategies with
LSTM trained under TIMIT corpus. Performing the weight
and activation quantization, we can achieve 12bit quantization without any accuracy loss.
The data quantization
strategies are shown in Table .1, 2, 3. For the lookup tables of activation functions sigmoid and tanh, the sampling
ranges are [-64, 64] and [-128, 128] respectively. The sampling points are both 2048, and the outputs are 16bit with
15bit decimals. All the results are obtained using the Kaldi
framework.
For TIMIT, as shown in Table .4, the PER is 20.4% for
the original network and changes to 20.7% after the pruning
and ﬁne-tune procedure when 32-bit ﬂoating-point numbers
are used. The PER remains as 20.7% without any accuracy
loss under 16/12-bit quantization, and deteriorates to 84.5%
while 8-bit quantization is employed.
ENCODING AND COMPILING
The LSTM computation includes sparse matrices multiplication, element-wise multiplication, and memory reference.
We designed a data ﬂow scheduler to make full use of the
hardware accelerator.
align with DDR
align with PCIE
weight column
relative index
zero padding
(weight column)
encoded weight
(encoded weight column)
Figure 7: Encoding in CSC format and data align
using zero-padding.
Table 3: Other Activation Quantization.
Activation
LSTM Input
Intermediate Results
Table 4: PER Before and After Compression.
Quantization Scheme
Phone Error Rate %
32bit ﬂoating original network
32bit ﬂoating pruned network
16bit ﬁxed pruned network
12bit ﬁxed pruned network
8bit ﬁxed pruned network
Data is divided into n blocks by row where n is the number
of PEs in one channels of our hardware accelerator. The ﬁrst
n rows are put in n diﬀerent PEs. The n + 1 row is put in
the ﬁrst PE again. This ensures that the ﬁrst part of the
matrix will be read in the ﬁrst reading cycle and can be used
in the next step computation immediately.
Because of the sparsity of pruned matrices. We only store
the nonzero number in weight matrices to save redundant
We use relative row index and column pointer
to help store the sparse matrix. The relative row index for
each weight shows the relative position from the last nonzero
weight. The column pointer indicates where the new column
begins in the matrix. The accelerator will read the weight
according to the column pointer.
Considering the byte-aligned bit width limitation of DDR,
we use 16bit data to store the weight. The quantized weight
and relative row index are put together (i.e. 12bit for quantized weight and 4bit for relative row index).
Fig.7 shows an example for the compressed sparse column
(CSC) storage format and zero-padding method. We locate
one column in the weight matrix through a pointer and calculate the absolute address of weights by accumulating relative indexes. In Fig. 8, we demonstrate the computation
pattern using a simple example where the input vector has
6 elements {a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5}, and the weight matrix contains 8×6 elements. There are 2 PEs calculating a3×w ,
where a3 is the fourth element in the input vector and w 
represents the fourth column in the weight matrix.
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present challenges in hardware
design and then propose the Eﬃcient Speech Recognition
Engine (ESE) accelerator system and detail how ESE accelerates the sparse LSTM.
Motivation
computation
weights in a column are assigned to 2 PEs, and every PE multiply-add their weights with the same
element from the shared vector.
computation time
Figure 9: Imbalanced workload results in more waiting time.
Although pruning and quantization can reduce the memory footprint, three new challenges are introduced. General
purpose processors cannot implement these challenges eﬃciently.
First, irregular computation is introduced by compression.
After pruning, dense computation becomes sparse computation; After quantization, the weight and index are not bytealigned and must be grouped. We group the 4-bit pointer,
and 12-bit weight into 2 bytes.
Second, load imbalance introduced by sparsity will reduce
the hardware eﬃciency. In the sparse LSTM, a single element in the voice vector will be consumed by multiple PEs.
As a result, operations of all PEs have to be synchronized.
It will create a long waiting period if some PEs have fewer
non-zero weights, as shown in Fig.9.
Moreover, general-purpose processors cannot fully exploit
the parallelism in the compressed LSTM network. In the
custom design, however, we have the freedom to take advantage of the parallelism of both the inter sparse SpMV
operation and the intra SpMV operation.
Many challenges exist in the specialized hardware accelerator design on FPGA. First, customized decoding circuits
are needed to recover the original weight matrix. The index
is relative, so accumulation is needed to recover the absolute
index. We use only 4-bits to represent relative oﬀset. If a
real oﬀset is more than 16, the largest oﬀset that 4 bits can
represent, a padding zero is introduced.
Second, data representation should be carefully designed.
The data width of the PCIE interface, external DDR3 memory interface, and data itself are not aligned. Moreover, the
dynamic-precision quantization makes hardware computation on diﬀerent data more complex and irregular. Bit shifts
are necessary for diﬀerent layers.
Third, a carefully designed scheduler/controller is needed.
The LSTM network involves a complicated data ﬂow and
many diﬀerent types of weights. Computations in the LSTM
network have dependency on each other. Some computation
can be executed concurrently, while other computation has
to be executed sequentially. Moreover, the hardware design
should support input vector sharing in the multi-channel system, which aims to perform multiple LSTM networks with
diﬀerent voice vectors concurrently. Therefore, a carefully
designed scheduler is necessary for a highly pipelined design,
which can overlap the data communication and computation.
System Overview
Fig.10 (a) shows the overview architecture of the ESE
system. It is a CPU+FPGA heterogeneous architecture to
accelerate LSTM. The whole system can be divided into
three parts: the hardware accelerator on a FPGA chip, the
software program on CPU, and the external memory on the
FPGA board.
The software part consists of a CPU and host memory. It
Table 5: Two types of LSTM operations: matrixvector multiplication and element-wise multiplication.
SpMV Group
ElemMul Group
Wixxt, Wiryt−1
Wfxxt, Wfryt−1
Wcxxt, Wcryt−1
ftct−1, itgt
Woxxt, Woryt−1
communicates with FPGA via the PCI-Express bus. In the
initialization procedure, it sends parameters of the LSTM
model to FPGA. It can transmit voice vectors and receive
corresponding results if the hardware accelerator on FPGA
The external memory together with the FPGA chip on
one development board stores all the parameters and voice
vectors. The on-chip BRAM is limited while the amount of
data in the LSTM model is larger than it can hold. The
accelerator accesses the DRAM through memory controller
(MEM Controller), which is built using the memory interface
generator (MIG) IP.
On the FPGA chip, we put the ESE Accelerator, ESE
Controller, PCIE Controller, MEM Controller, and On-chip
The ESE Accelerator consists of Processing Elements (PEs) which take charge of the majority of computation tasks in the LSTM model. PE is the basic computation unit for a slice of voice vectors with partial weight matrix. Each ESE channel implements the LSTM network for
one voice vector sequence independently. On-chip buﬀers,
including input buﬀer and output buﬀer, prepare data to
be consumed by PEs and store the generated results. The
ESE Controller determines the behavior of other circuits on
the FPGA chip.
It schedules the PCIE/MEM Controller
for data-fetch and the LSTM computation pipeline ﬂow of
the ESE Accelerator. The accelerator reads parameters and
voice vectors from, and writes computation results to, the
DRAM memory. When the MEM Controller is in the idle
state, the accelerator can read results currently stored in the
memory and feed them to the software part.
ESE Controller (Scheduler)
The most expensive operations are sparse matrix vector
multiplication (SpMV) and element-wise multiplication (ElemMul). We partition the operations involved in the LSTM
network described by equations (1) to (6), into the such two
operations, as shown in Table 5.
LSTM is a complicated dataﬂow. We want to meet the
data dependency and ensure more parallelism at the same
time. Fig.11 shows the state machine in the ESE scheduler.
It overlaps computation and memory reference. From state
INITIAL to STATE 6, the ESE accelerator completes the
computation of a LSTM. The ﬁrst three lines operations are
fetching weights, pointers, and vectors/diagonal matrix/bias
respectively to prepare for the next computation. Operations in the fourth line are matrix-vector multiplications,
and in the ﬁfth line are element-wise multiplications (indigo
blocks) or accumulations (orange blocks). Operations in the
horizontal direction have to be executed sequentially, while
those in the vertical direction can be executed concurrently.
For example, we can calculate Wfryt−1 and it concurrently,
External Memory
PCIE Controller
MEM Controller
ESE Controller
Input Buffer
Output Buffer
ESE Accelerator
External Memory
Software Program
Adder Tree
Channel with
multiple PEs
Act Buffer
Weight Buffer
Pointer Buffer
Act Buffer
Weight Buffer
Pointer Buffer
Act Buffer
Weight Buffer
Pointer Buffer
Act Buffer
Weight Buffer
Pointer Buffer
Figure 10: The Eﬃcient Speech Recognition Engine (ESE) accelerator system: (a) the overall ESE system
architecture; (b) one channel with multiple processing elements (PEs).
Computation
Data Fetch
Sparse matrix-vector multiplication by SpMV
Element-wise multiplication by ElemMul
Accumulate operations by Adder Tree
N/A Idle state
Fetch data for the next operation
Figure 11: The state ﬂow of the ESE accelerator system: operations in the horizontal direction and vertical
direction are executed sequentially and concurrently respectively.
because the two operations are not dependent on each other
in the LSTM network, and they can be executed by two independent computation units. Wiryt−1/Wicct−1 and it have
to be executed sequentially, because it is dependent on the
former operations in LSTM network.
Wixxt and Wfxxt are not dependent on each other in the
LSTM network, but they cannot be calculated concurrently
because they have resource conﬂict. Weights are stored in
one piece of DDR3 memory because even after compression
the real world network cannot ﬁt in the limited block RAM
(4.25MB). Other parameters and input vector are stored in
the other piece of DDR3 memory. Pointers are required for
the same computations as weights, because we use pointers to look up weights in the compressed LSTM network.
But the memory overhead necessary to store the pointers is
small. Note that x, bias b and diagonal matrix Wc are not
accessed at the same time, and all these parameters have
a relatively small quantity. Therefore, pointers, vectors, diagonal matrix and bias can be stored in the same external
memory and prepared accordingly during weight fetching
The latency of the element-wise operations and non-linear
functions is not on the critical path. These operations are
executed in parallel with the matrix-vector multiplication
and weights-fetching.
ESE Channel Architecture
Fig.10 (b) shows the architecture of one ESE channel with
multiple PEs.
It is composed of Activation Queue (ActQueue), Sparse Matix-vector Multiplier (SpMV), Accumulator, Element-wise Multiplier (ElemMul), Adder Tree, Sigmoid/Tanh Units and local buﬀers.
Activation Vector Queue (ActQueue).
consists of several FIFOs. Each FIFO stores some elements
of the input voice vector aj for each PE. ActQueue is shared
by all the PEs in one channel, while each FIFO is owned by
each PE independently.
ActQueue is used for decoupling the imbalanced workload among diﬀerent PEs. Load imbalance arises when the
number of multiply accumulation operations performed by
every PE is diﬀerent, due to the imbalanced sparsity. Those
PEs with fewer computation tasks have to wait until the
PE with the most computation tasks ﬁnishes. Thus if we
have a FIFO, the fast PE can fetch a new element from the
FIFO and won’t need to be blocked by slow PEs. The data
width of FIFO is 16-bit, the depth is adjusted from 1 to 16
to investigate its eﬀects on the latency, and the results are
discussed in the experiment section. These FIFOs are built
on the distributed RAM on chip.
Sparse Matrix Read (SpmatRead).
Pointer Read
Unit (PtrRead) and Sparse Matrix Read (SpmatRead) manage the encoded weight matrix storage and output.
start and end pointers pj and pj+1 for column j determine
the start location and length of elements in one encoded
weight column that should be fetched for each element of
a voice vector.
SpmatRead uses pointers pj and pj+1 to
look up the non-zero elements in weight column j.
PtrRead and SpmatRead consist of ping-pong buﬀers. Each
buﬀer can store 512 16-bit values and is implemented with
block rams. Each 16-bit data in SpmatRead buﬀers consists
of a 4-bit index and a 12-bit weight. Here are the four basic
components.
Sparse Matrix-vector Multiplication (SpMV). Each
element in the voice vector is multiplied by its corresponding weight column. Multiplication results in the same row
of all new vectors are summed to generate an element in the
result vector, which is a local reduction. In ESE, SpMV
multiplies an element from the input activation by a column
of weight, and the current partial result is written into the
partial result buﬀer ActBuffer. Accumulator Accu sums
the new output of SpMV and previous data stored in Act
Buﬀer. The multiplier instantiated in the design can perform 16bitx12bit functions.
Element-wise Multiplication (ElemMul). ElemMul
in Fig.10 (b) generates one vector by consuming two vectors.
Each element in the output vector is the element-wise multiplication of two input vectors.
There are 16 multipliers
instantiated for element-wise multiplications per channel.
Adder Tree. AdderTree performs summation by consuming the intermediate data produced by other units or
bias data from input buﬀer.
Sigmoid/Tanh.
SigmoidandTanh units are the nonlinear modules applied as activation functions to some intermediate summation results.
Here we explain how ESE computes it.
In the initial
state, PE receives weight Wix, pointers P and voice vector x. Then SpMV calculates WixXt in the ﬁrst phase of
Wiryt−1 and Wicct−1 are generated by SpMV
and ElemMul respectively in the ﬁrst phase of STATE 2. In
the second phase of STATE 2, Adder Tree accumulates these
output and bias data from the input buﬀer and then the
following non-linear activation function unit Sigmoid/Tanh
produces intermediate data it. PE will fetch required parameters in the previous phase to overlap with the computation. The other LSTM network operations are similar. In
Fig.11, either SpMV or ElemMul is in the idle state at some
phases. This is because both matrix-vector multiplication
and element-wise multiplication consume weight data, while
PE cannot pre-fetch enough weight data for both computations in the period of one phase.
Memory System
In the hardware design, on-chip buﬀers are built upon a
basic idea of double-buﬀering, in which double buﬀers are
operated in a ping-pong manner to overlap data transfer
with computation. We use two pieces of 4GB DDR3 DRAMs
as the oﬀ-chip memory, named DDR 1 and DDR 2 in Fig.12,
and design a memory controller (MEM Controller). Fig.12
shows the MEM Controller architecture. On the one hand,
it receives instructions from the ESE Controller and schedules the data ﬂow among the ESE accelerator, PCIE interface, and DDR3 interface. On the other hand, it rearranges
received data into structures required by the destination interface. We take the data ﬂow of result y as an example.
Data y at the output port of PE is 16-bit wide, while the
FIFO_WR_W128_
FIFO_RD_W512_
Y_ASSEMBLE
(16BIT–128BIT)
FIFO_WR_W128_
FIFO_RD_W512_
FIFO_WR_W128_
DDR_1_Controller
DDR_2_Controller
FIFO_W512_
PE DATA BUS
Figure 12: Memory management unit.
PCIE interface is 128-bit wide. In order to increase the data
transmission speed, we assemble eight 16-bit data into one
128-bit value by Y ASSEMBLE unit. Then the value will
be stored in DDR 1 temporarily and fed back to the software via PCIE interface when both PCIE and DDR 1 are
in idle state. The behavior described above is shown as the
green arrow line in Fig.12. Similarly, vector x is split into
32 16-bit values from a 512-bit value through asynchronous
FIFOs. Moreover, asynchronous FIFOs, FIFO WR XX and
FIFO RD XX also play an important role of asynchronous
clock domains isolation.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, the performance of the hardware system
is evaluated. First, we introduce the environment setup of
our experiments. Then, hardware resource utilization and
comprehensive experimental results are provided.
Experimental Setup
The proposed ESE hardware system is built on XCKU060
FPGA running at 200 MHz.
Two external 4GB DDR3
DRAMs are used. Our host program is responsible for sending parameters and vectors into the programmable logic
part, and collecting corresponding results.
We use the TIMIT dataset to evaluate the performance
of model compression. TIMIT is an acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus. It contains broadband recordings of
630 speakers of eight major dialects of American English,
each reading ten phonetically rich sentences. We also use
a proprietary, much larger speech recognition dataset that
contains 1000 hours of training data, 100 hours of validation
data and 10 hours of test data.
Our baseline software program runs on i7-5930k CPU and
Pascal Titan X GPU. We use MKL BLAS / cuBLAS on
CPU / GPU for dense matrix operation implementations,
and MKL SPARSE / cuSPARSE on CPU / GPU for sparse
matrix implementations.
Resource Utilization
Table 6 shows the resource utilization for our ESE design
conﬁgured with 32 channels, and each channel has 32 PEs on
XCKU060 FPGA. The ESE accelerator design almost fully
Table 6: ESE Resource Utilization.
1 LUTRAM is 64b each, BRAM is 36Kb each.
Utilization
(Busy Cycles /
Total Cycles)
Figure 13: FIFO improves load balancing and decreases latency. The ALU utilization is more than
90% when FIFO depth is 8 for load balancing.
utilizes the FPGA’s hardware resource.
We conﬁgured each channel with 32 PEs, which is determined by balancing computation and data transfer.
required that the speed of data transfer is no less than that
of computation in order not to starve the DSP. As a result,
we get Equation ??. The expression to the left of the equal
sign means that the amount of computations is divided by
the computation speed. Multiplied by 2 in the numerator
part means each piece of data needs multiplication and accumulation operations, and that in the denominator part indicates twice multiply-accumulate operations for 2 bytes (16bit). ESE implements the multiply-accumulate operation in
a pipeline manner. The expression to the right represents
the cycles that ESE fetch the required amount of data from
external memory.
In our hardware implementation, both
the frequencies of PE and memory interface controller are
200MHz. The width of external DRAM is 512-bit. Therefore, the proper number of PEs per channel is 32.
data size × compress ratio × 2
PE num × 2 × freq PE
≥data size × compress ratio × 16bit
ddr width × freq ddr
FIFO Depth. ESE uses FIFO to decouple the PEs and
solves the load imbalance problem.
Load imbalance here
means the number of non-zero weight assigned to every PE
is diﬀerent. The FIFO for each PE reduces the waiting time
for PEs with fewer computations. We adjust the cache depth
to investigate its eﬀect. The FIFO width is 16-bit, and its
depth is set at 1, 4, 8, 16. In Fig.13, when the FIFO depth is
one (no FIFO), the utilization, which is deﬁned as busy cycle
divided by total cycles, is low (80%) due to load imbalance.
When the FIFO depth is 4, the utilization is above 90%.
When the FIFO depth is increased to 8 and 16, the utilization increased but has a marginal gain. Thus we choose the
FIFO depth to be 8. Note that even when the FIFO depth
is 8, the last matrix (Wym) still has low utilization. This is
because that matrix has very few rows and each PE has few
elements, and thus the FIFO cannot fully solve this problem
for this matrix.
Accuracy, Speed and Energy Efﬁciency
We evaluate the trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and speedup
of ESE in Fig.15. The speedup increases as more parameters
get pruned away. The sparse model which is pruned to 10%
Table 7: Power consumption of diﬀerent platforms.
Figure 14: Measured at the socket, the total power
consumption of the machine with FPGA fully loaded
is 132W. Without FPGA the idle machine consumes
91W. Subtracting the two, ESE consumes 41W.
achieved 6.2× speedup over the dense baseline model. Comparing the red and green lines, we ﬁnd that load-balanceaware pruning improves the speedup from 5.5× to 6.2×.
We measured power consumption of CPU, GPU and ESE.
CPU power is measured by the pcm-power utility. GPU
power is measured with nvidia-smi utility. We measure
the power consumption of ESE by taking diﬀerence with
/ without the FPGA board installed. ESE takes 41 watts;
CPU takes 111 watts (38 watts when using MKLSparse) and
GPU takes 202 watts (136 watts when using cuSparse).
The performance comparison of LSTM on ESE, CPU,
and GPU is shown in Table 8. The CPU implementation
used MKL BLAS and MKL SPBLAS for dense/sparse implementation, and the GPU implementation used cuBlas
and cuSparse. We optimized the CPU/GPU speed by combining the four matrices of the i, f, o, c gates that have
no dependency into one large matrix. Both mklSparse and
cuSparse implementation results in signiﬁcant lower utilization of peak CPU/GPU performance for the interested matrix size (relatively small) and sparsity (around 10% nonzeros).
We implemented the whole LSTM on ESE. The
model was pruned to 10% non-zeros. There are 11.2% nonzeros taking padding zeros into account. On ESE, the total throughput is 282 GOPS with the sparse LSTM, which
corresponds to 2.52 TOPS on the dense LSTM. Processing
the LSTM with 1024 hidden elements, ESE takes 82.7 us,
CPU takes 6017.3/3569.9 us (dense/sparse), and GPU takes
240.2/287.4 us (dense/sparse). With batch=32, CPU sparse
is faster than dense because CPU is good at serial processing, while GPU sparse is slower than dense because GPU is
throughput oriented. With no batching, we observed both
CPU and GPU are faster for the sparse LSTM because the
saving of memory bandwidth is more salient.
Performance wise, ESE is 43× faster than CPU 3× faster
than GPU. Considering both performance and power consumption, ESE is 197.0×/40.0× (dense/sparse) more energy
eﬃcient than CPU, and 14.3×/11.5× (dense/sparse) more
energy eﬃcient than GPU. Sparse LSTM makes both CPU
and GPU more energy eﬃcient as well, which shows the advantage of our pruning technique.
Table 8: Performance comparison of running LSTM on ESE, CPU and GPU
ESE on FPGA (ours)
Sparsity Compres. Theoreti.
Real Comput. Real Comput.
Comput. Comput. Operat. Perform. Operat. Perform.
(Bytes)2 Time (µs) Time (µs) (GOP) (GOP/s) (GOP) (GOP/s)
Sparse Dense Sparse
1518.43 670.4
3225.04 2288.0
3569.9 240.3
1 Pruned with 10% sparsity, but padding zeros incurred about 1% more non-zero weights.
2 Sparse matrix index is included, and weight takes 12 bits, index takes 4 bits => 2 Bytes per weight in total.
3 Concatenating Wix, Wfx, Wcx and Wox into one large matrix Wifoc x, whose size is 4096×153.
4 Concatenating Wir, Wfr, Wcr and Wor as one large matrix Wifoc r, whose size is 4096×512. These matrices don’t have dependency
and combining matrices can achieve 2× speedup on GPU due to better utilization.
RELATED WORK
Deep Compression Deep Compression is a method
that can compress convolutional neural network models by
35x-59x without hurting the accuracy.
It is comprised of
pruning, weight sharing and Huﬀman coding. However, the
compression rate targets CNN and image recognition.
this work we target LSTM and speech recognition.
method also diﬀers from the previously proposed ‘Deep Compression’ in that we proposed load-balance-aware pruning.
During pruning, we enforce each row has the same amount
of weight to enforce hardware load balancing. During quantization, we use linear quantization instead of non-linear
quantization, which is simpler but has smaller compression
We also eliminate the Huﬀman Coding step which
introduces extra decoding overhead but marginal gain.
CNN Accelerators Many custom accelerators have been
proposed for CNNs.
DianNao implements an array of
multiply-add units to map large DNN onto its core architecture. Due to limited SRAM resource, the oﬀ-chip DRAM
traﬃc dominates the energy consumption. DaDianNao 
and ShiDianNao eliminate the DRAM access by having all weights on-chip (eDRAM or SRAM). However, these
DianNao-series architectures are proposed to accelerate CNNs,
and the weights are uncompressed and stored in the dense
format. In this work, we target LSTM neural network and
speech recognition, and data compression is also supported
in our ESE architecture. Our work in this paper also distinguishes itself from Angel-Eye architecture, which also has
the compression, compilation and acceleration, but it is accelerating CNNs, not LSTMs .
EIE Accelerator The EIE architecture proposed by Han
et al. can performs inference on compressed network
model and accelerates the resulting sparse matrix-vector multiplication with weight sharing. With only 600mW power
consumption, EIE can achieve 102 GOPS processing power
on a compressed network corresponding to 3 TOPS/s on an
uncompressed network, which is 24000× and 3400× more
energy eﬃcient than a CPU and GPU respectively. EIE is a
general building block for deep neural network, not specially
designed for LSTM and speech recognition; ESE in this paper targets LSTM. ESE has diﬀerent design constrains on
FPGA while EIE is for ASIC, which leads diﬀerent design
considerations. Besides, EIE uses codebook-based quantization, which has better compression ratio; ESE uses linear
Parameters Pruned Away
with load balance
without load balance
6.2x speedup
over dense
5.5x speedup
over dense
Figure 15:
Computation latency decreases as the
sparsity increases. Running the sparse model is 4.2×
faster over the dense model, both run on ESE. Load
balance aware pruning helps speedup.
quantization, which is easier to implement.
Sparse Matrix-Vector Multiplication Accelerators
To pursue a better computational eﬃciency on machine learning and deep learning, several recent works focus on using
FPGA as an accelerator for Sparse Matrix-Vector Multiplication (SpMV). Zhuo et al. proposed an FPGA-based
design on Virtex-II Pro for SpMV. Their design outperforms
general-purpose processors.
Fowers et al. proposed a
novel sparse matrix encoding and an FPGA-optimized architecture for SPMV. With lower bandwidth, it achieves 2.6×
and 2.3× higher power eﬃciency over CPU and GPU respectively while having lower performance due to lower memory
bandwidth. Dorrance et al. proposed a scalable SMVM
kernel on Virtex-5 FPGA. It outperforms CPU and GPU
counterparts with >300× computational eﬃciency and has
38-50× improvement in energy eﬃciency. For compressed
deep networks, previously proposed SpMV accelerators can
only exploit the static weight sparsity. In this paper, we use
the relative indexed compressed sparse column (CSC) format for data storing, and we develop a scheduler which can
map a complicate LSTM network on ESE accelerator.
GRU on FPGA Nurvitadhi et al presented a hardware accelerator for Gated Recurrent Network (GRU) on
Stratix V and Arria 10 FPGAs . This work shows that
FPGA can provide superior performance/Watt over CPU
and GPU. In our work, we present a FPGA accelerator
for LSTM network. It also demonstrates a higher eﬃciency
FPGA comparing with CPU and GPU. Diﬀerent from theirs,
ESE is especially designed for accelerating sparse LSTM
LSTM on FPGA In order to explore the parallelism for
RNN/LSTM, Chang presented a hardware implementation
of LSTM network on Zynq 7020 FPGA from Xilinx with
2 layers and 128 hidden units in hardware . The implementation is 21 times faster than the ARM Cortex-A9 CPU
embedded on the Zynq 7020 FPGA. Lee accelerated RNNs
using massively parallel processing elements (PEs) for low
latency and high throughput on FPGA . These implementations did not support sparse LSTM network, while our
ESE can achieve more speed up by supporting sparse LSTM.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present Eﬃcient Speech Recognition Engine (ESE) that works directly on compressed sparse LSTM
ESE is optimized across the algorithm-hardware
boundary: we ﬁrst propose a method to compress the LSTM
model by 20× without sacriﬁcing the prediction accuracy,
which greatly saves the memory bandwidth of FPGA implementation.
Then we design a scheduler that can map
the complex LSTM operations on FPGA and achieve parallelism. Finally we propose a hardware architecture that
eﬃciently deals with the irregularity caused by compression.
Working directly on the compressed model enables
ESE to achieve 282 GOPS (equivalent to 2.52 TOPS for
dense LSTM) on Xilinx XCKU060 FPGA board. ESE outperforms Core i7 CPU and Pascal Titan X GPU by factors
of 43× and 3× on speed, and it is 40× and 11.5× more
energy eﬃcient than the CPU and GPU respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No.61373026, 61622403, 61261160501).
We would like to thank Wei Chen, Zhongliang Liu, Guanzhe
Huang, Yong Liu, Yanfeng Wang, Xiaochuan Wang and
other researchers from Sogou for their suggestions and providing real-world speech data for model compression performance test.