CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 10, 55–63, Spring 2011
Combining Peer Discussion with Instructor Explanation
Increases Student Learning from In-Class Concept
M.K. Smith,*†‡ W.B. Wood,*† K. Krauter,* and J.K. Knight*†
*Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and †Science Education Initiative, University of
Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309
Submitted August 18, 2010; Revised December 1, 2010; Accepted December 9, 2010
Monitoring Editor: Diane Ebert-May
Use of in-class concept questions with clickers can transform an instructor-centered “transmissionist” environment to a more learner-centered constructivist classroom. To compare the effectiveness
of three different approaches using clickers, pairs of similar questions were used to monitor student understanding in majors’ and nonmajors’ genetics courses. After answering the ﬁrst question
individually, students participated in peer discussion only, listened to an instructor explanation
only, or engaged in peer discussion followed by instructor explanation, before answering a second
question individually. Our results show that the combination of peer discussion followed by instructor explanation improved average student performance substantially when compared with either
alone. When gains in learning were analyzed for three ability groups of students (weak, medium,
and strong, based on overall clicker performance), all groups beneﬁted most from the combination
approach, suggesting that peer discussion and instructor explanation are synergistic in helping students. However, this analysis also revealed that, for the nonmajors, the gains of weak performers
using the combination approach were only slightly better than their gains using instructor explanation alone. In contrast, the strong performers in both courses were not helped by the instructor-only
approach, emphasizing the importance of peer discussion, even among top-performing students.
INTRODUCTION
Active-learning activities can signiﬁcantly increase student
learning in biology courses . Among the many kinds of such activities that are
practical in large lecture classrooms, in-class concept ques-
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.10-08-0101
correspondence
(micsmith@
u.washington.edu).
‡Present address: Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.
c⃝2011 M. K. Smith et al. CBE—Life Sciences Education c⃝2011
The American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed
by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from
the author(s). It is available to the public under an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons
License ( 
“ASCB R⃝” and “The American Society for Cell Biology R⃝” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.
tions using personal response systems or “clickers” have
received recent attention .
Typically, instructors pose multiple-choice questions requiring application of a recently presented concept at several time
points during a class, and students record their answers using clickers. In addition to breaking up lectures into smaller
chunks, concept questions provide students with opportunities to practice solving problems and monitor their understanding during class. Recent work in cognitive psychology
has shown that frequent assessment of students in this manner has a powerful impact on both learning and retention
 .
In connection with in-class concept questions, instructors
often use an approach called peer instruction, which encourages students to verbalize their thinking and interact
with their peers to arrive at an answer . In one
commonly used mode, students ﬁrst answer a concept question individually, discuss the question with their peers, and
then revote before the answer to the question is revealed.
The instructor then explains the question and often shows a
M. K. Smith et al.
Demographic information on students who participated in this study
Majors’ course
Nonmajors’ course
41% female, 59% male
66% female, 34% male
Year in college
7% freshman, 31% sophomore, 29% junior,
26% senior, 7% other
36% freshman, 37% sophomore, 11% junior, 13%
senior, 3% other
55% biology; 98% indicated they hoped to
pursue a career related to science
10% biologya
Grade distribution in genetics course
26% A, 39% B, 22% C 9% D, 4% F
37% A, 36% B, 23% C, 3% D, 0% F
aThere are three biology majors at CU-Boulder: Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (MCDB); Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
(EBIO); and Integrative Physiology (IPHY). These students are EBIO and IPHY majors.
histogram of the student responses, which gives both instructors and students immediate feedback on how well a concept
is understood.
Many instructors report that the frequency of correct answers increases after peer discussion .
Two alternative hypotheses could explain this observation: 1)
active engagement of students during discussion with peers
leads to increased conceptual understanding, resulting in improved performance on the revote, or 2) students do not necessarily learn from the discussion, but simply choose the answer most strongly advocated by neighbors they perceive to
be knowledgeable.
In a previous study , strong support was
obtained for the ﬁrst hypothesis using matched pairs of inclass concept questions that addressed the same concept and
required similar reasoning but had a different story line. Students answered the ﬁrst question of a pair (Q1) individually. After a few minutes spent discussing their responses in
small groups, they revoted on Q1. Students then answered
a second question (Q2) individually, and only then were the
answers and the histograms for both questions revealed and
discussed. Subsequent tracking of student responses using
the clicker software showed that students who changed their
answers to Q1 from incorrect to correct after discussion performed on average much better on Q2 than students who
did not change their answers. Moreover, on the more difﬁcult questions, performance on both Q1 after discussion and
Q2 increased markedly, even for groups in which no student
initially answered Q1 correctly, indicating that the process of
discussion itself rather than the inﬂuence of knowledgeable
peers could lead students to increased understanding.
Although this study demonstrated that peer discussion
had a positive effect on student learning, it did not attempt to
compare peer discussion with explanation from the instructor as an alternative activity between Q1 and Q2. In informal
discussions with instructors, we learned that some instructors skip peer discussion, believing that their explanation of
a clicker question answer will be clearer, more efﬁcient, and
more informative than what students are likely to hear in conversations with each other. However, the constructivist viewpoint supported by the above study of Smith et al. predicts that the process of verbalization and discussion could
promote understanding more effectively than even a clear instructor explanation. In addition, grappling with a question
in discussions with peers could enhance the learning value
of a subsequent explanation by the instructor .
To explore the merits of these alternative views, we applied a modiﬁcation of our earlier protocol using matched
pairs of questions to ask which of the following
three presentation modes leads to the greatest improvement
in student performance: having a peer discussion, listening
to an instructor explanation, or engaging in peer discussion
followed by an instructor explanation (the combination approach). We evaluated the effects on student learning gains in
two classes, genetics for majors and nonmajors, as well as for
three different ability groups of students classiﬁed as strong,
medium, and weak clicker performers.
Student Demographics
This study was conducted in an undergraduate introductory
genetics course required for majors 
and a genetics course for nonmajors 
(student demographics shown in Table 1). These courses were
taught in the Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (MCDB) at the University of Colorado,
Boulder, by two of the authors: K.K. (majors) and J.K.K.
(nonmajors). Both courses met for three 50-min sessions per
week, and student grades in both courses were based on a
similar distribution of points (Table 2).
Instructional Modes and Experimental Protocols
In both courses, an average of four in-class concept questions
were asked per class, and approximately half the class periods
included matched-pair questions that were used in this study.
Even though all the in-class concept questions were awarded
only participation points, students had an incentive to do
Distribution of grading points in the majors’ and nonmajors’ genetics courses
Majors (%)
Nonmajors (%)
Clicker participation
Additional participation
(surveys, reﬂections)
Group project
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Combining Discussion and Explanation
Flowchart of the experimental design
for investigating whether students learn more
from in-class concept questions by peer discussion, listening to an instructor explanation, or
participating in a combination of peer discussion
followed by instructor explanation. These variations of the protocol are referred to as modes in
the text. Q1: one question of a matched pair was
voted on individually; Q1ad: the same question
was voted on again after peer discussion; Q2: the
second very similar question was voted on individually. See Methods for further detail.
well on these questions because they were told that clicker
questions gave them practice for the exams.
To determine whether engaging in peer discussion, listening to an instructor explanation, or participating in a combination of peer discussion followed by instructor explanation
was more effective for student learning, we followed each of
three different modes of the experimental protocol outlined
in Figure 1, using matched pairs of questions that test genetics concepts as described in the Introduction. Both courses
have similar learning objectives and questions on similar topics, but the question pairs used were different because of the
higher level of detail appropriate for the majors course (examples shown in Figure 2).
Our protocol included three types of questions: Q1, Q1ad,
and Q2 (Figure 1). In all three modes, students answered Q1
individually to provide a measure of student understanding
after listening to a lecture on the topic. The three modes were
as follows:
In the peer-discussion mode, students revoted on Q1 after
discussion (Q1ad). After recording their vote, they were told
the correct answer to the question, but no additional explanation was given.
In the instructor mode, after students had answered Q1 individually, the instructor asked the students to volunteer their
reasons for selecting speciﬁc answers, explained the solution
to Q1, and answered any student questions.
For the combination mode, after students answered Q1 individually, they discussed the question with their neighbors
and then voted on the same question again (Q1ad), just as in
the peer-discussion mode. The instructor then asked the students to volunteer their reasons for selecting speciﬁc answers,
explained the solution to Q1, and answered any student questions, as in the instructor-explanation mode.
In all three modes, students then individually voted on Q2.
After all of the Q2 votes were recorded, the instructor explained the solutions to Q1 (for the peer-discussion mode)
and Q2. Histograms of student responses to Q1 and Q2 were
shown only after the Q2 vote, because showing histogram
results can bias student responses and inﬂuence the student
discussion .
To compare these instructional modes in a normal classroom setting, there were no time limits placed on the instructor explanations or student voting. Both instructors generally
let student voting continue until 75–80% of the students had
recorded their vote, encouraged the remaining students to
vote, and then stopped the voting 10–20 s later. Consequently,
mean amounts of time devoted to consideration of Q1 for the
different modes varied (Table 3). For both the majors’ and
the nonmajors’ courses, more time on average was spent considering answers to Q1 in the combination mode than in the
peer-discussion or instructor-explanation modes, as might be
expected (implications of these differences are explored in the
Discussion).
All three modes of the protocol were used in the majors
course, but only the instructor-explanation and combination
modes were used in the nonmajors’ course.
Description of Matched Pair Questions
To minimize any bias toward writing an easier Q2 question,
the questions in each pair were randomly assigned to be
Q1/Q1ad, or Q2 after they were written .
Which of the three modes of presentation to use was also randomly determined for each question pair. Q1/Q1ad and Q2
were assigned to a mode of presentation and inserted into the
slide presentations shortly before class to minimize the possibility of altering the lecture to favor one mode of presentation
over another.
Both instructors agreed that questions where the individual Q1 vote was greater than 80% correct were insufﬁciently
challenging and left little opportunity for gains in learning; these questions were not included in this study. Although we intended all questions to be challenging, one peerdiscussion and two combination questions had Q1 scores of
>80% correct in the majors’ course. In the nonmajors’ course,
three instructor-explanation questions had Q1 scores of >80%
After the course was completed, all the question pairs used
were judged for similarity by two independent reviewers,
who did not have access to the student performance results.
Vol. 10, Spring 2011
M. K. Smith et al.
Examples of the Q1/Q1ad and
Q2 question pairs used in this study. The
correct answers are underlined.
The reviewers were familiar with the content of the genetics
courses and had participated in an earlier study that used
matched pairs of questions to measure the beneﬁts of peer
discussion . These reviewers were asked to
judge whether they thought the question pairs in this study
were testing the same concept. Data from ﬁve question pairs,
three from the majors’ course and two from the nonmajors’
course, were removed from the data set, because two independent reviewers judged them as not testing identical concepts. Individual responses were also removed from the data
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Combining Discussion and Explanation
Average elapsed times between the end of individual Q1
and the start of individual Q2 for the three modes of discussing Q1
Mode of discussing Q1
Nonmajorsa
Peer discussion
2 min 54 s
Instructor explanation
1 min 54 s
3 min 19 s
Combination
4 min 42 s
aThe SEM is in parentheses.
bThe peer discussion alone mode was not used in the nonmajors’
course (see text).
set if a student did not answer all questions in a question set
(e.g., answered Q1 and Q1ad but not Q2).
The remaining 32 question pairs were also rated for cognitive level according to Bloom’s taxonomy by two independent reviewers not associated with the course who are experts at these rankings . The raters were given all 64 questions in a random
order and were not told which questions were matched-pair
sets. Both raters independently determined that the average
level of the questions was 3 (application level). The two raters
concluded that 87% and 81%, respectively, of the Q1–Q2 pairs
were at the same Bloom’s level. For the question pairs that
did not match, 60% of the time the raters concluded that Q2
was at a higher level than Q1.
The data set included responses from 150 students in the
majors class and 62 students in the nonmajors class. These
students answered at least one complete set of questions in
each of the different modes. Table 4 shows the mean number
of questions answered for each protocol mode.
Data Analysis
The change in learning between question pairs was computed for each individual student using a modiﬁed version
of the Hake normalized gain formula known as
normalized change <c> . Normalized change values provide a measure of how much a
student’s performance increases compared with that individual’s maximum possible increase. When calculating the mean
normalized change between Q1 and Q2 over all question pairs
for a given student, the following formula was used when an
individual’s mean Q2 score was higher than the mean Q1
score (most cases): <c> = 100(mean Q2 −mean Q1)/(100 −
mean Q1). Alternatively, if an individual’s mean Q1 score was
Mean number of questions answered for each protocol
Mode of discussing Q1
Peer discussion
5.8 out of 7
Instructor explanation
5.3 out of 6
4.0 out of 5
Combination
4.0 out of 5
7.1 out of 9
aThe peer discussion alone mode was not used in the nonmajors’
course (see text).
higher than the mean Q2 score, <c> = 100((Q2 −Q1)/Q1),
was used. In cases where an individual’s mean Q1 score and
the mean Q2 score equaled either 100 or 0, the response for
that student was removed from the data set, because otherwise <c> would be recorded as 0. Signiﬁcant differences
between mean <c> values between two populations cannot
be determined because they are nonlinear computed quantities that are not normally distributed. Instead, the standard
error measurements on reported <c> values are used to provide a coarse depiction of the spread of values .
All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS (SPSS,
Chicago, IL) or Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). Item discrimination values (D) were calculated by rank, ordering
students by their overall Q1 percent correct score. The top
27% and the bottom 27% of students in the majors’ and
nonmajors’ courses were compared for this analysis. For
each Q1 question, the following formula was used: D =
(RU −RL)/(1/2T). RU is the number of students in the upper group who answered correctly, RL is the number of students in the lower group who answered correctly, and T is
the total number of students included in the item analysis
 . The average item discrimination values for
Q1 questions were then calculated for each protocol mode in
the majors’ and nonmajors’ courses.
Institutional Review Board Protocols
Approval to evaluate student clicker responses (exempt status, Protocol No. 0108.9) and end-of-year survey responses
(expedited status, Protocol No. 0603.08) was granted by the
Institutional Review Board, University of Colorado, Boulder.
Q1 Questions Have Equivalent Difﬁculty and
Adequate Item Discrimination for Question Pairs
Administered in Each of the Three Modes
The mean percentages of correct individual Q1 answers were
not statistically different between the three different protocol
modes for the majors (Figure 3A, repeated measures analysis of variance, p > 0.05). Similarly, for the nonmajors, the
percentages of correct individual Q1 answers were not statistically different between the instructor-explanation and combination modes (Figure 3B, paired t-test, p > 0.05). Also, the
average item discrimination values (D) for the Q1 questions
were greater than 0.3 for all protocol modes in both the majors’ and nonmajors’ courses (Table 5). Questions with D values above 0.3 are generally considered good discriminators
of the top and bottom students .
The Learning Gains between Q1 and Q1ad Were
Similar in Both Modes That Involved Peer Discussion
An initial measure of learning through peer discussion was
calculated by recording mean student performance on individual Q1s and the same questions after discussion (Q1ad)
(Figure 3). In all cases, students’ mean performance on Q1ad
was signiﬁcantly higher than on Q1 (dependent t-test, p <
0.05). In addition, we calculated the mean normalized change
(<c>) between Q1 and Q1ad for each individual student. In
Vol. 10, Spring 2011
M. K. Smith et al.
Effects of three different modes of discussing Q1 on percentage of Q1ad and Q2 correct answers in the majors’ (A) and nonmajors’
(B) genetics courses. Performance results were averaged for each individual before computing the means shown. The SEMs are shown with
error bars.
the majors’ course, this value was 41.5% (±3.4) for the peerdiscussion mode and 37.2% (±3.4) for the combination mode.
The similarity of these values suggests that peer discussion
resulted in similar performance improvement for both these
modes. For the nonmajors, the mean <c> between Q1 and
Q1ad for the combination mode was somewhat higher at
56.9% (±5.5%).
The Combination Mode Led to Larger Learning Gains
between Q1 and Q2 Than Either Peer Discussion or
Instructor Explanation Alone
In the majors’ course, when all three modes of the protocol
were compared for student performance on Q1 and Q2, the
mean percentage of correct answers was higher for Q2, indicating that performance improved in all three modes (Figure
3, dependent t-test, p < 0.05 in all cases). Similarly in the nonmajors’ course, the mean percentage of correct answers was
signiﬁcantly higher for Q2 than for Q1, indicating that performance improved in both the instructor-explanation and
combination modes (Figure 3, dependent t-test, p < 0.05 in all
Two principal ﬁndings from comparisons of learning gains
are presented in Figure 4, which shows the Q1-to-Q2 mean
<c> values for each mode in both the majors’ and nonmajors’
Mean item discrimination (D) values for Q1 questions in
the different protocol modes
Method of discussing Q1
Peer discussion
Instructor explanation
Combination
aThe peer discussion alone mode was not used in the nonmajors’
course (see text).
genetics courses. First, in the majors’ course, the peer discussion and instructor-explanation modes resulted in similar
mean <c> values, suggesting that each of these modes alone
is equally effective. Second, in both courses, the combination
mode resulted in strikingly higher <c> values than either of
the other modes alone.
The Combination Mode Results in the Largest Gain in
Learning for All Ability Levels of Students
To determine whether a certain instructional mode is better
for students who tend to do well or poorly on in-class concept
questions, mean Q1 percent correct scores for all instructional
modes were calculated for each student. Then the students
in each course were divided into three groups based on these
scores, in which weak, medium, and strong clicker performers were designated as having mean Q1 scores of <33.3%,
33.3–66.6%, and >66.6%, respectively. Table 6 shows the percentage of students who fell into each category. The majority
of students in both courses fell into the medium clicker performer category.
Figure 5 shows the learning gains represented by average Q1-to-Q2 <c> scores for the weak, medium, and strong
clicker performers for all three instructional modes in both
courses. In the majors’ course (Figure 5A), the combination
mode was clearly most effective for all three groups of students. For the weak and medium groups, the peer-discussion
and instructor-explanation modes appeared equally effective,
whereas for the strong group, the instructor mode appeared
least effective.
Similar trends were seen in the nonmajors’ course
(Figure 5B). Namely, the combination mode was most effective for all three groups of students, except for the weak
performers, for whom the gains for the instructor-explanation
and combination modes were similar. As was true with the
majors, the instructor-explanation mode was least effective
for the strong students.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Combining Discussion and Explanation
Effects of three different modes of
discussing Q1 on the normalized change <c>
between Q1 and Q2. Performance results were
averaged for each individual before computing the means shown (see Methods). The SEMs
are shown with error bars.
modes of discussing Q1 on mean for students in the majors’ (A) and nonmajors’
(B) genetics courses classiﬁed as weak,
medium, or strong clicker performers
based on their overall mean Q1 score (see
Results). SEM are shown with error bars.
DISCUSSION
Summary of Results
Our results show that genetics students, both majors and
nonmajors, learn from in-class concept questions whether the
mode of administration comprises peer discussion alone, instructor explanation alone, or a combination mode in which
peer discussion is followed by instructor explanation (Figure 3). However, the combination mode results in substantially higher learning gains compared with either the peerdiscussion or instructor-explanation modes, as measured by
the normalized change <c> in scores between Q1 and Q2
(Figure 4). Analysis of the results for three ability groups of
Distribution of students classiﬁed into the weak, moderate,
and strong clicker performer groups in the majors’ and nonmajors’
genetics courses
Majors (%)
Nonmajors (%)
Weak clicker performers
Moderate clicker performers
Strong clicker performers
students, designated weak, medium, and strong based on
mean Q1 scores, showed that the combination mode was
most effective for all three groups in both the majors’ and the
nonmajors’ courses (Figure 5).
Strikingly, the strong clicker performers in both classes
showed the smallest learning gains when the instructorexplanation mode was used (Figure 5). We hypothesize that
discussing questions with peers in either the peer-discussion
mode or the combination mode keeps the strong clicker performers engaged with the material. Without this element in
the instructor mode, the strong students may pay less attention to the subsequent question, Q2. These results are in
agreement with a study that compared overall student learning gains in introductory physics courses taught using traditional lecturing or interactive engagement . In this study, the stronger students learned more in the
interactive courses, possibly because they were cementing
their own understanding by helping their peers. Our results
support the conclusions of these authors that interactive approaches such as peer discussion beneﬁt the high-achieving
We see differences between students in the majors’ and
nonmajors’ genetics courses with respect to the weak clicker
performers. In the majors’ course, the weak students show
Vol. 10, Spring 2011
M. K. Smith et al.
substantially larger learning gains with the combination
mode than with either of the other two modes (Figure 5A).
However, for weak students in the nonmajors’ course, the
combination mode is only slightly more effective than the
instructor-explanation mode (Figure 5B). One likely reason
for this difference is that nonmajors were less inclined to regard their peers as learning resources. Several lines of support
for this idea come from a previous study in which behaviors
and motivation levels of nonmajor genetics students were
measured . Observations of these
students revealed that they were more likely than majors
to ask an instructor rather than peers for help when working on group activities. Nonmajors in this study also studied
outside of class signiﬁcantly less than did majors, consistent
with lower levels of motivation. These factors may combine to
generate an environment for nonmajors in which the weaker
students are less inclined to participate in peer discussion,
and thus do not beneﬁt as much as other groups.
Our data from the majors’ genetics course show that the
peer-discussion and instructor-explanation modes result in
similar learning gains, at least for the weak and medium
clicker performers (Figures 4 and 5A). Peer discussion has
beneﬁts over listening to an instructor, such as breaking up
the monotony of lecture and giving students a chance to practice putting their thoughts into words . However, in our experience, many students report that peer discussion without any instructor explanation
or feedback can be frustrating.
Why Is the Combination of Peer Discussion Followed
by Instructor Explanation So Effective for Student
The effectiveness of the combination mode is consistent with
previous ﬁndings in cognitive psychology, showing that student engagement in a learning activity such as answering
questions predisposes them to learn from a subsequent lecture . During peer discussion,
students engage with the material by sharing their ideas with
others. In short, students are ﬁguring out what they understand and what they have questions about. The instructor explanation immediately following peer discussion in our protocol corresponds to the subsequent lecture in the Schwartz
and Bransford study. Additional studies have shown
that feedback to students, which allows them to gauge their
current understanding of a topic, can have a positive impact
on their future performance. Feedback is especially helpful
when it includes a statement of the correct answer and information on why it is correct .
In both the instructor-explanation and combination modes
used in this study, students received extensive feedback of
this nature from their instructor, as well as explanations of
why other answers were incorrect.
In the combination mode, students spent on average about
2–3 min more total time engaging with Q1 than in either of
the other two modes (Table 3). Time on task was not strictly
controlled in our study because we wanted to compare these
modes in a normal classroom setting without imposing time
limits on the instructor. However, several considerations argue that time on task alone cannot account for the superior
effectiveness of the combination mode. From our experience
in the classroom, in agreement with published guides to best
practices with clickers , useful peer discussion following a question is generally limited to 2–3 min,
after which most of the students turn to conversations on
other matters or personal pursuits, such as email or texting.
Therefore, simply adding time to peer discussion would be
highly unlikely to increase the effectiveness of this mode signiﬁcantly. Consistent with this view is a recent physics education study, in which students individually answered a clicker
question and then for the next minute discussed the question
with their peers, reﬂected on their answers silently, or were
distracted by a cartoon . When the students then voted on the question again, the percent change
in performance was highest when students engaged in peer
discussion, suggesting that the beneﬁt of this activity is not
simply to provide additional time considering the question.
Based on these arguments, the substantially increased learning gains that result from adding instructor explanation after
peer discussion are highly unlikely to be attributed merely to
the increased time on task.
Could a longer and more detailed instructor explanation
following administration of Q1 have increased the effectiveness of this mode alone to the level of the combination
mode? Although we did not do the experiment, three considerations suggest that this possibility is unlikely as well.
The ﬁrst is the size of the effect; the combination mode
was on average approximately twice as effective in promoting learning gains as the instructor-explanation mode, in
both courses. Adding 2 or 3 min of instructor explanation
to an already complete explanation is unlikely to have produced such a doubling. Second, the ﬁndings of Schwartz and
Bransford suggest that, after grappling with a question,
students are primed to gain more from a subsequent lecture.
These results suggest an apparent synergy, which we have
also observed, between peer discussion and instructor explanation in the combination mode. Third, student surveys also
indicate that they perceive the combination mode to be synergistic. On end-of-course surveys in both courses (n = 122
major respondents, n = 45 nonmajor respondents), students
were asked to indicate agreement or disagreement with the
following statement: “Having a discussion with my neighbors prepares me to listen to the instructor’s explanation.”
Sixty-four percent of the majors and 84% of the nonmajors
agreed, and when asked to explain why, several students described how peer discussion helps prepare them to learn. Two
such descriptions follow:
It gets me thinking about the topic before [the instructor’s]
lecture, rather than just passively listening to what he has to
say – I am already engaged.
Discussion helps get the ideas and thoughts ﬂowing, which
makes what [the instructor] says more concrete.
The class time required for administration and discussion
of concept questions, especially using the combination mode,
may seem daunting to some instructors. However, several
studies have shown the value of modifying course structure
so as to place more responsibility on students for learning factual material outside of class, thereby freeing class time for
active-learning activities, such as clicker questions and discussion . In the courses described
here, the instructors focused primarily on conceptual understanding in class rather than transmission of detailed factual
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Combining Discussion and Explanation
knowledge. In addition, students practiced general skills and
application of concepts through regular online homework assignments outside of class. These modiﬁcations allowed the
instructors to require mastery of basic content while still leaving time for in-class active-learning activities.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Our research further deﬁnes best practices for using in-class
concept questions and clickers. From previous work, we
know that active engagement of students during peer discussion leads to improved performance . The
results presented here show that, in two different courses,
the largest gains in student performance occur when peer
discussion is immediately followed by instructor explanation. This combination mode is probably so effective because
it combines student engagement through peer discussion
with instructor feedback. Qualitative studies on the content
of student discussions during peer interaction, currently in
progress, should help to better understand the beneﬁts of this
mode of clicker use.
Although our results indicate that the combination mode is
better for in-class performance than the single modes tested,
we still do not know which modes of instruction best promote
retention of material. Following the evidence from cognitive
psychology studies , we would predict that peer discussion immediately followed by instructor explanation should enhance not
only short-term learning, but also retention as well. Longitudinal studies are needed to explore this prediction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the Science Education Initiative at the University
of Colorado, Boulder, for full support of M.K.S and partial support
of J.K.K during this project. Thanks to Alison Crowe and Mary Pat
Wenderoth for assessing the Bloom’s levels of the question pairs. We
also thank Carl Wieman and Wendy Adams for intellectual support
and comments on the manuscript and Tin Tin Su for help with the
experimental design.