A Cross-Cultural User Evaluation of Product
Recommender Interfaces
Li Chen and Pearl Pu
Human Computer Interaction Group, School of Computer and Communication Sciences
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)
CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
{li.chen, pearl.pu}@epfl.ch
We present a cross-cultural user evaluation of an organizationbased product recommender interface, by comparing it with the
traditional list view. The results show that it performed
significantly better, for all study participants, in improving on
competence
perceptions,
recommendation quality, perceived ease of use and perceived
usefulness, and positively impacting users’ behavioral intentions
such as intention to save effort in the next visit. Additionally,
oriental users were observed reacting more significantly strongly
to the organization interface regarding some subjective aspects,
compared to western subjects. Through this user study, we also
identified the dominating role of the recommender system’s
decision-aiding competence in stimulating both oriental and
western users’ return intention to an e-commerce website where
the system is applied.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information
interfaces
presentation]: User
Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, graphical user interfaces
(GUI), user-centered design.
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.
Product recommender systems, organization interface, list view,
cross-cultural user study.
1. INTRODUCTION
Online systems that help users select the most preferential item
from a large electronic catalog are known as product search and
recommender systems. In recent years, much research work has
emphasized on developing and improving the underlying
algorithms, whereas many of the user issues such as acceptance of
recommendations and trust building received little attention.
Trust is seen as a long-term relationship between a user and the
organization that the online technology represents. It is critical to
study especially for e-commerce environments where the
traditional salesperson, and subsequent relationship, is replaced
by a virtual vendor or a more intelligent product recommender
agent. Studies show that customer trust is positively associated
with customers’ intentions to transact, purchase a product, and
return to the website . However, these results have mainly been
derived from online shops’ ability to ensure security, privacy, and
reputation (i.e., the integrity and benevolence aspects of trust
formation) , and less from the website’s competence such as its
decision agent’s ability in providing good recommendations and
explaining its results.
We have always been engaged in investigating the effective
recommender design factors that may positively impact the
promotion of users’ trust and furthermore their behavioral
intentions. Previously, we have conceptualized a competence-based
trust model for recommender systems . We have primarily
studied trust-building by the different design dimensions of
explanation interfaces, given explanations’ potential benefits to
improve users’ confidence about recommendations and their
acceptance of the system .
traditional
displaying
explaining
recommendations, as popularly adopted in most of case-based
reasoning recommender systems and commercial websites
(www.activedecisions.com), is to display the recommendation
content in a rank ordered list and use a “why” component along
with each item to explain the computational reasoning behind it.
In order to accelerate users’ decision process by saving their
information-searching effort in reviewing all recommended items,
we have proposed a so called preference-based organization
technique. The main idea is that, rather than explaining each item
one by one, a group of products can be explained together by a
category title, provided that they have shared tradeoff characteristics
compared to a reference product (e.g., the top candidate) . In the
following, we first summarize previous studies on the organization
method and then give the contribution of our current work.
1.1 Summary of Previous Studies
A carefully conducted user survey (53 subjects) first showed
some interesting observations regarding the influence of
explanations on trust building and the effectiveness of the
organization-based recommender interface . That is, most of
surveyed users strongly agreed that they shall trust more in a
system with the explanation of how it computed the
recommended
recommendations was largely favored than the traditional “why”based list view, since it was perceived to more likely accelerate
the process of product comparison and choice making.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
RecSys’08, October 23–25, 2008, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-093-7/08/10...$5.00.
A follow-up user study asked 72 participants to evaluate the two
types of recommender interfaces in a within-subject procedure
 . The user task was to find a product s/he most preferred
among a set of most popular products recommended in either an
organized view or a list view with “why” components.
Results show that while both interfaces enabled trust-building, the
organized view was significantly more effective in increasing
users’ task efficiency, saving their cognitive effort and prompting
them to intend to return to the interface for future use.
1.2 Contribution of Our Current Work
The previous two experiments pointed out promising benefits of
the organization interface regarding its trust-inspiring ability.
They motivated us to further evaluate the interface’s practical
performance in a more realistic and interactive system where it
serves as the computation and explanation of personalized
recommendations according to users’ preferences (rather than
based on products’ general popularity). In such system,
preference specification/revision tools are provided for users to
input and refine their preferences, and the recommender interface
is returned whenever the user’s preferences are revised.
In addition, we were interested in identifying whether people
from different categories of cultural backgrounds (i.e., oriental
and western cultures) would all react actively to the organizationbased system. Thus, a relatively larger scale cross-cultural
experiment was set up, and a comparative user study was
additionally involved to compare the organization interface with
the “why”-based list view which was implemented in a similar
interactive system setting.
evaluation
measurements was also established to assess the system’s actual
benefits in respect of three design aspects: recommendation
quality, transparency, and user-control. As for upper-level
competence perceptions, perceived ease of use and perceived
usefulness, the two primary determining elements of convincing
users to accept a technology , were included, besides decision
confidence, perceived effort and satisfaction. Three trust-induced
behavioral intentions were also contained, which are intention to
purchase, intention to return and intention to save effort in the
next visit.
This paper is hence organized as follows: section 2 and 3 describes
the organization-based interface and its function in an implemented
prototype system; section 4 introduces the cross-cultural user
evaluation’s design and experimental procedure; section 5 presents
results from the study; and section 6 concludes the paper’s work.
2. ORGANIZATION-BASED
RECOMMENDER INTERFACE
The organization interface has been developed to compute and
categorize recommended products, and use the category title (e.g.
“these products have cheaper price and longer battery life, but
slower processor speed and heavier weight”) as the explanation of
multiple products (see Figure 1). Each presented title essentially
details the representative tradeoff properties shared by a set of
recommended products by comparing them with the top candidate
(the best matching product according to the user’s current
preferences). It exposes the recommendation opportunities and
indicates the reason of why these products are recommended, by
revealing their superior values on some important attributes, and
compromises on less important ones.
To derive effective principles for this interface design, we tested
13 paper prototypes by means of pilot studies and user interviews,
and finally concluded five design principles. The principles
include: proposing improvements and compromises in the
category title using the conversational language, keeping the
number of tradeoff attributes in the category title under five,
including a few of actual products within each category, and
diversifying the proposed category titles as well as associated
products (see details in ). We accordingly proposed an
algorithm to generate such organization interfaces . Briefly
speaking, the algorithm contains three main steps:
Step 1: the user preferences over all products are represented as a
weighted additive form of value functions according to the multiattribute utility theory (MAUT) . Based on this compensatory
preference model, we can resolve conflicting values explicitly by
considering tradeoffs between different attributes;
Step 2: all alternatives are ranked by their weighted utilities
calculated according to the MAUT model. Then, each of them,
except the ranked first one (i.e., the top candidate), is converted
into a tradeoff vector. Each tradeoff vector is a set of (attribute,
tradeoff) pairs, where tradeoff indicates the improved (denoted as ↑)
or compromised (↓) property of the product’s attribute value
compared to the same attribute of the top candidate. For the
attributes without explicitly stated preferences, default properties
are suggested (e.g., the cheaper, the better). For example, a
tradeoff vector is {(price, ↑), (processor speed, ↓), (memory, ↓),
(hard drive size, ↑), …}, meaning that the corresponding laptop has
lower price, slower processor speed, less memory, more hard drive
size, etc, in comparison with the top recommended laptop;
Step 3: all of the tradeoff vectors are then organized into different
categories by utilizing an association rule mining tool to
discover the recurring subsets of (attribute, tradeoff) pairs among
them. Each subset hence represents a category of products with
the same tradeoff properties. Since a large amount of category
candidates would be produced by the mining algorithm, they are
further ranked and diversified. We select ones with higher tradeoff
utilities (i.e., gains against losses relative to the top candidate and
user preferences) in consideration of both category titles and their
associated products.
Therefore, the presented category titles can in nature stimulate users
to consider hidden needs and even guide them to conduct tradeoff
navigations for a better choice. For instance, after the user saw the
products that “have faster processor speed and longer battery life,
although they are slightly more expensive”, she may likely
change to that direction from the top candidate, if she realized that
the processor speed is more important than the price to her, or she
likes “longer battery life” although she did not state any
preference on this attribute before. The support for this kind of
tradeoff navigation process has been demonstrated to have
significant effect on increasing users’ decision accuracy and
preference certainty . We have previously compared our
organization algorithm with other typical tradeoff supporting
approaches (such as the data-driven dynamic critiquing system
 ), and found that it achieved significantly higher accuracy in
predicting tradeoff criteria and targeted products that users
actually made, mainly owing to its preference-focused clustering
and selection strategies .
Figure 1. Screenshot of the organization-based recommender interface.
Figure 2. Screenshot of the list view of recommendations.
3. PROTOTYPE SYSTEM
We implemented the organization interface in a product
recommender system, which is in particular to assist users in
searing for high-involvement products (e.g., notebooks, digital
cameras, and cars) for which people will be willing to spend
considerable effort in locating a desired choice, in order to avoid
any financial damage or emotional burden.
A typical interaction procedure with the system can be as follows.
A user initially starts her search by specifying any number of
preferences in a query area. Each preference is composed of one
acceptable attribute value and its relative weight from 1 “least
important” to 5 “most important”. A preference structure is hence
a set of (attribute value, weight) pairs of all participating
attributes, as required by the MAUT model. After a user states her
initial preferences, the best matching product will be computed
and returned at the top, followed by k categories of other
recommended products as outcomes of the organization algorithm
(k = 4 in our prototype, see Figure 1). If the user is interested in
one of the suggested categories, she can click “Show All” to see
more products (up to 6) belonging to it. Among these products,
the user can either choose one as her final choice, or select a neartarget and click “Better Features” to view recommended products
with some better values than the selected one. In the latter case,
the user’s preference model will be automatically refined to
respect her current needs. Specifically, the weight of improved
attribute(s) that appears in the examined category title will be
increased and the weight of compromised one(s) be decreased. All
attributes’ acceptable values will be also updated according to the
selected new reference product.
On the other hand, the user can revise preferences on her own
through clicking the button “Specify your own criteria for ‘Better
Features’”. A critiquing page will be then activated that provides
her with options for making self-specified tradeoff criteria to a
near-target. For example, the user could choose to optimize any
attributes’ values (e.g., $100 cheaper) and accept compromise(s)
on one or more less important attributes, which revisions will be
directly reflected in her preference model. A small set of tradeoff
alternatives that best satisfy the stated tradeoff criteria will be
then returned, among which she either makes the final choice or
proceeds to conduct any further tradeoff navigations in either the
organization interface or by her self-initiated way.
Moreover, the system allows the user to view the product's
detailed specifications via a “detail” link, and to record all of her
interesting products in a consideration set to facilitate comparing
them before checking out.
4. CROSS-CULTURAL EVALUATION
4.1 Cultural Difference
It is commonly recognized that elements of a user interface
appropriate for one culture may not be appropriate for another.
For example, Barber and Badre claimed that Americans prefer
websites with a white background, while Japanese dislike the
white and Chinese favor the red background.
People are deeply influenced by the cultural values and norms
they hold. Many researchers have classified cultures around the
world in various categories. The most typical classification is
Oriental vs. Western cultures. The Oriental culture, influenced by
the ancient Chinese culture, focuses on holistic thought,
continuity, and interrelationships of objects. On the contrary, the
Western culture, influenced by the ancient Greek culture, puts
greater emphasis on analytical thought, detachment, and attributes
of objects .
In online user-experience researches, one primary reason
identified for consumer behavior differences has been based on
the belief that western countries generally have individualism and
a low context culture, whereas eastern countries generally have
collectivism and a high context culture .
Thus, we were interested in recruiting people from the two
different cultural backgrounds to see whether the culture
difference would influence their actual behavior and subjective
perceptions with our product recommender system, while they use
it to make a purchase decision. In our experiment, the participants
were mainly coming from two nations respectively representing
the two different cultures: China (oriental culture) and
Switzerland (western culture).
4.2 Participants and Materials
In total, 120 participants volunteered to take part in the
experiment. In collaboration with the HCI lab at Tsinghua
University in China, we recruited 60 native Chinese. Most of
them are students in the university pursuing Bachelor, Master or
PhD degrees, and a few of them work as engineers in domains of
software development, architecture, etc. Another 60 subjects are
mainly students in our university, and 41 of them are Swiss and
the others are from European countries nearby like France, Italy
and Germany. Table 1 lists demographical profiles of study
subjects from the two cultural backgrounds.
Table 1. Demographical profiles of study subjects from two
cultures (the number of users is in the bracket)
Oriental Culture (60)
Western Culture (60)
China (60)
Switzerland (41); Other
European countries (19)
Female (23); Male (37)
Female (15); Male (45)
Average age
21~30 (57); >30 (3)
<21 (14); 21~30 (44);
job domain
Computer, mathematics,
environment, electronics,
architecture, etc.
Computer, education,
mechanics, electronics,,
architecture, etc.
4.34 (advanced)
4.08 (advanced)
4.83 (almost daily)
4.98 (almost daily)
e-commerce
site visits
3.69 (1-3 times a month)
3.36 (a few times every 3
e-shopping
experiences
3.25 (a few times every 3
2.92 (a few times every 3
Two systems were prepared for this user study. One is the
prototype system with the organization-based recommender
interface, as described in Section 3. Another system differs from
it only in respect of the recommendation display. That is, it does
not show an organized view of recommendations, but a traditional
ranked list with a “why” component to explain each
recommended product. More specifically, in the list view, k
products (e.g., k = 25 in our implementation) that are with the
highest weighted utilities according to the user’s current
preferences are listed, and the “why” gives the reason of why the
corresponding product is presented (i.e., its pros and cons
compared to the top candidate) (see Figure 2). In this system,
users can also freely specify and revise preferences, examine
products’ detailed specifications, and in-depth compare neartargets in a consideration set.
Henceforth, the two compared systems are respectively
abbreviated as ORG and LIST. They were both developed with
two product catalogs: 64 digital cameras each constrained by 8
main attributes (manufacturer, price, resolution, optical zoom,
etc), and 55 tablet PCs by 10 main attributes (manufacturer, price,
processor speed, weight, etc). All products were extracted from a
real e-commerce website.
4.3 Evaluation Criteria
In this experiment, the measured variables used in previous user
studies (e.g., perceived effort, return intention) were
extended to include more subjective aspects, which are essentially
related to the competence-based trust model we have established
for recommender systems . The model consists of three main
constructs: system-design features, competence-inspired trust, and
trust-induced behavioral intentions. As for system-design features
that may directly contribute to the promotion of overall
competence
perceptions,
dimensions:
recommendation quality, transparency, and user-control. The
overall competence is composed of two crucial variables:
perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness, which have been
determined as the primary factors of persuading users to accept
and use a technology . Besides, we included questions about
decision confidence, cognitive effort, and satisfaction. Trusting
intentions are behavioral attitudes expected from users once their
trust has been built. In addition to commonly addressed purchase
and return intentions, we were interested in the intention to save
effort, because it examines whether users will potentially reduce
their decision-making effort in repeated visits upon establishing a
certain trust level with the recommender system.
Table 2 lists all of the questions as measurements of these
subjective variables. Most of them came from existing literatures
where they have been repeatedly shown to exhibit strong content
validity . Each question was required to respond on a 5-point
Likert scale from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”.
Except for these subjective criteria, we also measured
participants’ objective decision accuracy and effort. The objective
accuracy was defined as the percentage of users who stood by
their choice found using the assigned recommender system, when
they have the chance to review all alternatives in the database.
The objective effort was quantitatively measured in terms of both
task completion time and interaction cycles.
4.4 Experiment Design and Procedure
A 22 full-factorial between-group experiment design was used.
The manipulated factors are: (oriental culture, western culture)
and (ORG, LIST). Participants were evenly distributed into the
four conditions, resulting in a sample size of 30 for each condition
cell. Each participant was further randomly assigned one product
catalog (digital camera or tablet PC) to search.
An online procedure containing instructions, evaluated interfaces
and questionnaires was implemented, so that participants could
easily follow and we could record all of their actions in a log file.
At the beginning, the participant was required to fill in a prequestionnaire about her/his personal information and subjective
opinions on the priority order of different factors in influencing
her/his general trust formation in an e-commerce website. Then
s/he was asked to use the assigned system to locate a product that
s/he most preferred and would purchase if given the opportunity.
After the choice was made, the participant was asked to answer
post-study questions related to all of the measured subjective
variables. Then the interface’s decision accuracy was assessed by
revealing all of products to the participant to determine whether
s/he prefers another product in the catalog or sticks with the
choice just made using the recommender system.
Table 2. Questions to measure subjective variables
Question responded on a 5-point Likert scale
from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”
Subjective perceptions of system-design features
Recommendation
This interface gave me some really good
recommendations.
Transparency
I understand why the products were returned
through the explanations in the interface.
User control
I felt in control of specifying and changing my
preferences in this interface.
Overall competence perceptions
Perceived ease of
I find this interface easy to use.
This interface is competent to help me effectively
find products I really like.
I find this interface is useful to improve my
“shopping” performance.
usefulness
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.69
confidence
I am confident that the product I just “purchased” is
really the best choice for me.
I easily found the information I was looking for.
Looking for a product using this interface required
too much effort (reverse scale).
Perceived effort
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.54
Satisfaction
My overall satisfaction with the interface is high.
Trusting intentions
Intention to
I would purchase the product I just chose if given
the opportunity.
If I had to search for a product online in the future
and an interface like this was available, I would be
very likely to use it.
I don't like this interface, so I would not use it again
(reverse scale).
Intention to return
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.80
Intention to save
effort in next visit
If I had a chance to use this interface again, I
would likely make my choice more quickly.
Note: The Cronbach’s alpha value represents how well the two items are
related and unified to one construct.
4.5 Hypotheses
Regarding the culture difference, we postulated that it would not
have significant influence on users’ decision behavior in either
ORG or LIST. That is, people would react similarly to the system
no matter which cultural background s/he is from. The ORG
system was further hypothesized to outperform LIST, especially
in terms of subjective constructs related to user trust, owing to the
replacement of the list view of recommendations with the
organized view.
5. RESULTS
5.1 Objective Measures
We first measured users’ objective performance in the two
systems (see Table 3). We respectively compared the results
between two groups of people from the same cultural background
but used different systems, two groups of people using the same
system but from different cultures, and the overall comparison of
ORG and LIST taking into account of all study participants. The
between-group analyses were done by the Student t-test assuming
unequal variances, with estimated power of 86% under the
assumption of “large” effect size, which power indicates a high
likelihood of detecting a significant effect provided one exists.
The two-way ANOVA test was used to analyze the interaction
effect between the two independent variables: culture difference
and system difference.
Results show that both systems enable to achieve a high level of
accuracy (above 60% on average) for all users, although oriental
participants’ accuracy is slightly higher (but not significantly) in
the two systems.
The overall time consumption in ORG is slightly less, but
separate analysis showed that oriental users spent more time in
ORG, whereas western users expended more time in LIST.
However, all of the differences are not significant.
In terms of the total interaction cycles (i.e., times of revising
preferences and viewing recommended products), there only
exists a significant difference between users of different cultures
in LIST. That is, while using the list-based system, oriental users
were involved into a relatively less amount of interaction cycles
to locate their choice, compared to western participants. The
overall interaction cycles consumed in ORG is higher than in
LIST, but the difference does not reach to a significant level.
Furthermore, as the ANOVA test shows, the culture difference
did not have significant interaction effect on users’ objective
decision accuracy and effort in ORG and LIST.
Table 3. Comparisons regarding objective measures
Mean (st.d.)
Objective accuracy Interaction: F=0.14 , p=0.71
0.6 (0.49)
0.63 (0.486)
.710 (118)
Time consumption Interaction: F=1.52 , p=0.22
4.60 (3.21)
5.14 (3.95)
Interaction cycles
Interaction: F=1.71 , p=0.19
2.45 (1.77)
2.17 (1.46)
.341 (114)
Note: p1 and p2 are the significant values respectively from horizontal and
vertical between-group comparisons (df: degree of freedom); Mean (st.d.)
is the overall average value (and standard deviation) of two systems;
Interaction represents the interaction effect between the two factors:
culture difference and system difference; OU stands for Oriental Users and
WU for Western Users.
5.2 Subjective Measures
We further examined whether the cultural background would
influence users’ subjective perceptions with the system, and
which system would perform better respecting these subjective
As introduced before, 11 subjective variables were measured.
Analysis of all users’ responses indicates that ORG obtained
positively higher scores on all of them, 6 of which are
significantly better (see Table 4). More concretely, the
participants using ORG on average expressed significantly higher
perceived recommendation quality, higher perceived ease of use,
higher perceived usefulness, lower perceived effort, higher
satisfaction and higher intention to save effort in repeated visits,
compared to the rates of another group with LIST. The results
hence imply that the organization method will particularly
enhance the aspect of recommendation quality, with the resulting
benefit of increasing users’ system acceptance given its
significant impacts on the perceptions of ease of use and
usefulness. It is also likely to save users’ cognitive effort and
augment their overall satisfaction with the system. As for the
other two system-design features, the two systems did not exhibit
significant differences, which might be because they both provide
explanations (for recommendation transparency) and preference
revision tools (for user-control).
In-depth examination in consideration of cultural impacts shows
that the favorable tendencies towards ORG were more obvious
among oriental users, although the ANOVA test did not reveal
significant interaction effects from the culture factor. Concretely,
among oriental users, significant differences were found in favor
of ORG, in terms of perceived recommendation quality, perceived
usefulness, decision confidence, perceived effort and satisfaction,
but no such significant phenomena appeared among western
subjects. Additionally, the comparison of the two cultural groups’
responses purely on ORG indicates that oriental participants gave
significantly
recommendation quality, decision confidence and intention to
save effort. The similar comparison on LIST shows one
significant difference on the variable of intention to save effort in
the next visit, on which oriental participants scored higher, while
western users perceived significantly lower effort during the first
interaction.
All of the results hence infer that oriental subjects’ reaction to
ORG was indeed more positively stronger than western users’,
which is primarily reflected on their perceived recommendation
quality, decision confidence and cognitive effort.
5.3 Other Results
In the pre-questionnaire, we asked each participant to rate a set of
statements about the relative importance of factors influencing
perception
e-commerce
trustworthiness, their intention to purchase a product on the
website and intention to repeatedly visit it for products’
information. The goal was to understand the contribution of a
recommender system’s competence to users’ trust formation,
relative to the website’s reputation, integrity and price info.
Through the comparison of responses from people of different
cultures, it may indicate whether oriental and western users would
give different priorities on these factors when they evaluate an ecommerce website from a global viewpoint.
Table 4. Comparisons regarding subjective perceptions
p value (df)
Mean (st.d.)
Perceived recommendation quality
Interaction: F=0.93 , p=0.34
3.7 (0.77)
3.35 (0.95)
p value (df)
.029 (113)
Perceived transparency
Interaction: F=0.52 , p=0.47
0.685 (58)
3.9 (0.63)
0.238 (56)
3.7 (0.87)
p value (df)
.152 (108)
Perceived control
Interaction: F<0.01 , p=1
3.7 (0.96)
3.43 (0.91)
p value (df)
.121 (118)
Perceived ease of use Interaction: F=0.01 , p=0.92
3.72 (0.98)
p value (df)
.098 (117)
Perceived usefulness Interaction: F=0.22, p =0.64
3.64 (0.74)
3.36 (0.81)
p value (df)
.048 (117)
Decision confidence
Interaction: F=1.64 , p=0.20
3.72 (0.69)
3.6 (0.87)
p value (df)
.417 (112)
Perceived effort
Interaction: F=1.39 , p=0.24
2.28 (0.74)
2.55 (0.84)
p value (df)
.069 (116)
Satisfaction
Interaction: F=0.80 , p=0.37
3.62 (0.64)
3.35 (0.95)
p value (df)
.075 (103)
Intention to purchase
Interaction: F=0.04 , p=0.85
3.35 (0.86)
3.15 (1.04)
p value (df)
.253 (114)
Intention to return
Interaction: F=0.98 , p=0.33
3.67 (0.87)
3.54 (0.88)
p value (df)
.436 (118)
Intention to save effort in next visit
Interaction: F=0.16 , p=0.69
3.53 (0.96)
3.2 (0.94)
p value (df)
.057 (118)
Table 5 shows the priority order of these factors for each question
from both oriental and western subjects. All average scores are
beyond the medium level (“moderately important”). The factors
were ranked by their average scores and the top one is the most
important for most users. For the trustworthiness perception, the
priority order of the five factors is the same between two groups
of users: the website’s integrity (e.g., product quality, security,
delivery service, etc) is the most important, followed by its
reputation, price info, and competences in helping users find ideal
products and providing good recommendations. However, when
users were deciding whether to purchase a product on the website,
for western users, the most important is the product’s price, while
for oriental users, it is the integrity that most matters and the price
quality is the third important following the website’s reputation.
Table 5. Average rates of five considered factors and their
priority order for each question (the rate was given on a 5point Likert scale from “unimportant” to “very important”)
Trustworthiness
of an e-commerce
intention in an ecommerce
Return intention
in an e-commerce
Integrity (IN)
The website can keep promises they make in terms
of product quality, security, delivery service, and
privacy policy.
Reputation (RE)
The website has a good reputation.
Price (PR)
The website provides good prices on the products.
Competence 1
The website is capable of helping me effectively
find a product I really like.
Competence 2
recommendations.
Note: the average score is in the bracket.
Although two competence aspects were ordered the least
important than the others for general trustworthiness perception
and purchase intention by both oriental and western participants,
they went up to higher ranks when the question about return
intention was asked. As a matter of fact, the most important factor
leading to users’ return intention is that the website can help them
effectively find a product they really like.
Therefore, the five considered factors were found all important in
building a trustworthy and beneficial e-commerce website.
Furthermore, the website’s integrity, reputation and price quality
will more likely positively impact users’ trustworthiness
perception and conversion potential from visitors to buyers. On
the other hand, its competence in providing intelligent decision
aids to effectively help users make accurate choice will
particularly contribute to stimulating users’ intention to return to
the website for repeated uses.
6. CONCLUSION
We presented a user study that evaluated the organization-based
recommender system in a cross-cultural experiment setup. It
shows that people from both oriental and western cultures
basically acted similarly in this system, in terms of their objective
decision accuracy, interaction effort, and most of subjective
measures. In particular, compared to the list view of
recommendations, the organized view performed significantly
more effectively in improving on users’ perception of
recommendation quality and increasing their system-acceptance
levels (i.e., perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness) and
overall satisfaction. In-depth analysis concerning cultural impacts
further shows that some of these significant phenomena were
observably stronger among oriental participants, implying that
oriental users will likely be more actively reacting to the
organization interface once it replaces the traditional list view.
Incorporating the outcomes of our study for general recommender
system designs, we suggest two practical implications. One is that,
combining our previous and current findings, we can conclude
that the organization view of recommendation display should
provide more substantial benefits to users against the list view,
even to people from different cultural backgrounds. Its advantages
shall be mainly applicable and scalable for the condition of large
recommendation sets (such as the result page in some typical
recommender websites like www.movielens.org), but also
feasible for a small set if the amount of items is beyond a certain
number. For the future work, it must be of interest to investigate
what the threshold should be and how to accordingly customize
the optimal “number” of categories.
Another implication is for the user evaluation of recommender
systems. To our knowledge, there are few studies about potential
effects from the cultural influence on recommender interface
designs. We did this cross-cultural user study not only with the
purpose of verifying our technology’s universal effectiveness, but
also aiming at establishing an evaluation framework involving all
crucial objective and subjective criteria for assessing a
recommender system’s true benefits. We believe that other
researchers will profit from our evaluation methods when they
conduct similar types of experiments.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Prof. Yuanchun Shi and Yue Suo at Tsinghua
University in China for their help of recruiting Chinese subjects.
We are grateful to all participants for their time and patience.
8. REFERENCES
 Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T. and Swami, A. 1993. Mining
association rules between sets of items in large databases. In
Proc. ACM SIGMOD, 207–216.
 Barber, W. and Badre, A. 1998. Culturability: the merging of
culture and usability. In Proc. Fourth Human Factors and
the Web Conference.
 Chau, P. Y. K., Cole, M., Massey, A. P., Montoya-Weiss, M.
and O'Keefe, R. M. 2002. Cultural differences in the online
behavior of consumers. Communications of the ACM 45
(10), 138-143.
 Chen, L. and Pu, P. 2005. Trust building in recommender
agents. In Proc. the Workshop at 2nd Inter. Conf. on E-
Business and Telecommunication Networks (ICETE’02),
 Chen, L. and Pu, P. 2007. Preference-based organization
interfaces: aiding user critiques in recommender systems. In
Proc. Inter. Conf. on User Modeling (UM’07), 77-86.
 Davis, F. D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use and user acceptance of information technology. MIS
Quarterly 13 (3), 319-340.
 Falk, R. F. and Miller, N. B. 1992. A Primer for Soft
Modeling. The University of Akron Press.
 Gefen, D. 2000. E-commerce: the role of familiarity and
trust. Inter. J. of Management Science 28, 725-737.
 Grabner-Kräuter, S. and Kaluscha, E.A. 2003. Empirical
research in on-line trust: a review and critical assessment.
Inter. J. of Human-Computer Studies 58, 783-812.
 Herlocker, J. L., Konstan, J.A. and Riedl, J. 2000. Explaining
collaborative filtering recommendations. In ACM Conf. on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 241-250.
 Keeney, R. and Raiffa, H. 1976. Decisions with Multiple
Objectives: Preferences and Value Tradeoffs. Cambridge
University Press.
 Koufaris, M., Kambil, A. and LaBarbera, P. A. 2001.
Consumer behavior in web-based commerce: an empirical
study. Inter. J. of Electronic Commerce 5 (2), 115-138.
 Lee, K., Joshi, K. and McIvor, R. 2007. Understanding
multicultural differences in online satisfaction. In Proc. of
ACM SIGMIS Conf. Computer Personnel Doctoral
Consortium and Research (SIGMIS-CPR’07), 209-212.
 McCarthy, K., Reilly, J., McGinty, L. and Smyth, B. 2005.
Experiments in dynamic critiquing. In Proc. Inter. Conf. on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’05), 175-182.
 McSherry, D. 2004. Explanation in recommender systems. In
Workshop Proc. European Conf. on Case-Based Reasoning
(ECCBR’04), 125-134.
 Pu, P. and Chen, L. 2005. Integrating tradeoff support in
product search tools for e-commerce sites. In Proc. ACM
Conf. on Electronic Commerce (EC’05), 269-278.
 Pu, P. and Chen, L. 2006. Trust building with explanation
interfaces. In Proc. Inter. Conf. on Intelligent User
Interfaces (IUI’06), 93-100.
 Sinha, R. and Swearingen, K. 2002. The role of transparency
in recommender systems. In Extended Abstracts of
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’02), 830-831.