Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5582–5591
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
Combating Adversarial Misspellings with Robust Word Recognition
Danish Pruthi
Bhuwan Dhingra
Zachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
{ddanish, bdhingra}@cs.cmu.edu, 
To combat adversarial spelling mistakes, we
propose placing a word recognition model in
front of the downstream classiﬁer. Our word
recognition models build upon the RNN semicharacter architecture, introducing several new
backoff strategies for handling rare and unseen words. Trained to recognize words corrupted by random adds, drops, swaps, and
keyboard mistakes, our method achieves 32%
relative (and 3.3% absolute) error reduction
over the vanilla semi-character model.
Notably, our pipeline confers robustness on the
downstream classiﬁer, outperforming both adversarial training and off-the-shelf spell checkers. Against a BERT model ﬁne-tuned for sentiment analysis, a single adversarially-chosen
character attack lowers accuracy from 90.3%
to 45.8%. Our defense restores accuracy to
75%1. Surprisingly, better word recognition
does not always entail greater robustness. Our
analysis reveals that robustness also depends
upon a quantity that we denote the sensitivity.
Introduction
Despite the rapid progress of deep learning techniques on diverse supervised learning tasks, these
models remain brittle to subtle shifts in the data
distribution. Even when the permissible changes
are conﬁned to barely-perceptible perturbations,
training robust models remains an open challenge.
Following the discovery that imperceptible attacks
could cause image recognition models to misclassify examples , a veritable
sub-ﬁeld has emerged in which authors iteratively
propose attacks and countermeasures.
For all the interest in adversarial computer vision, these attacks are rarely encountered outside of academic research. However, adversarial
1All code for our defenses, attacks, and baselines is
available at 
Adversarial-Misspellings
Alteration
Movie Review
A triumph, relentless and beautiful
in its downbeat darkness
A triumph, relentless and beuatiful
in its downbeat darkness
A triumph, relentless and beautiful
in its dwnbeat darkness
A triumph, relentless and beautiful
in its downbeat darkness
A triumph, relentless and beautiful
in its downbeat darkness
Table 1: Adversarial spelling mistakes inducing sentiment misclassiﬁcation and word-recognition defenses.
misspellings constitute a longstanding real-world
problem. Spammers continually bombard email
servers, subtly misspelling words in efforts to
evade spam detection while preserving the emails’
intended meaning . As another example, programmatic
censorship on the Internet has spurred communities to adopt similar methods to communicate surreptitiously .
In this paper, we focus on adversarially-chosen
spelling mistakes in the context of text classiﬁcation, addressing the following attack types: dropping, adding, and swapping internal characters
within words. These perturbations are inspired by
psycholinguistic studies which demonstrated that humans can
comprehend text altered by jumbling internal characters, provided that the ﬁrst and last characters of
each word remain unperturbed.
First, in experiments addressing both BiLSTM
and ﬁne-tuned BERT models, comprising four
different input formats:
word-only, char-only,
word+char, and word-piece , we
demonstrate that an adversary can degrade a classiﬁer’s performance to that achieved by random
guessing. This requires altering just two charac-
ters per sentence. Such modiﬁcations might ﬂip
words either to a different word in the vocabulary or, more often, to the out-of-vocabulary token UNK . Consequently, adversarial edits can degrade a word-level model by transforming the informative words to UNK . Intuitively, one might
suspect that word-piece and character-level models would be less susceptible to spelling attacks
as they can make use of the residual word context. However, our experiments demonstrate that
character and word-piece models are in fact more
vulnerable. We show that this is due to the adversary’s effective capacity for ﬁner grained manipulations on these models.
While against a
word-level model, the adversary is mostly limited to UNK -ing words, against a word-piece or
character-level model, each character-level add,
drop, or swap produces a distinct input, providing
the adversary with a greater set of options.
Second, we evaluate ﬁrst-line techniques including data augmentation and adversarial training, demonstrating that they offer only marginal
beneﬁts here, e.g., a BERT model achieving 90.3
accuracy on a sentiment classiﬁcation task, is
degraded to 64.1 by an adversarially-chosen 1character swap in the sentence, which can only be
restored to 69.2 by adversarial training.
Third (our primary contribution), we propose
a task-agnostic defense, attaching a word recognition model that predicts each word in a sentence given a full sequence of (possibly mispelled)
The word recognition model’s outputs
comprise the input to a downstream classiﬁcation
model. Our word recognition models build upon
the RNN-based semi-character word recognition
model due to Sakaguchi et al. . While our
word recognizers are trained on domain-speciﬁc
text from the task at hand, they often predict UNK
at test time, owing to the small domain-speciﬁc
vocabulary. To handle unobserved and rare words,
we propose several backoff strategies including
falling back on a generic word recognizer trained
on a larger corpus.
Incorporating our defenses,
BERT models subject to 1-character attacks are
restored to 88.3, 81.1, 78.0 accuracy for swap,
drop, add attacks respectively, as compared to
69.2, 63.6, and 50.0 for adversarial training
Fourth, we offer a detailed qualitative analysis,
demonstrating that a low word error rate alone is
insufﬁcient for a word recognizer to confer robustness on the downstream task.
Additionally, we
ﬁnd that it is important that the recognition model
supply few degrees of freedom to an attacker. We
provide a metric to quantify this notion of sensitivity in word recognition models and study its relation to robustness empirically. Models with low
sensitivity and word error rate are most robust.
Related Work
Several papers address adversarial attacks on NLP
Changes to text, whether word- or
character-level, are all perceptible, raising some
questions about what should rightly be considered
an adversarial example . Jia and Liang 
address the reading comprehension task, showing that by appending distractor sentences to the
end of stories from the SQuAD dataset , they could cause models to output incorrect answers. Inspired by this work, Glockner
et al. demonstrate an attack that breaks entailment systems by replacing a single word with
either a synonym or its hypernym. Recently, Zhao
et al. investigated the problem of producing
natural-seeming adversarial examples, noting that
adversarial examples in NLP are often ungrammatical .
In related work on character-level attacks,
Ebrahimi et al. explored gradient-based
methods to generate string edits to fool classiﬁcation and translation systems, respectively. While
their focus is on efﬁcient methods for generating adversaries, ours is on improving the worst
case adversarial performance. Similarly, Belinkov
and Bisk studied how synthetic and natural noise affects character-level machine translation. They considered structure invariant representations and adversarial training as defenses against
such noise. Here, we show that an auxiliary word
recognition model, which can be trained on unlabeled data, provides a strong defense.
Spelling correction is often
viewed as a sub-task of grammatical error correction . Classic methods rely on a source language model and a
noisy channel model to ﬁnd the most likely correction for a given word . Recently, neural techniques have
been applied to the task , which model the context and orthography of the input together. Our work extends
the ScRNN model of Sakaguchi et al. .
Robust Word Recognition
To tackle character-level adversarial attacks, we
introduce a simple two-stage solution, placing a
word recognition model (W) before the downstream classiﬁer (C). Under this scheme, all inputs
are classiﬁed by the composed model C ◦W. This
modular approach, with W and C trained separately, offers several beneﬁts: (i) we can deploy the
same word recognition model for multiple downstream classiﬁcation tasks/models; and (ii) we can
train the word recognition model with larger unlabeled corpora.
Against adversarial mistakes, two important
factors govern the robustness of this combined
model: W’s accuracy in recognizing misspelled
words and W’s sensitivity to adversarial perturbations on the same input. We discuss these aspects
in detail below.
ScRNN with Backoff
We now describe semi-character RNNs for word
recognition, explain their limitations, and suggest
techniques to improve them.
ScRNN Model
Inspired by the psycholinguistic studies ,
Sakaguchi et al. proposed a semi-character
based RNN (ScRNN) that processes a sentence
of words with misspelled characters, predicting the correct words at each step.
{w1, w2, . . . , wn} denote the input sentence, a sequence of constituent words wi. Each input word
(wi) is represented by concatenating (i) a one hot
vector of the ﬁrst character (wi1); (ii) a one hot
representation of the last character (wil, where
l is the length of word wi); and (iii) a bag of
characters representation of the internal characters
j=2 wij). ScRNN treats the ﬁrst and the last
characters individually, and is agnostic to the ordering of the internal characters. Each word, represented accordingly, is then fed into a BiLSTM
cell. At each sequence step, the training target is
the correct corresponding word (output dimension
equal to vocabulary size), and the model is optimized with cross-entropy loss.
Backoff Variations
While Sakaguchi et al.
 demonstrate strong word recognition performance, a drawback of their evaluation setup is
that they only attack and evaluate on the subset
of words that are a part of their training vocabulary. In such a setting, the word recognition performance is unreasonably dependant on the chosen vocabulary size. In principle, one can design
models to predict (correctly) only a few chosen
words, and ignore the remaining majority and still
reach 100% accuracy. For the adversarial setting,
rare and unseen words in the wild are particularly
critical, as they provide opportunities for the attackers. A reliable word-recognizer should handle
these cases gracefully. Below, we explore different
ways to back off when the ScRNN predicts UNK
(a frequent outcome for rare and unseen words):
• Pass-through:
word-recognizer passes on
the (possibly misspelled) word as is.
• Backoff to neutral word:
Alternatively,
noting that passing
UNK -predicted words
through unchanged exposes the downstream
model to potentially corrupted text, we consider backing off to a neutral word like
‘a’, which has a similar distribution across
• Backoff to background model:
consider falling back upon a more generic
word recognition model trained upon a larger,
less-specialized corpus whenever the foreground word recognition model predicts
UNK 2. Figure 1 depicts this scenario pictorially.
Empirically, we ﬁnd that the background model
(by itself) is less accurate, because of the large
number of words it is trained to predict. Thus,
it is best to train a precise foreground model on
an in-domain corpus and focus on frequent words,
and then to resort to a general-purpose background
model for rare and unobserved words. Next, we
delineate our second consideration for building robust word-recognizers.
Model Sensitivity
In computer vision, an important factor determining the success of an adversary is the norm constraint on the perturbations allowed to an image
(||x −x′||∞< ϵ).
Higher values of ϵ lead to
a higher chance of mis-classiﬁcation for at least
one x′. Defense methods such as quantization and thermometer encoding try to reduce the space of perturbations available to the adversary by making the
model invariant to small changes in the input.
2Potentially the background model could be trained with
full vocabulary so that it never predicts UNK
Figure 1: A schematic sketch of our proposed word recognition system, consisting of a foreground and a background model. We train the foreground model on the smaller, domain-speciﬁc dataset, and the background model
on a larger dataset (e.g., the IMDB movie corpus). We train both models to reconstruct the correct word from
the orthography and context of the individual words, using synthetically corrupted inputs during training. Subsequently, we invoke the background model whenever the foreground model predicts UNK .
In NLP, we often get such invariance for free,
e.g., for a word-level model, most of the perturbations produced by our character-level adversary
lead to an UNK at its input. If the model is robust
to the presence of these UNK tokens, there is little
room for an adversary to manipulate it. Characterlevel models, on the other hand, despite their superior performance in many tasks, do not enjoy such
invariance. This characteristic invariance could be
exploited by an attacker. Thus, to limit the number
of different inputs to the classiﬁer, we wish to reduce the number of distinct word recognition outputs that an attacker can induce, not just the number of words on which the model is “fooled”. We
denote this property of a model as its sensitivity.
We can quantify this notion for a word recognition system W as the expected number of unique
outputs it assigns to a set of adversarial perturbations. Given a sentence s from the set of sentences S, let A(s) = s1′, s2′, . . . , sn′ denote the
set of n perturbations to it under attack type A,
and let V be the function that maps strings to an
input representation for the downstream classiﬁer.
For a word level model, V would transform sentences to a sequence of word ids, mapping OOV
words to the same UNK ID. Whereas, for a char
(or word+char, word-piece) model, V would map
inputs to a sequence of character IDs. Formally,
sensitivity is deﬁned as
#u(V ◦W(s1′), . . . , V ◦W(sn′))
where V ◦W(si) returns the input representation
(of the downstream classiﬁer) for the output string
produced by the word-recognizer W using si and
#u(·) counts the number of unique arguments.
Intuitively, we expect a high value of SA
lead to a lower robustness of the downstream classiﬁer, since the adversary has more degrees of
freedom to attack the classiﬁer. Thus, when using
word recognition as a defense, it is prudent to design a low sensitivity system with a low error rate.
However, as we will demonstrate, there is often a
trade-off between sensitivity and error rate.
Synthesizing Adversarial Attacks
Suppose we are given a classiﬁer C : S →Y
which maps natural language sentences s ∈S to
a label from a predeﬁned set y ∈Y. An adversary
for this classiﬁer is a function A which maps a sentence s to its perturbed versions {s′
2, . . . , s′
such that each s′
i is close to s under some notion
of distance between sentences. We deﬁne the robustness of classiﬁer C to the adversary A as:
s′∈A(s) 1[C(s′) = y]
where y represents the ground truth label for s. In
practice, a real-world adversary may only be able
to query the classiﬁer a few times, hence RC,A
represents the worst-case adversarial performance
of C. Methods for generating adversarial examples, such as HotFlip , focus on efﬁcient algorithms for searching the min
above. Improving RC,A would imply better robustness against all these methods.
Allowed Perturbations (A(s))
We explore adversaries which perturb sentences with four types
of character-level edits: (1) Swap: swapping two
adjacent internal characters of a word. (2) Drop:
removing an internal character of a word. (3) Keyboard: substituting an internal character with adjacent characters of QWERTY keyboard (4) Add:
inserting a new character internally in a word. In
line with the psycholinguistic studies , to ensure that the perturbations do not affect human ability to comprehend
the sentence, we only allow the adversary to edit
the internal characters of a word, and not edit stopwords or words shorter than 4 characters.
Attack Strategy
For 1-character attacks, we try
all possible perturbations listed above until we
ﬁnd an adversary that ﬂips the model prediction.
For 2-character attacks, we greedily ﬁx the edit
which had the least conﬁdence among 1-character
attacks, and then try all the allowed perturbations
on the remaining words. Higher order attacks can
be performed in a similar manner.
The greedy
strategy reduces the computation required to obtain higher order attacks3, but also means that the
robustness score is an upper bound on the true robustness of the classiﬁer.
Experiments and Results
In this section, we ﬁrst discuss our experiments on
the word recognition systems.
Word Error Correction
Data: We evaluate the spell correctors from §3 on
movie reviews from the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) . The SST dataset
consists of 8544 movie reviews, with a vocabulary of over 16K words. As a background corpus, we use the IMDB movie reviews , which contain 54K movie reviews, and a
vocabulary of over 78K words. The two datasets
do not share any reviews in common. The spellcorrection models are evaluated on their ability
to correct misspellings. The test setting consists
of reviews where each word (with length ≥4,
barring stopwords) is attacked by one of the attack types (from swap, add, drop and keyboard at-
3Its complexity is O(l), instead of O(lm) where l is the
sentence length and m is the order.
tacks). In the all attack setting, we mix all attacks
by randomly choosing one for each word. This
most closely resembles a real world attack setting.
Experimental Setup
In addition to our word
recognition models, we also compare to After
The Deadline (ATD), an open-source spell corrector4.
We found ATD to be the best freelyavailable corrector5. We refer the reader to Sakaguchi et al. for comparisons of ScRNN to
other anonymized commercial spell checkers.
For the ScRNN model, we use a single-layer Bi-
LSTM with a hidden dimension size of 50. The
input representation consists of 198 dimensions,
which is thrice the number of unique characters
(66) in the vocabulary.
We cap the vocabulary
size to 10K words, whereas we use the entire vocabulary of 78470 words when we backoff to the
background model. For training these networks,
we corrupt the movie reviews according to all attack types, i.e., applying one of the 4 attack types
to each word, and trying to reconstruct the original
words via cross entropy loss.
Word Recognition
Spell-Corrector
ScRNN (78K)
ScRNN (10K) w/ Backoff Variants
Pass-Through
Background
Table 2: Word Error Rates (WER) of ScRNN with each
backoff strategy, plus ATD and an ScRNN trained only
on the background corpus (78K vocabulary) The error
rates include 5.25% OOV words.
We calculate the word error rates
(WER) of each of the models for different attacks and present our ﬁndings in Table 2. Note
that ATD incorrectly predicts 11.2 words for every 100 words (in the ‘all’ setting), whereas, all of
the backoff variations of the ScRNN reconstruct
better. The most accurate variant involves backing
off to the background model, resulting in a low error rate of 6.9%, leading to the best performance
on word recognition. This is a 32% relative error
4 
//hunspell.github.io/), which is used in Linux
applications. ATD was signiﬁcantly more robust owing to
taking context into account while correcting.
reduction compared to the vanilla ScRNN model
with a pass-through backoff strategy. We can attribute the improved performance to the fact that
there are 5.25% words in the test corpus that are
unseen in the training corpus, and are thus only
recoverable by backing off to a larger corpus. Notably, only training on the larger background corpus does worse, at 8.7%, since the distribution of
word frequencies is different in the background
corpus compared to the foreground corpus.
Robustness to adversarial attacks
We use sentiment analysis and paraphrase detection as downstream tasks, as for these two tasks,
1-2 character edits do not change the output labels.
Experimental Setup
For sentiment classiﬁcation,
we systematically study the effect of
character-level adversarial attacks on two architectures and four different input formats. The ﬁrst
architecture encodes the input sentence into a sequence of embeddings, which are then sequentially processed by a BiLSTM. The ﬁrst and last
states of the BiLSTM are then used by the softmax layer to predict the sentiment of the input. We
consider three input formats for this architecture:
(1) Word-only: where the input words are encoded
using a lookup table; (2) Char-only: where the
input words are encoded using a separate singlelayered BiLSTM over their characters; and (3)
Word+Char: where the input words are encoded
using a concatenation of (1) and (2) 6.
The second architecture uses the ﬁne-tuned
BERT model , with an input
format of word-piece tokenization.
This model
has recently set a new state-of-the-art on several NLP benchmarks, including the sentiment
analysis task we consider here.
All models
are trained and evaluated on the binary version
of the sentence-level Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset with only positive and negative reviews.
We also consider the task of paraphrase detection.
Here too, we make use of the ﬁne-tuned
BERT , which is trained and
evaluated on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase
Corpus (MRPC) .
6Implementation details: The embedding dimension size
for the word, char and word+char models are 64, 32 and
64 + 32 respectively, with 64, 64 and 128 set as the hidden
dimension sizes for the three models.
strategies
methods for dealing with adversarial examples
include: (1) data augmentation (DA) ; and (2) adversarial training (Adv)
 .
In DA, the trained
model is ﬁne-tuned after augmenting the training
set with an equal number of examples randomly
attacked with a 1-character edit.
In Adv, the
trained model is ﬁne-tuned with additional adversarial examples (selected at random) that produce
incorrect predictions from the current-state classi-
ﬁer. The process is repeated iteratively, generating
and adding newer adversarial examples from the
updated classiﬁer model, until the adversarial
accuracy on dev set stops improving.
In Table 3, we examine the robustness
of the sentiment models under each attack and defense method.
In the absence of any attack or
defense, BERT (a word-piece model) performs
the best (90.3%7) followed by word+char models (80.5%), word-only models (79.2%) and then
char-only models (70.3%). However, even singlecharacter attacks (chosen adversarially) can be
catastrophic, resulting in a signiﬁcantly degraded
performance of 46%, 57%, 59% and 33%, respectively under the ‘all’ setting.
Intuitively, one might suppose that word-piece
and character-level models would be more robust
to such attacks given they can make use of the
remaining context.
However, we ﬁnd that they
are the more susceptible. To see why, note that
the word ‘beautiful’ can only be altered in a few
ways for word-only models, either leading to an
UNK or an existing vocabulary word, whereas,
word-piece and character-only models treat each
unique character combination differently.
provides more variations that an attacker can exploit. Following similar reasoning, add and key
attacks pose a greater threat than swap and drop
attacks. The robustness of different models can be
ordered as word-only > word+char > char-only ∼
word-piece, and the efﬁcacy of different attacks as
add > key > drop > swap.
Next, we scrutinize the effectiveness of defense
methods when faced against adversarially chosen
attacks. Clearly from table 3, DA and Adv are not
7The reported accuracy on SST-B by BERT in Glue
Benchmarks is slightly higher as it is trained and evaluated on phrase-level sentiment prediction task which has
more training examples compared to the sentence-level task
we consider. We use the ofﬁcial source code at https:
//github.com/google-research/bert
Sentiment Analysis (1-char attack/2-char attack)
Word-Level Models
(64.3/53.6)
(63.7/52.7)
(60.0/43.2)
(60.2/42.4)
(58.6/40.2)
BiLSTM + ATD
(76.2/75.3)
(66.5/59.9)
(55.6/47.5)
(62.6/57.6)
(55.8/37.0)
BiLSTM + Pass-through
(78.6/78.5)
(69.1/65.3)
(65.0/59.2)
(69.6/65.6)
(63.2/52.4)
BiLSTM + Background
(78.9/78.4)
(69.6/66.8)
(62.6/56.4)
(68.2/62.2)
(59.6/49.0)
BiLSTM + Neutral
(80.1/79.9)
(72.4/70.2)
(67.2/61.2)
(69.0/64.6)
(63.2/54.0)
Char-Level Models
(53.6/42.9)
(48.8/37.1)
(33.8/14.8)
(40.8/22.0)
(32.6/14.0)
BiLSTM + ATD
(66.6/65.2)
(58.0/53.0)
(54.6/44.4)
(61.6/57.5)
(46.5/35.4)
BiLSTM + Pass-through
(65.8/62.9)
(58.3/54.2)
(54.0/44.2)
(58.8/52.4)
(51.6/39.8)
BiLSTM + Background
(70.3/69.8)
(60.4/57.7)
(57.4/52.6)
(58.8/54.2)
(53.6/47.2)
BiLSTM + Neutral
(70.7/70.7)
(62.1/60.5)
(57.8/53.6)
(61.4/58.0)
(55.2/48.4)
Word+Char Models
(63.9/52.3)
(62.8/50.8)
(57.8/39.8)
(58.4/40.8)
(56.6/35.6)
BiLSTM + ATD
(78.0/77.3)
(67.7/60.9)
(55.6/50.5)
(68.7/64.6)
(48.5/37.4)
BiLSTM + Pass-through
(79.0/78.7)
(69.5/65.7)
(64.0/59.0)
(66.0/62.0)
(61.5/56.5)
BiLSTM + Background
(79.6/79.0)
(69.7/66.7)
(62.0/57.0)
(65.0/56.5)
(59.4/49.8)
BiLSTM + Neutral
(79.5/79.4)
(71.2/68.8)
(65.0/59.0)
(65.5/61.5)
(61.5/55.5)
Word-piece Models
(64.1/47.4)
(59.2/39.9)
(46.2/26.4)
(54.3/34.9)
(45.8/24.6)
(68.3/50.6)
(62.7/39.9)
(43.6/17.0)
(57.7/32.4)
(41.0/15.8)
BERT + Adv
(69.2/52.9)
(63.6/40.5)
(50.0/22.0)
(60.1/36.6)
(47.0/20.2)
BERT + ATD
(84.5/84.5)
(73.0/64.0)
(77.0/69.5)
(80.0/75.0)
(67.0/55.0)
BERT + Pass-through
(85.5/83.9)
(78.9/75.0)
(70.4/64.4)
(75.3/70.3)
(68.0/58.5)
BERT + Background
(89.1/89.1)
(79.3/76.5)
(76.5/71.0)
(77.5/74.4)
(73.0/67.5)
BERT + Neutral
(88.3/88.3)
(81.1/79.5)
(78.0/74.0)
(78.8/76.8)
(75.0/68.0)
Table 3: Accuracy of various classiﬁcation models, with and without defenses, under adversarial attacks. Even
1-character attacks signiﬁcantly degrade classiﬁer performance. Our defenses confer robustness, recovering over
76% of the original accuracy, under the ‘all’ setting for all four model classes.
effective in this case. We observed that despite a
low training error, these models were not able to
generalize to attacks on newer words at test time.
ATD spell corrector is the most effective on keyboard attacks, but performs poorly on other attack
types, particularly the add attack strategy.
The ScRNN model with pass-through backoff
offers better protection, bringing back the adversarial accuracy within 5% range for the swap attack. It is also effective under other attack classes,
and can mitigate the adversarial effect in wordpiece models by 21%, character-only models by
19%, and in word, and word+char models by over
4.5% . This suggests that the direct training signal
of word error correction is more effective than the
indirect signal of sentiment classiﬁcation available
to DA and Adv for model robustness.
We observe additional gains by using background models as a backoff alternative, because of
its lower word error rate (WER), especially, under
the swap and drop attacks. However, these gains
do not consistently translate in all other settings,
as lower WER is necessary but not sufﬁcient. Besides lower error rate, we ﬁnd that a solid defense
should furnish the attacker the fewest options to
attack, i.e. it should have a low sensitivity. As
we shall see in section § 4.3, the backoff neutral
variation has the lowest sensitivity due to mapping
UNK predictions to a ﬁxed neutral word. Thus, it
results in the highest robustness on most of the attack types for all four model classes.
All attacks
BERT + ATD
BERT + Pass-through
BERT + Neutral
Table 4: Accuracy of BERT, with and without defenses,
on MRPC when attacked under the ‘all’ attack setting.
Sensitivity Analysis
Closed Vocabulary Models (word-only)
Pass-Through
Background
Open Vocab. Models (char/word+char/word-piece)
Pass-Through
Background
Table 5: Sensitivity values for word recognizers. Neutral backoff shows lowest sensitivity.
Table 4 shows the accuracy of BERT on 200 examples from the dev set of the MRPC paraphrase
detection task under various attack and defense
settings. We re-trained the ScRNN model variants on the MRPC training set for these experiments. Again, we ﬁnd that simple 1-2 character
attacks can bring down the accuracy of BERT signiﬁcantly (89% to 31%). Word recognition models can provide an effective defense, with both our
pass-through and neutral variants recovering most
of the accuracy. While the neutral backoff model
is effective on 2-char attacks, it hurts performance
in the no attack setting, since it incorrectly modiﬁes certain correctly spelled entity names. Since
the two variants are already effective, we did not
train a background model for this task.
Understanding Model Sensitivity
Experimental setup
To study model sensitivity, for each sentence, we perturb one randomlychosen word and replace it with all possible perturbations under a given attack type. The resulting
set of perturbed sentences is then fed to the word
recognizer (whose sensitivity is to be estimated).
As described in equation 1, we count the number
of unique predictions from the output sentences.
Two corrections are considered unique if they are
mapped differently by the downstream classiﬁer.
The neutral backoff variant has the lowest sensitivity (Table 5). This is expected, as it
returns a ﬁxed neutral word whenever the ScRNN
predicts an UNK , therefore reducing the number
of unique outputs it predicts.
Open vocabulary
char-only, word+char, word-piece) downstream classiﬁers consider every unique combination of characters differently, whereas wordonly classiﬁers internally treat all out of vocabulary (OOV) words alike. Hence, for char-only,
Sensitivity
Pass-through
Background
Sensitivity
Figure 2: Effect of sensitivity and word error rate on
robustness (depicted by the bubble sizes) in word-only
models (left) and char-only models (right).
word+char, and word-piece models, the passthrough version is more sensitive than the background variant, as it passes words as is (and each
combination is considered uniquely).
for word-only models, pass-through is less sensitive as all the OOV character combinations are
rendered identical.
Ideally, a preferred defense is one with low sensitivity and word error rate. In practice, however,
we see that a low error rate often comes at the cost
of sensitivity. We visualize this trade-off in Figure 2, where we plot WER and sensitivity on the
two axes, and depict the robustness when using
different backoff variants. Generally, sensitivity is
the more dominant factor out of the two, as the error rates of the considered variants are reasonably
Human Intelligibility
We verify if the sentiment (of the reviews) is preserved with char-level
attacks. In a human study with 50 attacked (and
subsequently misclassiﬁed), and 50 unchanged reviews, it was noted that 48 and 49, respectively,
preserved the sentiment.
Conclusion
As character and word-piece inputs become commonplace in modern NLP pipelines, it is worth
highlighting the vulnerability they add.
show that minimally-doctored attacks can bring
down accuracy of classiﬁers to random guessing. We recommend word recognition as a safeguard against this and build upon RNN-based
semi-character word recognizers. We discover that
when used as a defense mechanism, the most accurate word recognition models are not always the
most robust against adversarial attacks. Additionally, we highlight the need to control the sensitivity of these models to achieve high robustness.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Graham Neubig, Eduard Hovy, Paul Michel, Mansi Gupta, and Antonios Anastasopoulos for suggestions and feedback.