Deep Learning for Tactile Understanding From Visual and Haptic Data
Yang Gao1, Lisa Anne Hendricks1, Katherine J. Kuchenbecker2 and Trevor Darrell1
Abstract— Robots which interact with the physical world will
beneﬁt from a ﬁne-grained tactile understanding of objects and
surfaces. Additionally, for certain tasks, robots may need to
know the haptic properties of an object before touching it.
To enable better tactile understanding for robots, we propose
a method of classifying surfaces with haptic adjectives (e.g.,
compressible or smooth) from both visual and physical interaction data. Humans typically combine visual predictions
and feedback from physical interactions to accurately predict
haptic properties and interact with the world. Inspired by this
cognitive pattern, we propose and explore a purely visual haptic
prediction model. Purely visual models enable a robot to “feel”
without physical interaction. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
using both visual and physical interaction signals together yields
more accurate haptic classiﬁcation. Our models take advantage
of recent advances in deep neural networks by employing a
uniﬁed approach to learning features for physical interaction
and visual observations. Even though we employ little domain
speciﬁc knowledge, our model still achieves better results than
methods based on hand-designed features.
I. INTRODUCTION
Tactile understanding is important for a wide variety of
tasks. For example, humans constantly adjust their movements based on haptic feedback during object manipulation
 . Similarly, robot performance is likely to improve on
a diverse set of tasks if robots can understand the haptic
properties of surfaces and objects. A robot might adjust
its grip when manipulating a fragile object, avoid surfaces
it perceives to be wet or slippery, or describe the tactile
qualities of an unfamiliar object to a human. In this work,
we explore methods to classify haptic properties of surfaces.
Using our proposed methods for haptic classiﬁcation, we
believe haptic information can be more effectively harnessed
for a wide array of robot tasks.
Humans rely on multiple senses to make judgments about
the world. A well known example of this multisensory
integration is the McGurk effect , in which humans
perceive different phonemes based on the interaction of
visual and auditory cues. Similarly, humans rely on both
tactile and visual understanding to interact with their environment. Humans use both haptic and vision to correctly
identify objects , and fMRI data demonstrates that haptic
and visual signals are processed in a multi-sensory fashion
*This material is based upon work supported by DARPA, Berkeley Vision
and Learning Center, as well as the U.S. National Science Foundation
(NSF) under grants 1426787 and 1427425 as part of the National Robotics
Initiative. Lisa Anne Hendricks is supported by the NDSEG.
1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, California, CA 94701, USA {yg,
lisa anne, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu
2 Haptics Group, GRASP Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 
Fig. 1: We propose deep models as a uniﬁed approach to
learning features for haptic classiﬁcation of objects. We
use both visual and haptic data. In comparison to training
models on only haptic data or only visual data, we ﬁnd
that combining learned features across modalities, as pictured
above, leads to superior performance. 1
during object recognition . Motivated by the cross-modal
processing inherent in the human brain, we build a model
that processes both haptic and visual input and demonstrate
that this combination achieves higher performance than using
either the haptic or visual input alone.
In order to effectively learn from haptic and visual data,
we train deep neural networks, which have led to dramatic
improvements in disparate learning tasks such as object
recognition and automatic speech recognition . As
opposed to hand-designing features for particular modalities,
neural networks provide a uniﬁed framework to learn features directly from data. With our neural network model,
we learn haptic features that outperform previous proposed
features with little haptic domain knowledge. Additionally,
when training models on visual features, we transfer learned
models on the related task of material classiﬁcation to haptic
classiﬁcation. Consequently, we can train a large visual
model with less than 1,000 training instances.
Our contributions are as follows. First, we demonstrate
that neural networks serve as a unifying framework for signal
classiﬁcation, allowing us to learn rich features on both visual
and haptic data with little domain knowledge. We believe
1To collect haptic data, we use the BioTac sensor . The image of
the sensor in the above ﬁgure is courtesy of the product webpage http:
//www.syntouchllc.com/Products/BioTac/.
 
similar methods can be used to learn models for other signals
that robots need to understand. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that visual data from a different yet related task, material
classiﬁcation, easily transfers to haptic classiﬁcation. Finally,
we show that haptic and visual signals are complementary,
and combining modalities further improves classiﬁcation.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Previous Approaches to Tactile Understanding
The tactile properties of consumer products have been explored to better understand the quality of items such as fabric
 and skin cream . Progress in tactile understanding
has been driven by both the creation of better mechanical
measurement systems ( , ) as well as learning better
algorithms for haptic understanding ( , ). A variety of
work ( , ) concentrates on classifying speciﬁc textures
(e.g., paper). Additionally, asserts that biomimicry is
important for texture recognition. In addition to using a
BioTac sensor , which is designed to replicate human
tactile sensations, reproduces human movement when
touching new textures. Unlike these approaches, our system produces predictions of haptic adjectives, enabling a
qualitative description of previously unexplored textures and
Prior work which focuses on haptic adjective classiﬁcation includes , , and . demonstrates that a
rich and diverse haptic measurement system that measures
temperature, compliance, roughness, and friction is key to
accurately discerning between haptic adjectives such as sticky
and rough. Our work most closely resembles Chu et al.
( , ), which detail the collection of haptic classiﬁcation
datasets (PHAC-1 and PHAC-2) and concentrates on classifying objects with binary haptic adjectives. and rely
on hand-designed features for haptic classiﬁcation. Two types
of features are proposed: static and dynamic. Static features
consist of simple data statistics while dynamic features are
learned from ﬁtting haptic signals to HMMs.
The haptic classiﬁcation problem is closely related to the
material classiﬁcation problem. For example, classifying a
surface as glass implies the presence of some haptic properties, such as hard, slippery, smooth and solid. However,
notable exceptions exist. For example, different plastic surfaces have vastly different roughness and hardness properties:
a plastic bag is smooth and soft but a sawed plastic block
is rough and hard. Consequently, haptic classiﬁcation goes
beyond simply identifying object materials. details the
collection of a large material classiﬁcation dataset and then
demonstrates that deep models can be used for the material
classiﬁcation problem.
B. Neural Networks
Neural networks have led to state-of-the-art results on
many important problems in artiﬁcial intelligence ( ,
 ). Neural networks are compositional models which are
formed by stacking “layers” such that the output of one layer
is the input of the next layer. A layer consists of an afﬁne
transformation of layer inputs and learned weights followed
by a nonlinearity. Other operations such as max-pooling and
normalization can also be included. Neural networks are
trained iteratively using backpropagation. Backpropagation
applies the chain rule in order to determine
dwl where w
are the weights of layer l and L is the loss function being
minimized. At each iteration, the gradients
dwl are used to
update the weights in order to minimize loss.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) use a convolution as the linear operation within the layer, as opposed
to fully connected layers (also called inner product layers)
which use inner products as the linear operation within the
layer. CNNs have been proposed to decrease the total number
of parameters of a model. The reduction in the number of
parameters has proven crucial for training large-scale object
recognition systems and has also been used for learning
dynamics in 1-D time series, such as in speech recognition
For understanding 1-D time series, recurrent networks
have also achieved great success on tasks such as language
modeling and handwriting recognition . Recurrent
networks include hidden units which are updated at each time
step based on the values of the hidden units at the previous
time step and the current input. Certain types of recurrent
networks, such as LSTMs and GRUs , include special
gates which learn to remember and forget previous states.
Exemplary results on tasks such as machine translation
 , automatic speech recognition , and parsing 
demonstrate that networks which include such gates are able
to learn complex temporal dynamics, making them a natural
ﬁt for modeling time-series data.
In addition to performing better than other methods, neural
networks are also advantageous because they require little
domain knowledge. This beneﬁt is particularly appealing in
the domain of haptics because high-dimensional haptic signals can be difﬁcult for humans to understand. Furthermore,
weights learned from one dataset can be transferred to similar
datasets through ﬁne-tuning. When ﬁne-tuning, the model is
initialized with weights learned on a previous task before
training. For example, weights from models trained on the
large ImageNet dataset can be transferred to related tasks
such as semantic segmentation , scene classiﬁcation 
and object detection . Pre-trained networks can also be
used as off-the-shelf feature extractors by using the outputs
(activations) of one of the layers of the network as a feature.
When a network has been pre-trained on a related task, using
the network as a feature extractor leads to good results on
tasks such as subcategory recognition and scene classiﬁcation
Multimodal networks have been proposed in both unsupervised ( ) and supervised ( , ) settings. Both 
and ﬁrst train deep models on individual data modalities
then use activations from these models to train a multimodal
classiﬁer.
III. DEEP HAPTIC CLASSIFICATION MODELS
Deep learning provides a uniﬁed framework for learning
models for classiﬁcation. We describe models that are able
to achieve high performance on the haptic classiﬁcation task
using haptic data, visual data, and in a multimodal setting.
A. Haptic Signal
We explore both CNN and LSTM models for haptic
classiﬁcation.
Fig. 2: Haptic CNN structure.
1) Haptic CNN Model: Our proposed CNN model performs temporal convolutions on an input haptic signal,
similar to models which have previously shown good results
on other tasks with 1-D signals, such as speech recognition
 . CNNs decrease the total number of parameters in the
model, making it easier to train with limited training data.
Fig. 2 shows the design of our CNN. Our haptic signal
includes 32 haptic measurements (see IV-B for details).
To form the input of our network, we concatenate signals
along the channel axis as opposed to the time axis. Thus,
concatenating two signals with dimension T ×C where T is
the number of time steps and C is the number of channels,
results in a T × 2C signal. After each convolution, we use
a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) nonlinearity.
To further reduce the number of parameters, we use
“grouping”. Grouping for a certain layer requires that groups
of channels do not interact with other groups. We use
groups of 32 in all our convolutional layers, which means
interactions between different haptic signals are not learned
until the fully connected layer. Generally, allowing crosschannel interactions earlier in the model is beneﬁcial, and
we anticipate better results without grouping when using a
larger training dataset.
Our initial classiﬁcation models are trained using logistic
loss. However we ﬁnd that after learning the weights for
the convolutional layers, ﬁne-tuning with hinge-loss obtains
similar or slightly better results for all models. Unless
otherwise mentioned, all reported results are from a network
trained with a hinge loss.
2) Haptic LSTM Model: In addition to designing a CNN
for haptic classiﬁcation, we also explore LSTM models.
Because LSTM models have a recurrent structure, they are
a natural ﬁt for understanding haptic time-series signals.
Our LSTM structure consists of 10 recurrent units, and is
followed by a fully connected layer with 10 outputs and a
ReLU nonlinearity. A ﬁnal fully connected layer produces a
binary prediction. We found that small changes in the LSTM
structure (e.g. number of recurrent units) did not result in
large changes in ﬁnal classiﬁcation scores. Though stacking
LSTMs generally leads to better results , this led to
performance degradation for haptic classiﬁcation.
B. Visual CNN Model
In addition to the haptic signal, we also use visual cues
for haptic classiﬁcation. Since the haptic classiﬁcation problem is closely related to material classiﬁcation, we transfer
weights from a CNN that is ﬁne-tuned on the Materials in
Context Database (MINC) . MINC is a material recognition dataset, which consists of 23 classes (such as brick and
carpet) and uses the GoogleNet architecture . We refer
to the ﬁne-tuned MINC network as MINC-CNN.
To ﬁne-tune a haptic classiﬁcation model, we transfer
weights for all layers below the “inception (5a)”2 layer of
the MINC-CNN. We ﬁnd that placing an average-pooling
layer and L2 normalization layer after the “inception (5a)”
and before a loss layer yields best results. Fig. 3 summarizes
the visual haptic adjective classiﬁcation pipeline.
Fig. 3: Visual CNN structure.
C. Multimodal Learning
Figure 1 shows the structure of our multimodal model. The
top left and top right denote the visual and haptic inputs
respectively. The learned weights from visual and haptic
CNN models are transferred to the multimodal network.
Activations from the 3rd convolutional layer (conv3) of the
haptic CNN and the activations after the L2-normalization of
the inception (5a) layer of the visual CNN are concatenated.
The ﬁnal multimodal classiﬁcation model is trained with a
2The GoogleNet architecture is built from “inception” modules which
consist of convolutions and ﬁlter concatenations. Please see for more
hinge loss. Note that when forming our multimodal network,
we directly transfer weights from our previously trained
haptic and visual networks, and only learn the classiﬁcation
D. Training method
We use standard backpropagation to train our networks.
We use SGD with a constant learning rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.9 and initialize model weights with “xavier”
initialization . We train our network for 200 epochs with
a batch size of 1000 (roughly 1
5 of the entire training dataset).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. PHAC-2 Dataset
We demonstrate our approach on the Penn Haptic Adjective Corpus 2 (PHAC-2) dataset, which appears in .
The PHAC-2 dataset contains haptic signals and images of
53 household objects. Each object is explored by a pair of
SynTouch biomimetic tactile sensors (BioTacs), which are
mounted to the gripper of a Willow Garage Personal Robot
2 (PR2). Because the BioTac sensor mimics humans tactile
capabilities, we believe its signals provide the rich haptic
data necessary for ﬁne-grained tactile understanding. Each
object is felt with the following four exploratory procedures
(EPs): Squeeze, Hold, Slow Slide, Fast Slide, which mimic
how humans explore the tactile properties of objects. The
BioTac sensor generates ﬁve types of signals: low-frequency
ﬂuid pressure (PDC), high-frequency ﬂuid vibrations (PAC),
core temperature (TDC), core temperature change (TAC),
and 19 electrode impedance (E1 . . . E19) which are spatially
distributed across the sensor (example signals in Fig. 4). The
PAC signal is sampled at 2200 Hz, and the other signals are
all sampled at 100 Hz. Ten trials of each EP are performed
per object. Although data on the joint positions and gripper
velocity and acceleration are available, we concentrate on
classifying the tactile signals.
The dataset also contains high resolution 
images of each object from eight different viewpoints (see
Fig 5). The objects are placed in the center of an aluminum
plate. Although lighting conditions are not explicitly controlled, the variations are insigniﬁcant.
Each object is described with a set of 24 binary labels
(Table I), corresponding to the existence or absence of each
of the 24 haptic adjectives (e.g., slippery or fuzzy). For example, the toothpaste box is given the classiﬁcation smooth. The
binary label for a given object was determined by a majority
vote of approximately twelve human annotators .
TABLE I: 24 haptic adjectives
compressible
unpleasant
(a) Examples of images automatically cropped by our
algorithm described in IV-B.2.
(b) Each object is photographed from 8 different viewpoints.
Fig. 5: Visual data.
B. Data Preprocessing
1) Haptic Signal: Normalization For each signal s ∈
{PAC, PDC, TAC, TDC, E1, . . . , E19}, we calculate the
mean ¯s and the standard deviation σ, and normalize the
signal by s′ = s−¯s
Subsampling Because PAC is sampled at a higher rate
than other signals, we ﬁrst downsample it to 100 Hz to match
the sampling rate of other signals. The durations of signals
for different objects are almost identical for the EPs Hold,
Slow Slide, and Fast Slide but the signal length of Squeeze
varies considerably among objects. To resolve the disparity
in signal lengths, we downsample signals for each EP to a
ﬁxed length of 150 for simplicity. Though our subsampling
scheme possibly discards important information, reducing
data dimensionality is crucial for training deep models with
such a small dataset.
PCA on Electrode Impedances There are 19 electrode
impedances spatially distributed across the core of BioTac.
We found that 4 principal components capture 95% of
the variations of E1 . . . E19. Consequently, we transform
the 19 dimensional electrode impedance signals to the ﬁrst
four coefﬁcients of the principal components. PCA is done
independently on each EP across all objects. Because we
have four other signals (PAC, PDC, TAC, TDC), four electrode signals after PCA, and four EPs, we have a total of
(4 + 4) × 4 = 32 haptic signals which we use as input to
our models.
Training Data Augmentation The total number of training instances is only 530 (53 objects with 10 trials each). We
use data augmentation to avoid substantial overﬁtting during
model training. To augment our data, we treat the two BioTac
sensors on PR2 as two distinct instances. Furthermore, we
sample ﬁve different signals by sub-sampling each signal at a
different starting point. After data augmentation, we increase
Fig. 4: A sample BioTac signal of the ﬁrst ﬁnger in the slow slide exploratory procedure. Both raw signal and preprocessed
signals are shown. The signals are pAC, pDC, tAC, tDC and electrode impedance respectively from top to bottom.
the number of total instances to 5,300.
preprocessing steps and subtract the mean values from the RGB
image and resize our image to the ﬁxed input size of the
MINC-CNN network (224×224). Instead of using the entire
image, we extract a central crop which includes the object.
The central crop is obtained by ﬁrst detecting the circular
aluminum plate by its color, then estimating the plate’s center
and radius R. Our ﬁnal crop is a rectangular region of size
2R × R with the center of the crop above the center of
the circular plate by R. More generally, the crop could be
obtained by a general bounding box detection method, or
simply by focusing the camera on the surface of interest.
Fig.5a shows examples of images cropped with this method.
C. Combining Data Instances
Combining separate instances from a single sample is a
common method to boost classiﬁcation results. For example,
in object recognition, it is common to augment data by
using different image crops and mirroring images. Better test
classiﬁcation can be achieved by averaging model outputs
across separate instances for a single image.
Likewise, we explore combining the ten haptic explorations of each object and the eight visual viewpoints for
each object. However, instead of averaging model outputs at
test time, we concatenate activations (conv3 for haptic signals
and inception (5a) for visual signals) for different instances
and retrain the network loss layer.
D. Train/Test Splits
Following , , we partition the 53 objects into 24
90/10 train/test splits, one for each adjective. Creating 24
separate train/test splits is necessary because there exists
no one split such that each adjective is present in both the
train and test split. Note that although a single object has
several corresponding measurements, we do not allow the
same object to appear in both the train and test split.
E. Performance Metric
To measure the performance of the approaches proposed,
we adopt the widely used Area Under Curve (AUC) metric. AUC measures the area under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic curve, which takes both the true positive rate
and the false positive rate into consideration. The previous
methods report F1 score , , which is biased towards true
positives . To provide a fair evaluation, we reproduce the
baseline methods and report AUC scores.
V. EVALUATION
In Table II we compare the AUC scores from our proposed
methods. We determine AUC scores for each adjective and
report the average over AUC scores for all adjectives. We
report models trained on the haptic, visual, and multimodal
data sources as well as models trained by combining features
from different trials on a single object (see section IV-C).
To differentiate our models, we use the following notation: the preﬁx for each model denotes the data source on
which it is trained, and the sufﬁx (if present) denotes how
many instances are combined for classiﬁcation. For example,
“Haptic-ConvNet-10” is a CNN model trained on haptic data
and concatenating the conv3 activations from 10 haptic trials
before classiﬁcation.
Models A-F are SVMs trained with the shallow features
from , 3. Models G-J and K-L are our deep haptic
and deep visual models. Models M-N are our multimodal
models, and model O is the result for a model that randomly
When comparing the features from previous work, we ﬁnd
that the static features (methods A, B) achieve a slightly
higher AUC than dynamic features (methods C, D). Combining static and dynamic features (method F) increases the
AUC by 0.9.
Though the hand-designed features perform well, our best
deep CNN trained on haptic data (model I) improves the
AUC score by 5.0. In model H, we augment our data by treating trials from the two BioTac as separate training instances
and by subsampling each signal starting a different time step
and using each sample as a separate training instance. This
leads to a tenfold increase in the size of the training set (2
signals from each BioTac sensor and 5 subsampled signals).
3Code for our reproduction of this result and further evaluation details,
including comparison of reproduced F1 numbers, are available at http:
//www.cs.berkeley.edu/˜yg/icra2016/
However, even though there is more available training data,
we achieve better results by concatenating features from both
BioTac recordings and each subsampled signal (model I).
One explanation is that examples from each BioTac sensor
and different subsampling schemes are extremely similar,
causing the model to overﬁt. However, combining haptic
signals for all trials for a given object (model J) results
in slightly lower AUC compared to model I. This could be
because haptic signals from various trials have informative
differences that enable the model to generalize better to
signals on new objects. We see the same general trend when
using the “shallow” static and dynamic baseline features. We
also classify haptic signals by using our LSTM model (model
G). Though LSTMs generally are quite good at learning
complex temporal dynamics, in the haptics domain they
perform considerably worse than the haptic CNN model.
Variations of LSTM, such as changing the inputs to the
frequency domain, could potentially improve the results. We
leave further investigations to future work.
Our visual models also perform well, though performance
is 6.0 points below our best haptic model. In contrast to
our haptic models, we ﬁnd that combining features across
multiple viewpoints is essential for good haptic classiﬁcation
and improves AUC from 71.5 to 77.2. For robotic applications, this implies that robots need to view objects from
varied viewpoints in order to gain an understanding of haptic
properties.
We ﬁnd that our multimodal models perform the best
by well over 2.7 points. When concatenating activations
from our best haptic model (I) and best visual model (L),
we achieve an AUC of 84.7. However, by concatenating
activations from model J and model L, we achieve an AUC
of 85.9, even though the corresponding haptic only model
performs slightly worse.
TABLE II: Comparison of Haptic Classiﬁcation Methods.
See section V for details.
Haptic-static-1 trial
Haptic-static-10 trials
Haptic-dynamic-1 trial
Haptic-dynamic-10 trials
Haptic (Combine model A + C)
Haptic (Combine model A + D)
Haptic-LSTM
Haptic-ConvNet
Haptic-ConvNet-1 trial
Haptic-ConvNet-10 trials
Image-GoogleNet-1 view
Image-GoogleNet-8 views
Multimodal (Combine model I + L)
Multimodal (Combine model J + L)
Random guess
We release our code in order to make our results easily
replicable 4. Additionally, by releasing our models, we hope
our haptic classiﬁers can be integrated into current robotic
4Code and data are available at 
˜yg/icra2016/.
pipelines that could beneﬁt from better tactile understanding
of real objects and surfaces.
VI. DISCUSSION
In order to gain a more intuitive understanding of our
model, we present analysis to illustrate what our models are
capable of learning.
A. Adjective Prediction Using Different Models
In order to compare the types of predictions produced by
our models, we randomly select three objects out of the 53
objects in the data set and examine haptic predictions for
each object.
Table III details the predicted adjective for three objects:
shelf liner, placemat, and furry eraser (see Fig 5a). We
observe that the haptic classiﬁer tends to have high recall,
predicting many adjectives for each class. In contrast, the
visual classiﬁer is more conservative and appears to have
higher precision. For the three examples shown, the visual
model predicts no false positives.
The prediction of the multimodal classiﬁer is not a simple
union of the haptic and visual classiﬁers, but rather combines
the two sources of information sensibly. For example, the
prediction of shelf liner contains the correct textured label
which does not occur in either the haptic or visual results.
Consequently, the multimodal model has higher precision
and recall than the haptic model and higher recall than the
visual model. For some objects, such as furry eraser, the
multimodal classiﬁer performs worse than the haptic classiﬁer. However, the multimodal model generally performs
better than either the haptic only or visual only model leading
to higher overall AUC.
B. Haptic and Visual Data are Complementary
Although it seems most natural to classify haptic adjectives purely by touch, we demonstrate that visual and haptic
signals are complementary. Fig. 6 compares the accuracy
of our visual model to our haptic model. Adjectives which
describe object size such as thin and thick are better classiﬁed
by visual data whereas adjectives such as squishy and absorbent are better classiﬁed by the haptic signal. Surprisingly,
even though the BioTac is equipped with a temperature
sensor, our visual model is better at determining whether
items are cool. Though the adjective metallic might seem
like something that would be understood using visual cues,
we ﬁnd that our haptic model is better at classifying objects
as metallic or not. This could possibly be because material
properties such as temperature and roughness are important
in classifying metallic objects, but not all metal surfaces have
comparable metallic lusters. For example, objects such as the
toothpaste box in Fig 5b appear shiny but are not actually
C. Which Haptic Signals Matter?
Although designing a deep architecture that reliably classiﬁes haptic signals requires little haptic domain knowledge,
observing activations within the net can provide insight into
TABLE III: Comparison of Haptic Classiﬁcation Methods. The letter in parentheses refers to the conﬁguration in Table II.
Shelf liner
Furry eraser
Ground Truth
bumpy compressible squishy textured
fuzzy squishy textured
Haptic Outputs (I)
absorbent compressible soft springy squishy
compressible textured
fuzzy hairy soft squishy textured
Visual Outputs (L)
Multimodal Outputs (M)
compressible scratchy squishy textured
compressible smooth thick
compressible rough squishy textured thick
Fig. 6: Comparison of AUC scores for our best visual and best haptic classiﬁer for each adjective. AUC scores are averaged
over three train/test splits.
what kinds of signals are important for classiﬁcation. In our
design of the haptic CNN, we use a “grouping” strategy,
such that each signal, such as pAC or pDC, is processed
independently before the fully connected layer. By looking
at the activations of the ﬁnal convolutional layer (conv3), we
can observe which channels result in higher activations, and
could thus be more important in haptic classiﬁcation.
In Fig. 7, we plot conv3 activations for 2 adjective
classiﬁers (metallic and compressible). The activations are
obtained on the held-out positive testing instances. We show
two metallic test instances which are classiﬁed correctly, and
one metallic test instance which is classiﬁed incorrectly. Additionally, we show one test instance for compressible which
is classiﬁed correctly. We observe that most of activations
are zero, as many authors have observed when analyzing
networks trained on images.
For the adjective metallic, it appears activations for Core
Temperature Change (tAC) signal are important for classiﬁcation, which makes intuitive sense. Because metallic objects
are presumably made of thermally conductive material, temperature is likely a valuable signal for haptic classiﬁcation.
Furthermore, the activations of different trials look similar,
as shown in Fig. 7 (a) and (b). This indicates the learnt haptic
CNN is robust to signal variations across trials. Furthermore
when the activations corresponding to tAC are not strongly
activated, as in Fig. 7 (c), the signal is incorrectly labeled as
not metallic.
For the adjective compressible we note that electrode
activations appear to be important. This ﬁnding implies
that different signal channels are important for classiﬁcation
of different adjectives, suggesting that most of the signals
recorded by the BioTac sensor are important for haptic classiﬁcation. In future work, training models with data collected
by less advanced sensors could verify the importance of
the high dimensional BioTac sensor for ﬁne-grained tactile
understanding.
VII. CONCLUSION
We successfully design deep architectures for haptic classiﬁcation using both haptic and visual signals, reinforcing
that deep architectures can be used as a paradigm to learn
features for a variety of signals. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that haptic and visual signals are complementary, and combining data from both modalities improves performance. We
believe that integrating our models into robotic pipelines can
provide valuable haptic information which will help boost
performance for myriad robot tasks.
In the future, we believe that our model can be improved
by a larger, more diverse dataset. Recently, discussed
efforts to collect a substantially larger dataset of paired visual
and haptic data. A larger dataset could possibly improve our
model in a variety of ways: it would allow to train a larger
network, ﬁne-tune through the entire multimodal network,
and less aggressively down sample our haptic signal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Jeff Donahue for advice and
guidance during the initial stages of the experiments, as well
as for useful discussions on deep models.