Megapixel Size Image Creation using Generative Adversarial
Marco Marchesi∗
Happy Finish Ltd.
June 2, 2017
Since its appearance, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have received a lot of interest in the
AI community. In image generation several projects
showed how GANs are able to generate photorealistic images but the results so far didn’t look adequate
for the quality standard of visual media production
We present an optimized image generation process based on a Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (DCGANs), in order to
create photorealistic high-resolution images (up to
1024x1024 pixels). Furthermore, the system was fed
with a limited dataset of images, less than two thousand images. All these results give more clue about
future exploitation of GANs in Computer Graphics
and Visual Eﬀects.
Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks are made by two
neural networks competing each other.
generator G(z), it creates images starting from a latent space z of uniformly distributed random numbers, while the discriminator D(x) has to judge the
images x it receives as fake or real. We train G(z)
with the goal to fool D(x) with fake images, minimizing log 1 −D(G(z)).
In order to do that, G(z)
has to learn to produce images that are as much photorealistic as possible.
∗ 
This approach is a valid alternative to maximum likelihood techniques, because its conditions and constraints make feasible to run it as an unsupervised
learning approach. By the contrary, training is still
challenging and eﬀorts are made to prevent both networks to fail. Several improvements have been introduced since the ﬁrst GAN model. One of the ﬁrst
techniques was the minibatch discrimination that reduces the chance for the generator to collapse .
Other techniques aim to ﬁnd a faster convergence,
modeling the discriminator D(x) as an energy function or introducing new loss deﬁnitions .
The model we used is a DCGAN , implemented
with Google TensorFlow, with a variable batch size
depending of the size of the images we wanted to
achieve. For training the discriminator we tested two
slightly diﬀerent datasets (1807 and 1796 images),
composed by faces of women taken from magazines
and social media. In fact the goal of this project was
to generate an image that summarized how the new
mums are wrongly represented by media in UK.
For doing that we faced a few challenges:
• The dataset was restricted to less than 2k images, compared to that ones used on research,
thus the system had to learn as much as possible from the limited amount of data.
Furthermore, 70% of the images in the dataset was
smaller than 512x512px, so the system had to
 
Figure 1: Samples generated at the 256x256 pixels size with the random numbers uniformly distributed in
the range [-0.4, 0.4].
4 x 4 x 1024
8 x 8 x 512
Figure 2: Scheme of G(z) for generating 1024x1024
learn mostly from upscaled images, inferring the
high resolution details from the small set of bigger images.
• We trained the system with a NVIDIA Pascal
Titan X that was limited in storing a DCGAN
able to generate megapixel size images (Fig.2).
For this reason the batch size for the training
process was a parameter, starting from 128 (for
192x192px) to 6 (for 1024x1024px).
• The generated samples had to be photorealistic,
to be used commercially, so the system had to
limit the artifacts.
• With our dataset, we found that bigger the image size, easier for G(z) to diverge.
Training Process
We generated images at diﬀerent sizes, starting
at 192x192px up to 1024x1024px (Fig.3).
Figure 3: A couple of face variations generated at
1024x1024px.
megapixel size has been produced for the ﬁrst time,
as long as the highest image size for GANs so far was
512px in width . To do so, in brief we applied the
following optimizations:
1. To prevent the generator and the discriminator
to diverge, we applied an additional step for updating alternatively the generator and the discriminator every 50 steps. In this way the loss
for both networks oscillated (loss(D) < 1 and
loss(G) < 3) on a limited interval but never diverged at any image size.
2. For generating the samples, we limited the interval of the uniform distribution of the random
inputs z. This solution reduced signiﬁcantly the
artifacts, as showed in Fig.4.
Figure 4: Images generated with a uniform distribution in the intervals [−1.0, 1.0] (above) and [−0.5, 0.5]
Conclusion and Future Work
We brieﬂy presented the optimization process made
on a DCGAN model to generate bigger photorealistic images with a limited dataset. We reached the
1024x1024px size, almost 4x the previous result in research, limiting the artifacts in order to use the image
in a creative process for a commercial campaign. We
want to test if our improvements can be applied to
any dataset. We aim to reduce the memory requirements for GANs, exploiting GPU parallelism, and we
want to apply new convergence criteria to GANs, in
order to generate even bigger photorealistic images.
Further conditional probabilities will let us exploit
GANs more widely in other computer graphics ﬁelds,
like animation and visual eﬀects.
Acknowledgement
This research was part of a commercial project
funded by MHPC.