Vol.:(0123456789)
Science and Engineering Ethics 26:1771–1796
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH/SCHOLARSHIP
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
Luciano Floridi1,2 · Josh Cowls1,2   · Thomas C. King1 · Mariarosaria Taddeo1,2
Received: 14 May 2019 / Accepted: 25 March 2020 / Published online: 3 April 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
The idea of artificial intelligence for social good (henceforth AI4SG) is gaining traction within information societies in general and the AI community in particular. It
has the potential to tackle social problems through the development of AI-based
solutions. Yet, to date, there is only limited understanding of what makes AI socially
good in theory, what counts as AI4SG in practice, and how to reproduce its initial
successes in terms of policies. This article addresses this gap by identifying seven
ethical factors that are essential for future AI4SG initiatives. The analysis is supported by 27 case examples of AI4SG projects. Some of these factors are almost
entirely novel to AI, while the significance of other factors is heightened by the
use of AI. From each of these factors, corresponding best practices are formulated
which, subject to context and balance, may serve as preliminary guidelines to ensure
that well-designed AI is more likely to serve the social good.
Keywords  AI4SG · Artificial intelligence · Ethics · Social good · Transparency ·
Privacy · Safety
Introduction
The idea of “Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Social Good” (henceforth AI4SG) is
becoming popular in many information societies and gaining traction within the
AI community . Projects seeking to use AI for social good vary
* Josh Cowls
 
Luciano Floridi
 
Thomas C. King
 
Mariarosaria Taddeo
 
Digital Ethics Lab, Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
L. Floridi et al.
significantly. They range from models to predict septic shock 
to game-theoretic models to prevent poaching ; from online reinforcement learning to target HIV-education at homeless youths to probabilistic models to prevent harmful policing and support student retention . Indeed, new applications of AI4SG
appear almost daily, making possible socially good outcomes that were once less
easily achievable, unfeasible, or unaffordable.
Several frameworks for the design, development, and deployment of ethical AI in
general have recently emerged . However, there is still only limited understanding about what constitutes
AI “for the social good” . Approaching AI4SG ad hoc,
by analysing specific areas of application—like famine-relief or disaster management—as an annual summit for AI industry and government has done indicates the presence of a phenomenon,
but neither explains it, nor does it suggest how other AI4SG solutions could and
should be designed to harness AI’s full potential. Furthermore, many projects that
generate socially good outcomes using AI are not (self-)described as such . The
system was trained using synthetic data and was not sufficiently refined to interpret
ambiguous, nuanced, or otherwise “messy” patient health records .
It also relied on US medical protocols, which are not applicable worldwide. The
heedless deployment and the poor design of the software led to misdiagnoses and
erroneous treatment suggestions, breaching the trust of doctors. Context-specific
design and deployment could help prevent such value misalignment and deliver successful AI4SG projects on a more consistent basis.
At the same time, the genuinely socially good outcomes of AI may arise merely
by chance, for example through an accidental application of an AI solution in a different context. This was the case with the use of a different version of IBM’s cognitive system. In this case, the Watson system was originally designed to identify biological mechanisms, but when used in a classroom setting, it inspired engineering
students to solve design problems . In this instance, AI provided
a unique mode of education. But lacking a clear understanding of AI4SG means
that this success is accidental and cannot be repeated systematically, whilst for each
“accidental success” there may be countless examples of missed opportunities to
exploit the benefits of AI for advancing socially good outcomes in different settings.
In order to avoid unnecessary failures and missed opportunities, AI4SG would
benefit from an analysis of the essential factors that support and underwrite the
design and deployment of successful AI4SG. In this article, we provide the first,
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
fine-grained analysis of these factors. Our aim here is not to document every single
ethical consideration for an AI4SG project. For example, it is essential, and hopefully self-evident, that an AI4SG project ought not to advance the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, an imperative which we do not discuss here . Likewise, it is important to acknowledge at the outset that
there are myriad circumstances in which AI will not be the most effective way to
address a particular social problem. This could be due to the existence of alternative
approaches that are more efficacious (i.e., “Not AI For Social Good”) or because
of the unacceptable risks that the deployment of AI would introduce (i.e., “AI For
Insufficient Social Good” as weighed against its risks). Nor do we foresee many (or
perhaps any) cases in which AI is a “silver bullet”—the single-handed solution to
an entrenched social problem (i.e., “Only AI for Social Good”). What is therefore
essential about the factors and the corresponding best practices is not their incorporation in every circumstance; we note several examples where it would be morally defensible not to incorporate a particular factor. Instead, what is essential is that
each best practice is (i) considered proactively, and (ii) not incorporated if and only
if there is a clear, demonstrable, and morally defensible reason why it should not be.
In this article, we focus on identifying factors that are particularly relevant to AI
as a technological infrastructure, to the extent that it is designed and used for the
advancement of social good. To anticipate, these seven factors are: (1) falsifiability
and incremental deployment; (2) safeguards against the manipulation of predictors;
(3) receiver-contextualised intervention; (4) receiver-contextualised explanation and
transparent purposes; (5) privacy protection and data subject consent; (6) situational
fairness; and (7) human-friendly semanticisation. With these factors identified, the
questions that are likely to arise in turn are: how these factors ought to be evaluated and resolved, by whom, and with what supporting mechanism (e.g. regulation or
codes of conduct). These questions, which are not within the scope of this article and
will be addressed in the next stage of this research, are intertwined with wider ethical
and political issues regarding the legitimacy of decision-making with, and about, AI.
The rest of the article is structured as follows. In section two, we explain how we
identified the seven factors. In section three, we analyse the seven factors individually. We elucidate each of them by reference to one or more case studies, and we
derive from each factor a corresponding best practice for AI4SG creators to follow.
In the concluding section, we discuss the factors and suggest how tensions between
them may be resolved.
Methodology
AI4SG initiatives are successful insofar as they help to reduce, mitigate or eradicate
a given problem of moral significance. Thus, our analysis of the essential factors for
successful AI4SG is based on the following working definition:
AI4SG =def. the design, development, and deployment of AI systems in ways
that (i) prevent, mitigate or resolve problems adversely affecting human life
L. Floridi et al.
and/or the wellbeing of the natural world, and/or (ii) enable socially preferable
and/or environmentally sustainable developments.1
Following this definition, we analysed a set of 27 projects, obtained via a systematic
review of relevant literature undertaken by the authors, to identify clear and significant cases of successful and unsuccessful examples of AI4SG. The literature analysis that underpins this article involved searching five databases (Google Scholar,
PhilPapers, Scopus, SSRN, and Web of Science), between October 2018 and May
2019. We initially conducted a broad search for AI for Social Good on each of these
search engines. This general search returned many results on AI’s application for
good. Hence, we searched for uses of AI in areas related to human life and the wellbeing of the natural world, like ‘healthcare’, ‘education’, ‘equality’, ‘climate change’,
and ‘environmental protection’. This provided disjoined keywords from which we
derived chosen synonyms to perform area-specific searches. Each research-area
search used the query: < area and synonyms > AND ("Artificial Intelligence" OR
"Machine Learning" OR "AI ") AND “Social Good”. From the set of 27 cases, we
identified 7 cases (see Appendix for a list) as being most representative in terms of
scope, variety, impact, and for their potentiality to corroborate the essential factors
that we argue should characterise the design of AI4SG projects.
The factors described in this article have been identified in coherence with more
general work in the field of AI ethics. Each factor relates to at least one of five ethical principles of AI—beneficence, nonmaleficence, justice, autonomy, and explicability—identified in the comparative analysis mentioned above .
This coherence is crucial: AI4SG cannot be inconsistent with the ethical framework
guiding the design and evaluation of AI in general. The principle of beneficence is
of particular relevance. It states that the use of AI should provide benefit to people
and the natural world, and indeed AI4SG projects should not just comply with but
reify this principle, such that the benefits of AI4SG should be preferable and sustainable, in line with the definition above. Beneficence is thus a necessary condition of
AI4SG, yet it is insufficient, not least because the beneficent impact of an AI4SG
project may be “offset” by the creation or amplification of other risks or harms.2
Moreover, while others of these ethical principles, such as autonomy and explicability, indeed recur throughout our discussion, the factors we evince below are more
closely associated with design considerations that are specific to AI4SG, and may be
operationalised in the form of the corresponding best practices provided for each. In
this way, ethical analysis informing the design and the deployment of AI4SG initiatives has a central role in mitigating foreseeable risks of unintended consequences
and possible misuses of the technology.
1  While it is beyond present scope to adjudicate this for any particular case, it is important to acknowledge at the outset that in practice there is likely to be considerable disagreement and contention regarding
what would constitute a socially good outcome.
2  This should not be taken as necessitating a utilitarian calculation: the beneficial impact of a given project may be “offset” by the violation of some categorical imperative. Therefore even if an AI4SG project
would do “more good than harm”, the harm may be ethically intolerable. In such a hypothetical case, one
would not be morally obliged to develop and deploy the project in question.
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
Before discussing the factors, it is important to clarify three general features of
the whole set: dependency, order, and coherence. The seven factors are often intertwined and co-dependent, but for the sake of simplicity we discuss them separately.
Nothing should be inferred from this choice. In the same way, the factors are all
essential, none of them is “more important” than any other, so we shall introduce
them not in terms of priority, but somewhat historically, starting with factors that
pre-date AI, and yet take on greater importance when AI technologies are used,
owing to the particular capabilities and risks of AI .3 These include
falsifiability and incremental deployment and safeguards against the manipulation
of data. There are also factors that relate more intrinsically to the sociotechnical
characteristics of AI as it exists today, like situational fairness and human-friendly
semanticisation.
The factors are ethically robust and pragmatically applicable, in the sense that
they give rise to design considerations in the form of best practices that should be
ethically endorsed. It is crucial to stress here that the seven factors we identify are
not by themselves sufficient for socially good AI, but careful consideration of each
of them is, we argue, necessary. Hence, the set of factors we identify should not be
taken as a “checklist” which, if merely complied with, guarantees socially good outcomes from the use of AI in a particular domain. In the same vein, we highlight the
need to strike a balance between the different factors, and indeed between tensions
that may arise even within a single factor. It follows that seeking to frame a project as “for social good” or “not for social good” in a binary way seems needlessly
reductive, not to mention subjective. The aim of the article is not to identify, or offer
the means to identify AI4SG projects; our goal is to identify ethically important
characteristics of projects that could feasibly be described as AI4SG.
Seven Essential Factors for Successful AI4SG
As we anticipated, the factors are (1) falsifiability and incremental deployment; (2)
safeguards against the manipulation of predictors; (3) receiver-contextualised intervention; (4) receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes; (5) privacy protection and data subject consent; (6) situational fairness; and (7) humanfriendly semanticisation. We shall elucidate each factor with one or more examples
of projects in the sample, and offer a corresponding best practice.
Falsifiability and Incremental Deployment
Trustworthiness is essential for technology in general , and for AI4SG applications in particular, to be adopted and
have a meaningful positive impact on human life and environmental wellbeing.
3  As noted in the introduction, we cannot hope to document every single ethical consideration for a
social good project, so even the least novel factors here are those that take on new relevance in the context of AI.
L. Floridi et al.
Trustworthiness of an AI application entails a high probability that the application
will respect the principle of beneficence, or at the very least the principle of nonmaleficience. While there is no universal rule or guideline that can ensure or guarantee
trustworthiness, falsifiability is an essential factor to improve the trustworthiness of
technological applications in general, and AI4SG applications in particular.
Falsifiability entails the specification, and the possibility of empirical testing, of
one or more critical requirements, that is, an essential condition, resource, or means
for a capability to be fully operational, such that something could or should not work
without it. Safety is an obvious critical requirement. Hence, for an AI4SG system
to be trustworthy, its safety should be falsifiable.4 If falsifiability is not possible,
then the critical requirements cannot be checked, and then the system should not be
deemed trustworthy. This is why falsifiability is an essential factor for all conceivable AI4SG projects.
Unfortunately, we cannot know for sure that a given AI4SG application is safe
unless we can test the application in all possible contexts. In this case, the map
of testing would simply equate to the territory of deployment. As this reductio ad
absurdum makes clear, complete certainty is out of reach. What is within reach, in
an uncertain and fuzzy world with many unforeseen situations, is the possibility to
know when a given critical requirement is not implemented or may be failing to
work properly. Hence, if the critical requirements are falsifiable, we can know when
the AI4SG application is not trustworthy, but not whether it is trustworthy.
Critical requirements should be tested with an incremental deployment cycle.
Unintended hazardous effects may only reveal themselves after testing. At the same
time, software should only be tested in the real world if it is safe to do so. This
requires adoption of a deployment cycle whereby developers: (a) ensure that the
application’s most critical requirements or assumptions are falsifiable, (b) undertake
hypothesis testing of those most critical requirements and assumptions in safe, protected contexts, and, if these hypotheses are not disproven over a small set of suitable contexts, then (c) conduct testing across increasingly wide contexts, and/or test
a larger set of less critical requirements, and all this while (d) being ready to halt or
modify the deployment as soon as hazardous or other unwanted effects may appear.
AI4SG applications may use formal approaches to try to test critical requirements. For example, they may include the use of formal verification to ensure that
autonomous vehicles, and AI systems in other safety–critical contexts, would make
the ethically preferable choice . Such methods offer safety
checks that, in terms of falsifiability, can be proved correct. Simulations may offer
roughly similar guarantees. A simulation enables one to test whether critical requirements (again, consider safety) are met under a set of formal assumptions. Unlike a
formal proof, a simulation cannot always indicate that the required properties are
4  It is of course likely that in practice, an assessment of the safety of an AI system must also take into
account wider societal values and cultural beliefs, for example, which may necessitate different trade-offs
between the requirements of critical requirements like safety and other, potentially competing norms and
expectations.
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
necessarily always satisfied. But a simulation often enables one to test a much wider
set of cases that cannot be dealt with formally, e.g., due to the complexity of the
It would be misguided to rely purely on formal properties or simulations to falsify an AI4SG application. The assumptions of these models cage the real-world
applicability of any conclusions that one might make. And assumptions may
be incorrect in reality. What one may prove to be correct via a formal proof, or
likely correct via testing in simulation, may be disproved later with the real-world
deployment of the system. For example, developers of a game-theoretic model
for wildlife security assumed a relatively flat topography without serious obstructions. Hence, the software that they developed originally had an incorrect definition of an optimal patrol route. Incremental testing of the application enabled the
refinement of the optimal patrol route by proving wrong the assumption of a flat
topography .
If novel dilemmas in real-world contexts require the alteration of prior
assumptions made in the lab, one solution is to rectify a priori assumptions after
deployment. Alternatively, one may adopt an “on-the-fly” or runtime system
for a constant update of a program’s processing (“understanding”) of its inputs.
Yet, problems also abound with this approach. For example, Microsoft’s infamous Twitter bot, Tay, acquired meanings, in a very loose sense, at runtime, as
it learned from Twitter users how it should respond to tweets. After deployment
in the real—and frequently vicious—world of social media, however, the bot’s
ability to adapt constantly its “conceptual understanding” became an unfortunate
bug, as Tay “learned” and regurgitated offensive language and unethical associations between concepts from other users .
The use of a retrodictive approach—that is, an attempt to understand some aspect
of reality through a priori information—to deal with the falsifiability of requirements presents similar problems. This is noteworthy, since retrodiction is the primary method of supervised machine learning approaches that learn from data (e.g.,
the learning of a continuous transformation function in the case of neural networks).
From the previous analysis it follows that the essential factor of falsifiability and
incremental development comprises a cycle: engineering requirements that are falsifiable (so that it is at least possible to know whether the requirements are not met);
falsification testing for incrementally improving levels of trustworthiness; adjustment of a priori assumptions; and then and only then deployment in an incrementally wider and critical context. Germany’s approach to regulating autonomous vehicles offer a good example of this incremental approach. Deregulated zones allow
experimentation of constrained autonomy and, after increasing the levels of trustworthiness, manufacturers may test vehicles with higher levels of autonomy . Indeed, the creation of such deregulated zones, or teststrecken, was one recommendation to support more ethical AI policy at the European level . The identification of this essential factor yields the following best practice:
(1) AI4SG designers should identify falsifiable requirements and test them in incremental steps from the lab to the “outside world”.
L. Floridi et al.
Safeguards Against the Manipulation of Predictors
The use of AI to predict future trends or patterns is very popular in AI4SG contexts,
from applying automated prediction to redress academic failure , to preventing illegal policing , and detecting corporate
fraud . The predictive power of AI4SG faces two risks: the
manipulation of input data, and excessive reliance on non-causal indicators.
The manipulation of data is not a new problem, nor is it limited to AI systems
alone. Well-established findings such as Goodhart’s Law , which
is often summarised as “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good
measure” , long pre-date widespread adoption of AI systems.
But in the case of AI, the problem of data manipulation may be exacerbated and lead to unfair outcomes that breach the principle
of justice. As such, it is a noteworthy risk for any AI4SG initiative, because it can
impair the predictive power of AI and lead to the avoidance of socially good interventions at the individual level. Consider the concern raised by Ghani over teachers
who face being evaluated in respect to:
the percentage of students in their class who are above a certain risk threshold.
If the model was transparent — for example, heavily reliant on math GPA — the
teacher could inflate math grades and reduce the intermediate risk scores of
their students .
As Ghani goes on to argue, the same concern applies to predictors of adverse police
officer interactions:
these systems [are] very easy to understand and interpret, but that also makes
them easy to game. An officer who has had two uses of force in the past 80
days may choose to be a bit more careful over the next 10 days, until the count
rolls over to zero again.
These hypothetical examples make clear that, when the model used is an easy one
to understand “on the ground”, it is already open to abuse or “gaming”, independently of whether AI is used. The introduction of AI complicates matters, owing
to the scale at which AI is typically applied.5As we have seen, if the information
used to predict a given outcome is known, an agent with such information (that is
predicted to take a particular action) can change each predictive variable’s value in
order to avoid an intervention. In this way, the predictive power of the overall model
is reduced, as it has been shown by empirical research in the domain of corporate
fraud . Such a phenomenon could carry across from fraud
detection to the domains that AI4SG initiatives seek to address.6
5  While, for the sake of simplicity, our focus is on minimising the spread of information used to predict
an outcome, we do not intend to foreclose on the suggestion, offered in Prasad , that in some cases
a fairer approach may be to maximise the available information and hence “democratise” the ability to
manipulate predictors.
6  For a discussion of the use of artificial intelligence in criminal acts more generally, see King et al.
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
At the same time, there is a risk that excessive reliance on non-causal indicators—that is, data which is correlated with, but not causal of, a phenomenon—may
distract attention from the context in which the AI4SG designer is seeking to intervene. To be effective, any such intervention should alter the underlying causes of
a given problem, such as a student’s domestic problems or inadequate corporate
governance, rather than non-causal predictors. To do otherwise is to risk addressing
only a symptom, rather than the root cause of a problem.
These risks suggest the need to consider the use of safeguards as a design factor
for AI4SG projects. Such safeguards may constrain the selection of indicators to be
used in the design of AI4SG projects; the extent to which these indicators should
shape interventions; and/or the level of transparency that should apply to how indicators affect decision. This yields the following best practice:
(2) AI4SG designers should adopt safeguards which (i) ensure that non-causal indicators do not inappropriately skew interventions, and (ii) limit, when appropriate, knowledge of how inputs affect outputs from AI4SG systems, to prevent
manipulation.
Receiver‑Contextualised Intervention
It is essential that software intervenes in users’ life only in ways that respect their
autonomy. Again, this is not a problem that arises only with AI-driven interventions,
but the use of AI introduces new considerations. In particular, a core challenge for
AI4SG projects is to devise interventions that balance current and future benefits.
The balancing problem, which is familiar to preference-elicitation research , boils down to a temporal
choice interdependency. An intervention in the present can elicit user preferences
that then enable the software to contextualise future interventions to the given user.
Consequently, an intervention strategy that has no impact on user autonomy (e.g.,
one that lacks any interventions) may be ineffective in extracting the necessary
information for correctly contextualised future interventions. Conversely, an intervention that overly infringes upon a user’s autonomy may cause the user to reject the
technology, making future interventions impossible.
This balancing consideration is a common one for AI4SG initiatives. Take, for
example, interactive activity recognition software for people with cognitive disabilities . The software is designed to prompt patients to maintain a
daily schedule of activities (e.g., taking medication), whilst minimising interruptions to their wider goals. Each intervention is contextualised in such a way that
the software learns the timing of future interventions from responses to past interventions. Moreover, only important interventions are made, and yet all interventions
are partially optional because declining one prompt leads to the same prompt later
on. Here, the concern was that patients would reject an overly intrusive technology;
hence a balance was sought. This balance is lacking in our second example. A gametheoretic application intervenes in wildlife security officers’ patrols by offering
L. Floridi et al.
suggested routes . If a route poses physical obstacles, however,
then the software lacks the possibility to provide alternative suggestions. Officers
may ignore the advice by taking a different route, but not without disengaging from
the application. It is essential to relax such constraints, so that users can ignore an
intervention, but accept subsequent, more appropriate interventions (in the form of
advice) later on.
These examples point to the importance of seeing users as equal partners in both
the design and deployment of autonomous decision-making systems. The adoption
of this mindset might have helped prevent the tragic loss of two Boeing 737 Max
airliners. It appears that the pilots of these flights struggled to reverse a software
malfunction caused by faulty sensors, due in part to the absence of “optional safety
features” which Boeing sold separately .
The risk of false positives (unnecessary intervention, creating disillusionment)
is often just as problematic as false negatives (no intervention where it is necessary, limiting effectiveness). Hence, a suitable receiver-contextualised intervention
is one that achieves the right level of disruption while respecting autonomy through
optionality. This contextualisation rests on information about users’ capacities, preferences and goals, and the circumstances in which the intervention will take effect.
One can consider five dimensions relevant to a receiver-contextualised intervention. Four of these dimensions emerge from McFarlane’s taxonomy of interdisciplinary research on disruptive computer–human interruptions . These are: the individual characteristics
of the person receiving the intervention; the methods of coordination between the
receiver and the system; the meaning or purpose of the intervention; and the overall
effects of the intervention.7 A fifth dimension of relevance is optionality: a user can
choose either to ignore all offered advice or to drive the process and request a different intervention better suited to their needs.
We can summarise these five dimensions in the form of the following best practice for receiver-contextualised intervention.
(3) AI4SG designers should build decision-making systems in consultation with
users interacting with, and impacted, by these systems; with understanding of
users’ characteristics, of the methods of coordination, and the purposes and
effects of an intervention; and with respect for users’ right to ignore or modify
interventions.
7  The four remaining dimensions proposed by MacFarlane—the source of the interruption, the method
of expression, the channel of conveyance and the human activity changed by the interruption—are not
relevant for purpose of this article.
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
Receiver‑Contextualised Explanation and Transparent Purposes
AI4SG applications should be designed to make explainable the operations and outcomes of these systems and to make transparent their purposes. These two requirements are of course intrinsically linked, as the operations and outcomes of AI systems reflect the wider purposes of human designers; in this section, we address both
Making AI systems explainable is an important ethical principle . It has been a focus of research since at least 1975 . And it has gained more attention recently given the increasingly pervasive distribution of AI systems. As we saw
above, AI4SG projects should offer interventions that are contextualised to the
receiver. In addition, the explanation for an intervention should be contextualised in
order to be adequate, and protect the autonomy of the receiver.
Designers of AI4SG projects have tried to increase the explainability of decisionmaking systems in various ways. For example, researchers have used machine learning to predict academic adversity . These predictors used
concepts that the school officials interpreting the system found familiar and salient, such as GPA scores and socio-economic categorisations. Researchers have also
used reinforcement-learning to help officials at homeless shelters educate homeless
youths about HIV . The system learns how to maximise the
influence of HIV education, by choosing which homeless youths to educate, on the
basis that homeless youths may pass on their knowledge. One version of the system
explained which youth was chosen by revealing their social network graph. However, the homeless shelter officials found that these explanations were counter-intuitive, potentially affecting the understanding of how the system worked and, hence,
users’ trust in the system. These two cases exemplify the importance of the right
conceptualisation when explaining an AI-based decision.
The right conceptualisation is likely to vary between AI4SG projects, because
they differ greatly in their objectives, subject matter, context and stakeholders. The
conceptual framework, that is, the Level of Abstraction (LoA) depends on what is
being explained and to whom . An LoA is a key component of a theory, and hence of any explanation. A theory comprises five components:
1. a System, which is the referent or object analysed by a theory;
2. a Purpose, which is the “what for” that motivates the analysis of a system (note
that this answers the question “what is the analysis for?” and should not be confused with a system’s purpose, which answers the question “what is the system
for?”. Below, we use the term “goal” for system’s purpose whenever there may
be a risk of confusion);
3. a Level of Abstraction, which provides a lens through which a system is analysed,
and generates;
4. a Model, that is, some relevant and reliable information about the analysed system,
which identifies;
5. a Structure of the system, which comprises the features that belong to the system
being analysed.
L. Floridi et al.
There is an interdependency between the choice of the specific purpose, the relevant LoA that can fulfil the purpose, the system analysed, and the model obtained
by analysing the system at a specified LoA for a particular purpose. The LoA provides the conceptualisation of the system (e.g., GPA scores, and socio-economic
backgrounds). But the purpose constrains the construction of LoAs. For example,
if we choose to explain the decision making system itself (e.g., the use of particular
machine learning techniques), then the LoA can only conceptualise those AI techniques. In turn, the LoA generates the model, which explains the system. The model
identifies system structures, such as a specific student’s GPA score, poor attendance
rate, and their socioeconomic background being predictors of their academic failure.
Consequently, designers must choose carefully the purpose and the corresponding
LoA, so that the explanation model can provide the right explanation of the system
in question for a given receiver.
A LoA is chosen for a specific purpose: for example, a LoA chosen to explain a
decision taken on the basis of outcomes obtained through an algorithmic procedure
varies depending on whether the explanation is meant for the receiver of that decision or for an engineer responsible for the design of the algorithmic procedure. This
is because, depending on the purpose and its granularity (e.g. a customer-friendly
vs. engineer-friendly explanation), not every LoA is appropriate for a given receiver.
Sometimes, a receiver’s conceptual view of the world may differ from the one on
which the explanation is based. In other cases, a receiver and an explanation may be
conceptually aligned, but the receiver may not agree on the amount of granularity
(LoA) of the information (what we called more precisely the model) provided. Conceptual disalignment means that the receiver may find the explanation irrelevant,
unintelligible or, as we shall see below, questionable. In respect of (un)intelligibility,
a LoA may use unknown labels (so-called observables), or labels that have different
meanings for different users.
Empirical studies suggest that the suitability of an
explanation differs among receivers according to their expertise. Receivers may
require explanations about how the AI software came to a decision, especially when
they must take action based on that decision . How the AI system came to a conclusion can be just as important as the
justification for that conclusion. Consequently, designers must also contextualise the
method of explanation to the receiver.
The case of the software that uses influence-maximisation algorithms to target
homeless youths for HIV education provides a good example of the relevance of
the receiver-contextualisation of concepts . The researchers
involved in this project considered three possible LoAs when designing the explanation model: the first LoA included utility calculations; the second LoA focused on
social graph connectivity; and a third LoA focusing on pedagogic purpose. The first
LoA highlighted the utility of targeting one homeless youth over another. According to the researchers, in this case, homeless shelter workers (the receivers) might
have misunderstood the utility calculations or found them irrelevant. Utility calculations offer little explanatory power beyond the decision itself, because they often
simply show that the “best” choice was made, and how good it was. Explanations
based on the second LoA faced a different problem: the receivers assumed that the
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
most central nodes in the network were the best for maximising the influence of
education, while the optimal choice is often a set of less well-connected nodes. This
disjuncture may have arisen from the nature of the connectivity between members
of the network of homeless youths, which reflects real-life uncertainty about friendships. Since who counts as a “friend” is often vague and changeable over time, the
researchers classified edges in the network as either “certain” or “uncertain” based
on domain knowledge. For “uncertain” relationships, the probability of a friendship
existing between two youths was determined by domain experts.8 The third LoA was
eventually chosen, after subsequent user testing of different explanation frameworks
 . In light of their stated goal to justify decisions in a way that
would be intuitive to homeless shelter officials, the researchers considered omitting
references to the Maximum Expected Utility (MEU) calculations, even though this
is what actually underlies the decisions made by the system. Instead, the researchers
considered justifying decisions using concepts with which officials would be more
comfortable and familiar, such as the centrality of the nodes (i.e., the youths) that
the system recommends officials prioritise for intervention. In this way, the researchers sought to provide the most relevant information contextualised to the receiver.
As this example shows, given a particular system, the purpose one chooses to
pursue when seeking an explanation of it, at what LoA, and the issuing model that
is obtained are crucial variables that impact the effectiveness of an explanation.
Explainability breeds trust in, and fosters adoption of, AI4SG solutions . This is why
it is essential that software uses persuasive argumentation for the target audience.
This is likely to include information about both the general functionality and logic
employed by a system and the reasons for the specific decision being made .
Transparency in the goal (i.e., system’s purpose) of the system is also crucial, for
it follows directly from the principle of autonomy. Consider, for example, the development of AI solutions to prompt people with cognitive disabilities to take their
medication . On its face, this application may seem invasive, involving vulnerable users, limiting the effectiveness of receiver-conceptualised explanation. However, the system is not designed to coerce the patients into a given behaviour, nor is it designed to resemble a human being. The patients have autonomy not
to interact with the AI system in question. This case highlights the importance of
transparency in goals, particularly in contexts in which explainable operations and
outcomes are unworkable or undesirable. Transparency in goals, thus, undergirds
other safeguards around the protection of target populations and may help ensure
compliance with relevant legislation and precedent .
Conversely, opaque goals may prompt misunderstanding and the potential for
harms. For instance, when users of an AI system are unclear about what type of
8  Note that the significance of involving domain experts in the process was not merely to improve
their experience as decision recipients, but also for their unparalleled knowledge of the domain that the
researchers drew upon in the system design, helping to provide the researchers with what Pagallo 
calls “preventive understanding” of the field.
L. Floridi et al.
agent they are dealing with—human, artificial, or a hybrid combination of both—
they may wrongly assume that the tacit norms of human-to-human social interaction
are upheld (e.g., not recording every detail of a conversation) . As ever,
the social context in which an AI4SG application takes place impacts the extent to
which AI systems should be transparent in their operations. Because transparency
is the default but not absolute position, there may be valid reasons for designers to
obviate informing users of the software’s goals. For example, the scientific value of
a project or the health and safety conditions of a public space may justify temporarily opaque goals. Consider a study that deceived students into believing that they
were interacting with a human course-assistant that was in fact, over time, realised
to be a bot . The bot’s deception, as the authors argue, was for
playing the “imitation game” without causing the students to choose simpler and
less human-like natural-language queries based on preconceptions of AI capabilities. In such cases, the choice between opacity and transparency may be informed
by preexisting notions of informed consent for human-subject experiments embedded in the Nuremberg Code, the Declaration of Helsinki, and the Belmont Report
 .
More broadly, the ability to avoid the use of an AI system becomes more likely
when AI software reveals its endogenous goals, like classifying data about a person.
For example, AI software could inform staff in a hospital ward that it has the goal of
classifying their hygiene levels . In this case, the staff may decide
to avoid such classifications if there are reasonable alternative actions that they can
take. In other cases, revealing a goal makes it less likely to be fulfilled.
Making transparent the goals and motivations of AI4SG developers themselves
is an essential factor to the success of any project, but one that may contrast the
very purpose of the system. This is why it is crucial to assess, at a design stage,
what level of transparency (i.e. how much transparency, of what kind, for whom,
and about what?) the project will embrace given its overall goal and the context of
implementation. Taken together with the need for receiver-conceptualised explanation, this consideration yields the following set of best practices:
(4) AI4SG designers should choose a Level of Abstraction for AI explanation that
fulfils the desired explanatory purpose and is appropriate to the system and the
receivers; then deploy arguments that are rationally and suitably persuasive for
the receivers to deliver the explanation; and ensure that the goal (the system’s
purpose) for which an AI4SG system is developed and deployed is knowable to
receivers of its outputs by default.
Privacy Protection and Data Subject Consent
Of our seven factors, privacy has perhaps the most voluminous literature. This
should not be a surprise, since privacy is considered to be an essential condition
for safety, human dignity, and social cohesion, among other things ,
and because earlier waves of digital technology have already had a major impact
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
on privacy . People’s safety may be compromised when a malicious actor or state gain control over individuals via privacy infringements . Respect for privacy is also a necessary condition of human
dignity, since we can view personal information as constituting an individual, and
deprivatising records without consent is likely to constitute a violation of human
dignity . The conception of individual privacy as a fundamental right
underlies recent legislative action in, for example, Europe (through its General Data
Protection Regulation) and Japan (through its Act on Protection of Personal Information), as well as judicial decisions in jurisdictions such as India . Privacy supports people in deviating from social norms without causing offense, and communities in maintaining their social structures, so privacy also
undergirds social cohesion.
In the case of AI4SG, it is particularly important to emphasise the relevance
of users’ consent to the use of personal data. Tensions may arise between different thresholds of consent . The tension is often at its most
fraught in “life-or-death” situations such national emergencies and pandemics. Consider the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa in 2014, which posed a complex ethical
dilemma . In this case, the rapid release and analysis of calldata records from cell phone users in the region may have allowed epidemiologists
to track the spread of the deadly disease. However, the release of the data was held
up over valid concerns around users’ privacy, as well as the value of the data to
industrial competitors.
In circumstances where haste is not so crucial, it is possible to obtain a subject’s
consent for—and before—the data being used. The level or type of consent sought
can vary with the context. In healthcare, one may adopt an assumed consent threshold, whereby reporting a medical issue to a doctor constitutes assumed consent on
the part of a patient. In other circumstances, an informed consent threshold will
be more appropriate. Yet, since informed consent requires researchers to obtain a
patient’s specific consent before using their data for a non-consented purpose, practitioners may choose an explicit consent threshold to general data processing, i.e.,
for any medical usage. This threshold does not require informing the patient about
all of the possible ways that researchers may use their data . Another
alternative is the evolving notion of “dynamic consent”, whereby individuals can
monitor and adjust their privacy preferences on a granular level .
In other cases, informed consent may be waived altogether. This was the case
with the recent creation of machine learning software to predict the prognosis of
ovarian cancer sufferers by drawing upon retrospective analysis of anonymised
images . The use of patient health data in the development of AI
solutions without patients’ consent has also attracted the attention of data protection
regulators. In 2017, the UK’s Information Commissioner ruled that the Royal Free
NHS Foundation Trust violated the Data Protection Act when it provided patient
details to Google DeepMind, for the purposes of training an AI system to diagnose
acute kidney injury . The Commissioner noted as a “shortcoming”
that “patients were not adequately informed that their data would be used as part of
the test” .
L. Floridi et al.
Striking a balance between respecting patient privacy and creating effective
AI4SG is still possible, however. This was the challenge faced by the researchers
in Haque et al. , who wanted to create a system for tracking compliance with
rules around hand hygiene in hospitals, to prevent the spread of infections. Despite
the clear technical advantages of taking a computer vision-based approach to the
problem, the use of video recording runs up against privacy regulations constraining it. Even in cases where video recording is allowed, access to the recordings (in
order to train an algorithm) is often strict. Instead, the researchers resorted to “depth
images”, which de-identify subjects, preserving their privacy. While this design
choice meant “losing important visual appearance cues in the process”, it satisfied
privacy rules, and the researchers’ non-intrusive system still managed to outperform
existing solutions.
Finally, consent in the online space is also problematic; users often lack the
choice and are presented with a ‘take it or leave it’ option when accessing online
services . The relative lack of protection or consent for the second-hand use of personal data that is publicly shared
online enables the development of ethically problematic AI software. For example,
a recent paper used publicly available images of faces uploaded to a dating website
as a way to train AI software to detect someone’s sexuality based on a small number
of photos . While the study received ethics committee
approval, it raises further questions around consent, since it is implausible that the
users of the dating website could or necessarily would have consented to the use of
their data for this particular purpose.
Privacy is not a novel problem, but the centrality of personal data to many AI
(and AI4SG) applications heightens its ethical significance and creates issues
around consent . From this we can derive the following
best practice.
(5) AI4SG designers should respect the threshold of consent established for the
processing of datasets of personal data.
Situational fairness
AI developers typically rely on data, which may be biased in ways that are socially
significant. This bias may carry across to the algorithmic decision-making that
underpins many AI systems, in ways that are unfair to the subjects of the decisionmaking process and, thus, may breach the
principle of justice. These decisions may be based on factors of ethical importance
(e.g., ethnic, gender, or religious grounds) and irrelevant to the decision-making at
hand, or they may be relevant but legally protected as a nondiscriminatory characteristic . Moreover, AI-driven decisions may be
amalgamated from factors that are not of obvious ethical importance, and yet collectively constitute unfairly biased decision-making . Such a cycle would begin with a biased dataset
informing a first phase of AI decision-making, resulting in discriminatory actions,
leading to the collection and use of biased data in turn. Consider the use of AI to
predict preterm birth in the United States, where the health outcomes of pregnant
women have long been affected by their ethnicity. Longstanding bias against African-American women seeking treatment, owing to harmful historical stereotypes,
contributes to a maternal morbidity rate that is over three times higher than that of
white women . Here, AI may offer great potential to reduce this stark
racial divide, but only if the same historical discrimination is not replicated in AI
systems . Or consider the use of predictive policing software. Developers may train predictive policing software on policing data that contains deeply
ingrained prejudices. When discrimination affects arrest rates, it becomes embedded
in prosecution data . Such biases may cause discriminatory
decisions (e.g., warnings or arrests) that feed back into the increasingly biased datasets , thereby completing a vicious cycle.
These examples involve the use of AI to improve outcomes in domains where
data were already collected. Yet, in many other contexts, AI4SG projects (or indeed
similar initiatives) are, in effect, making citizens “visible” in ways that they previously were not, including in global South contexts . This
increased visibility stresses the importance of protecting against the potential amplification of harmful bias by AI technologies.
Clearly, designers must sanitise the datasets used to train AI. However, there is
equally a risk of applying too strong a disinfectant, so to speak, by removing important contextual nuances which could improve ethical decision-making. So, designers
must also ensure that AI decision-making maintains sensitivity to factors that are
important for inclusiveness. For instance, we should ensure that a word processor
interacts identically with a human user regardless of that user’s gender and ethnicity,
but also expect that it may operate in a non-equal and yet equitable way by aiding
people with visual impairments.
Such expectations are not always met in the context of AI-driven reasoning.
Compared to the word processor, AI makes possible a far wider range of decisionmaking and interaction modalities, many of which are driven by potentially biased
data. Training datasets may contain natural language that carries unfair associations
between genders and words which, in turn, carry normative power . In other contexts and use cases, an equitable approach may require differences in communication, based on factors such as gender. Consider the case of the
virtual teaching assistant which failed to discriminate sufficiently well between men
and women in its responses to being told that a user was expecting a baby, congratulating the men and ignoring the women . A BBC News investigation highlighted an even more egregious example: a mental health chatbot deemed
suitable for use by children was unable to understand a child explicitly reporting
underage sexual abuse . As these cases make clear, the use of AI in
human–computer interactions, such as chatbots, requires the correct understanding of both the salient groups to which a user belongs and the characteristics they
embody when they interact with the software.
L. Floridi et al.
Respecting situational fairness is essential for the successful implementation of
AI4SG. To achieve it, AI4SG projects need to remove factors (and their proxies) that
are of ethical importance but irrelevant to an outcome, and include the same factors when these are required, whether for the sake of inclusiveness, safety, or other
ethical considerations. The problem of historical biases affecting future decisionmaking is an old one. What is new is the potential that these biases will be embedded in, strengthened, and perpetuated anew by erroneous reinforcement learning
mechanisms. This risk is especially pronounced when considered alongside the risk
of opacity in AI decision-making systems and their outcomes. We will return to this
topic in the next section.
From our identification of situational fairness as an essential factor, we can yield
the following best practice:
(6) AI4SG designers should remove from relevant datasets variables and proxies that
are irrelevant to an outcome, except when their inclusion supports inclusivity,
safety, or other ethical imperatives.
Human‑Friendly Semanticisation
AI4SG must allow humans to curate and foster their “semantic capital”, that is,
any content that can enhance someone’s power to give meaning to and make
sense of (semanticise) something .
This is crucial to maintain and foster human autonomy. With AI, we may often
have the technical capacity to automate meaning- and sense-creation (semanticisation), but mistrust or unfairness may also arise if we do so carelessly. Two problems emerge. The first problem is that AI software may define semanticisation in
a way that diverges from our own choices. This is the case if a procedure arbitrarily defines meanings (e.g., based on a coin toss). The same problem may arise if
AI software support some kind of semanticisation based on preexisting uses. For
example, researchers have developed an application that predicts the legal meaning
of ‘violation’ based on past cases . If one used the software to define the meaning of ‘violation’,9 then one would end up limiting the role
of judges and justices. They would no longer be able to semanticise (refine and redefine the meaning, and the possibility of making sense of) “violation”, when they
interpret the law. This is a problem, because past usage does not always predict how
we would semanticise the same concepts or phenomena in the future.
The second problem is that, in a social setting, it would be impractical for AI
software to define all meanings and senses. Some semanticisation is subjective,
because who or what is involved in the semanticisation is also partly constitutive of
the process and its outcome. For example, only legally empowered agents can define
9  There is no suggestion that this is the intended use.
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
the legal meaning of ‘violation’. Likewise, the meaning and sense of affective symbols, such as facial expressions, also depends on the type of agent showing a given
expression. Affective AI can detect an emotion ,
an artificial agent may state accurately that a human appears sad, but cannot change
the meaning of sadness.
The solution to these two problems rest on distinguishing between tasks that
should and should not be delegated to an artificial system. AI should be deployed to
facilitate human-friendly semantisation, but not to provide it itself. This is true, for
example, when considering patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Research into carerpatient relations highlights three points . First, carers play
a critical, but burdensome, role in reminding patients of the activities in which they
participate, e.g., taking medication. Second, carers also play a critical role in providing patients with meaningful interaction. And third, when carers remind patients to
take their medication, the patient-carer relation may become weaker by annoying the
patient, with the carer losing some capacity to provide empathy and meaningful support. Consequently, researchers have developed AI software that balances reminding
the patient against annoying the patient . The balance is learned and
optimised using reinforcement learning. The researchers designed the system so that
caregivers can spend most of their time providing empathic support and preserving a
meaningful relationship with the patient. As this example shows, it is possible to use
AI to sweep away formulaic tasks whilst sustaining human-friendly semanticisation.
Human-centric semanticisation, as an essential factor for AI4SG, underpins our
final best practice:
(7) AI4SG designers should not hinder the ability for people to semanticise (that is,
to give meaning to, and make sense of) something.
Conclusion: Balancing Factors for AI for Social Good
The seven factors analysed in the previous pages are summarised in Table 1, together
with the corresponding best practices, and the five principle(s) of AI ethics identified in to which each factor is most closely identified. To
reiterate, the principle of beneficence is assumed as a precondition for an AI4SG,
so the factors relate to one or more of the other four principles: nonmaleficence,
autonomy, justice and explicability.
The seven factors suggest that creating successful AI4SG requires two kinds of
balances to be struck: intra and inter.
On the one hand, each single factor in and of itself may require an intrinsic balance, for example, between the risk of over-intervening and the risk of under-intervening when devising contextual interventions; or between protection-by-obfuscation and
protection-by-enumeration of salient differences between people, depending on the
purposes and context of a system. On the other hand, balances are not just specific to a
single factor; they are also systemic, because they must also be struck between multiple
L. Floridi et al.
Table 1   Summary of seven factors supporting AI4SG and the corresponding best practices
Corresponding best practices
Corresponding ethical principle
Falsifiability and incremental deployment
Identify falsifiable requirements and test them in incremental steps from
the lab to the “outside world”
Nonmaleficence
Safeguards against the manipulation of predictors
Adopt safeguards which (i) ensure that non-causal indicators do not
inappropriately skew interventions, and (ii) limit, when appropriate, knowledge of how inputs affect outputs from AI4SG systems, to
prevent manipulation
Nonmaleficence
Receiver-contextualised intervention
Build decision-making systems in consultation with users interacting
with and impacted by these systems; with understanding of users’
characteristics, the methods of coordination, the purposes and effects
of an intervention; and with respect for users’ right to ignore or modify
interventions
Receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes
Choose a Level of Abstraction for AI explanation that fulfils the desired
explanatory purpose and is appropriate to the system and the receivers; then deploy arguments that are rationally and suitably persuasive
for the receiver to deliver the explanation; and ensure that the goal
(the system’s purpose) for which an AI4SG system is developed and
deployed is knowable to receivers of its outputs by default
Explicability
Privacy protection and data subject consent
Respect the threshold of consent established for the processing of datasets of personal data
Nonmaleficence; autonomy
Situational fairness
Remove from relevant datasets variables and proxies that are irrelevant to
an outcome, except when their inclusion supports inclusivity, safety, or
other ethical imperatives
Human-friendly semanticisation
Do not hinder the ability for people to semanticise (that is, to give meaning to, and make sense of) something
How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors
factors. Consider the tension between preventing malicious actors from understanding
how to “game” the input data of AI prediction systems versus enabling humans to override genuinely flawed outcomes; or the tension between ensuring the effective disclosure of the reasons behind a decision without compromising the consensual anonymity
of data subjects.
The overarching question facing the AI4SG community is, for each given case,
whether one is morally obliged to, or obliged not to, design, develop, and deploy a specific AI4SG project. This article does not seek to answer such a question in the abstract.
Resolving the tensions that are likely to arise among and between factors is highly context-dependent, and the previous analysis is not meant to cover all potential contexts,
not least because this would be inconsistent with the argument for falsifiable hypothesis
testing and incremental deployment supported in this article; nor would a checklist of
purely technical “dos and don’ts” suffice. Rather, our analysis has yielded a set of essential factors that need to be considered, interpreted and evaluated contextually when one
is designing, developing, and deploying a specific AI4SG project. The future of AI4SG
will likely provide more opportunities to enrich such a set of essential factors. AI itself
may help to manage its own life cycle by providing, in a meta-reflective way, tools to
evaluate how best to strike the individual and systemic balances indicated above.
The most pertinent questions to arise from the factors described in this article are
likely to concern this challenge of balancing the competing needs and claims that
the factors and corresponding best practices introduce. This concerns what it is that
legitimates decision-making with and about AI. While we leave this concern primarily to future research, we offer some remarks on it in closing. Questions such as
this are inevitably intertwined with wider ethical and political challenges regarding
who has the power or “standing” to participate in this process of evaluation, as well
as how multiple preferences are measured and aggregated, as Baum’s trichotomic
framework outlines . If we assume that the challenge of balancing factors ought to be at least somewhat participatory in nature, Prasad’s overview
of relevant social choice theorems identifies several background conditions to support efficacious group decision-making. As these analyses suggest, the incorporation
of multiple perspectives into the design of AI decision-making systems is likely to
be an ethically important step both for AI in general, and AI4SG in particular.
There is much work still to be done to ensure that AI4SG projects are designed
in ways that not merely advance beneficial goals and address societal challenges, but
that do so in socially preferable and sustainable ways. This article seeks to contribute to lay the ground for good practices and policies in this respect, as well as for
further research on the ethical considerations that should undergird AI4SG projects,
and hence the “AI4SG project” at large.
Appendix: Representative AI4SG Examples
In the table below, we list the seven initiatives from our wider sample that are especially representative in terms of scope, variety, impact, and for their potentiality
to evince the factors that should characterise the design of AI4SG projects. This
includes the factor(s) that were identified as a result of our analysis of each project.
L. Floridi et al.
References
Relevant factor(s)
Field optimization of the
protection assistant for
wildlife security
Fang et al. 
Environmental sustainability
Identifying students at
risk of adverse academic outcomes
Lakkaraju et al. 
Health information for
homeless youth to
reduce the spread of
Yadav et al. ,
Yadav et al. 
Poverty, public welfare,
public health
Interactive activity recognition and prompting
to assist people with
cognitive disabilities
Chu et al. 
Disability, public health
(3), (4), (7)
Virtual teaching assistant
experiment
Eicher et al. 
Detecting evolutionary
financial statement
Zhou and Kapoor Finance, crime
Tracking and monitoring
hand hygience compliance
Haque et al. 
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
ses/by/4.0/.