DEEP LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING:
THE ELECTRIC LOAD CASE
Alberto Gasparin
Faculty of Informatics
Università della Svizzera Italiana
6900 Lugano, Switzerland
 
Slobodan Lukovic
Faculty of Informatics
Università della Svizzera Italiana
6900 Lugano, Switzerland
 
Cesare Alippi
Dept. of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering
Politecnico di Milano
20133 Milan, Italy,
Faculty of Informatics
Università della Svizzera Italiana
6900 Lugano, Switzerland
 
Management and efﬁcient operations in critical infrastructure such as Smart Grids take huge advantage
of accurate power load forecasting which, due to its nonlinear nature, remains a challenging task.
Recently, deep learning has emerged in the machine learning ﬁeld achieving impressive performance
in a vast range of tasks, from image classiﬁcation to machine translation. Applications of deep learning
models to the electric load forecasting problem are gaining interest among researchers as well as the
industry, but a comprehensive and sound comparison among different architectures is not yet available
in the literature. This work aims at ﬁlling the gap by reviewing and experimentally evaluating on two
real-world datasets the most recent trends in electric load forecasting, by contrasting deep learning
architectures on short term forecast (one day ahead prediction). Speciﬁcally, we focus on feedforward
and recurrent neural networks, sequence to sequence models and temporal convolutional neural
networks along with architectural variants, which are known in the signal processing community but
are novel to the load forecasting one.
Keywords smart grid, electric load forecasting, time-series prediction, deep learning, recurrent neural network, lstm,
gru, temporal convolutional neural network, sequence to sequence models
Introduction
Smart grids aim at creating automated and efﬁcient energy delivery networks which improve power delivery reliability
and quality, along with network security, energy efﬁciency, and demand-side management aspects . Modern power
distribution systems are supported by advanced monitoring infrastructures that produce immense amount of data, thus
enabling ﬁne grained analytics and improved forecasting performance. In particular, electric load forecasting emerges as
a critical task in the energy ﬁeld, as it enables useful support for decision making, supporting optimal pricing strategies,
seamless integration of renewables and maintenance cost reductions. Load forecasting is carried out at different time
horizons, ranging from milliseconds to years, depending on the speciﬁc problem at hand.
In this work we focus on the day-ahead prediction problem also referred in the literature as short term load forecasting
(STLF) . Since deregulation of electric energy distribution and wide adoption of renewables strongly affects daily
market prices, STLF emerges to be of fundamental importance for efﬁcient power supply . Furthermore, we
differentiate forecasting on the granularity level at which it is applied. For instance, in individual household scenario,
load prediction is rather difﬁcult as power consumption patterns are highly volatile. On the contrary, aggregated load
consumption i.e., that associated with a neighborhood, a region, or even an entire state, is normally easier to predict as
the resulting signal exhibit slower dynamics.
 
A PREPRINT
Predictive Family of Models
Time Horizon
Exogenous Variables
Dataset (Location)
LSTM, GRU, ERNN, NARX, ESN
Rome, Italy
LSTM, GRU, ERNN, NARX, ESN
New England 
T, H, P, other∗
Palermo, Italy
Hubli, India
15min to 1Y
Sceaux, France 
LSTM, NARX
Australia 
T, W, H, C, TI
T, P, H, C, TI
Unknown 
LSTM, seq2seq-LSTM
Sceaux, France 
LSTM, seq2seq-LSTM
New England 
T, C, other∗∗
Dongguan, China
Sceaux, France
CNN + LSTM
North-China
CNN + LSTM
North-Italy
Table 1: Time Horizon: H(hour), D (day), W(week), M(month), Y(year), ?(Not explicitly stated, thus, inferred from
text) Exogenous variables: T (temperature), W (wind speed), H (humidity), P (pressure), C (calendar including date and
holidays information), TI (time), ∗other input features were created for this dataset, ∗∗categorical weather information
is used (e.g., sunny, cloudy), Dataset: the data source, a link is provided whenever available.
Historical power loads are time-series affected by several external time-variant factors, such as weather conditions,
human activities, temporal and seasonal characteristics that make their predictions a challenging problem. A large
variety of prediction methods has been proposed for the electric load forecasting over the years and, only the most
relevant ones are reviewed in this section. Autoregressive moving average models (ARMA) were among the ﬁrst model
families used in short-term load forecasting . Soon they were replaced by ARIMA and seasonal ARIMA models 
to cope with time variance often exhibited by load proﬁles. In order to include exogenous variables like temperature into
the forecasting method, model families were extended to ARMAX and ARIMAX . The main shortcoming of
these system identiﬁcation families is the linearity assumption for the system being observed, hypothesis that does not
generally hold. In order to solve this limitation, nonlinear models like Feed Forward Neural Networks were proposed
and became attractive for those scenarios exhibiting signiﬁcant nonlinearity, as in load forecasting tasks .
The intrinsic sequential nature of time series data was then exploited by considering sophisticated techniques ranging
from advanced feed forward architecture with residual connections to convolutional approaches and
Recurrent Neural Networks along with their many variants such as Echo-state Network , Long-Short
Term Memory and Gated Recurrent Unit . Moreover, some hybrid architectures have also been
proposed aiming to capture the temporal dependencies in the data with recurrent networks while performing a more
general feature extraction operation with convolutional layers .
Different reviews address the load forecasting topic by means of (not necessarily deep) neural networks. In 
the authors focus on the use of some deep learning architectures for load forecasting. However, this review lacks a
comprehensive comparative study of performance veriﬁed on common load forecasting benchmarks. The absence of
valid cost-performance metric does not allow the report to make conclusive statements. In an exhaustive overview
of recurrent neural networks for short term load forecasting is presented. The very detailed work considers one layer
(not deep) recurrent networks only. A comprehensive summary of the most relevant researches dealing with STLF
employing recurrent neural networks, convolutional neural networks and seq2seq models is presented in Table 1. It
emerges that most of the works have been performed on different datasets, making it rather difﬁcult - if not impossible to asses their absolute performance and, consequently, recommend the best state-of-the-art solutions for load forecast.
In this survey we consider the most relevant -and recent- deep architectures and contrast them in terms of performance
accuracy on open-source benchmarks. The considered architectures include recurrent neural networks, sequence
to sequence models and temporal convolutional neural networks. The experimental comparison is performed on
two different real-world datasets which are representatives of two distinct scenarios. The ﬁrst one considers power
consumption at an individual household level with a signal characterized by high frequency components while the
second one takes into account aggregation of several consumers. Our contributions consist in:
A PREPRINT
• A comprehensive review. The survey provides a comprehensive investigation of deep learning architectures
known to the smart grid literature as well as novel recent ones suitable for electric load forecasting.
• A multi-step prediction strategy comparison for recurrent neural networks: we study and compare how different
prediction strategies can be applied to recurrent neural networks. To the best of our knowledge this work has
not been done yet for deep recurrent neural networks.
• A relevant performance assessment. To the best of our knowledge, the present work provides the ﬁrst systematic
experimental comparison of the most relevant deep learning architectures for the electric load forecasting
problems of individual and aggregated electric demand. It should be noted that envisaged architectures are
domain independent and, as such, can be applied in different forecasting scenarios.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2 we formally introduce the forecasting problems along with the notation that will be used in this work. In
Section 3 we introduce Feed Forward Neural Networks (FNNs) and the main concepts relevant to the learning task. We
also provide a short review of the literature regarding the use of FNNs for the load forecasting problem.
In Section 4 we provide a general overview of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their most advanced architectures:
Long Short-Term Memory and Gated Recurrent Unit networks.
In Section 5 Sequence To Sequence architectures (seq2seq) are discussed as a general improvement over recurrent
neural networks. We present both, simple and advanced models built on the sequence to sequence paradigm.
In Section 6 Convolutional Neural Networks are introduced and one of their most recent variant, the temporal
convolutional network (TCN), is presented as the state-of-the-art method for univariate time-series prediction.
In Section 7 the real-world datasets used for models comparison are presented. For each dataset, we provide a description
of the preprocessing operations and the techniques that have been used to validate the models performance.
Finally, In Section 8 we draw conclusions based on the performed assessments.
Problem Description
Fixed-length Time Windows
(Sliding Window Apprach)
Indexes refer to the
whole time series
Indexes refer to the
time window
One fixed-length Time
Figure 1: A sliding windowed approach is used to frame the forecasting problem into a supervised machine learning
problem. The target signal s is split in multiple input output pairs (xt, yt)∀t ∈{nT , nT + 1, . . . , T −nO}
In basic multi-step ahead electric load forecasting a univariate time series s = [s , s . . . , s[T]] that spans through
several years is given. In this work, input data are presented to the different predictive families of models as a regressor
vector composed of ﬁxed time-lagged data associated with a window size of length nT which slides over the time series.
Given this ﬁxed length view of past values, a predictor f aims at forecasting the next nO values of the time series.
In this work the forecasting problem is studied as a supervised learning problem. As such, given the input vector at
discrete time t deﬁned as xt = [s[t −nT + 1], . . . , s[t]] ∈IRnT , the forecasting problem requires to infer the next nO
A PREPRINT
Description
window size of the regressor vector
time horizon of the forecast
number of exogenous variable
scalar value
vector/matrix
vector/matrix transposed
elementwise product
convolution operator
dilated convolution operation
index for the lth layer
regressor vector at discrete time t
(reference system: time-series)
xt ∈IRnT or xt ∈IRnT ×d
true output for the input sequence at time t
(reference system: time-series)
predicted output for the input sequence at time t
(reference system: time-series)
input vector of load & other features at time t
(reference system: time window)
x[t] ∈IR or x[t] ∈IRd
value of the load time-series at time t + 1
(reference system: time window)
exogenous features vector at time t
(reference system: time series)
zt ∈IRnT ×d−1
exogenous features vector at time t
(reference system:time window).
z[t] ∈IRd−1
hidden state vector
model’s vector of parameters
number of hidden neurons
Table 2: The nomenclature used in this work.
measurements yt = [s[t + 1], . . . , s[t + nO]] ∈IRnO or a subset of. To ease the notation we express the input and
output vectors in the reference system of the time window instead of the time series one. By following this approach,
the input vector at discrete time t becomes xt = [xt , . . . , xt[nT −1]] ∈IRnT , xt[i] = s[i + 1 + t −nT ] and the
corresponding output vector is yt = [yt[nT −1], . . . , yt[nT + nO −2]] ∈IRnO. yt characterizes the real output values
deﬁned as yt[t] = xt[t + 1],
∀t ∈T. Similarly, we denote as ˆyt = f(xt; ˆΘ) ∈IRnO, the prediction vector provided
by a predictive model f whose parameters vector Θ has been estimated by optimizing a performance function.
Without loss of generality, in the remaining of the paper, we drop the subscript t from the inner elements of xt and yt.
The introduced notation, along with the sliding window approach, is depicted in Figure 1.
In certain applications we will additionally be provided with d −1 exogenous variables (e.g., the temperatures) each
of which representing a univariate time series aligned in time with the data of electricity demand. In this scenario
the components of the regressor vector become vectors, i.e., xt = [x , . . . , x[nT −1]] ∈IRnT ×d. Indeed, each
element of the input sequence is represented as x[t] = [x[t], z0[t], . . . , zd−2[t]] ∈IRd where x[t] ∈IR is the scalar load
measurement at time t, while zk[t] ∈IR is the scalar value of the kth exogenous feature.
The nomenclature used in this work is given in Table 2.
A PREPRINT
Feed Forward Neural Networks
Feed Forward Neural Networks (FNNs) are parametric model families characterized by the universal function approximation property . Their computational architectures are composed of a layered structure consisting of three
main building blocks: the input layer, the hidden layer(s) and the output layer. The number of hidden layers (L > 1),
determines the depth of the network, while the size of each layer, i.e., the number nH,ℓof hidden units of the ℓ−th layer
deﬁnes its complexity in terms of neurons. FNNs provide only direct forward connections between two consecutive
layers, each connection associated with a trainable parameter; note that given the feedfoward nature of the computation
no recursive feedback is allowed. More in detail, given a vector x ∈IRnT fed at the network input, the FNN’s
computation can be expressed as:
ℓhℓ−1 + bℓ,
ℓ= 1, ...L
hℓ= φℓ(aℓ)
where h0 = xt ∈IRnT and ˆyt = hL ∈IRnO.
Each layer ℓis characterized with its own parameters matrix Wℓ∈IRnH,ℓ−1×nH,ℓand bias vector bℓ∈IRnH,ℓ.
Hereafter, in order to ease the notation, we incorporate the bias term in the weight matrix, i.e., Wℓ= [Wℓ; bℓ] and
hℓ= [hℓ; 1]. Θ = [W1, . . . , WL] groups all the network’s parameters.
Given a training set of N input-output vectors in the (xi, yi) form, i = 1, . . . , N, the learning procedure aims at
identifying a suitable conﬁguration of parameters ˆΘ that minimizes a loss function L evaluating the discrepancy
between the estimated values f(xt; Θ) and the measurements yt:
ˆΘ = arg min
The mean squared error:
(yt −f(xt; Θ))2
is a very popular loss function for time series prediction and, not rarely, a regularization penalty term is introduced to
prevent overﬁtting and improve the generalization capabilities of the model
(yt −f(xt; Θ))2 + Ω(Θ).
The most used regularization scheme controlling model complexity is the L2 regularization Ω(Θ) = λ∥Θ∥2
2, being λ a
suitable hyper-parameter controlling the regularization strength.
As Equation 4 is not convex, the solution cannot be obtained in a closed form with linear equation solvers or convex
optimization techniques. Parameters estimation (learning procedure) operates iteratively e.g., by leveraging on the
gradient descent approach:
Θk = Θk−1 −η∇ΘL(Θ)
where η is the learning rate and ∇ΘL(Θ) the gradient w.r.t. Θ. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), RMSProp ,
Adagrad , Adam are popular learning procedures. The learning procedure yields estimate ˆΘ = Θk associated
with the predictive model f(xt; ˆΘ).
In our work, deep FNNs are the baseline model architectures.
In multi-step ahead prediction the output layer dimension coincides with the forecasting horizon nO > 1. The dimension
of the input vector depends also on the presence of exogenous variables; this aspect is further discussed in Section 7.
Related Work
The use of Feed Forward Neural networks in short term load forecasting dates back to the 90s. Authors in propose
a shallow neural network with a single hidden layer to provide a 24-hour forecast using both load and temperature
information. In one day ahead forecast is implemented using two different prediction strategies: one network
provides all 24 forecast values in a single shot (MIMO strategy) while another single output network provides the
day-ahead prediction by recursively feedbacking its last value estimate (recurrent strategy). The recurrent strategy
A PREPRINT
shows to be more efﬁcient in terms of both training time and forecasting accuracy. In the authors present a feed
forward neural network to forecast electric loads on a weekly basis. The sparsely connected feed forward architecture
receives the load time-series, temperature readings, as well as the time and day of the week. It is shown that the extra
information improves the forecast accuracy compared to an ARIMA model trained on the same task. presents one
of the ﬁrst multi-layer FNN to forecast the hourly load of a power system.
A detailed review concerning applications of artiﬁcial neural networks in short-term load forecasting can be found in .
However, this survey dates back to the early 2000s, and does not discuss deep models. More recently, architectural
variants of feed forward neural networks have been used; for example, in a ResNet inspired model is used to
provide day ahead forecast by leveraging on a very deep architecture. The article shows a signiﬁcant improvement on
aggregated load forecasting when compared to other (not-neural) regression models on different datasets.
Recurrent Neural networks
In this section we overview recurrent neural networks, and, in particular the Elmann Net architecture , Long-Short
Term Memory and Gated Recurrent Unit networks. Afterwords, we introduce deep recurrent neural networks
and discuss different strategies to perform multi-step ahead forecasting. Finally, we present related work in short-term
load forecasting that leverages on recurrent networks.
Elmann RNNs (ERNN)
Elmann Recurrent Neural Networks (ERNN) were proposed in to generalize feedforward neural networks for
better handling ordered data sequences like time-series.
The reason behind the effectiveness of RNNs in dealing with sequences of data comes from their ability to learn a
compact representation of the input sequence xt by means of a recurrent function f that implements the following
h[t] = f(h[t −1], x[t]; Θ)
Figure 2: (Left) A simple RNN with a single input. The black box represents the delay operator which leads to Equation
6. (Right) The network after unfolding. Note that the structure reminds that of a (deep) feed forward neural network
but, here, each layer is constrained to share the same weights. hinit is the initial state of the network which is usually
set to zero.
By expanding Equation 6 and given a sequence of inputs xt = [x , . . . , x[nT −1]], x[t] ∈IRd the computation
a[t] = WT h[t −1] + UT x[t]
h[t] = φ(a[t])
y[t] = ψ(VT h[t])
where W ∈IRnH×nH, U ∈IRd×nH, V ∈IRnH×nO are the weight matrices for hidden-hidden, input-hidden,
hidden-output connections respectively, φ(·) is an activation function (generally the hyperbolic tangent one) and ψ(·) is
normally a linear function. The computation of a single module in an Elmann recurrent neural network is depicted in
A PREPRINT
Afﬁne transform.
nonlinear op.
Element-wise
operations
Figure 3: A simple ERNN block with one cell implementing Equation 78 once rewritten as matrix concatenation:
a[t] = [W, U]T [h[t −1], x[t]], h[t] = φ(a[t]), with [W, U] ∈IR(nH+d)×nH and [h[t −1], x[t]] ∈IRnH+d, Usually
φ(·) is the hyperbolic tangent.
It can be noted that an ERNN processes one element of the sequence at a time, preserving its inherent temporal order.
After reading an element from the input sequence x[t] ∈IRd the network updates its internal state h[t] ∈IRnH using
both (a transformation of) the latest state h[t−1] and (a transformation of) the current input (Equation 6). The described
process can be better visualized as an acyclic graph obtained from the original cyclic graph (left side of Figure 2) via an
operation known as time unfolding (right side of Figure 2). It is of fundamental importance to point out that all nodes in
the unfolded network share the same parameters, as they are just replicas distributed over time.
The parameters of the network Θ = [W, U, V] are usually learned via Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) ,
a generalized version of standard Backpropagation. In order to apply gradient-based optimization, the recurrent neural
network has to be transformed through the unfolding procedure shown in Figure 2. In this way, the network is converted
into a FNN having as many layers as time intervals in the input sequence, and each layer is constrained to have the
same weight matrices. In practice Truncated Backpropagation Through Time TBPTT(τb, τf) is used. The method
processes an input window of length nT one timestep at a time and runs BPTT for τb timesteps every τf steps. Notice
that having τb < nT does not limit the memory capacity of the network as the hidden state incorporates information
taken from the whole sequence. Despite that, setting τb to a very low number may result in poor performance. In the
literature BPTT is considered equivalent to TBPTT(τb = nT , τf = 1). In this work we used epoch-wise Truncated
BPTT i.e., TBPTT(τb = nT , τf = nT ) to indicate that the weights update is performed once a whole sequence has
been processed.
Despite of the model simplicity, Elmann RNNs are hard to train due to ineffectiveness of gradient (back)propagation.
In fact, it emerges that the propagation of gradient is effective for short-term connections but is very likely to fail for
long-term ones, when the gradient norm usually shrinks to zero or diverges. These two behaviours are known as the
vanishing gradient and the exploding gradient problems and were extensively studied in the machine learning
community.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
Recurrent neural networks with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) were introduced to cope with the vanishing and
exploding gradients problems occurring in ERNNs and, more in general, in standard RNNs . LSTM networks
maintain the same topological structure of ERNN but differ in the composition of the inner module - or cell.
A PREPRINT
Element-wise
operations
Afﬁne transform.
nonlinear op.
Figure 4: Long-Short Term Memory block with one cell.
Each LSTM cell has the same input and output as an ordinary ERNN cell but, internally, it implements a gated system
that controls the neural information processing (see Figure Figure 3 and 4). The key feature of gated networks is their
ability to control the gradient ﬂow by acting on the gate values; this allows to tackle the vanishing gradient problem, as
LSTM can maintain its internal memory unaltered for long time intervals. Notice from the equations below that the
inner state of the network results as a linear combination of the old state and the new state (Equation 14). Part of the
old state is preserved and ﬂows forward while in the ERNN the state value is completely replaced at each timestep
(Equation 8). In detail, the neural computation is:
i[t] = ψ (Wfh[t −1] + Ufx[t])
f[t] = ψ (Wih[t −1] + Uix[t])
o[t] = ψ (Woh[t −1] + Uox[t])
ec[t] = φ (Wch[t −1] + Ucx[t])
c[t] = f[t] ⊙c[t −1] + i[t] ⊙ec[t]
h[t] = o[t] ⊙φ(c[t])
where Wf, Wi, Wo, Wc ∈IRnH×nH, Uf, Ui, Uo, Uc ∈IRnH×d are parameters to be learned, ⊙is the Hadamard
product, ψ(·) is generally a sigmoid activation while φ(·) can be any non-linear one (hyperbolic tangent in the original
paper). The cell state c[t] encodes the - so far learned - information from the input sequence. At timestep t the ﬂow
of information within the unit is controlled by three elements called gates: the forget gate f[t] controls the cell state’s
content and changes it when obsolete, the input gate i[t] controls which state value will be updated and how much, ec[t],
ﬁnally the output gate o[t] produces a ﬁltered version of the cell state and serves it as the network’s output h[t] .
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
Firstly introduced in , GRUs are a simpliﬁed variant of LSTM and, as such, belong to the family of gated RNNs.
GRUs distinguish themselves from LSTMs for merging in one gate functionalities controlled by the forget gate and the
input gate. This kind of cell ends up having just two gates, which results in a more parsimonious architecture compared
to LSTM that, instead, has three gates.
A PREPRINT
Afﬁne transform.
nonlinear op.
Element-wise
operations
Figure 5: Gated Recurrent Unit memory block with one cell.
The basic components of a GRU cell are outlined in Figure 5, whereas the neural computation is controlled by:
u[t] = ψ (Wuh[t −1] + Uux[t])
r[t] = ψ (Wrh[t −1] + Urx[t])
eh[t] = φ (Wc (r[t] ⊙h[t −1]) + Ucx[t])
h[t] = u[t] ⊙h[t −1] + (1 −u[t]) ⊙eh[t]
where Wu, Wr, Wc ∈IRnH×nH, Uu, Ur, Uc ∈IRnH×d are the parameters to be learned, ψ(·) is generally a sigmoid
activation while φ(·) can be any kind of non-linearity (in the original work it was an hyperbolic tangent). u[t] and r[t]
are the update and the reset gates, respectively. Several works in the natural language processing community show that
GRUs perform comparably to LSTM but train generally faster due to the lighter computation .
Deep Recurrent Neural Networks
All recurrent architectures presented so far are characterized by a single layer. In turn, this implies that the computation
is composed by an afﬁne transformation followed by a non-linearity. That said, the concept of depth in RNN is less
straightforward than in feed-forward architectures. Indeed, the later ones become deep when the input is processed by a
large number of non-linear transformations before generating the output values. However, according to this deﬁnition,
an unfolded RNN is already a deep model given its multiple non-linear processing layers. That said, a deep multi-level
processing can be applied to all the transition functions (input-hidden, hidden-hidden, hidden-output) as there are no
intermediate layers involved in these computations . Deepness can also be introduced in recurrent neural networks
by stacking recurrent layers one on top of the other . As this deep architecture is more intriguing, in this work, we
refer it as a Deep RNN. By iterating the RNN computation, the function implemented by the deep architecture can be
represented as:
hℓ[t] = f(hℓ[t −1], hℓ−1[t]; Θ)
ℓ= 1, 2, ..., L
where hℓ[t] is the hidden state at timestep t for layer ℓ. Notice that h0[t] = x[t]. It has been empirically shown in
several works that Deep RNNs are better to capture the temporal hierarchy exhibited by time-series then their shallow
counterpart . Of course, hybrid architectures having different layers -recurrent or not- can be considered as
Multi-Step Prediction Schemes
There are ﬁve different architecture-independent strategies for multi-step ahead forecasting :
A PREPRINT
Recursive strategy (Rec)
a single model is trained to perform a one-step ahead forecast given the input sequence.
Subsequently, during the operational phase, the forecasted output is recursively fedback and considered to be the correct
one. By iterating nO times this procedure we generate the forecast values at time t + nO. The procedure is described in
Algorithm 1, where x[1 :] is the input vector without its ﬁrst element while the vectorize(·) procedure concatenates the
scalar output y to the exogenous input variables.
Algorithm 1 Recursive Strategy (Rec) for Multi-Step Forecasting
2: o ←empty list
4: while k < nO + 1 do
o ←concatenate(o, o)
x ←concatenate(x[1 :], vectorize(o)))
9: end while
10: return o as ˆyt
To summarize, the predictor f receives in input a vector x of length nT and outputs a scalar value o.
Direct strategy
design a set of nO independent predictors fk, k = 1, . . . , nO, each of which providing a forecast at
time t + k. Similarly to the recursive strategy, each predictor fk outputs a scalar value o, but the input vector is the
same to all the predictors. Algorithm 2 details the procedure.
Algorithm 2 Direct Strategy for Multi-Step Forecasting
2: o ←empty list
4: while k < nO + 1 do
o ←concatenate(o, fk(x))
7: end while
8: return o as ˆyt
DirRec strategy
 is a combination of the above two strategies. Similar to the direct approach, nO models are
used, but here, each predictor leverages on an enlarged input set, obtained by adding the results of the forecast at the
previous timestep. The procedure is detailed in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 DirRec Strategy for Multi-Step Forecasting
2: o ←empty list
4: while k < nO + 1 do
o ←concatenate(o, o)
x ←concatenate(x, vectorize(o))
9: end while
10: return o as ˆyt
MIMO strategy
(Multiple input - Multiple output) , a single predictor f is trained to forecast a whole output
sequence of length nO in one-shot, i.e., differently from the previous cases the output of the model is not a scalar but a
ˆyt = f(xt)
A PREPRINT
DIRMO strategy
 , represents a trade-off between the Direct strategy and the MIMO strategy. It divides the nO
steps forecasts into smaller forecasting problems, each of which of length s. It follows that ⌈nO
s ⌉predictors are used to
solve the problem.
Given the considerable computational demand required by RNNs during training, we focus on multi-step forecasting
strategies that are computationally cheaper, speciﬁcally, Recursive and MIMO strategies . We will call them
RNN-Rec and RNN-MIMO.
Given the hidden state h[t] at timestep t, the hidden-output mapping is obtained through a fully connected layer on top
of the recurrent neural network. The objective of this dense network is to learn the mapping between the last state of the
recurrent network, which represents a kind of lossy summary of the task-relevant aspect of the input sequence, and
the output domain. This holds for all the presented recurrent networks and is consistent with Equation 9. In this work
RNN-Rec and RNN-MIMO differ in the cardinality of the output domain, which is 1 for the former and nO for the
latter, meaning that in Equation 9 either V ∈IRnH×1 or V ∈IRnH×nO. The objective function is:
(y[t] −ˆy[t])2 + Ω(Θ)
Related work
In an Elmann recurrent neural network is considered to provide hourly load forecasts. The study also compares
the performance of the network when additional weather information such as temperature and humidity are fed to the
model. The authors conclude that, as expected, the recurrent network beneﬁts from multi-input data and, in particular,
weather ones. makes use of ERNN to forecast household electric consumption obtained from a suburban area
in the neighbours of Palermo (Italy). In addition to the historical load measurements, the authors introduce several
features to enhance the model’s predictive capabilities. Besides the weather and the calendar information, a speciﬁc
ad-hoc index was created to assess the inﬂuence of the use of air-conditioning equipment on the electricity demand. In
recent years, LSTMs have been adopted in short term load forecasting, proving to be more effective then traditional
time-series analysis methods. In LSTM is shown to outperform traditional forecasting methods being able to
exploit the long term dependencies in the time series to forecast the day-ahead load consumption. Several works
proved to be successful in enhancing the recurrent neural network capabilities by employing multivariate input data.
In the authors propose a deep, LSTM based architecture that uses past measurements of the whole household
consumption along with some measurements from selected appliances to forecast the consumption of the subsequent
time interval (i.e., a one step prediction). In a LSTM-based network is trained using a multivariate input which
includes temperature, holiday/working day information, date and time information. Similarly, in a power demand
forecasting model based on LSTM shows an accuracy improvement compared to more traditional machine learning
techniques such as Gradient Boosting Trees and Support Vector Regression.
GRUs have not been used much in the literature as LSTM networks are often preferred. That said, the use of GRU-based
networks is reported in , while a more recent study uses GRUs for the daily consumption forecast of individual
customers. Thus, investigating deep GRU-based architectures is a relevant scientiﬁc topic, also thanks to their faster
convergence and simpler structure compared to LSTM .
Despite all these promising results, an extensive study of recurrent neural networks , and in particular of ERNN,
LSTM, GRU, ESN and NARX, concludes that none of the investigated recurrent architectures manages to
outperform the others in all considered experiments. Moreover, the authors noticed that recurrent cells with gated
mechanisms like LSTM and GRU perform comparably well to much simpler ERNN. This may indicate that in short-term
load forecasting gating mechanism may be unnecessary; this issue is further investigated -and evidence found- in the
present work.
Sequence To Sequence models
Sequence To Sequence (seq2seq) architectures or encoder-decoder models were initially designed to solve
RNNs inability to produce output sequences of arbitrary length. The architecture was ﬁrstly used in neural machine
translation but has emerged as the golden standard in different ﬁelds such as speech recognition and
image captioning .
The core idea of this general framework is to employ two networks resulting in an encoder-decoder architecture. The
ﬁrst neural network (possibly deep) f, an encoder, reads the input sequence xt ∈IRnT ×d of length nT one timestep
at a time; the computation generates a, generally lossy, ﬁxed dimensional vector representation of it c = f(xt, Θf),
A PREPRINT
STATE EMBEDDINGS
Figure 6: seq2seq (Encoder-Decoder) architecture with a general Recurrent Neural network both for the encoder and
the decoder. Assuming a Teacher Forcing training process, the solid lines in the decoder represents the training phase
while the dotted lines depicts the values’path during prediction.
c ∈IRd′. This embedded representation is usually called context in the literature and can be the last hidden state of
the encoder or a function of it. Then, a second neural network g - the decoder - will learn how to produce the output
sequence ˆyt ∈IRnO given the context vector, i.e., ˆy = g(c, Θg). The schematics of the whole architecture is depicted
in Figure 6.
The encoder and the decoder modules are generally two recurrent neural networks trained end-to-end to minimize the
objective function:
(y[t] −ˆy[t])2 + Ω(Θ),
Θ = [Θf, Θg]
ˆy[t] = g(y[t −1], h[t −1], c; Θ)
where ˆy[t] is the decoder’s estimate at time t, y[t] is the real measurement, h[t −1] is the decoder’s last state, c is the
context vector from the encoder, x is the input sequence and Ω(Θ) the regularization term. The training procedure
for this type of architecture is called teacher forcing . As shown in Figure 6 and explained in Equation 23, during
training, the decoder’s input at time t is the ground-truth value y[t −1], which is then used to generate the next state
h[t] and, then, the estimate ˆy[t]. During inference the true values are unavailable and replaced by the estimates:
ˆy[t] = g(ˆy[t −1], h[t −1], c; Θ).
This discrepancy between training and testing results in errors accumulating over time during inference. In the literature
this problem is often referred to as exposure bias . Several solutions have been proposed to address this problem;
in the authors present scheduled sampling, a curriculum learning strategy that gradually changes the training
process by switching the decoder’s inputs from ground-truth values to model’s predictions. The professor forcing
algorithm, introduced in , uses an adversarial framework to encourage the dynamics of the recurrent network to be
the same both at training and operational (test) time. Finally, in recent years, reinforcement learning methods have been
adopted to train sequence to sequence models; a comprehensive review is presented in .
In this work we investigate two sequence to sequence architectures, one trained via teacher forcing (TF) and one using
self-generated (SG) samples. The former is characterized by Equation 23 during training while Equation 24 is used
during prediction. The latter architecture adopts Equation 24 both for training and prediction. The decoder’s dynamics
are summarized in Figure 7. It is clear that the two training procedures differ in the decoder’s input source: ground-truth
values in teacher forcing, estimated values in self-generated training.
Related Work
Only recently seq2seq models have been adopted in short term load forecasting. In a LSTM based encoderdecoder model is shown to produce superior performance compared to standard LSTM. In the authors introduce
an adaptation of RNN based sequence-to-sequence architectures for time-series forecasting of electrical loads to
A PREPRINT
DECODER (TF)
DECODER (SG)
Figure 7: (Left) decoder with ground-truth inputs (Teacher Forcing). (Right) Decoder with self-generated inputs.
demonstrate its better performance with respect to a suite of models ranging from standard RNNs to classical time
series techniques.
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a family of neural networks designed to work with data that can be
structured in a grid-like topology. CNNs were originally used on two dimensional and three-dimensional images, but
they are also suitable for one-dimensional data such as univariate time-series. Once recognized as a very efﬁcient
solution for image recognition and classiﬁcation , CNNs have experienced wide adoption in many different
computer vision tasks . Moreover, sequence modeling tasks, like short term electric load forecasting, have been
mainly addressed with recurrent neural networks, but recent research indicates that convolutional networks can also
attain state-of-the-art-performance in several applications including audio generation , machine translation and
time-series prediction .
As the name suggests, these kind of networks are based on a discrete convolution operator that produces an output
feature map f by sliding a kernel w over the input x. Each element in the output feature map is obtained by summing
up the result of the element-wise multiplication between the input patch (i.e., a slice of the input having the same
dimensionality of the kernel) and the kernel. The number of kernels (ﬁlters) M used in a convolutional layer determines
the depth of the output volume (i.e., the number of output feature maps). To control the other spatial dimensions of
the output feature maps two hyper-parameters are used: stride and padding. Stride represents the distance between
two consecutive input patches and can be deﬁned for each direction of motion. Padding refers to the possibility of
implicitly enlarging the inputs by adding (usually) zeros at the borders to control the output size w.r.t the input one.
Indeed, without padding, the dimensionality of the output would be reduced after each convolutional layer.
Considering a 1D time-series x ∈IRnT and a one-dimensional kernel w ∈IRk, the ith element of the convolution
between x and w is:
f(i) = (x ∗w)(i) =
x(i −j)w(j)
with f ∈IRnT −k+1 if no zero-padding is used, otherwise padding matches the input dimensionality, i.e., f ∈IRnT .
Equation 25 is referred to the one-dimensional input case but can be easily extended to multi-dimensional inputs (e.g.,
images, where x ∈IRW ×H×D) . The reason behind the success of these networks can be summarized in the
following three points:
• local connectivity: each hidden neuron is connected to a subset of input neurons that are close to each other
(according to speciﬁc spatio-temporal metric). This property allows the network to drastically reduce the
number of parameters to learn (w.r.t. a fully connected network) and facilitate computations.
• parameter sharing: the weights used to compute the output neurons in a feature map are the same, so that the
same kernel is used for each location. This allows to reduce the number of parameters to learn.
A PREPRINT
Figure 8: A 3 layers CNN with causal convolution (no dilation), the receptive ﬁeld r is 4.
Figure 9: A 3 layers CNN with dilated causal convolutions. The
dilation factor d grows on each layer by a factor of two and the
kernel size k is 2, thus the output neuron is inﬂuence by 8 input
neurons, i.e., the history size is 8
• translation equivariance: the network is robust to an eventual shifting of its input.
In our work we focus on a convolutional architecture inspired by Wavenet , a fully probabilistic and autoregressive
model used for generating raw audio wave-forms and extended to time-series prediction tasks . Up to the authors’
knowledge this architecture has never been proposed to forecast the electric load. A recent empirical comparison between
temporal convolutional networks and recurrent networks has been carried out in on tasks such as polymorphic
music and charter-sequence level modelling. The authors were the ﬁrst to use the name Temporal Convolutional
Networks (TCNs) to indicate convolutional networks which are autoregressive, able to process sequences of arbitrary
length and output a sequence of the same length. To achieve the above the network has to employ causal (dilated)
convolutions and residual connections should be used to handle a very long history size.
Dilated Causal Convolution (DCC)
Being TCNs a family of autoregressive models, the estimated value at time
t must depend only on past samples and not on future ones (Figure 9). To achieve this behavior in a Convolutional
Neural Network the standard convolution operator is replaced by causal convolution. Moreover, zero-padding of length
(ﬁlter size - 1) is added to ensure that each layer has the same length of the input layer. To further enhance the network
capabilities dilated causal convolutions are used, allowing to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network (i.e., the number
of input neurons to which the ﬁlter is applied) and its ability to learn long-term dependencies in the time-series. Given a
one-dimensional input x ∈IRnT , and a kernel w ∈IRk, a dilated convolution output using a dilation factor d becomes:
f(i) = (x ∗d w)(i) =
x(i −dj)w(j)
This is a major advantage w.r.t simple causal convolutions, as in the later case the receptive ﬁeld r grows linearly with
the depth of the network r = k(L −1) while with dilated convolutions the dependence is exponential r = 2L−1k,
ensuring that a much larger history size is used by the network.
Residual Connections
Despite the implementation of dilated convolution, the CNN still needs a large number of
layers to learn the dynamics of the inputs. Moreover, performance often degrade with the increase of the network depth.
The degradation problem has been ﬁrst addressed in where the authors propose a deep residual learning framework.
The authors observe that for a L-layers network with a training error ϵ, inserting k extra layers on top of it should either
leave the error unchanged or improve it. Indeed, in the worst case scenario, the new k stacked non linear layers should
learn the identity mapping y = H(x) = x where x is the output of the network having L layers and y is the output of
the network with L + k layers. Although almost trivial, in practice, neural networks experience problems in learning
this identity mapping. The proposed solution suggests these stacked layers to ﬁt a residual mapping F(x) = H(x) −x
instead of the desired one, H(x). The original mapping is recast into F(x) + x which is realized by feed forward
neural networks with shortcut connections; in this way the identity mapping is learned by simply driving the weights of
the stacked layers to zero.
By means of the two aforementioned principles, the temporal convolutional network is able to exploit a large history size
in an efﬁcient manner. Indeed, as observed in , these models present several computational advantages compared to
RNNs. In fact, they have lower memory requirements during training and the predictions for later timesteps are not
done sequentially but can be computed in parallel exploiting parameter sharing. Moreover, TCNs training is much
A PREPRINT
Conv1D (1x1)
Conv1D (1x1)
Conv1D (1x1)
Figure 10: TCN Architecture. xt is the vector of historical loads along with the exogenous features for the time
window indexes from 0 to nT , zt is the vector of exogenous variables related to the last nO indexes of the time window
(when available), ˆyt is the output vector. Residual Blocks are composed by a 1D Dilated Causal Convolution, a ReLU
activation and Dropout. The square box represents a concatenation between (transformed) exogenous features and
(transformed) historical loads.
more stable than that involving RNNs allowing to avoid the exploding/vanishing gradient problem. For all the above,
TCNs have demonstrated to be promising area of research for time series prediction problems and here, we aim to
assess their forecasting performance w.r.t state-of-the-art models in short-term load forecasting. The architecture used
in our work is depicted in Figure 10, which is, except for some minor modiﬁcations, the network structure detailed
in . In the ﬁrst layer of the network we process separately the load information and, when available, the exogenous
information such as temperature readings. Later the results will be concatenated together and processed by a deep
residual network with L layers. Each layer consists of a residual block with 1D dilated causal convolution, a rectiﬁed
linear unit (ReLU) activation and ﬁnally dropout to prevent overﬁtting. The output layer consists of 1x1 convolution
which allows the network to output a one-dimensional vector y ∈IRnT having the same dimensionality of the input
vector x. To approach multi-step forecasting, we adopt a MIMO strategy.
Related Work
In the short-term load forecasting relevant literature, CNNs have not been studied to a large extent. Indeed, until
recently, these models were not considered for any time-series related problem. Still, several works tried to address the
topic; in a deep convolutional neural network model named DeepEnergy is presented. The proposed network is
inspired by the ﬁrst architectures used in ImageNet challenge (e.g, ), alternating convolutional and pooling layers,
halving the width of the feature map after each step. According to the provided experimental results, DeepEnergy can
precisely predict energy load in the next three days outperforming ﬁve other machine learning algorithms including
LSTM and FNN. In a CNN is compared to recurrent and feed forward approaches showing promising results on a
benchmark dataset. In a hybrid approach involving both convolutional and recurrent architectures is presented. The
authors integrate different input sources and use convolutional layers to extract meaningful features from the historic
load while the recurrent network main task is to learn the system’s dynamics. The model is evaluated on a large dataset
containing hourly loads from a city in North China and is compared with a three-layer feed forward neural network. A
different hybrid approach is presented in , the authors process the load information in parallel with a CNN and
an LSTM. The features generated by the two networks are then used as an input for a ﬁnal prediction network (fully
connected) in charge of forecasting the day-ahead load.
Performance Assessment
In this section we perform evaluation and assessment of all the presented architectures. The testing is carried out by
means of three use cases that are based on two different datasets used as benchmarks. We ﬁrst introduce the performance
metrics that we considered for both network optimization and testing, then describe the datasets that have been used and
ﬁnally we discuss results.
A PREPRINT
Performance Metrics
The efﬁciency of the considered architectures has been measured and quantiﬁed using widely adopted error metrics.
Speciﬁcally, we adopted the Root mean squared error (RMSE) and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE):
(ˆyi[t] −yi[t])2
| ˆyi[t] −yi[t] |
where N is the number of input-output pairs provided to the model in the course of testing, yi[t] and ˆyi[t] are respectively
the real load values and the estimated load values at time t for sample i (i.e., the i −th time window). ⟨·⟩is the mean
operator, ∥· ∥2 is the euclidean L2 norm, while ∥· ∥1 is the L1 norm. y ∈IRnO and ˆy ∈IRnO are the real load
values and the estimated load values for one sample, respectively. Still, a more intuitive and indicative interpretation of
prediction efﬁciency of the estimators can be expressed by the normalized root mean squared error which, differently
from the two above metrics, is independent from the scale of the data:
ymax −ymin
where ymax and ymin are the maximum and minimum value of training dataset, respectively. In order to quantify the
proportion of variance in the target that is explained by the forecasting methods we consider also the R2 index:
(ˆyi[t] −yi[t])2
(yi[t] −¯yi)2
where ¯yi =
All considered models have been implemented in Keras 2.12 with Tensorﬂow as backend. The experiments
are executed on a Linux cluster with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver CPU and an Nvidia Titan XP.
Use Case I
The ﬁrst use case considers the Individual household electric power consumption data set (IHEPC) which contains
2.07M measurements of electric power consumption for a single house located in Sceaux (7km of Paris, France).
Measurements are collected every minute between December 2006 and November 2010 (47 months) . In this study
we focus on prediction of the "Global active power" parameter. Nearly 1.25% of measurements are missing, still, all
the available ones come with timestamps. We reconstruct the missing values using the mean power consumption for
the corresponding time slot across the different years of measurements. In order to have a uniﬁed approach we have
decided to resample the dataset using a sampling rate of 15 minutes which is a widely adopted standard in modern
smart meters technologies. In Table 3 the sample size are outlined for each dataset.
In this use case we performed the forecasting using only historical load values. The right side of Figure 11 depicts the
average weekly electric consumption. As expected, it can be observed that the highest consumption is registered in the
morning and evening periods of day when the occupancy of resident houses is high. Moreover, the average load proﬁle
over a week clearly shows that weekdays are similar while weekends present a different trend of consumption.
The ﬁgure shows that the data are characterized by high variance. The prediction task consists in forecasting the electric
load for the next day, i.e., 96 timesteps ahead.
In order to assess the performance of the architectures we hold out a portion of the data which denotes our test set and
comprises the last year of measurements. The remaining measurements are repeatedly divided in two sets, keeping
aside a month of data every ﬁve ones. This process allows us to build a training set and a validation set for which
different hyper-parameters conﬁgurations can be evaluated. Only the best performing conﬁguration is later evaluated on
the test set.
A PREPRINT
GEFCom2014
Table 3: Sample size of train, validation and test sets for each dataset.
Active Power (MW)
Figure 11: Weekly statistics for the electric load in the whole IHEPC(Left) and GEFCom2014datasets (right). The bold
line is the mean curve, the dotted line is the median and the green area covers one standard deviation from the mean.
Use Case II and III
The other two use cases are based on the GEFCom2014dataset , which was made available for an online forecasting
competition that lasted between August 2015 and December 2015. The dataset contains 60.6k hourly measurements of
(aggregated) electric power consumption collected by ISO New England between January 2005 and December 2011.
Differently from the IHEPCdataset, temperature values are also available and are used by the different architectures to
enhance their prediction performance. In particular the input variables being used for forecasting the subsequent nO
at timestep t include: several previous load measurements, the temperature measurements for the previous timesteps
registered by 25 different stations, hour, day, month and year of the measurements. We apply standard normalization
to load and temperature measurements while for the other variables we simply apply one-hot encoding, i.e., a Kdimensional vector in which one of the elements equals 1, and all remaining elements equal 0 . On the right side
of Figure 11 we observe the average load and the data dispersion on a weekly basis. Compared to IHEPC, the load
proﬁles look much more regular. This meets intuitive expectations as the load measurements in the ﬁrst dataset come
from a single household, thus the randomness introduced by user behaviour makes more remarkable impact on the
results. On the opposite, the load information in GEFCom2014comes from the aggregation of the data provided by
several different smart meters; clustered data exhibits a more stable and regular pattern. The main task of these use
cases, as well the previous one, consists in forecasting the electric load for the next day, i.e., 24 timesteps ahead. The
hyper-parameters optimization and the ﬁnal score for the models follow the same guidelines provided for IHEPC, the
number of points for each subset is described in Table 3.
The compared architectures are the ones presented in previous sections with one exception. We have additionally
considered a deeper variant of a feed forward neural network with residual connections which is named DFNN in the
remainder of the work. In accordance to the ﬁndings of we have employed a 2-shortcut network, i.e., the input
undergoes two afﬁne transformations each followed by a non linearity before being summed to its original values. For
regularization purposes we have included Dropout and Batch Normalization in each residual block. We have
additionally inserted this model in the results comparison because it represents an evolution of standard feed forward
neural networks which is expected to better handle highly complex time-series data.
Table 4 summarizes the best conﬁgurations found trough grid search for each model and use case. For both datasets we
experimented different input sequences of length nT . Finally, we used a window size of four days, which represents the
best trade-off between performance and memory requirements. The output sequence length nO is ﬁxed to one day. For
each model we identiﬁed the optimal number of stacked layers in the network L, the number of hidden units per layer
nH, the regularization coefﬁcient λ (L2 regularization) and the dropout rate pd. Moreover, for TCN we additionally
tuned the width k of the convolutional kernel and the number of ﬁlters applied at each layer M (i.e., the depth of each
A PREPRINT
Hyperparameters
Rec MIMO Rec MIMO Rec MIMO TF
GEFCOMexog
GEFCOMexog
0.0005 0.005 0.001
0.001 0.001 0.0005 0.01
0.0005 0.01
0.0005 0.001
0.01 0.0005 0.01
GEFCOMexog
0.0005 0.005 0.0005 0.001 0.0005 0.0005 0.001
GEFCOMexog
GEFCOMexog
Table 4: Best conﬁgurations found via Grid Search for the IHEPCdataset, GEFCom2014dataset and GEFCom2014with
exogenous features.
output volume after the convolution operation). The dilation factor is increased exponentially with the depth of the
network, i.e. d = 2ℓwith ℓbeing the ℓ−th layer of the network.
Table 5 summarizes the test scores of the presented architectures obtained for the IHEPCdataset. Certain similarities
among networks trained for different uses cases can be spotted out already at this stage. In particular, we observe that
all models exploit a small number of neurons. This is not usual in deep learning but - at least for recurrent architectures
- is consistent with . With some exceptions, recurrent networks beneﬁt from a less strict regularization; dropout is
almost always set to zero and λ values are small.
Among Recurrent Neural Networks we observe that, in general, the MIMO strategy outperforms the recursive one in
this multi step prediction task. This is reasonable in such a scenario. Indeed, the recursive strategy, differently from the
MIMO one, is highly sensitive to errors accumulation which, in a highly volatile time series as the one addressed here,
results in a very inaccurate forecast. Among the MIMO models we observe that gated networks perform signiﬁcantly
better than simple Elmann network one. This suggests that gated systems are effectively learning to better exploit the
temporal dependency in the data. In general we notice that all the models, except the RNNs trained with recursive
strategy, achieve comparable performance and none really stands out. It is interesting to comment that GRU-MIMO and
LSTM-MIMO outperform sequence to sequence architectures which are supposed to better model complex temporal
dynamics like the one exhibited by the residential load curve. Nevertheless, by observing the performance of recurrent
networks trained with the recursive strategy, this behaviour is less surprising. In fact, compared with the aggregated
load proﬁles, the load curve belonging to a single smart meter is way more volatile and sensitive to customers behaviour.
For this reason, leveraging geographical and socio-economic features that characterize the area where the user lives
may allow deep networks to generate better predictions.
For visualization purposes we compare all the models performance on a single day prediction scenario on the left side
of Figure 12. On the right side of Figure 12 we quantify the differences between the best predictor (the GRU-MIMO)
and the actual measurements; the thinner the line the closer the prediction to the true data. Furthermore, in this Figure,
we concatenate multiple day predictions to have a wider time span and evaluate the model predictive capabilities. We
observe that the model is able to generate a prediction that correctly models the general trend of the load curve but fails
to predict steep peaks. This might come from the design choice of using MSE as the optimization metric, which could
discourage deep models to predict high peaks as large errors are hugely penalized, and therefore, predicting a lower and
smoother function results in better performance according to this metric. Alternatively, some of the peaks may simply
represent noise due to particular user behaviour and thus unpredictable by deﬁnition.
A PREPRINT
Steps (15 min)
Active Power (kW)
Measurements
seq2seq_tf
seq2seq_sg
Steps (15 min)
Active Power (kW)
Figure 12: (Right) Predictive performance of all the models on a single day for IHEPCdataset. The left portion of the
image shows (part of) the measurements used as input while the right side with multiple lines represents the different
predictions. (Left) Difference between the best model’s predictions (GRU-MIMO) and the actual measurements. The
thinner the line the closer the prediction is to the true data.
10.02±0.17
0.250±0.026
0.269±0.007
0.76±0.008
10.07±0.11
0.245±0.017
10.33±0.08
0.201±0.012
11.61±0.29
0.001±0.039
0.276±0.006
11.06±0.74
0.085±0.125
MIMO 0.75±0.00 0.52±0.00 9.83±0.03 0.279±0.004
11.64±0.23
10.22±0.17
0.221±0.026
10.00±0.14
0.253±0.03
Table 5: Individual household electric power consumption data set results. Each model’s mean score (± one standard.
deviation) comes from 10 repeated training processes.
The load curve of the second dataset (GEFCom2014) results from the aggregation of several different load proﬁles
producing a smoother load curve when compared with the individual load case. Hyper-parameters optimization and the
ﬁnal score for the models can be found in Table 4.
Table 6 and Table 7 show the experimental results obtained by the models in two different scenarios. In the former case,
only load values were provided to the models while in the latter scenario the input vector has been augmented with the
exogenous features described before. Compared to the previous dataset this time series exhibits a much more regular
pattern; as such we expect the prediction task to be easier. Indeed, we can observe a major improvement in terms of
performance across all the models. As already noted in the prediction accuracy increases signiﬁcantly when the
forecasting task is carried out on a smooth load curve (resulting from the aggregation of many individual consumers).
We can observe that, in general, all models except plain FNNs beneﬁt from the presence of exogenous variables.
When exogenous variables are adopted, we notice a major improvement by RNNs trained with the recursive strategy
which outperform MIMO ones. This increase in accuracy can be attributed to a better capacity of leveraging the
exogenous time series of temperatures to yield a better load forecast. Moreover, RNNs with MIMO strategy gain
negligible improvements compared to their performance when no extra-feature is provided. This kind of architectures
use a feedforward neural network to map their ﬁnal hidden state to a sequence of nO values, i.e., the estimates.
Exogenous variables are elaborated directly by this FNN, which, as observed above, shows to have problems in handling
both load data and extra information. Consequently, a better way of injecting exogenous variables in MIMO recurrent
network needs to be found in order to provide a boost in prediction performance comparable to the one achieved by
employing the recursive strategy.
A PREPRINT
Steps (1 Hour)
Measurements
seq2seq_sg
seq2seq_tf
Steps (1 Hour)
Figure 13: (Right) Predictive performance of all the models on a single day for GEFCom2014dataset. The left portion
of the image shows (part of) the measurements used as input while the right side with multiple lines represents the
different predictions. (Left) Difference between the best model’s predictions (LSTM-Rec) and the actual measurements.
The thinner the line the closer the prediction to the true data.
0.833±0.041
0.801±0.124
0.891±0.00
0.879±0.046
0.732±0.046
0.861±0.007
0.757±0.041
0.868±0.003
0.737±0.064
0.829±0.034
17.1±0.2 11.3±0.2 5.67±0.06 0.893±0.002
Table 6: GEFCom2014results without any exogenous variable. Each model’s mean score (± one standard. deviation)
comes from 10 repeated training processes.
For reasons that are similar to those discussed above, sequence to sequence models trained via teacher forcing (seq2seq-
TF) experienced an improvement when exogenous features are used. Still, seq2seq trained in free-running mode
(seq2seq-SG) proves to be a valid alternative to standard seq2seq-TF producing high quality predictions in all use cases.
The absence of a discrepancy between training and inference in terms of data generating distribution shows to be an
advantage as seq2seq-SG is less sensitive to noise and error propagation.
Finally, we notice that TCNs perform well in all the presented use cases. Considering their lower memory requirements
in the training process along with their inherent parallelism this type of networks represents a promising alternative to
recurrent neural networks for short-term load forecasting.
The results of predictions are presented in the same fashion as for the previous use case in Figure 13. Observe that,
in general, all the considered models are able to produce reasonable estimates as sudden picks in consumption are
smoothed. Therefore, predictors greatly improve their accuracy when predicting day ahead values for the aggregated
load curves with respect to individual households scenario.
Conclusions
In this work we have surveyed and experimentally evaluated the most relevant deep learning models applied to the
short-term load forecasting problem, paving the way for standardized assessment and identiﬁcation of the most optimal
solutions in this ﬁeld. The focus has been given to the three main families of models, namely, Recurrent Neural
Networks, Sequence to Sequence Architectures and recently developed Temporal Convolutional Neural Networks.
A PREPRINT
0.709±0.062
0.805±0.021
0.917±0.007
0.883±0.004
0.925±0.005
0.877±0.018
13.8±0.6 7.5±0.3 4.59±0.18 0.930±0.006
0.882±0.002
0.898±0.006
0.924±0.014
0.907±0.021
Table 7: GEFCom2014results with exogenous variables. Each model’s mean score (± one standard. deviation) comes
from 10 repeated training processes.
An architectural description along with a technical discussion on how multi-step ahead forecasting is achieved, has
been provided for each considered model. Moreover, different forecasting strategies are discussed and evaluated,
identifying advantages and drawbacks for each of them. The evaluation has been carried out on the three real-world use
cases that refer to two distinct scenarios for load forecasting. Indeed, one use case deals with dataset coming from a
single household while the other two tackle the prediction of a load curve that represents several aggregated meters,
dispersed over the wide area. Our ﬁndings concerning application of recurrent neural networks to short-term load
forecasting, show that the simple ERNN performs comparably to gated networks such as GRU and LSTM when adopted
in aggregated load forecasting. Thus, the less costly alternative provided by ERNN may represent the most effective
solution in this scenario as it allows to reduce the training time without remarkable impact on prediction accuracy. On
the contrary, a signiﬁcant difference exists for single house electric load forecasting where the gated networks shows to
be superior to Elmann ones suggesting that the gated mechanism allows to better handle irregular time series. Sequence
to Sequence models have demonstrated to be quite efﬁcient in load forecasting tasks even though they seem to fail in
outperforming RNNs. In general we can claim that seq2seq architectures do not represent a golden standard in load
forecasting as they are in other domains like natural language processing. In addition to that, regarding this family of
architectures, we have observed that teacher forcing may not represent the best solution for training seq2seq models on
short-term load forecasting tasks. Despite being harder in terms of convergence, free-running models learn to handle
their own errors, avoiding the discrepancy between training and testing that is a well known issue for teacher forcing. It
turns out to be worth efforts to further investigate capabilities of seq2seq models trained with intermediate solutions
such as professor forcing. Finally, we evaluated the recently developed Temporal Convolutional Neural Networks which
demonstrated convincing performance when applied to load forecasting tasks. Therefore, we strongly believe that the
adoption of these networks for sequence modelling in the considered ﬁeld is very promising and might even introduce a
signiﬁcant advance in this area that is emerging as a key importance for future Smart Grid developments.
Acknowledgment
This project is carried out within the frame of the Swiss Centre for Competence in Energy Research on the Future Swiss
Electrical Infrastructure (SCCER-FURIES) with the ﬁnancial support of the Swiss Innovation Agency (Innosuisse -
SCCER program).