Global analysis of protein folding using massively parallel
design, synthesis and testing
Gabriel J. Rocklin1, Tamuka M. Chidyausiku1,2, Inna Goreshnik1, Alex Ford1,2, Scott
Houliston3,4, Alexander Lemak3, Lauren Carter1, Rashmi Ravichandran1, Vikram K.
Mulligan1, Aaron Chevalier1, Cheryl H. Arrowsmith3,4,5, and David Baker1,6,*
1Department of Biochemistry & Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA
2Graduate program in Biological Physics, Structure, and Design, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
3Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7
4Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7
5Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
Proteins fold into unique native structures stabilized by thousands of weak interactions that
collectively overcome the entropic cost of folding. Though these forces are “encoded” in the
thousands of known protein structures, “decoding” them is challenging due to the complexity of
natural proteins that have evolved for function, not stability. Here we combine computational
protein design, next-generation gene synthesis, and a high-throughput protease susceptibility assay
to measure folding and stability for over 15,000 de novo designed miniproteins, 1,000 natural
proteins, 10,000 point-mutants, and 30,000 negative control sequences, identifying over 2,500 new
stable designed proteins in four basic folds. This scale—three orders of magnitude greater than
that of previous studies of design or folding—enabled us to systematically examine how sequence
determines folding and stability in uncharted protein space. Iteration between design and
experiment increased the design success rate from 6% to 47%, produced stable proteins unlike
those found in nature for topologies where design was initially unsuccessful, and revealed subtle
*Correspondence to: .
Author contributions
G.J.R. designed the research, the experimental approach, and the proteins. G. J. R., T. M. C., I. G., S. H., L. C., R. R., and A. C.
performed experiments. All authors analyzed data. G. J. R., A. F., and V. M. contributed new computational tools. C. H. A. and D. B.
supervised research. G. J. R. and D. B. wrote the manuscript.
Supplementary Materials
Figs. S1 to S12
Tables S1 to S3
Definition of scoring metrics
Explanation of supplementary datasets
Supplementary datasets and design scripts
References 53–88
Published as: Science. 2017 July 14; 357(6347): 168–175.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
contributions to stability as designs became increasingly optimized. Our approach achieves the
long-standing goal of a tight feedback cycle between computation and experiment, and promises
to transform computational protein design into a data-driven science.
The key challenge to achieving a quantitative understanding of the sequence determinants of
protein folding is to accurately and efficiently model the balance between the many energy
terms contributing to the free energy of folding (1–3). Minimal protein domains (30–50aa)
such as the villin headpiece and WW-domain are commonly employed to investigate this
balance because they are the simplest protein folds found in nature (4). The primary
experimental approach used to investigate this balance has been mutagenesis (5–12), but the
results are context-dependent and do not provide a global view of the contributions to
stability. Molecular dynamics simulations on minimal proteins have also been employed to
study folding (13–15), but these do not reveal which interactions specify and stabilize the
native structure, and cannot in general determine whether a given sequence will fold into a
stable structure.
De novo protein design has the potential to reveal the sequence determinants of folding for
minimal proteins by charting the space of non-natural sequences and structures to define
what can and cannot fold. Protein sequence space (16) is vastly larger than the set of natural
proteins that currently form the basis for nearly all models of protein stability (9, 12, 17–19),
and is unbiased by selection for biological function. However, only two minimal proteins
(<50 a.a. and stabilized exclusively by noncovalent interactions) have been computationally
designed to date (FSD-1 (20) and DS119 (21)). In part, this is due to the cost of gene
synthesis, which has limited design studies to testing tens of designs at most -- a miniscule
fraction of design space. Because of the small sample sizes, design experiments are typically
unable to determine why some designs are stable and others are unstructured, molten
globule-like, or form aggregates (22).
Here we present a new synthetic approach to examine the determinants of protein folding by
exploring the space of potential minimal proteins using de novo computational protein
design on a three order of magnitude larger scale. To enable this new scale, both DNA
synthesis and protein stability measurements are parallelized. To encode our designs, we
employ oligo library synthesis technology (23, 24), originally developed for transcriptional
profiling and large gene assembly applications, and now capable of parallel synthesis of
104–105 arbitrarily specified DNA sequences long enough to encode short proteins (Fig. S1).
To assay designs for stability, we express these libraries in yeast so that every cell displays
many copies of one protein sequence on its surface, genetically fused to an expression tag
that can be fluorescently labeled (25) (Fig. 1A). Cells are then incubated with varying
concentrations of protease, those displaying resistant proteins are isolated by FACS (Fig.
1B), and the frequencies of each protein at each protease concentration are determined by
deep sequencing (Fig. 1C, for reproducibility of the assay see Fig. S2). We then infer
protease EC50 values for each sequence from these data by modeling the complete selection
procedure (Fig. 1D, details given in Methods). Finally, each design is assigned a “stability
score” (Fig. 1E): the difference between the measured EC50 and the predicted EC50 in the
unfolded state, according to a sequence-based model parameterized using EC50
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
measurements of scrambled sequences (Fig. S3, S4). A stability score of 1 corresponds to a
10-fold higher EC50 than the predicted EC50 in the unfolded state. The complete
experimental procedure applied here costs under $7,000 in reagents (mainly from DNA
synthesis and sequencing), and required ~10 hours of sorting per protease for each library.
Massively parallel measurement of folding stability
Proteolysis assays have been previously used to select for stable sequences (26–28) and to
quantify stability for individual proteins (29) and proteins from cellular proteomes (30), but
have not been applied to date to quantify stability for all sequences in a constructed library.
To evaluate the ability of the assay to measure stability on a large scale, we obtained a
synthetic DNA library encoding four small proteins (pin1 WW-domain (31), hYAP65 WWdomain (5, 10), villin HP35 (7, 11), and BBL (8)) and 116 mutants of these proteins whose
stability has been characterized in experiments on purified material. The library also
contained 19,610 unrelated sequences (a fourth-generation designed protein library, detailed
below), and all sequences were assayed for stability simultaneously as described. Although
the stability score is not a direct analog of a thermodynamic parameter, stability scores
measured with trypsin and separately measured with chymotrypsin were each wellcorrelated with folding free energies (or melting temperatures) for all four sets of mutants,
with r2 values ranging from 0.63 to 0.85 (Fig. 1F–I). Most mutants in this dataset were
predicted to have similar unfolded state EC50 values to their parent sequences, so the relative
stability scores of the mutants are very similar to their relative EC50 values. However, in the
case of villin assayed with chymotrypsin, the unfolded state model improved the correlation
between protease resistance and folding free energy from r2 = 0.46 (using raw EC50 values)
to the reported r2 = 0.77 by correcting for the effect mutations such as K70M and F51L have
on intrinsic chymotrypsin cleavage rates. The mutual agreement between trypsin results,
chymotrypsin results, and experiments on purified protein indicate that the assay provides a
robust measure of folding stability for small proteins.
Massively parallel testing of designed miniproteins
We selected four protein topologies (ααα, βαββ, αββα, and ββαββ) as design targets.
These topologies have increasing complexity: the ααα topology features only two loops and
exclusively local secondary structure (helices); the ββαββ fold requires four loops and
features a mixed parallel/antiparallel β-sheet bridging the N- and C-termini. Of these
topologies, only ααα proteins have been found in nature within the target size range of 40–
43 residues; no proteins have been previously designed in any of the four topologies at this
size (excluding designed ααα and βαββ proteins stabilized by multiple disulfide linkages
(32)). For each topology, we first designed between 5,000 and 40,000 de novo proteins using
a blueprint-based approach described in (33). Each design has its own unique threedimensional main chain conformation and its own specific sequence predicted to be nearoptimal for that conformation. We then selected 1,000 designs per topology for experimental
testing by ranking the designs by a weighted sum of their computed energies and additional
filtering terms (see Methods: Protein design). The median sequence identity between any
pair of tested designs of the same topology ranged from 15–35%, and designs were typically
no more than 40–65% identical to any other design. This diversity is due to the different
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
backbone conformations possible within a topology, along with the vast sequence space
available even for small proteins (Fig. S5). For each design, we also included two control
sequences in our library: one made by scrambling the order of amino acids in that design
(preserving the overall amino acid composition), and a second made by scrambling the order
while preserving both the composition and the hydrophobic or polar character at each
position (34–36). This library comprised 12,459 different sequences in total: 4,153 designed
proteins and 8,306 control sequences. The designed proteins are named using their
secondary structure topology (using H for α-helix and E for β-strand), their design round,
and a design number.
We assayed the sequence library for stability using both chymotrypsin and trypsin. To
stringently identify stable designs, we ranked sequences by the lower of their trypsin or
chymotrypsin stability score, referred to simply as their (overall) stability score from here
on. The fully scrambled sequences and patterned scrambled sequences had similar stability
score distributions; most of these controls had stability scores below 0.5, and only one had a
score greater than 1.0 (Fig. 2A, Round 1). In contrast, 206 designed sequences had stability
scores above 1.0 (Fig. 2A, Round 1). Most of these (195/206) were ααα designs (both lefthand and right-handed bundles); the remaining 11 were βαββ. The clustering of the 206
most stable designs around the ααα topology, and the high stability of designed sequences
compared with chemically identical control sequences, strongly suggests these stable
designs fold into their designed structures. To examine this further, we selected six stable
designs (four ααα and two βαββ) for E. coli expression, purification, and further
characterization by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and circular dichroism
spectroscopy (CD). All six designs eluted from SEC as expected for a 5–7 kDa monomer,
and the CD spectra were consistent with the designed secondary structure (Fig. S6A and
Table S1). Five of the six designs had clear, cooperative melting transitions, re-folded
reversibly and were highly stable for minimal proteins: all had melting temperatures above
70°C, and the βαββ design EHEE_rd1_0284 had only partially melted at 95°C (ΔGunf = 4.7
kcal/mol, Fig. 3D); the sixth design HHH_rd1_0005 did not refold and showed signs of
aggregation (Fig. S6A). We determined solution structures for EHEE_rd1_0284 and the lefthanded ααα design HHH_rd1_0142 by NMR; each structure closely matched the design
model (average backbone root-mean-squared deviation (RMSD) 2.2 + for each NMR
ensemble member against the design model, Fig. 3A; NMR data summary given in Table
S2). In sum, both high-throughput control experiments and low-throughput characterization
of individual proteins indicate that the protease resistant designs fold as designed.
Global determinants of stability
This unprecedentedly large set of stable and unstable minimal proteins with varying physical
properties enabled us to quantitatively examine which protein features correlated with
folding. We computed over 60 structural and sequence-based metrics and examined which
metrics differed between the 195 most stable ααα designs (stability score > 1.0, considered
to be design successes) and the 664 remaining ααα designs (considered to be failures) using
the K-S 2-sample test. Significant differences indicate that a particular metric captures an
important contribution to protein stability, and that this contribution was poorly optimized
among the tested designs.
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
The dominant difference between stable and unstable ααα designs was the total amount of
buried nonpolar surface area (NPSA) from hydrophobic amino acids (Fig. 2B). Stable
designs buried more NPSA than did unstable designs (p < 5e–38, Fig. S7A), and none of the
95 designs below 32 Å2/residue were stable. Above this threshold, the success rate
(successful designs / tested designs) steadily increased as buried NPSA increased (Fig. 2B).
Stable designs also had better agreement between their sequences and their local structures
as assessed by quantifying the geometric similarity (in Å of RMSD) between 9-residue long
fragments of the designs and 9-residue long fragments of natural proteins similar in local
sequence to the designed fragment (Fig. 2C and Methods: Fragment analysis). Fragments of
stable designs were more geometrically similar to fragments of natural proteins of similar
local sequence, while fragments of unstable designs were more geometrically distant from
the fragments of natural proteins matching their local sequence (p < 2e–26, Fig. S7B). Other
metrics were only weakly correlated with success despite substantial variability among
designs, including different measures of amino acid packing density, and the total Rosetta
energy itself. Although local sequence-structure agreement and especially buried NPSA are
well known to be important for protein stability (1, 9), it is very challenging to determine the
precise strength of these contributions at a global level in the complex balance of all the
energetic contributions influencing protein structure. Our results directly demonstrate how
specific imbalances (under-weighting buried NPSA and local sequence-structure agreement
in the Rosetta energy model and the design procedure) led to hundreds of design failures,
and our data and approach provide a new route to refining this balance in biophysical
Iterative, data-driven protein design
We sought to use these findings to increase the success rate of protein design by (1)
changing the design procedure to increase buried NPSA, and (2) re-weighting the metrics
used to select designs for testing (see Methods: Protein design). Using the improved design
and ranking procedure, we built a second generation of 4,150 designs, along with two
control sequences per design: a pattern-preserving scrambled sequence as before (now also
preserving Gly and Pro positions), and a second control identical to the designed sequence,
but with the most buried side chain (according to the design model) replaced with aspartate.
As in Round 1, almost no scrambled sequences had stability scores above 1 (our cutoff
defining success) despite the increased hydrophobicity of the scrambled sequences (Fig. 2A,
Round 2). However, a much greater fraction of second-generation designs proved stable:
success for ααα designs improved from 23% to 69%, βαββ designs improved from 1% to
11% successful, and we also obtained 7 stable αββα designs and one stable ββαββ design
(Fig. 2H). These increases demonstrate how iterative, high-throughput protein design can
make concrete improvements in design and modeling. Nearly all stable designs were
destabilized via the single buried Asp substitution: the median drop in stability score for
these designs was 1.1, and only 33 buried Asp controls had stability scores greater than 1.0,
compared with 271 designs (Fig. 2A, Round 2). This significant destabilization from a single
designed substitution provides further large-scale evidence that the stable designs fold into
their designed structures. We purified and characterized seven second-generation proteins by
SEC and CD, all of which (including three αββα designs and one ββαββ design) were
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
monomeric, displayed their designed secondary structure in CD, and folded cooperatively
and reversibly after thermal denaturation (Fig. S6B, Table S1). Although the αββα and
ββαββ designs were only marginally stable, the second-generation βαββ design
EHEE_rd2_0005 is, to our knowledge, the most thermostable minimal protein ever found
(lacking disulfides or metal coordination): its CD spectrum is essentially unchanged at 95°C,
and its Cm is above 5 M GuHCl (Fig. S6B).
The amount of buried NPSA was the strongest observed determinant of folding stability for
second-generation βαββ designs (Fig. 2E), and continued to show correlation with stability
for second-generation ααα designs (Fig. 2D). The success rate for ααα designs improved
in Round 2 at all levels of buried NPSA (cf. Fig. 2D versus Fig. 2B), indicating that
improving design properties unrelated to buried NPSA (mainly local sequence-structure
compatibility) contributed to the increase in success rate along with the increase in NPSA.
This also illustrates the coupling between different contributions to stability. Although
analyzing single terms makes it possible to identify key problems with the design procedure
and imbalances in the energy model, the specific success rates shown in Fig. 2 depend on the
overall protein context and are not, on their own, fully general.
To improve the stability of the other two topologies, we built a third generation of designs
with even greater buried NPSA, at the cost of increased exposure of hydrophobic surface.
This might decrease the solubility of the designs, highlighting one of the limits of our
approach aimed at optimizing stability. To increase buried NPSA in the ββαββ topology, we
expanded the architecture from 41 to 43 residues. This led to a large increase in the ββαββ
success rate (~0% to 13%, Fig. 2H) and 236 newly discovered stable ββαββ designs (Fig.
2A, Round 3). We purified four third-generation designs (Fig. S6C, Table S1) and found the
ββαββ design EEHEE_rd3_1049 to be very stable (Fig. 3). We determined the solution
structure of this design by NMR, revealing that it folds into its designed structure, which is
not found in nature at this size range (average backbone RMSD 1.5 +, Fig. 3). Buried NPSA
remained the dominant determinant of stability within the tested ββαββ designs (Fig. 2F).
We also observed that a newly improved Rosetta energy function (optimized independently
from this work (19)) provided significant discrimination between stable and unstable
designs, both for the ββαββ topology (Fig. 2G) and for other topologies.
Having accumulated nearly 1,000 examples of stable designs from rounds 1–3, we asked
whether more systematic utilization of this data could be used to select better designs. We
designed 2,000–6,000 new proteins per topology (using the improved energy function), and
then selected 1,000 designs each for experimental testing by ranking the designs using
topology-specific linear regression, logistic regression, and gradient boosting regression
models trained on the structural features and experimental stabilities of the 10,000 designs
from rounds 1–3. Many designs selected for testing were predicted to have a low likelihood
of folding, but were included to increase sequence diversity and because better designs could
not be found (see Methods: Protein design). Despite this, an even larger fraction of designs
proved stable than before: most notably, the success rate for βαββ designs increased from
17% to 39%, and the success rate for ββαββ designs increased from 13% to 58% (Fig. 2H).
Although the success rate for designing the αββα topology remained low (as predicted by
the models), five purified fourth-generation designs in this topology possessed the highest
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
stability yet observed for the fold by CD (Fig. S6D, Table S1). We solved the structure of
one of these (HEEH_rd4_0097) by NMR and found that it adopts the designed structure in
solution (average backbone RMSD 1.5 +, Fig. 3). The overall increase in success across the
four rounds (Fig. 2H) -- from 200 stable designs in Round 1 (nearly all in a single topology)
to over 1,800 stable designs in Round 4 spread across all four topologies -- demonstrates the
power of our massively parallel approach to drive systematic improvement in protein design.
Of the models used to rank designs, logistic regression was the most successful, and was
quite accurate: when designs are binned according to their predicted success probability, the
number of successes in each bin is close to that predicted beforehand by the logistic
regressions (Fig. 2I, Fig. S8A). The accuracy of the regression models demonstrates that
large-scale analysis of stable and unstable designed proteins can be used to build predictive
models of protein stability. Although the models we built are limited by their training data
and not fully general, the inputs to the models were global features of all proteins, such as
buried NPSA and total hydrogen bonding energy. This gives these models greater potential
for generality than other models used in iterative protein engineering that are typically
specific to particular protein families (37, 38), although those approaches have their own
advantages. Retrospectively, we found that a single logistic regression trained on data from
all topologies from rounds 1–3 performed comparably to the topology-specific regressions at
ranking Round 4 designs within each topology (Fig. S8B). Ultimately, continued application
of our approach should greatly expand and broaden the available training data, which can be
integrated with other sources of physical, chemical, and biological information (19, 39) to
build a new generation of general-purpose protein energy functions (22).
Sequence determinants of stability
We next examined determinants of stability at the individual residue level by constructing a
library containing every possible point mutant of 14 designs, as well as every point mutant in
three paradigm proteins from decades of folding research: villin HP35, pin1 WW-domain,
and hYAP65 WW-domain L30K mutant. This library of 12,834 point mutants is comparable
in size to the 12,561 single mutants found in the entire ProTherm database (40) and is
unbiased toward specific mutations. We assayed this library for stability using trypsin and
chymotrypsin, and determined an overall stability effect for each mutation by using the
independent results from each protease to maximize the dynamic range of the assay (see
Methods: Mutational stability effects and Fig. S9). The mutational effects were qualitatively
consistent with the designed structures for 13 of 14 designs (Fig. S10A–N). As expected, the
positions on the designs that were most sensitive to mutation were the core hydrophobic
residues, including many alanine residues, which indicates the designed cores are tightly
packed (Fig. 4A, Fig. S10A–N). Mutations to surface residues had much smaller effects,
highlighting the potential of these proteins as stable scaffolds whose surfaces can be
engineered for diverse applications.
To examine the mutability of protein surfaces in greater detail and to probe more subtle
contributions to stability, we divided the 260 surface positions in 12 of the designs into
categories based on secondary structure, and calculated the average stability effect of each
amino acid for each category using the ~5,000 stability measurements at these positions
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
(Fig. 4E–L and Methods: Mutational stability effects). We observed specific, though weak,
preferences for helices (Fig. 4E), helix N-caps (Fig. 4F), the first and last turns of helices
(Fig. 4G,H), middle strands and edge strands (Fig. 4I,J), and loop residues (Fig. 4K,L).
Amino acids that were favorable for capping helices (Asp, Ser, Thr, and Asn) were
unfavorable within helices; these amino acids (except Asn) were as destabilizing as glycine
when inside helices (Fig. 4E,F). Hydrophobic side chains were stabilizing even when
located on the solvent-facing side of a β-sheet, and this effect was stronger at middle strand
positions compared with edge strand positions (Fig. 4I,J). Most notably, we observed
stabilization from charged amino acids on the first and last turns of α-helices when these
charges counteract the C-to-N negative-to-positive helical dipole; charges that enhanced the
dipole were destabilizing (41). We isolated this effect by comparing the average stability of
each amino acid on first and last helical turns with the average stability of each amino acid at
all helical sites (polar sites only in both cases, Fig. 4G,H); the effect remained significant
even when we restricted the analysis to positions that were Arg or Lys in the original designs
to control for any bias in the designed structures favoring original, designed residues
compared with mutant residues, although no significant effect was seen at Glu positions
(Fig. S11). We had not examined agreement with this dipolar preference during the four
rounds of design, and after this observation, we found that the net favorable charge on first
and last helical turns (stabilizing charges minus destabilizing charges summed over all
helices) discriminated between stable and unstable fourth-generation ααα designs better
than any other metric we examined, explaining in part why the success rate had not reached
In the three naturally occurring proteins, mutations at conserved positions were generally
destabilizing, although each natural protein possessed several highly conserved positions
that we experimentally determined to be unimportant or deleterious to stability. In villin
HP35, these were W64, K70, L75, and F76 (villin HP35 consists of residues 42–76), which
are required for villin to bind F-actin (Fig. 4B, Fig. S12, (42, 43)). In pin1, the highly
conserved S16 is deleterious for stability, but directly contacts the phosphate on
phosphopeptide ligands of pin1 (44), highlighting a stability-function trade-off in pin1 (6,
45) discoverable without directly assaying function (Fig. 4C, Fig. S12, (44)). In hYAP65, the
conserved residues H32, T37, and W39 are relatively unimportant for stability, but these
residues form the peptide recognition pocket in YAP-family WW-domains (Fig. 4D, Fig.
S12, (46, 47)). These examples illustrate how our approach enables high-throughput
identification of functional residues, even without a functional assay or a protein structure
(as in computational approaches (48)), via comparison between stability data and residue
conservation.
Stability measurement of all known small protein domains
How stable are these designed proteins compared with naturally occurring proteins? To
examine this, we synthesized DNA encoding (1) all 472 sequences in the protein databank
(PDB) between 20 and 50 residues in length and containing only the 19 non-Cys amino
acids, and (2) one representative for all 706 domains meeting these criteria in the Pfam
protein family database. These DNA sequences were prepared by reverse translation in an
identical manner to the designs (see Methods: DNA synthesis). We included this DNA in the library containing our fourth-generation
designs to facilitate a head-to-head comparison. The large majority of these natural proteins
successfully displayed on yeast (92% each for PDB and Pfam sequences), which was
comparable to the fourth generation buried aspartate mutants (also 92%) but lower than
fourth generation scrambled sequences (96%) and fourth generation designs (99%). The
most resistant overall sequence (measured by stability score) was a C-terminal coiled-coil
domain from a TRP channel (3HRO, stability score 1.93). This protein is likely stabilized by
inter-subunit interactions made possible by assembly on the yeast surface (49). Of the 100
unique, monomeric sequences with PDB structures, the most protease-resistant was a
peripheral subunit binding domain (ααα topology) from the thermophile Bacillus
stearothermophilus (2PDD, stability score 1.48), which has been heavily studied as an
ultrafast-folding protein (4, 8). A total of 774 designed proteins had higher stability scores
than this most protease-resistant natural monomeric protein. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the
number of stable proteins discovered in this paper is 50-fold larger than that of natural
proteins in the PDB (monomeric or not) in this size range.
Conclusion
We have shown that proteins can be computationally designed and assayed for folding
thousands at a time, and that high-throughput design experiments can provide quantitative
insights into the determinants of protein stability. Large libraries can be designed in a
relatively unbiased manner (as in our first generation) to maximize the protein property
space examined, or properties can be tuned to increase the design success rate at the cost of
diversity. The power of our iterative learning approach to progressively hone in on more
subtle contributions to stability is highlighted by the progression of our ααα design sets
from early rounds in which design failures were caused by insufficient buried nonpolar
surface area to the last round where helix-sidechain electrostatics had the greater effect. The
large numbers of folded and not folded designs will also provide stringent tests of molecular
dynamics simulation approaches which have successfully reproduced structures (13, 15) and
some thermodynamic measurements (14, 50) of natural proteins, but have not yet been
challenged with plausible but unstable protein structures like our design failures.
The four solution structures, saturation mutagenesis data on 13 of 14 designs, and over thirty
thousand negative control experiments indicate that the large majority of our stable
sequences are structured as designed. These 2,788 designed proteins, stable without
disulfides or metal coordination, should have numerous applications in bioengineering and
synthetic biology. Many are more stable than any comparably-sized monomeric proteins
found in the PDB, making them ideal scaffolds for engineering inhibitors of intracellular
protein-protein interactions. Their small size may also help promote membrane translocation
and endosomal escape (51, 52). As DNA synthesis technology continues to improve, highthroughput protein design will become possible for larger proteins as well, revealing
determinants of protein stability in more complex structures and leading to a new era of
iterative, data-driven de novo protein design and modeling.
Rocklin et al.
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 14.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge support from Howard Hughes Medical Institute (to D.B.), and the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (to C.H.A.). G.J.R. is a Merck Fellow of the Life Sciences Research
Foundation. C.H.A. holds a Canada Research Chair in Structural Genomics. We would also like to thank Stephen
Rettie for mass spectrometry support, Charlie Lee for deep sequencing support, Sergey Ovchinnikov for assistance
quantifying sequence conservation, Vanessa Nguyen, Angelica Yehdego, Tessa Howard, and Kara Lau for
assistance with protein purification, and Hannah Gelman and many other members of the Baker Lab for helpful
discussions. This work was facilitated by the Hyak supercomputer at the University of Washington and by
donations of computing time from Rosetta@Home participants. The Structural Genomics Consortium is a
registered charity (number 1097737) that receives funds from AbbVie, Bayer Pharma AG, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Canada Foundation for Innovation, Eshelman Institute for Innovation, Genome Canada through Ontario Genomics
Institute [OGI-055], Innovative Medicines Initiative (EU/EFPIA) [ULTRA-DD grant no. 115766], Janssen, Merck
& Co., Novartis Pharma AG, Ontario Ministry of Research, Innovation and Science (MRIS), Pfizer, São Paulo
Research Foundation-FAPESP, Takeda, and the Wellcome Trust. The RosettaScripts code and blueprint files used
for protein design are provided in the supplementary materials. The data for this work (designed sequences and
structures, deep sequencing counts, EC50 values, stability scores, and structural analysis of the designed models)
are also provided in supplementary materials. The python code for inferring EC50 values and for fitting the
unfolded state model is provided at