Detecting and Reading Text in Natural Scenes
Xiangrong Chen1
Alan L. Yuille1,2
Departments of Statistics1, Psychology2,
University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA 90095.
emails: {xrchen,yuille}@stat.ucla.edu
This paper gives an algorithm for detecting and reading text in natural images. The algorithm is intended for
use by blind and visually impaired subjects walking through
city scenes. We ﬁrst obtain a dataset of city images taken by
blind and normally sighted subjects. From this dataset, we
manually label and extract the text regions. Next we perform
statistical analysis of the text regions to determine which image features are reliable indicators of text and have low entropy (i.e. feature response is similar for all text images). We
obtain weak classiﬁers by using joint probabilities for feature responses on and off text. These weak classiﬁers are
used as input to an AdaBoost machine learning algorithm
to train a strong classiﬁer. In practice, we trained a cascade
with 4 strong classiﬁers containg 79 features. An adaptive
binarization and extension algorithm is applied to those regions selected by the cascade classiﬁer. A commercial OCR
software is used to read the text or reject it as a non-text region. The overall algorithm has a success rate of over 90%
(evaluated by complete detection and reading of the text)
on the test set and the unread text is typically small and distant from the viewer.
1.. Introduction
This paper presents an algorithm for detecting and reading text in city scenes. This text includes stereotypical forms
– such as street signs, hospital signs, and bus numbers –
as well as more variable forms such as shop signs, house
numbers, and billboards. Our database of city images were
taken in San Francisco partly by normally sighted viewers
and partly by blind volunteers who were accompanied by
sighted guides (for safety reasons) using automatic camera
settings and little practical knowledge of where the text was
located in the image. The databases have been labelled to
enable us to train part of our algorithm and to evaluate the
algorithm performance.
The ﬁrst, and most important, component of the algorithm is a strong classiﬁer which is trained by the AdaBoost
learning algorithm , , on labelled data. AdaBoost
requires specifying a set of features from which to build the
strong classiﬁer. This paper selects this feature set guided
by the principle of informative features (the feature set used
in is not suitable for this problem). We calculate joint
probability distributions of these feature responses on and
off text, so weak classiﬁers can be obtained as log-likelihood
ratio tests. The strong classiﬁer is applied to sub-regions of
the image (at multiple scale) and outputs text candidate regions. In this application, there are typically between 2-5
false positives in images of 2,048 x 1,536 pixels. The second component is an extension and binarization algorithm that acts on the text region candidates. The extension
and binarization algorithm takes the text regions as inputs,
extends these regions, so as to include text that the strong
classiﬁer did not detect, and binarizes them (ideally, so that
the text is white and the background is black). The third
component is an OCR software program which acts on the
binarized regions (the OCR software gave far worse performance when applied directly to the image). The OCR software either determines that the regions are text, and reads
them, or rejects the region as text.
The performance is as follows: (I) Speed. The current algorithm runs in under 3 seconds on images of size 2,048 by
1,536. (II) Quality of Results. We are able to detect text of
almost all form with false negative rate of 2.8 %. We are
able to read the detected text correctly at 93.0 % (correctness is measured per complete word and not per letter). We
incorrectly read non-text as text for 10 % of cases. But only
1 % remains incorrectly read after we prune out text which
does not form coherent words. (Many of the remaining errors correspond to outputting ”111” due to vertical structures in the image.)
2. Previous Work
There has been recent successful work on detecting text
in images. Some has concentrated on detecting individual
letters , , . More relevant work is reported in ,
 , , , . In particular, Lucas et al report on
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
performance analysis of text detection algorithms on a standardized database. It is hard to do a direct comparison to
these papers. None of these methods use AdaBoost learning and the details of the algorithms evaluated by Lucas et
al are not given. The performance we report in this paper is
better than those reported in Lucas et al, but the datasets are
different and more precise comparison on the same datasets
are needed. We will be making our dataset available for testing.
3. The Datasets
We used two image datasets with one used for training
the AdaBoost learning algorithm and the other used for testing it.
The training dataset was 162 images of which 41 of them
were taken by scientists from SKERI (the Smith-Kettlewell
Eye Research Institute) and the rest taken by blind volunteers under the supervision of scientists from SKERI.
The test dataset of 117 images was taken entirely
by blind volunteers. Brieﬂy, the blind volunteers were
equipped with a Nikon camera mounted on the shoulder or
the stomach. They walked around the streets of San Francisco taking photographs. Two observers from SKERI accompanied the volunteers to assure their safety but took no
part in taking the photographs. The camera was set to the
default automatic setting for focus and contrast gain control.
From the dataset construction, see ﬁgure (1), we noted
that: (I) Blind volunteers could keep the camera approximately horizontal. (II) They could hold the camera fairly
steady so there was very little blur. (III) The automatic contrast gain control of the cameras was almost always sufﬁcient to allow the images to have good contrast.
4.. Selection of Features for AdaBoost
The AdaBoost algorithm is a method for combining a
set of weak classiﬁers to make a strong classiﬁer. The weak
classiﬁers correspond to image features. Typically a large
set of features are speciﬁed in advance and the algorithm
selects which ones to use and how to combine them.
The problem is that the choice of feature set is critical
to the success and transparency of the algorithm. The set of
features used for face detection by Viola and Jones consists of a subset of Haar basis functions. But there was no
rationale for this choice of feature set apart from computational efﬁciency. Also there are important differences between text and face stimuli because the spatial variation per
pixel of text images is far greater than for faces. Facial features, such as eyes, are in approximately the same spatial
position for any face and have similar appearance. But the
positions of letters in text is varied and the shapes of letters
differ. For example, PCA analysis of text, see ﬁgure (2), has
Figure 1. Example images in the training
dataset taken by blind volunteers (top two
panels) and by scientists from SKERI (bottom two panels). The blind volunteers are, of
course, poor at centering the signs and in
keeping the camera horizontally alligned.
far more non-zero eigenvalues than for faces (where Pentland reported that 15 eigenfaces capture over ninety percent
of the variance ).
Ideally, we should select informative features which give
similar results on all text regions, and hence have low entropy, and which are also good for discriminating between
text and non-text. Statistical analysis of the dataset of training text images shows that there are many statistical regularities.
For example, we align samples from our text dataset
(precise alignment is unnecessary) and analyze the response
of the modulus of the x and y derivative ﬁlters at each pixel.
The means of the derivatives have an obvious pattern, see
ﬁgure (3), where the derivatives are small in the background
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
Number of Eigen values
Energy captured
Figure 2. PCA on our dataset of text images
(40 x 20 pixels). Observe that about 150 components are required to get 90 percent of the
variance. Faces require only 15 components
to achieve this variance .
regions above and below the text. The x derivatives tend to
be large in the central (i.e. text) region while the y derivatives are large at the top and bottom of the text and small
in the central region. But the variances of the x derivatives
are very large within the central region (because letters have
different shapes and positions). However, the y derivatives
tend to have low variance, and hence low entropy.
Our ﬁrst set of features are based on these observations.
By averaging over regions we obtain features which have
lower entropy. Based on the observation in ﬁgure (3), we
designed block patterns inside the sub-window, corresponding to horizontal and vertical derivative. We also designed
three symmetrical block patterns, see ﬁgure (4), which are
chosen so that there is (usually) a text element within each
sub-window. This gives features based on block based mean
and STD of intensity and modulus of x and y derivative ﬁlters.
We build weak classiﬁers from these features by computing probability distributions. Formally, a good feature f(I)
will determine two probability distributions P(⃗f(I)|text)
and P(⃗f(I)|non-text). We can obtain a weak classiﬁer by
using the log-likelihood ratio test. This is made easier if we
can ﬁnd tests for which P(⃗f(I)|text) is strongly peaked
(i.e. has low-entropy because it gives similar results for every image of text) provided this peak occurs at a place where
P(⃗f(I)|non-text) is small. Such tests are computationally
cheap to implement because they only involved checking
the value of ⃗f(I) within a small range.
We also have a second class of features which are more
complicated. These include tests based on the histograms
of the intensity, gradient direction, and intensity gradient.
STD of module of horizontal derivative
STD of module of vertical derivative
Figure 3. The means of the moduli of the
x (left top) and y (right top) derivative ﬁlters have this pattern. Observe that the average is different directly above/below the text
compared to the response on the text. The y
derivative is small everywhere. The x derivatives tend to have large variance (bottom left)
and the y derivatives have small variance
(bottom right).
In ideal text images, we would be able to classify pixels
as text or background directly from the intensity histogram
which should have two peaks corresponding to text and
background mean intensity. But, in practice, the histograms
typically only have a single peak, see ﬁgure (5) (top right).
But by getting a joint histogram on the intensity and the intensity derivative, see ﬁgure (5) (bottom left), we are able
to estimate the text and background mean intensities. These
joint histograms are useful tests for distinguishing between
text and non-text.
Figure 4. Block patterns. Features which
compute properties averaged within these regions will typically have low entropy, because
the ﬂuctuations shown in the previous ﬁgure
have been averaged out.
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
Number of pixels
Module of intensity
derivative
Number of pixels
Number of pixels
Figure 5. Original image (top left) has intensity histogram (top right) with only a single
peak. But the joint histograms of intensity
and intensity gradient shows two peaks (bottom left) and shown in proﬁle (bottom right).
The intensity histogram is contaminated by
edge pixels which have high intensity gradient and intensity values which are intermediate between the background and foreground
mean intensity. The intensity gradient information helps remove this contamination.
Our third, and ﬁnal, class of features based on performing edge detection, by intensity gradient thresholding, followed by edge linking. These features are more computationally expensive than the previous tests, so we only use
them later in the AdaBoost cascade, see next section. Such
features count the number of extended edges in the image.
These are also properties with low entropy, since there will
typically be a ﬁxed number of long edges whatever the letters in the text region.
In summary, we had : (i) 40 ﬁrst class features including 4 intensity mean features, 12 intensity standard deviation features, 24 derivative features, (ii) 24 second class
features including 14 histograms features, and (iii) 25 third
class features based on edge linking.
distributions
P(⃗f(I)|text) and P(⃗f(I)|non-text) for all features f.
In practice, this is impossible because of the dimensionally of the feature set and because we do not know which
set of features should be chosen. We would need an immense amount of training data.
Instead, we use both single features and joint distributions for pairs of features, followed by log-likelihood ratio
tests, as our weak classiﬁers. See ﬁgure (6). These are then
combined together by standard AdaBoost techniques. It is
Figure 6. Joint histograms of the ﬁrst features that AdaBoost selected.
worth noting that all weak classiﬁers selected by AdaBoost
are from joint distributions, indicating that it is more ”discriminant” and making the learning process less greedy.
The result of this feature selection approach is that our
ﬁnal strong classiﬁer, see next section, uses far fewer ﬁlter’s than Viola and Jones’ face detection classiﬁer .
This helps the transparency of the system.
5.. AdaBoost Learning
The AdaBoost algorithm has been shown to be arguably the most effective method for detecting target objects in images . Its performance on detecting faces 
compares favorably with other successful algorithms for detecting faces .
The standard AdaBoost algorithm learns a “strong classiﬁer” HAda(I) by combining a set of T “weak classiﬁers”
{ht(I)} using a set of weights {αt}:
HAda(I) = sign(
The selection of features and weights are learned through
supervised training off-line . Formally, AdaBoost uses a
set of input data {Ii, yi : i = 1, .., N} where Ii is the input, in this case image windows described below, and yi is
the classiﬁcation where yi = 1 indicates text, yi = −1 is
not-text. The algorithm uses a set of weak classiﬁers denoted by {hµ(.)}. These weak classiﬁers correspond to a
decision of text or non-text based on simple tests of visual
cues (see next paragraph). These weak classiﬁers are only
required to make the correct classiﬁcations slightly over half
the time. The AdaBoost algorithm proceeds by deﬁning a
set of weights Dt(i) on the samples. At t = 1, the samples are equally weighted so D1(i) = 1/N. The update rule
consists of three stages. Firstly, update the weights by
Dt+1(i) = Dt(i)e−yiαtht(Ii)/Zt[αt, ht],
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
is a normalization factor chosen so that
i=1 Dt+1(i) = 1. The algorithm selects the αt, ht(.) that
minimize Zt[αt, ht(.)]. Then the process repeats and outputs a strong classiﬁer Ht(I) = sign(T
t=1 αtht(I)). It
can be shown that this classiﬁer will converge to the optimal classiﬁer as the number of classiﬁers increases
AdaBoost requires a set of classiﬁed data with image
windows labelled manually as being text or non-text. Figure (7) shows some text examples. We performed this labelling for the training dataset and and divided each text
window into several overlapping text segments with ﬁxed
width-to-height ratio 2:1. This lead to a total of 7,132 text
segments which were used as positive examples. The negative examples were obtained by a bootstrap process similar
to Drucker et al . First we selected negative examples by
randomly sampling from windows in the image dataset. After training with these samples, we applied the AdaBoost
algorithm to classify all windows in the training images
(at a range of sizes). Those misclassiﬁed as text were then
used as negative examples for retraining AdaBoost. The image regions most easily confused with text were vegetation,
repetitive structures such as railings or building facades, and
some chance patterns.
Figure 7. Text example used for getting positive examples for training AdaBoost. Observer the low quality of some of the examples.
The previous section described the weak classiﬁers we
used for training AdaBoost. We used standard AdaBoost
training methods to learn the strong classiﬁer combined with Viola and Jones’ cascade approach which uses
asymmetric weighting . The cascade approach enables
the algorithm to rule out most of the image as text locations
with a few tests (so we do not have to apply all the tests everywhere in the image). This makes the algorithm extremely
fast when applied to the test dataset and yields order of magnitude speed-up over standard AdaBoost . Our algorithm had a total of 4 cascade layers. Each layer has 1, 10,
30, 50 tests respectively. The overall algorithm uses 91 different feature tests. The ﬁrst three layers of the cascade only
use mean, STD and module of derivative features, since they
can be easily calculated from integral images . Computation intensive features, histogram and edge linking, involve all pixels inside the sub-window. So we only let them
be selected in the last layer.
In the test stage, we applied the AdaBoost strong classiﬁer H(I) to windows of the input images at a range of
scales. There was a total of 14 different window sizes, ranging from 20 by 10 to 212 by 106, with a scaling factor of
1.2. Each window was classiﬁed by the algorithm as text or
non-text. There was often overlap between windows classi-
ﬁed as text. We merged these regions by taking the union of
the text windows.
In our test stage, AdaBoost gave very high performance
with low false positives and false negatives (in agreement
with previous work on faces ). When applied to over
20,000,000 image windows, taken from 35 images, the total number of false positives was just over 118 and the number of false negatives was 27. By altering the threshold we
could reduce the number of false negatives to 5 but at the
price of raising the number of false positives, see table (1).
We decided to keep not to alter the threshold so as to keep
the number of false positives down to an average of 4 per
image (almost all of which will be eliminated at the reading stage).
False Pos.
False Neg.
Subwindows
20,183,316
20,183,316
Table 1. Performance of AdaBoost at different thresholds. Observe the excellent overall
performance and the trade-off between false
positives and false negatives.
We illustrate these results by showing the windows that
AdaBoost classiﬁes as text for typical images in the test
dataset, see ﬁgure (8).
6. Extension and Binarization
Our next stage produces binarized text regions to be used
as inputs to the OCR reading stage. (It is possible to run
OCR directly on intensity images but we obtain substantially worse performance if we do so). In addition to binarization, we must extend the text regions found by the AdaBoost strong classiﬁers because these regions sometimes
miss letters or digits at the start and end of the text.
We start by applying adaptive binarization to the
text regions detected by the AdaBoost strong classiﬁer. This
is followed by a connected component algorithm which
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
Figure 8. Results of AdaBoost on typical test
images (taken by blind subjects). The boxes
display areas that AdaBoost classiﬁes as
text. Observe that text is detected at a range
of scales and at non-horizontal orientations.
Note the small number of false positives. The
boxes will be expanded and binarized in the
next processing stage.
detects letter and digit candidates and enables us to estimate their size and the spacing between them. These estimates are used to extend the search for text into regions directly to the left, right, above and below of the regions detected by AdaBoost. Binarization is then applied in these
extended text regions.
Our approach is a variant of Niblack’s adaptive binarization algorithm , which was reported by Wolf to
be the most successful binarization algorithm (jointly with
Yanowitz-Bruckstein’s method ). Niblack’s algorithm
requires adaptively determining a threshold T for each pixel
x from the intensity statistics within a local window of size
Tr(x) = µr(x) + k · σr(x),
where µr(x) and σr(x) are the mean and standard deviation
(std) of the pixel intensities within the window. The scalar
parameter k is used to weight the threshold in terms of the
local image variance. Niblack’s algorithm sets a ﬁxed value
of k and window size r.
Figure 9. Extension (left column) and binarization of the text regions shown in ﬁgure (8). Note that our OCR software is not yet
able to read Chinese or Spanish so we treat
these as non-text.
Our binarization algorithm selects r adaptively at each
point in the text regions because text size and stroke width
vary greatly. We set
r(x) = min
r (σr(x) > Tσ),
where Tσ is a ﬁxed threshold. The value of Tσ is selected
so that windows with standard deviations less than Tσ are
smooth areas. The value of k is ﬁxed.
We show results for the extension and binarization algorithms in ﬁgure (9) using the text regions shown in ﬁgure (8).
7. Text Reading
We applied commercial OCR software to the extended
text regions (produced by AdaBoost followed by extension
and binarization). This was used both to read the text and to
discard false positive text regions.
Overall, the AdaBoost strong classiﬁer (plus extension/binarization) detected 97.2 % of the visible text in
our test dataset (text that could be detected by a normally sighted viewer). See ﬁgure (10) for typical examples
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
Figure 10. Examples of different text that we
fail to detect by the AdaBoost strong classi-
ﬁer. Some are blurred, badly shaded, or have
highly non-standard font. Others are not detected because we did not train AdaBoost to
detect individual letters/digits or vertical text.
of the text that AdaBoost fails to detect. Most of these errors correspond to text which is blurred or badly shadowed.
Others occur because we do not train AdaBoost to detection vertical text or individual letters. (Our training examples were horizontal segments usually containing two or
three letters/digits).
For the 286 extended text regions correctly detected by
the AdaBoost strong classiﬁer (plus extension/binarization),
we obtained a correct reading rate of 93.0 % (proportion of
words correctly read). This required a preprocessing stage
to scale the text region. The 7 % errors are caused by small
text areas. See ﬁgure (11) for examples of text that we can
read successfully and ﬁgure (12) for text that we cannot
Figure 11. Examples of different text that
can be correctly detected and read. First
row: Road signs and street numbers. Second and third rows: Commercial and Informational signs. Fourth row: bus signs and bus
stops. Fifth row: House numbers and Phone
The OCR algorithm will also sometimes misclassify the
false positive text regions found by AdaBoost and classify
them as text. See the example in ﬁgure (13). This occurred
Figure 12. Examples of text that we can detect by the AdaBoost strong classiﬁer but
cannot read correctly. These correspond to
small text and blurred text. But improvements
in our binarization process might make some
of them readable.
for about 10 % of false positive text regions, but often the
text read made no grammatical sense and can be removed
(though this requires an additional stage after the OCR software). The most common remaining error are text string like
”111” or ”Ill” which correspond to vertical edges in the image caused, for example, by iron railings.
The results presented here use the ABBYY Fine Reader
software. Other OCR software we tested that gives almost
identical performance includes TOCR and Readiris Pro 8.
Figure 13. Examples of OCR output on nontext. Only the bottom window is incorrectly
read as text.
8. Summary
This paper used the AdaBoost algorithm to learn a strong
classiﬁer for detecting text in unconstrained city scenes.
The key element was the choice of the feature set which
was selected to have features with low entropy of the positive training examples (so that they gave similar responses
for any text input). In addition, we used log-likelihood ratio tests on the joint probability distributions of pairs of features. The resulting system is small, compared to that used
by Viola and Jones for face detection , and required only
91 ﬁlters and 4 layers of cascade.
The resulting strong classiﬁer was very effective on our
dataset taken by blind users. This database, with ground
truth, will be made available to other researchers. The detection rates resulted in only a small number (2-5) false positive rates in images of size 2,048 x 1,536.
0-7695-2158-4/04 $20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we
used it as a front end to a system which included an extension and binarization algorithm followed by a commercial OCR system. The resulting performance was highly effective.
The algorithm currently runs under 3 seconds on a 2,048
x 1,536 image (which compares favourably to speeds for
AdaBoost classiﬁers for faces when the size of the image
is taken into account). We anticipate that multi-scale processing will enable us to signiﬁcantly reduce the algorithm
Our future work involves developing alternative text
reading software. Although current OCR algorithms are, as
we have shown, very effective they remain a black box and
we cannot modify them or improve them. Instead we will
continue developing our reading algorithms based on deformable templates , . These algorithms have the additional advantage that they use generative models and
can be applied directly to the image intensity without requiring binarization.
9. Acknowledgement
This work is supported by an NIH(NEI) grant RO1-EY
012691-04. The authors thank the Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute for providing us with all the text images.