This is the accepted manuscript made available via CHORUS. The article has been
published as:
Learning scheme to predict atomic forces and accelerate
materials simulations
V. Botu and R. Ramprasad
Phys. Rev. B 92, 094306 — Published 25 September 2015
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.92.094306
A learning scheme to predict atomic forces and accelerate materials simulations
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
R. Ramprasad
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
The behavior of an atom in a molecule, liquid or solid is governed by the force it experiences. If the
dependence of this vectorial force on the atomic chemical environment can be learned eﬃciently with
high-ﬁdelity from benchmark reference results—using “big data” techniques, i.e., without resorting
to actual functional forms—then this capability can be harnessed to enormously speed up in silico
materials simulations. The present contribution provides several examples of how such a force ﬁeld
for Al can be used to go far beyond the length-scale and time-scale regimes accessible presently
using quantum mechanical methods. It is argued that pathways are available to systematically and
continuously improve the predictive capability of such a learned force ﬁeld in an adaptive manner,
and that this concept can be generalized to include multiple elements.
The dynamic behavior of an atom in a molecule, liquid or solid is directly determined by the local force it
experiences.
Nevertheless, as already pointed out by
Feynman1, forces are generally viewed as secondary computed quantities and are obtained through the agency of
the total potential energy—a global property of the entire
system. In practice, forces on atoms are obtained either
as by-products during a potential energy evaluation, or
from the ﬁrst derivative of the potential energy with respect to the atomic positions. Direct and rapid access
to atomic forces, given just the atomic conﬁguration of
a system (molecule, liquid, or solid), immediately makes
it possible to perform eﬃcient geometry optimizations
and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, provided, of
course, the predicted force is formally conservative, i.e., it
is consistent with an underlying potential energy surface.
If the capability to predict conservative forces preserves
the ﬁdelity of high-level quantum mechanics based methods, but comes at a minuscule fraction of the cost, and if
this capability can be extended systematically and progressively to potentially all conﬁgurational and chemical
environments that an atom may experience, we will have
a powerful and adaptive materials simulation scheme.
The present contribution lays the ground work and
takes initial steps towards the above vision.
scheme is presented that systematically learns in an interpolative manner to predict atomic forces in environments encountered during the dynamical evolution of materials from a set of high-level calculations performed
on reference atomic conﬁgurations with modest system
sizes. This concept is resonant with emerging data-driven
(or “big data”2–6) approaches aimed at materials discovery in general7,8, as well as at accelerating materials simulations9–13. Machine learning (ML) methods using neural networks9,10 and Gaussian processes11,12 have
been successful in the development of interatomic potentials, wherein the potential energy surface is learned from
a set of higher-level (quantum mechanics based) reference
calculations.
The distinctive aspect of the present contribution,
namely, learning to predict atomic forces directly from
past data has been suggested only recently12,13 (to accelerate ab initio MD simulations on-the-ﬂy). Here, we
propose the creation of a stand-alone purely data-driven
force prediction recipe (devoid of any explicit functional
form), that can also provide the underlying potential
energy surface (through integration).
Both the forces
and the potential energy can be predicted with a high
level of accuracy at speeds several orders of magnitude
faster than the reference quantum mechanics based calculations.
Moreover, this force ﬁeld is adaptive (i.e.,
new congurational environments can be systematically
incorporated as required), and generalizable (i.e., the
scheme can be extended to any collection of elements for
which reliable reference calculations can be performed).
A practical scheme that exploits the rapid high-ﬁdelity
force prediction capability within a materials simulation
framework is presented, and demonstrated for Al in several conﬁgurational environments and dynamical situations that go well beyond the reaches of conventional ﬁrst
principles simulations. Pathways to extend this concept
to handle multi-elemental systems are also proposed.
Central to this development is a robust scheme to numerically and simply represent, or ﬁngerprint, the atomic
environments. Such a ﬁngerprint should diﬀerentiate dissimilar conﬁgurations with adequate accuracy, and be
invariant to transformations of the environment such as
translation, rotation and permutation of like elements.
While several such prescriptions have been proposed in
the past12–18, the present objective, namely, mapping the
vectorial force experienced by an atom to its conﬁgurational environment, places stringent constraints on the
nature of the ﬁngerprint. We argue that the following
ﬁngerprint function, V k
i (η), may be used to accurately
represent the kth component of the force on atom i12:
rij is the distance between atoms i and j, while rk
scalar projection of this distance along component k. To
FIG. 1. Comparison of the forces predicted using the ML force ﬁeld with reference DFT results, for (a) the trained model (light
blue) and the validation dataset (dark blue), (b) a test unit cell containing over 800 Al atoms in the fcc phase, and (c) a test
unit cell containing over 160 atoms in a hypothetical bcc phase. In (b) and (c), atoms were randomly perturbed from their
equilibrium positions. Insets show the distribution of the prediction errors (deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the predicted and
reference DFT forces) leading to respectable mean absolute errors (MAE).
determine the force on an atom, we require three such
components along non-parallel directions. The parameter η governs the extent of co-ordination around atom i
that needs to be captured. The ﬁngerprint is essentially
a spectrum of V k
i values corresponding to predetermined
choices of η values, i.e., V k
i is deﬁned in an η-grid. The
diminishing inﬂuence of faraway atoms is handled by a
damping function, f(rij) = 0.5
summation in Eq.
1 runs over all neighboring atoms
within an arbitrarily large cutoﬀdistance Rc (8 ˚A, in
the present work).
By construction, the ﬁngerprint is
symmetry-adapted, and respects asymmetries of potential wells. For instance, due to the ﬁrst term in the summation of Eq. 1, an atom in a centro-symmetric position will lead to a ﬁngerprint with all zero values (to be
mapped to a zero force), and an atom displaced from a
centro-symmetric position will lead to ﬁngerprints with
non-zero components whose values will depend on the
magnitude and direction of the oﬀ-center displacement.
The next step is to map the ﬁngerprints to appropriate force components.
Here, we have adopted the
kernel ridge regression (KRR) method, capable of handling complex non-linear relationships12,17,18. The KRR
method works on the principle of similarity. By comparing an atom’s ﬁngerprint, V k
i (η), with a set of reference
cases, an interpolative prediction of the kth component
of the force (F k
i ) can be made, and is given by
i (η) −V k
t labels each reference atomic environment, and V k
is its corresponding ﬁngerprint. ||V k
i (η) −V k
t (η)|| is the
Euclidean distance between the two atomic ﬁngerprints,
though other distance metrics can be used. αts and σ
are the weight coeﬃcients and length scale parameter,
respectively. The optimal values for αts and σ are determined during the training phase, with the help of crossvalidation and regularization methods12,17,19,20. Further
details concerning the ﬁngerprint construction and the
learning algorithm can be found elsewhere12.
Using the above prescribed framework, a ML force ﬁeld
for Al has been developed using a plethora of reference
atomic environments accumulated from density functional theory (DFT) based MD runs at various temperatures using the Vienna ab initio simulation package21–24
(other means may also be used to generate the reference
data, as long as they satisfy prescribed demands on accuracy of the atomic forces). To ensure a diverse set of
reference cases, Al in diﬀerent geometric arrangements
were considered (but each one with just a few tens of
atoms per repeating unit cell), including defect-free bulk
in the face centered cubic (fcc) phase, bulk fcc phase with
vacancy, clean (111) surface, and the (111) surface with
adatom, resulting in over 100,000 atomic environments12.
Interestingly, a random set of 1000 atomic environments
drawn from the accumulated environments proved suﬃcient to construct an accurate interpolative force prediction model. Figure 1(a) compares the predicted forces
with the DFT forces (including the error distribution in
the inset) for all accumulated conﬁgurations, i.e., those
used in the training phase and the remaining conﬁgurations whose results were used for validation. The mean
absolute error (MAE) of the prediction model was 0.03
eV/˚A, of the order of the expected chemical and numerical accuracy of the reference DFT calculations.
Furthermore, this procedure to predict atomic forces is also
extremely expedient; it scales linearly with system size,
and can be well over 8 orders of magnitude faster than a
typical DFT calculation.
An immediate (and straight-forward) application of
this fast high-ﬁdelity capability to predict atomic forces
FIG. 2. Arrhenius plots for (a) vacancy migration in bulk Al and (b) adatom diﬀusion on the Al (111) surface. For each
temperature, the MD simulation time was extended so as to allow at least 50 hopping events (thus allowing estimation of an
average hop rate, and the indicated error bar). A linear ﬁt (solid red line) was used to determine the dynamic activation energy
(Ea), and is compared with the static DFT activation energy (indicated in brackets as ‘Ref’). (c) For the vacancy migration
in bulk Al, the DFT potential energy along the migration trajectory (symbols and dashed line), and the corresponding energy
obtained via an integration of the ML forces along the reaction coordinate (solid line).
is geometry optimization, including the prediction of potential energy minima and saddle points. Simulations involving hundreds of thousands of atoms (i.e., cases that
are beyond the reaches of present day DFT computations) can be handled, provided the chemical environments encountered during the course of such optimizations are included in the force ﬁeld. In order to understand the limits of the constructed ML force ﬁeld for Al
within the context of such simulations, a few tests were
performed. The ﬁrst one involved a large unit cell containing over 800 Al atoms in the fcc phase along with Al
vacancies. Atoms were randomly perturbed, and the ML
force ﬁeld was used to optimize this perturbed structure.
The correct equilibrium geometry was recovered, as ascertained by a separate DFT calculation starting with
the same perturbed system. A video of this optimization
is included in the Supplemental Information25. Figure
1(b) compares the predicted forces with the DFT forces
for the initial perturbed geometry. Although we restrict
ourselves to modest sizes in this discussion (as we are constrained by the inability of DFT to provide validation for
truly large unit cells), this example demonstrates that the
force ﬁeld is transferrable to much larger systems, thus
going signiﬁcantly beyond previous eﬀorts12,13.
As a second geometry optimization example, a 160
atom unit cell of Al in a hypothetical body centered cubic
(bcc) phase was considered. Once again, the atoms were
perturbed randomly, followed by geometry optimization.
Figure 1(c) captures the performance of the force ﬁeld
for the starting geometry. Given that the bcc phase was
never used in the training phase during the force ﬁeld
creation, we would expect that forces on atoms in such
an environment will be diﬃcult to predict. Surprisingly,
going by the rather small force error distribution (comparable to the 800-atom fcc example), we conclude that the
current choice of ﬁngerprints allows us to eﬀectively capture diverse chemical environments in a versatile manner.
Next, we consider non-zero temperature dynamical situations. For the force prescription to correctly capture
dynamic processes with high-ﬁdelity, ergodicity has to
be preserved. In other words, the average behavior and
time scales of elementary steps or processes should be
correctly represented during a MD simulation using the
force ﬁeld. As a ﬁrst example, we consider the diﬀusion
of an Al vacancy in bulk Al, using a unit cell containing 32 Al sites and an Al vacancy. MD simulations were
performed at 9 temperatures in the 500-900 K range for
times up to 5 ns, with a timestep of 0.5 fs. By observing
the dynamics of the vacancy, the average rate constant
(k) for the migration process at each temperature was
determined. k is given as 1/thop, where thop is the average time taken for a vacancy to migrate to a neighboring
site. To ensure that suﬃcient statistics are collected, k
was averaged over 50 such hop events at each temperature. Figure 2(a) shows an Arrhenius plot of k versus the
reciprocal temperature, whose slope yields the activation
energy (Ea) for Al vacancy migration to be 0.49 eV. The
corresponding DFT value for a similar, but static, migration process was determined to be 0.59 eV (c.f., Figure
2(c)). Barrier “softening” is expected under dynamical
conditions, relative to the results of static calculations in
which entropic eﬀects are neglected26,27.
Another elementary process we considered was the selfdiﬀusion of an Al adatom on the Al (111) surface, using
a 6 ˚A x 6 ˚A surface unit cell containing a 4-layer thick Al
slab. Similar to the Al vacancy example, by monitoring
the dynamics of the adatom across a temperature range
of 50-300 K, an Ea of 0.03 eV was predicted, as shown in
Figure 2(b), whilst a static DFT calculation yielded an
Ea of 0.04 eV. A video of the adatom migration MD sim-
ulation is included in the Supplemental Information25.
Both dynamical diﬀusion scenarios considered lead to
the correct Arrhenius behavior indicating that the underlying physics is properly captured in the ML force ﬁeld
based MD simulations. Moreover, although the force ﬁeld
is aimed at directly predicting atomic forces, potential
energy diﬀerences for elementary steps may be obtained
by integrating the forces along a suitable reaction coordinate. Figure 2(c), for instance, portrays the DFT energy
proﬁle along the Al vacancy migration pathway in bulk
Al, as well as the corresponding energy determined by integrating the forces predicted by the ML force ﬁeld. The
close agreement between the two energies is self-evident,
indicating that energies corresponding to critical parts
of a trajectory may indeed be obtained from the forces
through integration. More importantly, this demonstration places the force prediction scheme in a formally solid
framework as the predicted ML forces are shown to be
consistent with the underlying potential energy.
Lastly, we evaluate the prospect of how well thermal
behavior of materials can be simulated using the forcebased framework. In particular, we focus on the vibrational (or phonon) density of states (DOS), which has
to be properly captured to allow for accurate calculations of thermodynamic quantities, thermal expansion,
thermal conductivity, etc. Figure 3(a) shows the phonon
band structure as determined using the ML force ﬁeld
and using DFT, and in both cases, the ﬁnite displacement
method was used28. Figure 3(b) shows the correspond-
FIG. 3. (a) Phonon band structure, (b) phonon density of
states (DOS), and (c) Helmholtz free energy and constant volume heat capacity computed using the ML force ﬁeld (solid
lines) and DFT (dashed lines). The phonon band structure
and DOS were computed using the ﬁnite atomic displacement
method. Also included in (b) are the DOS results obtained
from the Fourier transform of the velocity autocorrelation
function (solid cyan hatched ﬁll).
ing DOS, as well as the DOS computed using the Fourier
transform of the velocity autocorrelation obtained from
a MD simulation29. This latter approach implicitly includes anharmonicity to all orders (the ﬁrst method, in
contrast, includes just the harmonic part). The MD simulation involved a 864 atom unit cell, and a simulation
time of 5 ps at 700 K. Excellent agreement of the ML
force ﬁeld result with the reference DFT calculations can
be seen. The deviations of the DOS computed using MD
simulations relative to that obtained using the ﬁnite displacement scheme (especially at high frequencies) may be
attributed to non-zero anharmonic eﬀects. The DOS can
be utilized to determine thermodynamic properties such
as the Helmholtz free energy and the constant volume
heat capacity. These properties, as a function of temperature, are compared with the corresponding DFT results
in Figure 3(c). The ML force ﬁeld and DFT results are
nearly indistinguishable, indicating that even under the
stringent test of small atomic perturbations encountered
in these situations (as opposed to the larger length scale
vacancy or adatom hops discussed earlier), the ﬁdelity of
the force prediction is preserved.
A natural question that arises at this point is how this
force ﬁeld paradigm may be extended to include multiple
elements. In a multi-elemental system, the ﬁngerprint of
an atom of a given element type may be constructed to
have as many parts as the number of elements in the
system. Each part would represent the arrangement of
atoms of a particular elemental type around the reference
atom. While this scheme requires further optimization,
preliminary work shows signiﬁcant promise. For two binary systems, α-Al2O3 and monoclinic HfO2, the force
prediction based on the concatenated multi-component
ﬁngerprint prescription rivals that for the elemental Al
in quality. A parity plot comparing the predicted force
with the corresponding reference DFT result for each element type is shown in the Supplemental Information25.
Given such accuracies, extension of the proposed concept
to multielemental systems appears feasible.
The discussion thus far has provided an expos´e of
materials simulation examples that can beneﬁt enormously through a capability to directly and rapidly predict atomic forces with demonstrable verisimilitude. This
capability learns from past reference quantum mechanical calculations of modest system sizes, but can access length-scales and time-scales signiﬁcantly beyond
the reaches of the reference calculations (while preserving accuracy). Examples of phenomena that can potentially be studied include transport (thermal and mass),
phase transformations and chemical reactions, mechanical behavior, materials degradation and failure, etc., all
within the framework of reality-mimicking non-zero temperature dynamical simulations. Widespread use of the
proposed class of learning-based force ﬁelds will require
attending to a few critical matters. These include: (i)
creation of an initial compact training set of reference
atomic environments appropriate for a particular materials application; and, (ii) development of a capability to
recognize a truly new atomic environment when such is
encountered during the course of a simulation. The latter
aspect is critical to evaluating when the force ﬁeld is expected to fail, and, as importantly, to supplement the initial training set so as to make the force prediction scheme
adapt, evolve and continuously improve with time. Nevertheless, these hurdles have been encountered, and addressed, in the past in many “big data” situations2–6.
Hence, there is reason for (cautious) optimism in the
present context of high-ﬁdelity, adaptive and generalizable atomic force ﬁelds.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported ﬁnancially by a grant from
the Oﬃce of Naval Research (N00014-14-1-0098). The
authors would like to acknowledge helpful discussions
with K. B. Lipkowitz, G. Pilania, T. D. Huan, A.
Mannodi-Kanakkithodi and A. Dongare.
Partial computational support through a Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) allocation is
also acknowledged. All calculations were performed in
the pythonic environment, with the atomic simulation
environment, pwtools and mlpy modules30–32.
1 R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 56, 340 .
2 J. Ginsberg, M. H. Mohebbi, R. S. Patel, L. Brammer,
M. S. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant, Nature 457, 1012 .
3 H. Choi and H. Varian, Econ. Rec. 88, 2 .
4 S. E. Hampton, C. A. Strasser, J. J. Tewksbury, W. K.
Gram, A. E. Budden, A. L. Batcheller, C. S. Duke,
J. H. Porter, Front. Ecol. Environ. 11, 156 .
5 M. M. Gobble, Res. Technol. Manage. 56, 64 .
6 P. T. Metaxas and E. Mustafaraj, Science 338, 472 .
7 T. Mueller, A. G. Kusne, and R. Ramprasad, in Reviews
in Computational Chemistry, edited by A. L. Parrill and
K. B. Lipkowitz .
8 L. M. Ghiringhelli, J. Vybiral, S. V. Levchenko, C. Draxl,
and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 105503 .
9 J. Behler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 17930 .
10 S. Lorenz, A. Groß, and M. Scheﬄer, Chem. Phys. Lett.
395, 210 .
11 A. P. Bartok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor,
and G. Csanyi,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 .
12 V. Botu and R. Ramprasad, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 115,
1074 .
13 Z. Li, J. R. Kermode,
and A. De Vita, Phys. Rev. Lett.
114, 096405 .
14 J. Behler, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 074106 .
15 L. Yang, S. Dacek, and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 90, 054102
16 A. P. Bartok, R. Kondor,
and G. Csanyi, Phys. Rev. B
87, 184115 .
17 M. Rupp, A. Tkatchenko, K. R. Muller,
and O. A. von
Lilienfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 058301 .
18 G. Pilania, C. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Rajasekaran,
R. Ramprasad, Sci. Rep. 3, 2810 .
19 K. Hansen, G. Montavon, F. Biegler, S. Fazil, M. Rupp,
M. Scheﬄer, O. A. von Lilienfeld, A. Tkatchenko,
K. Muller, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9, 3404 .
20 T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements
of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, 2nd ed. .
21 G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169
22 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 .
23 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 54,
16533 .
24 P. E. Bl¨ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 .
25 See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by
publisher] for (i) a video of geometry optimization of defects in bulk fcc Al, (ii) a video of a molecular dynamics simulation of adatom migration on the Al (111) surface, and (iii) a discussion on using the direction-resolved
atomic ﬁngerprint for multi-elemental systems, including
some preliminary force predictions.
26 V. K. La Mer, J. Chem. Phys. 1, 289 .
27 S. W. Benson, Thermochemical kinetics: methods for the
estimation of thermochemical data and rate parameters,
2nd ed. .
28 D. Alfe, Comp. Phys. Comm. 180, 2622 .
29 J. M. Dickey and A. Paskin, Phys. Rev. 188, 1407 .
30 S. R. Bahn and K. W. Jacobsen, Comput. Sci. Eng. 4, 56
Schmerler,
“pwtools,”
 
org/pwtools/index.html .
32 D. Albanese, R. Visintainer, S. Merler, S. Riccadonna,
G. Jurman,
and C. Furlanello, “mlpy: Machine learning
python,” , arXiv:1202.6548.