Twitter Sentiment Analysis:
The Good the Bad and the OMG!
Efthymios Kouloumpis∗
i-sieve Technologies
Athens, Greece
 
Theresa Wilson∗
HLT Center of Excellence
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA
 
Johanna Moore
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
 
In this paper, we investigate the utility of linguistic features
for detecting the sentiment of Twitter messages. We evaluate
the usefulness of existing lexical resources as well as features
that capture information about the informal and creative language used in microblogging. We take a supervised approach
to the problem, but leverage existing hashtags in the Twitter
data for building training data.
Introduction
In the past few years, there has been a huge growth
in the use of microblogging platforms such as Twitter.
Spurred by that growth, companies and media organizations are increasingly seeking ways to mine Twitter for
information about what people think and feel about their
products and services. Companies such as Twitratr (twitrratr.com), tweetfeel (www.tweetfeel.com), and Social Mention (www.socialmention.com) are just a few who advertise
Twitter sentiment analysis as one of their services.
While there has been a fair amount of research on how
sentiments are expressed in genres such as online reviews
and news articles, how sentiments are expressed given the
informal language and message-length constraints of microblogging has been much less studied. Features such as
automatic part-of-speech tags and resources such as sentiment lexicons have proved useful for sentiment analysis in
other domains, but will they also prove useful for sentiment
analysis in Twitter? In this paper, we begin to investigate this
Another challenge of microblogging is the incredible
breadth of topic that is covered. It is not an exaggeration to
say that people tweet about anything and everything. Therefore, to be able to build systems to mine Twitter sentiment
about any given topic, we need a method for quickly identifying data that can be used for training. In this paper, we explore one method for building such data: using Twitter hashtags (e.g., #bestfeeling, #epicfail, #news) to identify positive, negative, and neutral tweets to use for training threeway sentiment classiﬁers.
∗Work performed while at the University of Edinburgh
Copyright c⃝2011, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Related Work
Sentiment analysis is a growing area of Natural Language
Processing with research ranging from document level classiﬁcation to learning the polarity of
words and phrases ). Given the character limitations on tweets, classifying the sentiment of Twitter messages is most similar to sentence-level sentiment analysis ); however, the informal and specialized language used
in tweets, as well as the very nature of the microblogging
domain make Twitter sentiment analysis a very different
task. It’s an open question how well the features and techniques used on more well-formed data will transfer to the
microblogging domain.
Just in the past year there have been a number of papers
looking at Twitter sentiment and buzz . Other researchers have
begun to explore the use of part-of-speech features but results remain mixed. Features common to microblogging
(e.g., emoticons) are also common, but there has been little investigation into the usefulness of existing sentiment resources developed on non-microblogging data.
Researchers have also begun to investigate various ways
of automatically collecting training data. Several researchers
rely on emoticons for deﬁning their training data . exploit existing Twitter sentiment sites for collecting
training data. also use
hashtags for creating training data, but they limit their experiments to sentiment/non-sentiment classiﬁcation, rather than
3-way polarity classiﬁcation, as we do.
We use three different corpora of Twitter messages in
our experiments. For development and training, we use
the the hashtagged data set (HASH), which we compile
from the Edinburgh Twitter corpus1, and the emoticon
data set (EMOT) from 
1 
Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
31,861 (14%)
64,850 (29%)
125,859 (57%)
230,811 (61%)
150,570 (39%)
1,520 (38%)
2,295 (57%)
Table 1: Corpus statistics
#followfriday
#nowplaying
#tweetajob
#musicmonday
#letsbehonest
#tobehonest
#factsaboutme
Table 2: Most frequent hashtags in the Edinburgh corpus
appspot.com. For evaluation we use a manually annotated data set produced by the iSieve Corporation2
(ISIEVE). The number of Twitter messages and the distribution across classes is given in Table 1.
Hashtagged data set
The hashtagged data set is a subset of the Edinburgh Twitter corpus. The Edinburgh corpus contains 97 million tweets
collected over a period of two months. To create the hashtagged data set, we ﬁrst ﬁlter out duplicate tweets, non-
English tweets, and tweets that do not contain hashtags.
From the remaining set (about 4 million), we investigate the
distribution of hashtags and identify what we hope will be
sets of frequent hashtags that are indicative of positive, negative, and neutral messages. These hashtags are used to select
the tweets that will be used for development and training.
Table 2 lists the 15 most-used hashtags in the Edinburgh
corpus. In addition to the very common hashtags that are part
of the Twitter folksonomy (e.g., #followfriday, #musicmonday), we ﬁnd hashtags that would seem to indicate message
polarity: #fail, #omgthatsotrue, #iloveitwhen, etc.
To select the ﬁnal set of messages to be included in the
HASH dataset, we identify all hashtags that appear at least
1,000 times in the Edinburgh corpus. From these, we selected the top hashtags that we felt would be most useful
for identifying positive, negative and neutral tweets. These
hashtags are given in Table 3. Messages with these hashtags
were included in the ﬁnal dataset, and the polarity of each
message is determined by its hashtag.
2www.i-sieve.com
#iloveitwhen,
#thingsilike,
#bestfeeling,
#bestfeelingever,
#omgthatssotrue,
#imthankfulfor, #thingsilove, #success
#epicfail,
#nevertrust,
#worstlies,
#imtiredof,
#itsnotokay, #worstfeeling, #notcute, #somethingaintright, #somethingsnotright, #ihate
#job, #tweetajob, #omgfacts, #news, #listeningto, #lastfm, #hiring, #cnn
Table 3: Top positive, negative and neutral hashtags used to
create the HASH data set
Emoticon data set
The Emoticon data set was created by Go, Bhayani, and
Huang for a project at Stanford University by collecting
tweets with positive ‘:)’ and negative ‘:(’ emoticons. Messages containing both positive and negative emoticons were
omitted. They also hand-tagged a number of tweets to use
for evaluation, but for our experiments, we only use their
training data. This set contains 381,381 tweets, 230,811 positive and 150,570 negative. Interestingly, the majority of
these messages do not contain any hashtags.
iSieve data set
The iSieve data contains approximately 4,000 tweets. It was
collected and hand-annotated by the iSieve Corporation. The
data in this collection was selected to be on certain topics,
and the label of each tweet reﬂects its sentiment (positive,
negative, or neutral) towards the tweet’s topic. We use this
data set exclusively for evaluation.
Preprocessing
Data preprocessing consists of three steps: 1) tokenization, 2) normalization, and 3) part-of-speech (POS) tagging.
Emoticons and abbreviations (e.g., OMG, WTF, BRB) are
identiﬁed as part of the tokenization process and treated as
individual tokens. For the normalization process, the presence of abbreviations within a tweet is noted and then abbreviations are replaced by their actual meaning (e.g., BRB
−> be right back). We also identify informal intensiﬁers
such as all-caps (e.g., I LOVE this show!!! and character repetitions (e.g., I’ve got a mortgage!! happyyyyyy”), note their
presence in the tweet. All-caps words are made into lower
case, and instances of repeated charaters are replaced by a
single character. Finally, the presence of any special Twitter tokens is noted (e.g., #hashtags, usertags, and URLs) and
placeholders indicating the token type are substituted. Our
hope is that this normalization improves the performance of
the POS tagger, which is the last preprocessing step.
We use a variety of features for our classiﬁcation experiments. For the baseline, we use unigrams and bigrams. We
also include features typically used in sentiment analysis,
namely features representing information from a sentiment
lexicon and POS features. Finally, we include features to
capture some of the more domain-speciﬁc language of microblogging.
n-gram features
To identify a set of useful n-grams, we ﬁrst remove stopwords. We then perform rudimentary negation detection by
attaching the the word not to a word that preceeds or follows a negation term. This has proved useful in previous
work . Finally, all unigrams and
bigrams are identiﬁed in the training data and ranked according to their information gain, measured using Chi-squared.
For our experiments, we use the top 1,000 n-grams in a bagof-words fashion.3
Lexicon features
Words listed the MPQA subjectivity lexicon are tagged with their prior polarity: positive, negative, or neutral. We create three features
based on the presence of any words from the lexicon.
Part-of-speech features
For each tweet, we have features for counts of the number
of verbs, adverbs, adjectives, nouns, and any other parts of
Micro-blogging features
We create binary features that capture the presence of positive, negative, and neutral emoticons and abbreviations and
the presence of intensiﬁers (e.g., all-caps and character repetitions). For the emoticons and abbreviations, we use the
Internet Lingo Dictionary and various internet slang dictionaries available online.
Experiments and Results
Our goal for these experiments is two-fold. First, we want to
evaluate whether our training data with labels derived from
hashtags and emoticons is useful for training sentiment classiﬁers for Twitter. Second, we want to evaluate the effectiveness of the features from section for sentiment analysis in
Twitter data. How useful is the sentiment lexicon developed
for formal text on the short and informal tweets? How much
gain do we get from the domain-speciﬁc features?
For our ﬁrst set of experiments we use the HASH and
EMOT data sets. We start by randomly sampling 10% of the
HASH data to use as a validation set. This validation set is
used for n-gram feature selection and for parameter tuning.
The remainder of the HASH data is used for training. To
train a classiﬁer, we sample 22,2474 tweets from the training data and use this data to train AdaBoost.MH models with 500 rounds of boosting.56 We
repeat this process ten times and average the performance of
the models.
3The number n-grams to include as features was determined
empirically using the training data.
4This is equivalent to 10% of the training data. We experimented with different sample sizes for training the classiﬁer, and
this gave the best results based on the validation data.
5The rounds of boosting was determined empirically using the
validation set.
6We also experimented with SVMs, which gave similar trends,
but lower results overall.
HASH+EMOT
Figure 1: Average F-measure on the validation set over models trained on the HASH and HASH+EMOT data
Because the EMOT data set has no neutral data and our
experiments involve 3-way classiﬁcation, it is not included
in the initial experiments. Instead, we explore whether it is
useful to use the EMOT data to expand the HASH data and
improve sentiment classiﬁcation. 19,000 messages from the
EMOT data set, divided equally between positive and negative, are randomly selected and added to the HASH data and
the experiments are repeated.
To get a sense for an upper-bound on the performance
we can expect for the HASH-trained models and whether
including the EMOT data may yield improvements, we ﬁrst
check the results of the models on the validation set. Figure 1
shows the average F-measure for the n-gram baseline and all
the features on the HASH and the HASH+EMOT data. On
this data, adding the EMOT data to the training does lead to
improvements, particularly when all the features are used.
Turning to the test data, we evaluate the models trained
on the HASH and the HASH+EMOT data on the ISIEVE
data set. Figure 2 shows the average F-measure for the baseline and four combinations of features: n-grams and lexicon
features (n-gram+lex), n-grams and part-of-speech features
(n-gram+POS), n-grams, lexicon features and microblogging features (n-grams+lex+twit), and ﬁnally all the features
combined. Figure 3 shows the accuracy for these same experiments.
Interestingly, the best performance on the evaluation data
comes from using the n-grams together with the lexicon
features and the microblogging features. Including the partof-speech features actually gives a drop in performance.
Whether this is due to the accuracy of the POS tagger on the
tweets or whether POS tags are less useful on microblogging
data will require further investigation.
Also, while including the EMOT data for training gives
a nice improvement in performance in the absense of microblogging features, once the microblogging features are
included, the improvements drop or disappear. The best results on the evaluation data comes from the n-grams, lexical
and Twitter features trained on the hashtagged data alone.
n-grams+lex
n-grams+POS
n-grams+lex+twit
HASH+EMOT
Figure 2: Average F-measure on the test set over models
trained on the HASH and HASH+EMOT data
n-grams+lex
n-grams+POS
n-grams+lex+twit
HASH+EMOT
Figure 3: Average accuracy on the test set over models
trained on the HASH and HASH+EMOT data
Conclusions
Our experiments on twitter sentiment analysis show that
part-of-speech features may not be useful for sentiment analysis in the microblogging domain. More research is needed
to determine whether the POS features are just of poor quality due to the results of the tagger or whether POS features
are just less useful for sentiment analysis in this domain.
Features from an existing sentiment lexicon were somewhat
useful in conjunction with microblogging features, but the
microblogging features (i.e., the presence of intensiﬁers and
positive/negative/neutral emoticons and abbreviations) were
clearly the most useful.
Using hashtags to collect training data did prove useful, as did using data collected based on positive and negative emoticons. However, which method produces the better training data and whether the two sources of training data
are complementary may depend on the type of features used.
Our experiments show that when microblogging features are
included, the beneﬁt of emoticon training data is lessened.