IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, VOL. SMC-4, NO. 4, JULY 1974
Learning Automata
KUMPATI S. NARENDRA, SENIOR MEMBER, IEEE, AND M. A. L. THATHACHAR
Abstract-Stochastic automata operating in an unknown random
can be considered
to show learning behavior. Tsypkin
environment have been proposed earlier as models of learning. These
[GT1] has recently argued that seemingly diverse problems
automata update their action probabilities in accordance with the inputs
received from the environment and can improve their own performance
oidenfatio
during operation. In this context they are referred to as learning autocan be treated ii a unified manner as problems in learning
mata. A survey of the available results in the area of learning automata
using probabilistic iterative methods.
has been attempted in this paper. Attention has been focused on the
Viewed in a purely mathematical context the goal of a
norms of behavior of learning automata, issues in the design of updating
learning system
is the optimization of a functional not
schemes, convergence of the action probabilities, and interaction of
Utilization
of learning
expicily,asfunctoeamlwith
athematidaltexpeta-n
optimization and hypothesis testing is discussed, and potential areas o
tion of a random functional with a probability distribution
application are suggested.
function not known in advance. An approach that has been
used in the past is to reduce the problem to the determina-
I. INTRODUCTION
tion of an optimal
set of parameters and then apply
stochastic hillclimbing techniques [GT1]. An alternative
rN CLASSICAL deterministic control theory, the control
of a process is always preceded by complete knowledge
approach gaining attention recently is to regard the problem
as one of finding an optimal action out of a set of allowable
actions and to achieve this using stochastic automata [LN2].
description of the process is assumedito bknon, an the
The following example of the learning process of a student
inputs to the process are deterministic functions of time.
Later developments in stochastic control theory took into
account uncertainties that might be present in the process;
stochastic
effected by
thestden andanite
aer nAtivn isp
probabilistic characteristics of the uncertainties are known.
he student
alternative
Frequently, the uncertainties are of a higher order, and even
he teacher respond
the probabilistic characteristics such as the distribution
indicaing wheth
the selcter
functions may not be completely known. It is then necessary
thri howeve,poabster
to make observations on the process as it is in operation and
probabilit ficither
esponse zfra
gain further knowledge of the process. In other words, a
of the answers selected by the student. The saving feature of
distinctive feature of such problems is that there is little
that Thetachr'
a priori information, and additional information is to be
responses have the least probability for the correct answer.
acquired on learnine.Oeipnitrgdhsa
Under these circumstances the interest
is in finding the
aro mingslearing.
manner in which the student should plan a choice of a
Learning is defined as any relatively permanent changin
alternatives
information
behavior resulting from past experience, and a learning
obtained from the teacher so that he learns the correct
system is characterized by its ability to improve its behavior
with time, in some sense tending towards an ultimate goal.
In stochastic automata models the stochastic automaton
In mathematical psychology, models of learning systems
corresponds to the student, and the random environment in
[GBI], [GLI] have been developed to explain behavior
which it operates represents the probabilistic teacher. The
patterns among living organisms. These models in turn have
actions (or states) of the stochastic automaton
lately been adapted to synthesize engineering systems, which
various alternative answers that are provided. The responses
of the environment for a particular action of the stochastic
Manuscript received January 15, 1974; revised February 13, 1974.
automaton are the teacher's probabilistic responses. The
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under
problem is to obtain the optimal action that corresponds to
Grant GK-20580.
K. S. Narendra is with the Becton Center, Yale University, New
thcortanw.
Haven, Conn.
The stochastic automaton attempts a solution of this
M. A. L. Thathachar is with the Becton Center, Yale University,
problem as follows. To start with, no information as to
New Haven, Conn., on leave from the Indian Institute of Science,
steotmlato
Bangalore, India.'
hconisteotmlato
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, JULY 1974
probabilities are attached to all the actions. One action is
Union and elsewhere has followed the trend set by his
selected at random, the response of the environment to this
source paper. No attempt, however, has been made in this
action is observed, and based on this response the action
paper to review all these studies.
probabilities are changed. Now a new action is selected
Varshavskii and Vorontsova [LVY] observed that the use
according to the updated action probabilities, and the
of stochastic automata with updating of action probabilities
procedure is repeated. A stochastic automaton acting in
could reduce the number of states in comparison with
this manner to improve its performance is referred to as a
deterministic automata. This idea has proved to be very
learning automaton in this paper.
fruitful and has been exploited in a series of investigations,
Stochastic
hillclimbing
stochastic
the results of which form the subject of this paper.
approximation) and stochastic automata methods represent
Fu and his associates [LFI]-[LF6] were among the first
two distinct approaches to the learning problem. Though
to introduce stochastic automata into the control literature.
both approaches involve iterative procedures, updating at
of applications
optimization,
every stage is done in the parameter space in the first method
pattern recognition, and game theory were considered by
and probability space in the second. It is, of course, possible
this school. McLaren [LM1] explored the properties of
that they lead to equivalent descriptions in some examples.
linear updating schemes and suggested the concept of a
The automata methods have two distinct advantages over
"growing" automaton [LM2]. Chandrasekaran and Shen
stochastic hillclimbing methods in that the action space
[LC1]-[LC3] made useful studies of nonlinear updating
need not be a metric space (i.e., no concept of neighborhood
nonstationary
environments,
is needed), and since at every stage any element of the
automata. Tsypkin and Poznyak [LTI] attempted to unify
action set can be chosen, global rather than local optimum
the updating schemes by focusing attention on an inverse
can be obtained.
optimization
Experimental simulation of automata methods carried
associates [LS1], [LS2], [LV3]-[LV10], [LN1], [LN2],
out during the last few years has indicated the feasibility of
[LL1]-[LL5] have studied the theory and applications of
the automaton approach in the
solution of interesting
learning automata and also carried out simulation studies
examples in parameter optimization, hypothesis testing, and
in the area.
appropriate in the study of hierarchical systems and in
Sklansky [GS1] and Fu [GF1] have devoted part of their
nonstationary
optimization
attention to learning automata. The topic also finds a place
Furthermore,
several other avenues to learning can be
in some books and collections of articles on learning
interpreted as iterative procedures in the probability space,
systems [GM2], [GF2],
[LF6]. The
literature on the
and the learning automaton provides a natural mathematical
two-armed bandit problem is relevant in the present context
model for such situations and serves as a unifying theme
but is not referred to in detail as the approach taken is
among diverse techniques [GM3].
References
Previous studies on learning automata have led to a
contributions will be made at appropriate points in the body
certain understanding of the basic issues involved and have
of the paper.
guidelines
of algorithms. An
appreciation of the fundamental problems in the field has
Organization
also taken place. It appears that research in this area has
This paper has been divided into nine sections. Following
reached a stage where the power and applicability of the
the introduction, the basic concepts and definitions of
approach needs to be made widely known in order that it
stochastic automata and random environments are given in
can be fully exploited in solving problems in relevant areas.
Section II. The possible ways in which the behavior of
In this paper we review recent results in the area of learning
learning automata can be judged are defined in Section III.
automata, reexamine some of the theoretical questions that
Section IV deals with reinforcement schemes (or updating
arise, and suggest potential areas where the available results
algorithms) and their properties and includes a discussion
may find application.
of convergence. Section V describes collective behavior of
automata in terms of games between automata and multilevel structures of automata. Nonstationary environments
Historically,
first learning automata models were
briefly considered
Possible uses of
developed in mathematical psychology. Early work in this
learning automata in optimization and hypothesis testing
area has been well documented in the book by Bush and
form the subject matter of Section VII. A short description
Mosteller [GBl]. More recent results can be found in
of the fields of application of learning automata is given in
Atkinson et al. [GAl]. A rigorous mathematical framework
Section VIII. A comprehensive bibliography is provided in
has been developed for the study of learning problems by
the Reference section and is divided into three subsections
Iosifescu and Theodorescu [GIl] as well as by Norman
dealing with 1) general references in the literature pertinent
to the topic considered, 2) some important papers on de-
Tsetlin [DT1] introduced the concept of using determiterministic automata that provided the impetus for stochasnistic automata
environments
tic automata models, and 3) publications wholly devoted to
models of learning. A great deal of work in the Soviet
learning automata.
NARENDRA AND THATHACHAR: LEARNING AUTOMATA
| STOCHASTIC
ACTION(OUTPUT)
Learning Automaton (Stochastic Automaton in a Random
}{O,I)AUTOMATON
4E a,,a2,-ar
Environment)
Stochastic automaton.
Fig. 3 represents a feedback connection of a stochastic
automaton and an environment. The actions of the autom-
PENALTY PROBABILITY SET
aton in this case form the inputs to the environment. The
responses of the environment in turn are the inputs to the
INPUT ENVI,...arONMEN
OUTPU RESPONE
probabilities. As these responses are random, the action
Environment.
probability vector p(n) is also random.
In psychological learning experiments the organism under
PENALTY PROBABILITY SET
study is said to learn when it improves the probability of
correct response as a result of interaction with its environment. Since the stochastic automaton being considered in
this paper behaves in a similar fashion, it appears proper to
a learning automaton. Thus
a learning
automaton is a stochastic automaton that operates in a
random environment and updates its action probabilities in
STOCHASTIC
accordance with the inputs received from the environment
a E {a,,.. ar)
so as to improve its performance in some specified sense.
Learning automaton.
In the context of psychology, a learning automaton may
be regarded as a model of the learning behavior of the
II. STOCHAsTic AUTOMATA AND RANDom ENVIRONMENTS
organism under study and the environment as controlled by
the experimenter. In an engineering application such as the
Stochastic Automaton
control of a process, the controller corresponds to the
A stochastic automaton is a sextuple {x,0,oc,p,A,G} where
learning automaton, while the rest of the system with all
x is the input set, 4 = {01,02,.- * ,l} is the set of internal
uncertainties constitutes the environment.
os = {01,0C2, *Cr } with
is the output
It is useful to note the distinction between several models
action set, p is the state probability vector governing the
based on the nature of the input to the learning automaton.
choice of the state at each stage (i.e., at each stage n,
If the input set is binary, e.g., {0, 1}, the model is known as
p(n) = (pl(n),p2(n),
- *,p.(n))), A
is an algorithm (also
a P-model. On the other hand it is called a Q-model if the
called an updating scheme or reinforcement scheme) which
input set is a finite collection of distinct symbols as, for
generates p(n + 1) from p(n), and G: 0 -ao is the output
example, obtained by quantization and an S-model if the
function. G could be a stochastic function, but there is no
input set is an interval . Each of these models appears
loss of generality in assuming it to be deterministic [GP1].
appropriate in certain situations.
In this paper G is taken to be deterministic and one-to-one
A remark on the terminology is relevant here. Following
(i.e., r = s, states and actions are regarded synonymous)
Tsetlin [DT1], deterministic automata operating in random
and s < xo. Fig.
1 shows a stochastic automaton with its
environments have been proposed as models of learning
inputs and actions.
contenders
It may be noted that the states of a stochastic automaton
"learning automata." However, in the view of the present
correspond
discrete-state
discreteauthors the stochastic automaton with updating of action
Occasionally,
probabilities is a general model from which the deterministic
convenient to regard the pi(n) themselves as states of a
automaton can be obtained as a special case having a
continuous-state Markov process.
0-1-state transition matrix, and it appears reasonable to
Environment
apply the term learning automaton to the more general
model. In cases where it is felt necessary to emphasize the
Only an environment (also called a medium) with random
learning properties of a deterministic automaton one can
characteristics
of interest
the problems
qualifying term
"deterministic
considered. The environment (shown in Fig. 2) has inputs
automaton." It may also be noted that learning automata
c(n) = {f,xl.
'r} and outputs (responses) belonging to a
of this paper have been referred to as "variable-structure
set x. Frequently the responses are binary {0,1 } with zero
stochastic automata," in earlier literature [LVI].
being called the nonpenalty response and one as the penalty
response. The probability of emitting a particular output
III. NORMS OF BEHAVIOR OF LEARNING AUTOMATA
symbol (say,
1) depends on the input and is denoted by
The basic operation carried out by a learning automaton
ci(i = 1,..*
,r). The ci are called the penalty probabilities,
is the updating of the action probabilities on the basis of the
If the ci do not depend on n, the environment is said to be
responses of the environment. A natural question here is to
stationary. Otherwise it is nonstationary. It is assumed that
examine whether the updating is done in such a manner as
the ci are unknown initially; the problem would be trivial
to result in a performance compatible with intuitive notions
if they are known a priori.
of learning.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, JULY 1974
One quantity useful in judging the behavior of a learning
In practice, the penalty probabilities are often completely
automaton is the average penalty received by the automaton.
unknown, and
it would be necessary to have desirable
At a certain stage n, if the action (i is selected with probperformance whatever be the values of ci, that is, in all
ability pi(n) the average penalty conditioned on p(n) is
stationary random media. The performance would also be
superior if the decrease of E[M(n)] is monotonic. Both
M(n) = E{x(n)
these requirements are considered in the following definition
Definition 4: A learning automaton is said to be absolutely
expedient if
If no a priori information is available, and the actions are
E[M(n + 1)
p(n)] < M(n)
chosen with equal probability (i.e., at random), the value of
the average penalty is denoted by Mo and is given by
for all n,
all pk(n) E (0,1)(k = 1,.*.*,r), and all possible
of ci(i= 1,
Absolute expediency implies
= Cl + C2 +
that M(n) is a supermartingale and that E[M(n)] is strictly
monotonically decreasing with n in all stationary random
environments. If M(n) < Mo initially, absolute expediency
The average penaltyaisimadetlessothanMe atilea
implies expediency. It is thus a stronger requirement on the
if the average penalty iS made less than MO,
asymptotically. Such a behavior is called expediency and is
learning automaton. Furthermore, it can be shown that
defined as follows [DTI], [LCI].
absolute expediency implies E-optimality in all stationary
Definition 1: A learning automaton is called expedient' if
random environments [LL4]. It is not at present known
whether the reverse implication is true.
lowever, every
lim E[M(n)] < Mo.
learning automaton presently known to be e-optimal in all
stationary
absolutely
expedient.
When a learning automaton is expedient it only does better
s-optimality and absolute expediency will be treated as
than one which chooses actions in a purely random manner.
synonymous in the sequel.
It would be desirable
if the average penalty could be
The definitions in this section have been given with
minimized by a proper selection of the actions. In such a
reference to a P-model but can be applied with minor
case the learning automaton is called optimal. From (1) it
changes to Q- and S-models [LV3], [LV8], [LCl].
can be seen that the minimum value of M(n) is mini {c'}.
Definition 2: A learning automaton is called optinmal if
IV. REINFORCEMENT SCHEMES
Having decided on the norms of behavior of learning
lim E[M(n)] = cl
automata we can now focus attention on the means of
achieving the desired performance. It is evident from the
cl = min {c-}.
description of the learning automaton that the crucial
factor that affects the performance is the reinforcement
Optimality implies that asymptotically the action associated
scheme for the updating of the action probabilities. It thus
with the minimum penalty probability
becomes necessary to relate the structure of a reinforcement
probability one. While optimality appears a very desirable
scheme and the performance of the automaton using the
conditions
situation may
preclude its achievement. In such a case one would aim at a
suboptimal performance. One such property is given by
e-optimality [LV4].
p(n + 1) = T[p(n),c(n),x(n)]
Definition 3: A learning automaton is called c-optimal if
where T is an operator; x(n) and x(n) represent the action
lim E[M(n)] < cl +
of the automaton and the input to the automaton at instant
n, respectively. One can classify the reinforcement schemes
can be obtained for any arbitrary
c > 0 by a suitable
either on the basis of the property exhibited by a learning
choice of the parameters of the reinforcement scheme.
automaton using the scheme (as, for example, the automaton
s-optimality implies that the performance of the automaton
being expedient or optimal) or on the basis of the nature of
can be made as close to the optimal as desired.
the functions appearing in the scheme (as, for example,
It is possible that the preceding properties hold only when
linear, nonlinear, or hybrid). Ifp(n + 1) is a linear function
fpenalty probabilities c
satisfy certain restricof the components of p(n), the reinforcement scheme is said
tions, for example, that they should lie in certain intervals,
to be linear, otherwise
is nonlinear. Sometimes
In such cases the properties are said to be conditional.
advantageous to update p(n) according to different schemes
depending on the intervals in which the value of p(n) lies.
1 Since pi(n), limn .
p1(n), and consequently M(n) are, in general,
random variables, the expectation operator is needed in the definition
2 It is usually assumed that the set {c1} has unique maximum and
to represent the average penalty.
minimum elements.
NARENDRA AND THATHACHAR: LEARNING AUTOMATA
In such a case the combined reinforcement scheme is called
It is known that an automaton using the LR-P scheme is
a hybrid scheme.
expedient in all stationary random environments. Expres-
The basic idea behind any reinforcement scheme is rather
sions for the rate of learning and the variance of the action
simple. If the learning automaton selects an action ici at
probabilities are also available.
a nonpenalty
By setting
probability pi(n) is increased, and all the other components
fj(p) = apj
ofp(n) are decreased. For a penalty input, pi(n) is decreased,
and the other components are increased. These changes in
we get the linear reward-inaction
(LR-I) scheme.
reward and
respectively.
scheme was considered first in mathematical psychology
Occasionally the action probabilities may be retained at the
[GBl] but was later independently conceived and introprevious values, in which case the status quo is known as
engineering
literature
Shapiro and
"inaction."
Narendra [LSI], [LS2].
In general, when the action at n is o
The characteristic of the scheme is that it ignores penalty
inputs from the environment so that the action probabilities
pi(n + 1) = p/n)-f/p(n)),
for x(n) = 0
remain unchanged under these inputs.
Because of this
pj(n + 1) = pJ(n) + gj(p(n)),
for x(n) =
property a learning autoinaton using the scheme has been
called a "benevolent automaton" by Tsypkin and Poznyak
The algorithm for pi(n + 1) is to be fixed so that Pk(n + 1)
The LR--I scheme was originally reported to be optimal in
(k = 1,* *
,r) add to unity. Thus
all stationary random environments, but it is now known
that it is only c-optimal [LV4], [LL4].
It is significant,
p1(n + 1) = pi(n) + E f1(p(n)),
for x(n) = 0
however, that replacing the penalty by inaction in the LR-P
scheme totally changes the performance from expediency to
pi(n + 1) = pi(n) - E gsp(n)),
for x(n) =
c-optimality.
3heretheonnegativecontinuousfunctionsOther possible combinations such as the linear rewardwhere
the nonnegative3
continuous
functions fj() and
penalty-penalty,
inaction-penalty
gj( ) are such that Pk(n + 1) E (0,1), for all k = 1,
have been considered in [LV9], but these are, in general,
every pk(nl) E (0,1).
latter requirement
inferior to the LR-I and LR-P schemes. The effect of varying
necessary to prevent the automaton from getting trapped
the parameters a and b with n has also been studied in
prematurely in an absorbing barrier.
Varshavskii and Vorontsova [LVI] were the
suggest such reinforcement schemes for two-state automata
Nonlinear Schemes
and thus set the trend for later developments. They con-
As mentioned earlier, the first nonlinear scheme for a
sidered two schemes-one linear and the other nonlineartwo-state automaton was proposed by Varshavskii and
in terms of updating of the state-transition probabilities.
Vorontsova [LVI] in terms of transition probabilities. The
Fu, McLaren, and McMurtry [LFI], [LF2] simplified the
total-probability version of the scheme corresponds to the
procedure by considering updating of the
total action
probabilities as dealt with here.
gj(p) = fj(p) = apj(l - pj),
Linear Schemes
This scheme is c-optimal in a restricted random environment
The earliest known scheme can be obtained by setting
satisfying either c, < 1/2 < c2 or c2 < 1/2 < cl. Chanfj-p
j(p=pj blrdrasekaran
g/(p) = bp1 + b/r-
schemes with power-law nonlinearities. Several nonlinear
schemes, which are c-optimal
all stationary random
where 0 < a, b < 1.4 This is known as a linear rewardenvironments, have been suggested by Viswanathan and
penalty (denoted LR-P) scheme. Early studies of the scheme,
Narendra [LV9]
Lakshmivarahan
principally dealing with the two-state case, were made by
Thathachar [LLI], [LL3]. A simple scheme of this type for
Bush and Mosteller [GB1] and Varshavskii and Vorontsova
the two-state case is
[LVY]. McLaren [LMI] made a detailed investigation of
f (p) = apj2(l - pj)
gj(p) = bpj(
multistate
this work was
Chandrasekaran and Shen [LCI] as well as by Viswanawhere 0 < a < 4, 0 < b <
than and Narendra [LV9]. Norman [LN4]
established
several results pertaining to the ergodic character of the
Acobntnofleaadnniertrm
appears advantageous [LL3]. Extensive simulation results
on a variety of schemes utilizing several possible combinations of reward, penalty, and
inaction are available
3The nonnegativity condition need be imposed only if the "*reward"
[LV10]. A result that unifies most of the preceding reincharacter of f,(.) and the "penalty" character of g>( ) are to be
forcement schemes has been reported in [LL3] and is given
4g9j() for this scheme is not nonnegative for all values of pj.
by the following.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, JULY 1974
Theorem: A necessary and sufficient condition for the
whereas they play a crucial role in the case of s-optimal
learning automaton using (8) to be absolutely expedient is
It has been shown that when the LR-P scheme is used,
fi(P) =M_P) -
- fr(P) =-(p)
p(n) converges to a random variable with a continuous
distribution
the mean and
variance can be
computed. The variance can be made as small as desired by
a proper choice of the parameters of the scheme [LM1],
where A(-) and 4(*) are arbitrary continuous functions
In s-optimal schemes the action probability vector p(n)
satisfying5
converges to the set of absorbing states with probability
one. As there are at least two such states and only one of
O < A(p) < 1
the states is the desired one (i.e., the state associated with
the minimum penalty probability) one can only say that
O < ,u(p) < min (pa/i - pj)
p(n) converges to the desired state with a positive probability. It is important to quantify this probability.
for all j = 1, *
,r and all pj E (0,1).
For simplicity, consider a two-state case. If c1 < c2, we
In simple terms, the theorem suggests that to obtain
require p1(n) -÷ 1, and if c1 > c2, p1(n) -+ 0. When an
absolute expediency one type of updating should be mae
c-optimal scheme is used the only conclusion that can be
abslut exedincYonetyp ofupdtin shuldbemade
is p1(n) -+{0, 1} with probability one, hence,
for the probability of the action selected by the automaton
desirable event happens with a specific probability. Furtherat the instant considered and a different type of updating
more, this probability depends on the initial valuepi (). In
for all the other action probabilities. No distinction should
ore, to bain
dendsonthe
inithevalue
adeamogte atios nt sleced
y te atomton
order to gain confidence in the use of the schemes the
be made among the actions not selected by the automaton
probability of convergence to the desired state has to be
in the sense thththe ratio
pn(n + 1)/(ps(n)) should be the
determined as a function of the initial probability.
same for all these actions.
For fixing ideas, let us assume c1 < c2. It is necessary to
All the schemes known so far, which are s-optimal in all
find a function6 y(p) defined by
stationary
environments,
absolutely
expedient; hence the functions appearing in these schemes
y(p) = Pr [p1(e) = 1
P1(O) = p].
satisfy the conditions of the theorem. The theorem also
The available results in the theory of stochastic stability are
provides guidelines for the choice of new schemes.
not of much use here as they treat, for the most part, the
case of one absorbing state, whereas there are two such
Convergence of Action Probabilities
states here. Pioneering work on the present problem has
So far only the gross behavior of the automaton based on
been done by Norman [LN3], who has shown that y(p)
changes in the average penalty has been considered. It is of
satisfies a functional equation
interest to probe deeper into the nature of asymptotic
Uy(p) = y(p)
behavior of the action probability vector p(n).
There are two distinct types of convergence associated
with suitable boundary conditions at p = 0 and p = 1,
with the reinforcement schemes. In one case the distribution
where the operator U is defined by
functions of the sequence of action probabilities converge
Uy(p) = E[y(pl(n ± 1))
to a distribution function at all points of continuity of the
latter function. This mode of convergence occurs typically
However, this functional equation is extremely difficult to
in the case of expedient schemes such as the LR-P scheme. A
solve. Hence the next best thing that can be done is to estabdifferent mode of convergence occurs in the case Of elish upper and lower bounds on y(p). These can be computed
optimal schemes (such as the LR-I scheme). Here it can be
by finding two functions ii(p) and +'2(P) such that
proved using the martingale convergence theorem that the
sequence of action probabilities converges to a limiting
Ut/I (p) .
random variable with probability one. Thus a stronger mode
of convergence is exhibited by s-optimal schemes [LN4].
U2(p) < +12(P)
The difference between the two modes of convergence can
be understood by the fact that expedient schemes (such as
all p E with appropriate boundary conditions.
LR-P) generate Markov processes that are ergodic but have
Satisfaction of these inequalities yields
no absorbing barrier, whereas e-optimal schemes result in
Markov processes with more than one absorbing barrier.
#f2(P) . 7(P) . tf1(p)
values of action
probabilities do not
The functions 4,1e( ) and {1X2( ) are called subregular and
asymptotic behavior in the case of expedient schemes,
superregular, respectively, and are comparatively easy to
find as it involves only establishment of inequalities. Use of
sThese conditions broadly arise because the pj(fl) are probabilities
and are required to lie in (0,1) and sum to unity. For a more precise
statement see [LL3].
6p represents a scalar in the remainder of this subsection.
NARENDRA AND THATHACHAR: LEARNING AUTOMATA
exponential
particularly
appropriate
present, is the case when all the roots of the martingale
here. With
equation correspond to these absorbing states.
In view of the preceeding clarifications, some of the
exp (xipii= 1,2
conclusions drawn
literature have to be
exp (xi- 1)
modified. The nonlinear schemes regarded as optimal in
Norman [LN3] has established tight bounds for y(p) in the
restricted environments by Varshavskii and Vorontsova
case of the LR-I scheme with two states. The technique has
[LV1] as well as by Chandrasekaran and Shen [LCI] are
been extended to cover nonlinear schemes and multistate
now seen to be only c-optimal. Similarly the LR-I scheme of
cases [LL4].
Shapiro and Narendra [LS1] and the nonlinear schemes
Convergence
Recognizing
given by Viswanathan and Narendra [LV9] Lakshmivaraimportance of the study of convergence of the action
han and Thathachar [LL1]
only c-optimal in
probabilities, several researchers have attempted to simplify
stationary random environments. The nonlinear schemes in
the procedures involved. Some intuitively attractive ideas
[LCI] where there are roots of the martingale equation
were employed extensively in this context, but on closer
other than those corresponding to the absorbing states have
incorrect.
to be studied in greater detail in order to make definitive
mechanism of convergence now appears to be more complex
statements about their convergence. In connection with the
than what was thought of earlier. Attention will be drawn
LR Dscheme, the asymptotic values of the state probabilities
to some of these fallacious arguments in the following,
given in [LCI] actually refer to their expectations.
1) In the case of a two-state automaton, suppose pi(n)
Some General Remarks on Reinforcement Schemes
1) All the schemes available in the literature so far are
Ap1(n) = E[pl(n + 1) - pl(n)
pi(n)] > O,
either expedient or c-optimal. Vorontsova [LV2] stated
sufficient conditions for a scheme to be optimal for a
for all pi(n) e (0,1)
two-state automaton operating in continuous time. It is not
for p (n) = 0 and I.
known at present whether these conditions ensure optimality
for the discrete-time automaton of our interest.
It follows immediately that lim,,
. pl(n) = {0,1} and that
2) The question whether expedient or c-optimal schemes
E[p1(n)] is strictly monotonically increasing. It has further
are to be used in a particular situation is of considerable
since E[pl(n)]
interest. While c-optimal schemes show definite advantages
bounded above by unity, E[pi(n)] -+
-oo. This in
in stationary random environments, the situation
turn implies that pi(n) --+1 with probability one. However,
clear in the case of more general environments. A detailed
the conclusion that E[p1(n)] --+1
is not necessarily true
comparison of various schemes has been made by Viswanaeven though E[pl(n)] is strictly monotonically increasing.
than and Narendra [LV6].
Neither is the conclusion about convergence of p1(n) to
3) Only schemes suitable for the P-model have been
unity with probability one.
discussed here. With appropriate modifications each of
2) A stability argument to be described has been widely
these schemes can be made suitable for Q- and S-models
used [LVl], [LCl] in gaining insight into the nature of
[LCI], [LV3], [LV8].
convergence. Let P i (i = 1,2, * * *) be the roots (in the unit
4) For the sake of simplicity, examples mostly of twointerval) of the martingale equation
state schemes have been given. These can, however, be
a simple manner
multistate
Ap1(n) = E[p1(n + 1) - pi(n)
p1(n)] = 0.
automata [LV9], [LL4].
The roots satisfying
5) Several
linear and
discussed in this section. Often improved rates of condAp,
vergence can be obtained by a combination of linear and
dp1P1=1 < 0
terms [LL3],
[LL4]. c-optimal
usually slow when the action probabilities are close to their
are called stable roots and the rest unstable.
It is then
final values. The convergence can be speeded up by using a
argued, on the basis of regarding Ap, as an increment in
hybrid scheme constructed from a judicious combination of
pl(n), that p1(n) converges to the set of stable roots with
an c-optimal scheme and an expedient scheme [LV1O].
probability one. When Apl(n) is sign definite the argument
6) In any particular scheme, the speed of convergence
reduces to that in the previous comment 1).
can be increased by changing the values of the parameters
On deeper probing, no justification of this argument has
in the scheme. However, this is almost invariably accombeen found. It does not generally appear possible to prove
panied by an increase in the probability of convergence to
convergence with probability one when there are roots of
the martingale equation other than those corresponding to
problem of speed versus accuracy. To score on both the
the absorbing states. Indeed what conclusions can be drawn
counts, it appears that a careful selection of the nonlinear
in such a situation are at present unclear. The only situation,
terms is necessary. Development of an analytical measure
 s_x(l)
prior knowledge is not available, and the automata have to
choose their strategies on-line. The payoff function
A A2 LEARNING AUTOMATA
random variable with an unknown distribution.
Game between learning automata.
The concept of automata games was originally suggested
by Krylov and Tsetlin [DKI], who considered competitive
deterministic
7) While the reinforcement scheme updates the action
extended by the introduction of learning automata by
probabilities,
a simultaneous
estimation
of the penalty
Chandrasekaran and Shen [LC3], who used the LR--P and
probabilities
environment
Viswanathan
technique is proposed by Lakshmivarahan and Thathachar
Narendra [LV7]
discussed such games using c-optimal
[LL2]. This leads to a fast estimate of the optimal action
It was demonstrated in [LV7] that when the
and also provides a confidence level on this estimate.
payoff matrix has a unique saddle point, the value of the
game coincides with that obtained
in the deterministic
V. INTERACTION OF AUTOMATA
situation, even though the characteristics of the game have
The discussions made thus far have been centered around
to be learned as the game evolves. Since the automata
a single stochastic automaton interacting with a random
operate entirely on the basis of their own strategies and the
environment. We shall now consider interactions between
corresponding
several automata. In particular, two types of interactions
knowledge of the other automata participating in the game,
are of interest. In one case several automata are operating
this result also has implications in the context of decentogether in an environment either in a competitive or a
tralized control systems.
cooperative manner so that we have a game situation. In
The preceding discussion pertains to competitive game
the other case we consider a hierarchical system where
problems, because each player, in trying to maximize his
there are various levels of automata, and there is interaction
gain, is also attempting to minimize the gain of the other
interesting
player. When the participants of a game cooperate with
interaction, mostly with reference to deterministic automata,
each other, we have a cooperative game. Stefanyuk and
have been brought out in a series of papers by Varshavskii
Vaisboard [DSl], [DVI], [DV2] considered cooperative
[DV5]-[DV8].
deterministic
Viswanathan and
Games of Automata
Narendra [LV7] have shown that the value of the game can
be made as close to the Von Neumann value as desired by
Consider two automata operating in the same environusing s-optimal schemes when the payoff matrix has a
ment (Fig. 4). Each automaton selects its actions without
unique saddle point.
any knowledge of the operation of the other automaton.
The results available so far on learning automata games
For each pair of actions selected by the automata, the
are few and limited. It appears that there is a broad scope
environment responds in a random manner with outcomes
for further study.
that form zero-sum inputs to the two automata. The action
probabilities of the two automata are now independently
Multilevel Automata
updated according to suitable reinforcement schemes, and
A multilevel system of automata consists of several
the procedure
is repeated. The interest here
levels, each comprising many automata. Each action of an
asymptotic behavior of the action probabilities and inputs.
automaton at a certain level triggers automata at the next
This problem may be regarded as a game between the
level, and thus the complete system has a tree
two automata. In this context several quantities can be
structure. At each stage, decisions are made at various
event corresponding
levels and communicated to lower levels in the hierarchy.
selection of a pair of actions by the automata is called a
The purpose of organizing such a multilevel system may be
play. A game consists of a sequence of plays. Each action
to achieve a performance that cannot be obtained using a
chosen by an automaton in a play is called a strategy. The
single automaton or to overcome the high dimensionality of
eniVronment iS known as a referee, and the input received
the decision space. The main problem in such multilevel
by each automaton corresponds to the payoff. Since the sum
systems is the coordination of activities at different levels
of the payoffs is zero, the game corresponds to a zero-sum
or, in other words, to ensure convergence of the entire
two-person game. The asymptotic value of the expectation
structure towards the desired behavior.
of the payoff to one of the players is called the value of the
A two-level system has been proposed by Narendra and
Viswanathan [LN 1] for the optimization of-performance of
NARENDRA AND THATHACHAR: LEARNING AUTOMATA
automata operating in a periodic random environment. It
mances of the expedient
linear scheme and c-optimal
is assumed that the penalty probabilities ci(n) are periodic
schemes with the suggested modification is not available at
functions of n with an unknown period. The upper bound on
the present time.
the period is known.
The first level consists of one automaton in which the
Periodic Environments
actions correspond to the various possible values of the
If it is known a priori that the penalty probabilities of the
period. The second level consists of a number of automata,
environment vary periodically in time with a common
one automaton corresponding to each of these first-level
period T, the period T may be divided into N intervals. A
actions. Following the selection of a period T(n) by the
system of N automata with a suitable arrangement can then
first level automaton, the first T(n) automata in the second
be used so that one automaton is in operation at any instant
level are initiated to operate in the environment for one
of time and each automaton operates only once in every
cycle. The average output of the environment in this cycle
period. This is equivalent to each automaton operating in a
is used as the input to the first level to make the next
stationary environment, so that over many cycles of operaselection of the value of the period. It has been shown
tion the automata converge to the desired actions. In the
simulations [LNI]
of s-optimal
case in which the environment is known to be periodic but
schemes leads to the convergence of the period to the true
the value of tfie period is unknown, a two-level automaton
can be used as already described in Section V.
VI. NONSTATIONARY ENVIRONMENTS
VII. UTILIZATION OF AUTOMATA
Most of the available work relates to the behavior of
The learning automata discussed in earlier sections can be
learning automata in stationary environments. The problem
utilized to perform certain specific functions in a systems
of behavior in nonstationary environments appears difficult,
context. In particular, they may be used as optimizers or -as
and only a few and specialized results are known [LL6],
decision-making devices and consequently can prove useful
[LC4]. The interaction of automata in game situations and
in a large class of practical problems.
in hierarchical systems is one such special case. Some of the
other known results will be described in this section.
Parameter Optimization
As remarked earlier many problems of adaptive control,
pattern recognition, filtering, and identification can, under
Tsetlin [DT1]
considered
a composite
environment,
proper assumptions, be regarded as parameter optimization
which switches between a number of stationary environproblems.
It appears that a learning automaton can be
ments in accordance with a Markov chain, and investigated
fruitfully applied to solve such problems especially under
the behavior of deterministic automata [DT2]. Varshavskii
noisy conditions when the a priori information is small. In
and Vorontsova [LVI] applied the learning automaton to
fact, the possibility of using a stochastic automaton as a
the same problem and showed that expediency can be
model for a learning controller provided the first motivation
obtained for the entire range of possible values of the
for studies in this area.
parameter of the switching transition probability matrix.
Given a system with only noisy measurements g(x,co) on
In a very limited situation where the Markov chain
the performance function I(a) = E{g(o,co)}, where 2 is an
environment
m-vector of parameters and co is the measurement noise, the
stationarity quickly in comparison with the time taken for
optimization
the convergence of the reinforcement scheme, the problem
optimal vector of parameters
OCopt such that the system
essentially reduces to the operation in a stationary environperformance function is extremized. It is assumed that an
ment, hence, c-optimal schemes would perform well.
analytical
is not possible because of lack of
sufficient
information
concerning
system and its performance function or because of math-
When the penalty probabilities of the environment vary
ematical intractability. The performance function I(x) may
"slowly" in time, an c-optimal scheme tends to lock on to a
also be multimodal.
certain action, thereby losing
its ability to change. As
When this problem is tackled by gradient methods, both
by Chandrasekaran
deterministic and stochastic, a search in the parameter
frequency of variation is sufficiently small, then the LR-P
space is carried out resulting in convergence to a local
scheme, which is expedient, seems to function satisfactorily.
optimum. In the automaton approach the adaptive con-
If prior information about the rate of variation is available,
troller is the automaton in which the actions correspond to
the performance of c-optimal schemes can be improved by
different values of a. The automaton updates the probintroducing reinitialization of action probabilities (that is,
abilities of the various parameter values based on
resetting them to be equal) at regular intervals of time.
measurements of the performance function.
Another possible approach appears to be to bound the
As observed earlier, the gradient methods are in a sense
action probabilities so that they fall short of attaining the
inhibited by the fact that at each instant a new value of the
absorbing barriers and are thus free to change according to
parameter is to be chosen close to the previous value. There
changes in the environment. A comparison of the perforis no similar restriction in the automaton approach, for each
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, JULY 1974
parameter value has a certain probability of being selected
number (say, r) of regions v1,v2,
,vr. There is one automand only these probabilities are updated. Thus the learning
aton at the first level having r actions each corresponding to
automaton has the desired flexibility not to get locked on
one region, and this automaton acts as a supervisor governto a local optimum, and this difference makes automata
ing the choice of one of the regions. When discretization of
methods particularly attractive for use in systems having
the parameter space is permissible, the second level has r
multimodal performance criteria.
automata, each automaton having control over one region.
Several studies have been made on applying automata
If, on the contrary, the parameter space is to be treated as
to parameter optimization. When
continuous, the second level consists of a local search such
automaton is used, one problem is to relate the performance
as stochastic approximation. In this case it is necessary that
measurement, which is usually a continuous real variable,
the number of regions be large enough so that each region
to a binary-valued response of the environment. Fu and
has at most one local extremum if the two-level system is
McLaren [LF2]
this by defining the penaltyto act as a global optimizer. Narendra and Viswanathan
strength (S-) model where the environmental response can
[LV5] demonstrated through simulation that the two-level
take any value in . McMurtry and Fu [LM3] applied
system exhibits a faster convergence rate than a single
a learning automaton using the LR-P scheme to find the
automaton.
global minimum of a multimodal surface and showed that
2) Cooperative
of Automata:
the automaton chooses
global minimum with
cooperative games of automata can be naturally applied to
highest probability. The use of c-optimal schemes such as
optimization problem
as mentioned
the LR-I scheme was advocated by Shapiro and Narendra
the problem where
[LWI], who
success on
parameters each of which is discretized into r values. The
problem of handling a relatively flat performance surface
parameter space now has rm points. If r and m are large, the
along with the superposition of a high variance noise.
use of a single automaton controller would lead to a slow
When the bounds on the performance measurements are
rate of convergence. Instead, if the controller consists of m
known it is simple to normalize them to and then use
automata each of which chooses the value of one parameter,
an S-model scheme. However, if these bounds are unknown,
then the number of probabilities to be updated at each
it is suggested in [LV3] that the current estimates of the
stage would only be rm. The m automata used in this
bounds can be used for normalization, and it is further
manner could be regarded as playing a cooperative game
shown experimentally that s-optimal convergence can still
with the common object of extremizing the performance
be achieved.
function. It follows from the results of Viswanathan and
A problem of higher complexity was considered by
Narendra [LV5], [LV7] that if the performance function is
Jarvis [LJ1], [LJ2] who studied, through simulation, the
unimodal, the use of c-optimal schemes by the m-automaton
operation of a learning automaton using the LR-P scheme
controller leads to convergence of parameter values to the
as a global optimizer in a nonstationary environment. A
optimum with as high a probability as desired. Further
pattern recognizer was used for sensing the changes in the
research is needed to extend this approach to multimodal
environment.
search problems.
The restriction that the set of parameter values considered
must be finite is sometimes undesirable. To overcome this
Statistical Decision-Making
McLaren [LM2] has proposed a "growing automaton"
As the learning automaton selects the desirable action
where the number of actions of the automaton can grow
from the set of all actions on the basis of probabilistic
countably to cx. A comparison of several on-line learning
inputs from the environment, one can regard the automaton
algorithms, which include the growing automaton algorithm,
as a device for making decisions under uncertainty. It can
was recently made by Saridis [GS2].
thus be expected to be used as a tool for solving statistical
Dimensionality: A
decision problems.
associated with the use of automata methods in parameter
Many problems in control and communication can be
optimization is that of high dimensionality. The problem is
posed as the fundamental problem of deciding between two
caused by the fact that the number of control actions of the
hypotheses H1 and H2 on the basis of noisy observations
automaton rapidly increases with the number of parameters
x(n). The conditional densities p(x
H1) and p(x
and the "fineness" of the grid employed in the search. The
given, and the problem is to decide whether H1 or H2 is
speed of convergence of the updating schemes is to a large
true so that the probabilities of making errors of the two
extent dependent upon the number of control actions, and
kinds are less than prespecified values.
thus when the parameter space contains a large number of
In order to apply the learning automaton approach to
points the convergence is too slow to be of any practical
this situation it is necessary to make certain identifications.
use. In case the parameter space is continuous, the automata
The two hypotheses H1 and H2 are made to correspond to
method cannot be applied directly.
the two actions of an automaton, and the observations x(n)
There are two methods of overcoming this problem of
are regarded as the responses from the environment. Binary
high dimensionality, as presented in the following discusresponses required for a P-model are obtained by using a
sion. Both the methods employ several interacting automata.
threshold.
1) Two-Level Controller: Thg controller has a two-level
As no a priori information on the true hypothesis
structure here. The parameter space is divided into a finite
available, the initial action probabilities are set at 0.5 each,
NARENDRA AND THATHACHAR: LEARNING AUTOMATA
and the automaton is allowed to operate according to an
Learning automata provide a novel and computationally
c-optimal scheme. The hypothesis corresponding to the
attractive mode of attacking a large class of problems
action in which the probability attains unity is taken as the
involving uncertainties
order. As such they
true one. A design procedure for choosing the threshold and
constitute
alternative
the well-known
the parameters of the reinforcement scheme so as to satisfy
parameter optimization method using stochastic approxany prespecified bounds on the error probabilities has been
imation. It is the opinion of the authors that a judicious
worked out by Lakshmivarahan and Thathachar [LL5].
combination of the two approaches will find increasing
Extension to multiple-hypothesis testing is also straightapplication in many practical problems in the future.
forward [LL4].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Tes-ting Reinforcement Schemes
The authors would like to thank R. Viswanathan and
Attempts to develop new learning models in recent years
S. Lakshmivarahan who worked with them on several
have resulted in a variety of linear and nonlinear reinforceaspects of learning automata.
ment schemes with adjustable parameters.
It has consequently become
increasingly