This is the accepted manuscript made available via CHORUS. The article has been
published as:
Accurate interatomic force fields via machine learning with
covariant kernels
Aldo Glielmo, Peter Sollich, and Alessandro De Vita
Phys. Rev. B 95, 214302 — Published 8 June 2017
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.95.214302
Accurate Interatomic Force Fields via Machine Learning with Covariant Kernels
Aldo Glielmo,1, ∗Peter Sollich,2 and Alessandro De Vita1, 3
1Department of Physics, King’s College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, United Kingdom
2Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, United Kingdom
3Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Architettura, Universita’ di Trieste, via A. Valerio 2, I-34127 Trieste, Italy
We present a novel scheme to accurately predict atomic forces as vector quantities, rather than sets
of scalar components, by Gaussian Process (GP) Regression. This is based on matrix-valued kernel
functions, on which we impose the requirements that the predicted force rotates with the target
conﬁguration and is independent of any rotations applied to the conﬁguration database entries.
We show that such “covariant” GP kernels can be obtained by integration over the elements of the
rotation group SO(d) for the relevant dimensionality d. Remarkably, in speciﬁc cases the integration
can be carried out analytically and yields a conservative force ﬁeld that can be recast into a pair
interaction form. Finally, we show that restricting the integration to a summation over the elements
of a ﬁnite point group relevant to the target system is suﬃcient to recover an accurate GP. The
accuracy of our kernels in predicting quantum-mechanical forces in real materials is investigated by
tests on pure and defective Ni, Fe and Si crystalline systems.
INTRODUCTION
The last decades have witnessed an exponential growth
of computer processing power (“Moore’s Law” ) and
an even faster progress of storage technology (“Kryder’s Law” ). Atomistic modelling methods based
on computation and data-intensive quantum mechanical
methods, such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) , have correspondingly evolved in both feasibility and
scope. Moreover, the possibility of retaining at low cost
very large amounts of data generated by Quantum Mechanical (QM) codes has prompted novel eﬀorts to make the
data openly accessible .
The information contained in the data can thus be harnessed and re-used indeﬁnitely, in various ways.
throughput techniques are routinely used to identify new
correlations between physical properties, with the aim of
designing new high-performance materials . Inference techniques can meanwhile also be used as a boost
or substitute for QM techniques. This typically involves
predicting a physical property for a new system conﬁguration, on the basis of its values for an existing database
of conﬁgurations. If the database is suﬃciently large and
representative, the new property values can be quickly
inferred, rather than calculated anew by expensive QM
procedures, with controllable accuracy.
Machine Learning techniques have been successfully
used to predict properties as diverse as atomisation energies , density functionals , Green’s functions
 , electronic transport coeﬃcients , potential energy surfaces and free energy landscapes .
The high conﬁguration space complexity of real chemical
systems has also inspired “learning” molecular dynamics
schemes that never assume database completeness, but
rather combine inference with on-the-ﬂy QM calculations
(learning on-the-ﬂy, LOTF) carried out when in-
∗ 
ference is infeasible or not deemed suﬃciently accurate.
A well established general concept within the Machine
Learning community is that functional invariance properties under some known transformation can be used to
improve prediction, whether this is carried out by e.g.
Gaussian Process (GP) regression or neural networks . Exploiting in similar ways properties other
than invariance has received more limited attention .
In the same spirit, materials modellers have been successful in exploiting the invariance of energy under rotation or translation to improve the performance of energy
prediction techniques . In LOTF molecular dynamics applications the high-accuracy target and local
interpolation character of force prediction makes it appealing to learn forces directly rather than learning a potential energy scalar ﬁeld ﬁrst and then deriving forces
by diﬀerentiation. In previous works this was accomplished by using GP regression to separately learn
individual force components.
Here, we show how Vectorial Gaussian Process (VGP)
 regression provides a more natural framework
for force learning, where the correct vector behaviour
of forces under symmetry transformations can be obtained by using a new family of vector kernels of covariant nature.
These kernels prove particularly eﬃcient at exploiting the information contained in QM force
databases, however constructed, together with any prior
knowledge of the symmetry properties of the physical
system under investigation. The next section provides a
brief overview of the notion of a VGP, where we pay particular attention to the problem of force learning. Then
we deﬁne a covariant kernel, explain its symmetry properties and give a general recipe to generate such kernels.
The procedure is best exempliﬁed by looking at one and
two dimensional systems, where the relevant symmetry
force transformation groups are D1 and O(2). Finally
we address the full three dimensional case, where covariant kernels are tested by examining their performance in
learning QM forces in realistic physical systems.
VECTORIAL GAUSSIAN PROCESS
REGRESSION
We wish to model by a VGP the force f acting on an
atom whose chemical environment is in a conﬁguration ρ
that encodes the positions of all neighbours of the atom,
up to a suitable cutoﬀradius, in an arbitrary Cartesian
reference frame. In the absence of long range ionic interactions, the existence of such a local map is guaranteed
for all ﬁnite-temperature systems by the "nearsightedness" principle of electronic matter .
In a Bayesian setting, before any data is considered,
f is treated as a Gaussian Process, i.e., it is assumed
that for any ﬁnite set of conﬁgurations {ρi, i = 1, . . . N}
the values f(ρi) taken by the vector function f are well
described by a multivariate Gaussian distribution .
f(ρ) ∼GP(m(ρ), K(ρ, ρ′))
where m(ρ) is a vector-valued mean function and K(ρ, ρ′)
is a matrix-valued kernel function. Before any data is
considered, m is usually assumed to be zero as all prior
information on f is encoded into the kernel function
K(ρ, ρ′). The latter represents the correlation of the vectors f(ρ) and f(ρ′) as a function of the two conﬁgurations
(“input space points”) ρ and ρ′:
K(ρ, ρ′) = ⟨f(ρ)f T(ρ′)⟩,
where angular brackets here signify the expected value
over the multivariate Gaussian distribution.
Any kernel K consistent with this deﬁnition must be a positive
semi-deﬁnite matrix function, since for any collection of
vectors {vi}
i K(ρi, ρj)vj = ⟨(
i f(ρi))2⟩≥0.
To train the prediction model we need to access a
database of atomic conﬁgurations and reference forces
D = {(ρ, f r)i, i = 1, . . . , N}. Using Bayes’ theorem 
the distribution (1) is modiﬁed to take the data D into account . If the likelihood function is also Gaussian
(which eﬀectively assumes that the observed forces f r
the true forces subject to Gaussian noise of variance σ2
then the resulting posterior distribution f(ρ | D), conditional on the data, will also be a Gaussian process
f(ρ | D) ∼GP(ˆf(ρ | D), ˆC(ρ, ρ′)).
The mean function of the posterior distribution, ˆf(ρ | D),
is at this point the best estimate for the true underlying
ˆf(ρ | D) =
K(ρ, ρi)[K + Iσ2
n, formally the noise aﬀecting the observed forces
f r, serves in practice as a regulariser for the matrix inverse. In the following, blackboard bold characters such
as K or I indicate N ×N block matrices (for instance, the
Gram matrix K is deﬁned as (K)ij = K(ρi, ρj)). Similarly, we denote by [K+Iσ2
ij the ij-block of the inverse
We next examine how to incorporate the vector behaviour of forces into the learning algorithm. The relevant symmetry transformations in the input space are:
rigid translation of all atoms, permutation of atoms of
the same chemical species, rotations and reﬂections of
atomic conﬁgurations. Forces are invariant with respect
to translations and atomic permutations, and covariant
with respect to rotations and reﬂections. Assuming that
the representation of the atomic conﬁguration is local,
i.e., the atom subject to the force fi is at the origin of the
reference frame used for ρi, translations are automatically taken into account. The remaining symmetries must
be addressed in the construction of covariant kernels.
COVARIANT KERNELS
From now on we will deﬁne S to be any symmetry
operator (rotation or reﬂection) acting on an atomistic
conﬁguration of a d-dimensional system. Rotations will
be denoted by R and reﬂections by Q.
We require two properties to apply to the predicted
force ˆf(ρ | D), once conﬁgurations are transformed by an
operator S (represented by a matrix S):
Property 1
If the target conﬁguration ρ is transformed to Sρ, the predicted force must transform accordingly:
ˆf(Sρ | D) = Sˆf(ρ | D).
Property 2
The predicted force must not change if we
arbitrarily transform the conﬁgurations in the database
(D →˜D = {(Siρi, Sif r
i )}) with any chosen set of rotoreﬂections {Si}.
We next introduce a special class of kernel functions
that automatically guarantees these two properties: a
covariant kenrel has the deﬁning property
K(Sρ, S′ρ′) = SK(ρ, ρ′)S′T.
That a covariant kernel imposes Property 1 follows
straightforwardly from Eq. (5):
ˆf(Sρ | D) =
K(Sρ, ρi)[K + Iσ2
SK(ρ, ρi)[K + Iσ2
= Sˆf(ρ | D).
To prove Property 2 we note that, if the kernel function is
covariant, the transformed database ˜D has Gram matrix
(˜K)ij = K(Siρi, Sjρj) = SiK(ρi, ρj)ST
j . If we deﬁne the
block-diagonal matrix Sij = δijSi, this can be written in
the simple block-matrix form ˜K = SKST. Using kernel
covariance again to write K(ρ, Siρi) = K(ρ, ρi)ST
prediction associated with the transformed database ˜D
can be written as
ˆf(ρ | ˜D) =
K(ρ, ρi)ST
ii[SKST + Iσ2
By simple matrix manipulations it is now possible to
show that in the above expression the symmetry transformations cancel out; indeed
ST[SKST + Iσ2
n]−1S = ST[S(K + Iσ2
= ST(ST)−1[K + Iσ2
= [K + Iσ2
Equation (10) along with (9) implies ˆf(ρ | ˜D) = ˆf(ρ | D),
that is, Property 2.
It is easy to check that standard
kernels such as the squared exponential or the overlap integral of atomic conﬁguration do not possess
the covariance property (7). Designing, entirely by feature engineering, a covariant kernel is in principle possible but can require complex tuning and is likely to be
highly system dependent (see e.g. ). We note that
non covariant kernels can be used and avoid these dif-
ﬁculties, and some have been successfully implemented
 . This leaves space for improvement as prediction
eﬃciency will generally be enhanced by increased exploitation of symmetry (see e.g., Figure 3 below for a simple
test of this).
We next present a general method to transform a
standard matrix kernel into a covariant one, followed by
numerical tests suggesting that the resulting kernel improves very signiﬁcantly on the force-learning properties
of the initial one, its error converging with just a fraction
of the training data.
This proceeds along the lines of
previous techniques to generate scalar invariants, namely
the transformation integration procedure developed in
 and the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Orbitals (SOAP)
representation for learning potential energy surfaces of
atomic systems .
Given a group S and a base kernel Kb, a covariant
kernel Kc can be constructed by
Kc(ρ, ρ′) =
1 Kb(S1ρ, S2ρ′)S2
where dS is the normalised Haar measure for the symmetry group we are integrating over .
The covariance of Kc as given by (11) is easily checked
Kc(Sρ, S′ρ′) =
1 Kb(S1Sρ, S2S′ρ′)S2
d ˜S1d ˜S2 S˜ST
1 Kb( ˜S1ρ, ˜S2ρ′)˜S2S′T
= SKc(ρ, ρ′)S′T
where the second line follows from the substitutions
˜S1 = S1S and ˜S2 = S2S′. Note that these transformations have unit Jacobian because of the translational invariance (within the group) of any Haar measure .
It can be shown that the positive semi-deﬁniteness of
the base kernel is preserved under the operation (11) of
covariant integration.
In particular, a kernel is positive semi-deﬁnite if and only if it is a scalar product in
some (possibly inﬁnite dimensional) vector space .
Hence the base kernel can be written as Kb(ρ, ρ′) =
dα φα(ρ)φT
α(ρ′). It is then possible to show that its
covariant counterpart Kc (equation (11)) will also be a
scalar product in a new function space. Indeed
Kc(ρ, ρ′) =
1 Kb(S1ρ, S2ρ′)S2
dα dS1dS2 ST
1 φα(S1ρ)φT
dα ψα(ρ)ψT
where the new basis vectors were deﬁned as ψα(ρ) =
dS STφα(Sρ). Hence, Kc will also be positive deﬁnite.
The completely general procedure above can be cumbersome to apply in practice, because of the double integration over group elements in (11) and the dependence on
the design of the base kernel matrix Kb. As a simpliﬁcation, we assume the base kernel to be of diagonal form;
assuming equivalence of all space directions, we can then
Kb(ρ, ρ′) = Ikb(ρ, ρ′).
where the scalar base kernel kb is independent on the
reference frame in which the conﬁgurations are expressed.
This requires that
kb(Sρ, Sρ′) = kb(ρ, ρ′),
that is, scalar invariance of the base kernel (a property
very commonly found in standard kernels). The double
integration in (11) reduces at this point to a single one
Kc(ρ, ρ′) =
1 S2kb(S1ρ, S2ρ′)
1 S2kb(ρ, S−1
dS S kb(ρ, Sρ′)
where the second line follows from property (15) and the
third line is obtained by the substitution S = S−1
In the next section we show that some base kernels
allow analytical integration of (16). Here we note that
incorporating our prior knowledge of the correct behaviour of forces in the kernel enables us to learn and predict forces associated with any conﬁguration, regardless
of its orientation. However, being able to do this for completely generic orientations is not always necessary. In
many systems (e.g. crystalline solids where the orientation is known) all relevant conﬁgurations cluster around
particular discrete symmetries.
For these systems the
relevant physics can be captured by restricting equation
(11) to a discrete sum over the relevant group elements:
Kc(ρ, ρ′) =
Gk(ρ, Gρ′),
and since there are 48 distinct group elements at most
(the order of the full O48 group), the procedure remains
computationally feasible. In the particular case of onedimensional systems, where the only symmetry operation
available other than the identity is the inversion, equations (16) and (17) are formally equivalent.
COVARIANT KERNELS FROM 1 TO 3
DIMENSIONS
In the following we will assume that a single chemical
species is present, so that permutation invariance will
be simply enforced by representing conﬁgurations as linear combinations of n Gaussian functions each centred
on one atom, all having the same width σ, and suitably
normalised depending on the dimension d considered:
ρ(r, {ri}) =
From (18), a linear base kernel kb
L can be deﬁned as the
overlap integral of two conﬁgurations 
L(ρ, ρ′) =
dr ρ(r, {ri})ρ′(r, {r′
dr e−∥r−ri∥2
where the integration yielding the third line is performed
by standard completion of the square.
We can interpret the linear kernel kb
L in (19) as a scalar
product in function space, so that kb
L(ρ, ρ) = ∥ρ∥2 can
be thought of as the squared norm of the ρ conﬁguration
function. A permutation invariant distance is also readily
obtained as d(ρ, ρ′) = ∥ρ−ρ′∥, which can be used within
a squared exponential kernel to give
SE(ρ, ρ′) = e−∥ρ−ρ′∥2/2θ
L(ρ′,ρ′)−2kb
L(ρ,ρ′))/2θ.
The representation described above is by construction
translation (and atomic permutation) invariant. We next
address the transformations for which the atomic force is
Figure 1. Lennard-Jones dimer force ﬁeld, learned with data
from one atom only. The base kernel (C1) does not learn the
symmetric counterpart (reaction force), while the covariant
(D1) does. The kernels are labelled by the symmetry group
used to make them covariant; see main text for details.
covariant, i.e., rotations and reﬂections, using the approach described in the previous section. Systems with
dimensions d = 1, 2, 3 are considered in the following
three subsections. The ﬁrst two provide a useful conceptual playground where the features of “covariant learning”
can be more easily visualised. The third one benchmarks
the method in real physical systems, simulated at the
DFT level of accuracy.
1D systems
A key feature of covariant kernels is the ability to enable “learning” of the entire set of conﬁgurations that are
equivalent by symmetry to those actually provided in the
database. For instance, the force acting on the (“central”)
atom at the origin of conﬁguration ρ can be predicted
even if only conﬁgurations ρ′ of diﬀerent symmetry are
contained in the database. The only relevant symmetry
transformation in 1D is the reﬂection Q of a conﬁguration about its centre. In the simplest possible system, a
dimer, this maps conﬁgurations where the central atom
has a right neighbour (i.e. those for which the central
atom is the left atom in the dimer) onto conﬁgurations
where the central atom has a left neighbour. The covariant symmetrisation discussed in the previous section
(equation (17)) takes the very simple form
kc(ρ, ρ′) = 1
L(ρ, ρ′) −kb
L(ρ, Qρ′)).
Note that kc is identically zero for inversion-symmetric
conﬁgurations ρ or ρ′ whose associated forces must vanish.
The force ﬁeld associated with a 1D Lennard Jones dimer is plotted in Figure 1 (dotted curve) as a function
of a single signed number – the 1D vector going from
the central atom to its neighbour. The ﬁgure also shows
the predictions of the unsymmetrised base kernel using
Figure 2. Learning Curves for a 1D chain of LJ atoms. The
covariant kernel (D1) learns twice as fast as the base one (C1).
training data coming from conﬁgurations centred on the
left atom only (solid blue curve). This closely reproduces
the true LJ forces in the region where the data are available, and predicts the pure prior mean (i.e. zero) in the
symmetry related region, i.e. the left half of the ﬁgure.
Meanwhile, because of the covariant constraint (prior information) the GP based on the covariant kernel learns
the left part of the ﬁeld by just reﬂecting the right part
appropriately.
To further check the performance of the covariant kernel (21) we extended the comparison above to predicting
the forces associated with a 1D Lennard Jones 50-atom
chain system, in periodic boundary conditions. A database of training conﬁgurations and an independent test
set of local conﬁgurations and forces were sampled from
a constant temperature molecular dynamics simulation
using a Langevin thermostat.
Before presenting the results, it is necessary to introduce some conventions that will apply throughout the
rest of this work. As a measure of error between reference
force f r(ρ) and predicted force ˆf(ρ), we will take the absolute value of their vector diﬀerence |∆f| = |f r(ρ) −ˆf(ρ)|.
Relative errors are obtained by dividing this absolute error by the time-ensemble average of the force modulus
¯|f|. Average errors are found by randomly sampling N
training conﬁgurations and 1000 test conﬁgurations. Repeating this operation provides the standard deviation
and hence the errors bars on absolute and relative errors.
We furthermore denote by Cn the cyclic group of order
n and by Dn the dihedral group (containing also reﬂections) of order 2n (C1 hence indicates the trivial group).
With the above clariﬁcations, we can proceed with the
analysis of Figure 2, which reports the average relative
force error made by the GP regression on the test set as
a function of training set size. It is immediately apparent
that the covariant kernel performance is comparable to
that of the base kernel with double the number of data
points for training. We will observe the same eﬀect also
in 2 and 3 dimensions: symmetrising over a relevant ﬁnite
group of order |G| gives rise to an error drop approxim-
Figure 3. Learning curves for 2D triangular grid of LJ atoms.
The larger the symmetry group used to construct the kernel,
the faster the learning, provided that the lattice symmetry is
ately equivalent to a |G|-fold increase in the number of
training points. Since the computational complexity of
training GP is O(N 3), this can obviously lead to signi-
ﬁcant computer time savings.
2D systems
In two dimensions all rotations and reﬂections, as
well as any combination of these, are elements of O(2).
Moreover, the O(2) group can be represented by the
following set of matrices O(2) = {R(θ), θ ∈(0, 2π]} ∪
{R(θ)Q, θ ∈(0, 2π]} where R(θ) =
−sin(θ) cos(θ)
and Q is any 2 × 2 reﬂection matrix.
This makes the covariant integration (16) over O(2)
trivial once the matrix elements resulting from the integration over SO(2) have been calculated. We next carry
out the integration for the linear base kernel of Eq. (19).
This can be expressed as a sum of pair contributions,
where the ﬁrst atom in each pair belongs to ρ and the
second to ρ′ :
SO(2)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
Consistent with Eq. (16), only one atom of the pair is
rotated during the integration, with L being the normalisation factor (cf. equation (19)). The pairwise integrals
in (22) are calculated in two steps. We ﬁrst deﬁne Rij to
be the rotation matrix which aligns r′
j onto ri, and then
perform the change of variable ˜R = RRT
ij (and analogously ˜R = RR
ij ) yielding
SO(2)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
d ˜R ˜R e−
Since the two vectors ri and Rijr′
j are now aligned, the
integral in Eq. (23) can only depend on the two moduli
j . The ﬁnal result takes a very simple analytic
form (cf. Supplemental Material):
SO(2)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
where I1(·) is a modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind.
The kernel in (24) is rotation-covariant by construction
as can be seen immediately by comparison with Eq. (7).
By exploiting the internal structure of the orthogonal
group discussed above, it is straightforward to show that
the roto-reﬂection covariant kernel is given by
O(2)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
SO(2)(ρ, ρ′) + Kc
SO(2)(ρ, Qρ′)Q
which is the two-dimensional analog of Eq. (21). Interestingly, the resulting kernel can be also cast in the more
intuitive form
O(2)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
where the hat denotes a normalised vector. Equation (26)
implies that the predicted force on an atom at the centre
of a conﬁguration ρ will be a sum of pairwise forces oriented along the directions ˆri connecting the central atom
with each of its neighbours (while each neighbour will experience a corresponding reaction force). The modulus of
these forces will be a function of the interatomic distance
completely determined by the training database, whose
integral can be thought of as a pairwise energy potential.
Clearly then, the resulting force ﬁeld will be conservative: for any ﬁxed database, the forces predicted by GP
inference using this kernel will do zero work if integrated
along any closed trajectory loop in conﬁguration space.
To test the relative performance of the learning models
discussed above, we constructed training and test databases for a two-dimensional triangular lattice, sampled
from a constant temperature molecular dynamics simulation of a 48-particle system interacting via standard
Lennard-Jones forces, once more using periodic boundary conditions and a Langevin thermostat. As the chosen
lattice has three-fold and six-fold symmetry, we can also
examine the performance of covariant kernels that obey
the two properties described above restricted to appropriate ﬁnite groups; these kernels are constructed as in
Eq. (17). In this way we can monitor how imposing a
progressively higher degree of symmetry on the kernel
changes the rate at which forces in this system can be
Our results are reported in Figure 3. As anticipated,
we ﬁnd that the discrete covariant summation over the
elements of a group G is approximately equivalent to a
|G|-fold increase in the number of data points. This can
be seen e.g. from the results for the C3 kernel (3-fold rotations) and the C6 kernel (6-fold rotations), by comparing
Figure 4. Learning Curves for crystalline nickel at two target
temperatures. The SO(3) covariant kernel (full lines) outperforms the base one (dashed lines).
the error incurred in the two cases using 20 and 10 datapoints, respectively. More generally, we observe that the
larger the group, the faster the learning. Note, however,
that for the covariant summation (17) to extract content
from the database that is actually useful for predicting
forces in the test conﬁgurations at hand, the group used
must describe a true underlying point symmetry of the
system. Hence, for instance, the C4 kernel gives rise to
much slower learning than the C3 kernel for the 2D triangular lattice examined. Consistently, for this lattice
the full point group D6 performs almost as well as the
continuous symmetry kernels, suggesting that not much
more is to be gained once the full (ﬁnite-group) symmetry
of a system has been captured. This ﬁnding enables accurate force prediction in crystalline system when base
kernels are used for which the covariant integration cannot be performed analytically, because the summation
over a discrete symmetry group is available as a viable
alternative.
3D systems
We next benchmark our kernels’s accuracy in predicting DFT forces in three-dimensional bulk metal systems.
As in the 2D case, starting from the linear base kernel we
proceed to carry out the covariant integration analytically. After expressing the integration as a sum of pairwise
integrals, the position vectors ri and r′
j of two atoms in
each pair are aligned onto each other. A convenient way
to achieve this is by making both vectors parallel to the
z-axis with appropriate rotations Rz
As before, the covariant integration will yield a matrix whose
elements are scalar functions of the radii ri and r′
The integration can be carried out analytically over the
standard three Euler angle variables (cf. Supplemental
Material for further details). Due to the z-axis orientation, the kernel matrix elements turn out to be all zero
Figure 5. Density of relative error made by the GP algorithm
(N = 320) for bulk nickel at 500K.
The inset shows the
scatter plot of real vs. predicted cartesian components for the
same data.
except for the zz one. The result reads
SO(3)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
0 0 φ(ri, r′
φ(ri, rj) = e−αij
(γij cosh γij −sinh γij),
γij = rir′
As in the 2D case, this covariant kernel matrix can be
rewritten in terms of the unit vectors ˆri and ˆr′
j associated
with the atoms of the conﬁgurations ρ, ρ′ as
SO(3)(ρ, ρ′) = 1
making it apparent that the kernel models a pairwise
conservative force ﬁeld. However, while in 2D we needed
to impose the full roto-reﬂection symmetry in order to
obtain Eq. (26), rotations alone are suﬃcient to arrive at
the fully covariant kernel in (28). This is a consequence of
the fact that, in 3D, the covariant integral over rotations
already imposes that the predicted force any atom will
exert on any other is aligned along the vector connecting
the pair: by symmetry there can be no preferred direction for an orthogonal force component after integrating
over all rotations around the connecting vector, so that
SO(3). This is not the case in 2D where covariant integration is over rotations around the z-axis orthogonal to all connecting vectors lying in the xy plane, so
that non-aligned predicted force components associated
with a non-zero torque are not forbidden by symmetry in
SO(2), and only the fully symmetrised kernel (25) will
reduce to the pairwise form (26). More generally we may
conjecture that the rotationally covariant kernel Kc
derived from a linear base kernel predicts pairwise central forces, and hence is conservative, in any dimension
We note that energy conserving kernels have previously
been obtained as double derivatives (Hessian matrices) of
scalar energy kernels (as originally described in 
and used for atomistic systems in to learn energies
and more recently in to learn forces). However, no
closed-form expressions exist for the energy kernels that
would yield our O(d) energy conserving kernels through
this route, since the required double integration of the
kernels (21,26,28) cannot be carried out analytically.
To test our models, we performed DFT-accurate dynamical simulation with exchange and correlation energy
modeled via the PBE/GGA approximation . The systems considered were 4 × 4 × 4 supercells of fcc nickel
and bcc iron in periodic boundary conditions. A weakly
coupled Langevin thermostat was used to control the
temperature. We ﬁrst examine bulk nickel at the target
temperatures of 500K and 1700K, i.e. for an intermediate
temperature where anharmonic behaviour is already signiﬁcant, and at a temperature close to the melting point
where the strong thermal ﬂuctuations make the system
explore a more complex target conﬁguration space. Figure 4 illustrates the performance of the kernel in Eq. (27)
on this system.
The eﬀect of adding symmetry information on the
learning curve is very signiﬁcant for both temperatures.
In particular, the SO(3) covariant kernel achieves a force
error average lower than the 0.1eV/Å threshold using remarkably few training points: 10 and 80 for the lower and
higher temperatures in this test, respectively. The errors
of the most accurate models (achieved with a N = 320
database) are particularly low:
0.0435(±0.0006)eV/Å
and 0.095(±0.003)eV/Å respectively. Moreover, we note
that the error on each force component (often reported
in the literature, and diﬀerent from the error on the full
force vector used here) will be lower by a factor
yields errors of 0.025eV/Å and 0.052eV/Å in the two
cases, the former comparing well with the 0.09eV/Å value
obtained by using a state of the art Embedded Atom
Model (EAM) interatomic potential for nickel .
Figure 5 allows one to assess the accuracy of the GP
predictions in a complementary way: here we plot the
probability distribution of the atomic forces as a function of the force modulus (blue histogram) and the associated relative error density (grey histogram). We deﬁne
the latter as RED(f) = |∆f|
f p(f), which is normalised to
0.055, reﬂecting the 5.5% average relative error incurred
by force prediction. The fact that RED(f) is everywhere
a small fraction of p(f) demonstrates that a reasonable
accuracy is achieved for the whole range of forces predicted.
The results presented so far indicate that fully exploiting symmetry signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of force
prediction. Covariance is thus always used in the following analysis, where we compare the performance of diﬀerent symmetry-aware kernels. We start by choosing iron
Learning curves associated with force prediction
by the linear (L, dashed lines) and squared exponential (SE,
solid lines) covariant kernels in bulk iron systems. Red and
blue colours indicate undefected systems and model systems
containing a vacancy, respectively.
systems for these tests as many properties of iron-based
systems remain out of modelling reach. This is mostly
due to technical limitations. On the one hand, full DFT
calculations on large systems are too computationally expensive and even hybrid quantum-classical (“QM/MM”)
simulations of iron systems are typically overwhelmingly
costly, as they require large QM-zone buﬀered clusters to
fully converge the forces . On the other hand, in many
situations even the best available, state of the art classical
force ﬁelds may not guarantee accurate force prediction,
as they may incur systematic errors , or may be
hard to extend to complex chemical compositions , so
that a technique that can indeﬁnitely re-use all computed
QM forces via GP inference and produce results that are
traceably aligned with DFT-accurate forces could be very
useful .
We carried out constant temperature (500K) molecular dynamics simulations of two bcc iron systems: a 64atom crystalline system and a 63-atom system derived
from this and containing a single a vacancy. In the latter, only the atoms within the ﬁrst two neighbour shells
of the vacancy were used to test the algorithm, to better
resolve the performance of our kernels in a defective system. Figure 6 shows the learning curves for the two symmetrised kernels: the linear kernel covariant over O(3)
and the squared exponential kernel (20) covariant over
the full cubic point-group of the crystal. The ﬁgure also
reports the performance of a high-quality EAM potential
 . Both kernels perform better than the EAM potentials in this test. However, the error rate of the linear
kernel (dashed lines) levels oﬀto some constant non-zero
value that might or might not be satisfactory (depending on the application), and will generally depend on
the system being examined. In bulk iron the error ﬂoor
value is about 0.09eV/Å while in the vicinity of a vacancy
it is considerably higher (0.15eV/Å), suggesting that in
spite of its many attractive properties (e.g. fast evaluation, fast convergence, energy conservation), the linear
Figure 7. Learning curves obtained for crystalline silicon using the linear kernel (dashed lines) or the quadratic kernel
(solid lines).
Diﬀerent colours indicate diﬀerent temperatures.
class of kernels of the form (28) is by no means complete, that is, it sometimes cannot capture and reproduce
the entirety of the reference QM physical interaction. In
many situations, kernels capable of reproducing higher
order interactions could be needed to reach the target
accuracy. This is exempliﬁed by the much better performance of the squared exponential kernel (full lines in
the ﬁgure), which yields higher accuracy, particularly for
the more complex vacancy system (about 0.05eV/Å and
0.075eV/Å for atoms in the bulk and near the vacancy
respectively). It is worth noting here that, in general,
conserving energy exactly by construction provides no
guarantee of higher force accuracy. For instance, in the
case above, the squared exponential kernel delivers much
more precise forces even though it conserves energy only
approximately.
As the approximation will in any case
improve with the accuracy of the predicted forces, while
no SO(3)-invariant energy conserving equivalent of this
kernel has been proposed or appears viable, whether it is
preferable to use this kernel or a less accurate but energy
conserving alternative one, will generally depend on both
the target system and the application at hand.
For target systems with no clear point symmetry, a
full covariant integration would always be desirable. This
cannot be carried out analytically for the squared exponential kernel, where symmetrising by a discrete summation is the only option.
However, interactions beyond
pairwise can be still captured by the quadratic kernel obtained by taking the square of the linear kernel (19). In
contrast to the squared exponential kernel, this is analytically tractable (for instance, a SO(3)-invariant scalar
quadratic kernel was obtained in ), and our analysis
reveals that a matrix-valued quadratic kernel covariant
over O(3) can be derived analytically (details of the calculation will be presented in a forthcoming publication
The resulting model generates a roto-reﬂection
symmetric three-body force ﬁeld that can be expected
to properly describe non close-packed bonding, such as
found in covalent systems, for example.
Figure 7 illustrates the errors incurred by the linear
and the quadratic kernel while attempting to reproduce
the forces obtained during Langevin dynamics of a 64atom crystalline silicon system using Density Functional
Tight Binding (DFTB) . Both linear and quadratic
kernel are signiﬁcantly more accurate than a classical
Stillinger Weber (SW) potential ﬁtted to reproduce
the DFTB lattice parameter and bulk modulus . Due
to its more restricted associated function space, the linear kernel is the one that learns faster, and would be the
more accurate if only very restricted databases had to be
used. However, the quadratic kernel eventually performs
much better than the (eﬀective two-body) linear one for
both of the temperatures, 500K and 1000K, that we investigated in this covalent system. We obtain errors of
0.05eV/Å and 0.1eV/Å in the two cases, corresponding
respectively to approximately 4% and 6% of the mean
force. These are very close to the minimum baseline locality error associated with the ﬁnite cutoﬀradius
used for the Gaussian expansion in (18).
CONCLUSION
In this work we presented a new method to learn
quantum forces on local conﬁgurations. This method is
based on a Vectorial Gaussian Process that encodes prior
knowledge in a matrix valued kernel function. We showed
how to include rotation and reﬂection symmetry of the
force in the GP process via the notion and use of covariant kernels. A general recipe was provided to impose
this property on otherwise non-symmetric kernels. The
essence of this recipe lies in a special integration step,
which we call covariant integration, over the full rotoreﬂection group associated with the relevant number of
system dimensions. This calculation can be performed
analytically starting from a linear base kernel, and the
resulting O(d) covariant kernels can be shown to generate conservative force ﬁelds.
We furthermore tested covariant kernels on standard
physical systems in 1, 2 and 3 dimensions. The 1 and
2 dimensional scenarios served as playgrounds to better
understand and illustrate the essential features of such
learning. The 3D systems allowed some practical benchmarking of the methodology in real systems. In agreement with what physical intuition would suggest, we consistently found that incorporating symmetry gives rise
to more eﬃcient learning.
In particular, if both database and target conﬁgurations belong to a system with
a deﬁnite underlying symmetry, restricting kernel covariance to the corresponding ﬁnite symmetry group will deliver the full speed-up of error convergence with respect
to database size. At the same time this approach lifts
the requirement of analytical integrability over the full
SO(d) manifold, as the restricted integration becomes a
simple discrete sum over the relevant ﬁnite set of group
Testing on nickel, silicon and iron (the latter both pure and defective) reveals that the present recipes can improve signiﬁcantly on available classical potentials. In general, non-linear kernels may be needed for
accurate force predictions in the presence of complicated
interactions, e.g. in the study of plasticity or embrittlement/fracture behaviour of covalent or metallic systems.
In particular, a quadratic base kernel yields a fully O(3)
covariant eﬀective three-body force ﬁeld, and our tests
suggest that this can be used successfully to improve the
accuracy of force prediction in covalent materials. Current work is focussing on amorphous Si systems, where
the lack of a clear point symmetry makes the full O(3)
covariance strictly necessary.
Our results reveal that force covariance is achievable
without imposing energy conservation to the kernel form.
While both are desirable properties, we ﬁnd that lifting the exact energy conservation constraint can sometimes yield higher force accuracy. For instance, no invariant local energy based kernel has been proposed for
the square exponential ("universal approximator") kernel, since the analytic integration over SO(3) is not viable.
However, we ﬁnd that covariance limited to the
O48 point group is very eﬀective for force predictions in
crystalline Fe systems using this kernel (see Figure 6).
In general, while predicting forces with high accuracy
is the main motivation for machine learning-based work
in this ﬁeld, the best compromise between accuracy, energy conservation and covariance will depend on the speciﬁc target application. For instance, kernels built from
a covariant integration (or summation) that do not conserve energy exactly should not be used as substitutes
for conventional interatomic potentials to perform long
NVE simulations, since they might in principle lead to
non-negligible spurious energy drifts. This is not a problem in NVT simulations, where a thermostat exchanges
energy with the system to achieve and conserve the target temperature, which will be able to compensate for
any such drift if appropriately chosen . Furthermore,
the same kernels will be particularly suited for schemes
that are in all cases incompatible with strict energy conservation. These include the LOTF approach and any
online learning scheme similarly involving a dynamically
updated force model. They also include any highly accurate and transferable scheme based on a ﬁxed, very large
database where, to maximise eﬃciency, each force prediction only uses its corresponding most relevant database
On the other hand, any usage style is possible for covariant kernels conserving energy exactly, like the covariant linear kernels of equations (21), (26) and (28). In
fact, the conservative pairwise interaction forces generated by these covariant linear kernels can be easily integrated to provide eﬀective “optimal” standard pairwise
potentials for any application needing a total energy expression. We also note that while the pair interaction
form would still ensure very fast evaluation of the predicted forces, its accuracy for complex systems could be
improved by dropping the transferability requirement of
a single pairwise function. In such a scheme, diﬀerent
system regions could conceivably be modelled by locally
optimised forces/potentials, where the local tuning could
be simply achieved by restricting the inference process to
subsets of the database pertinent to each target region.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge funding by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
through the Centre for Doctoral Training “Cross Disciplinary
Approaches
Non-Equilibrium
(CANES, Grant No. EP/L015854/1), by the Oﬃce of
Naval Research Global . The research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility at
Argonne National Laboratory, which is supported by the
Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under
Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The DFT dataset
used in this work is openly available from the research
data management system of King’s College London at
 
AG would like to
thank F. Bianchini for his help in data collection and
R. G. Margiotta, K. Rossi, F. Bianchini and C. Zeni for
useful discussions.
 G. E. Moore, “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits ,” Proceedings of the Ieee, vol. 86, no. 1,
pp. 82–85, Jan. 1998.
 C. Walter, “Kryder’s Law,” Scientiﬁc American, vol. 293,
no. 2, pp. 32–33, Aug. 2005.
 M. H. Kryder and C. S. Kim, “After hard drives—what
comes next?” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 2009.
 D. R. Hartree, “The wave mechanics of an atom with a
non-Coulomb central ﬁeld. Part I. Theory and methods,”
Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, 1928.
 V. Fock, “Näherungsmethode zur Lösung des quantenmechanischen Mehrkörperproblems,”
Zeitschrift für
Physik, vol. 61, no. 1-2, pp. 126–148, 1930.
 J. C. Slater,
“A Simpliﬁcation of the Hartree-Fock
Method,” Physical review, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 385–390,
Feb. 1951.
 Nomad Database, “ .”
 L. M. Ghiringhelli, J. Vybiral, S. V. Levchenko, C. Draxl,
and M. Scheﬄer, “Big Data of Materials Science: Critical
Role of the Descriptor,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 114,
no. 10, pp. 105 503–5, Mar. 2015.
 G. Pilania, C. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Rajasekaran, and
R. Ramprasad, “Accelerating materials property predictions using machine learning,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 3,
pp. 1–6, Sep. 2013.
 C. Kim, G. Pilania, and R. Ramprasad, “From Organized High-Throughput Data to Phenomenological Theory using Machine Learning: The Example of Dielectric
Breakdown,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 28, no. 5, pp.
1304–1311, Mar. 2016.
 M. Rupp, A. Tkatchenko, K. R. Müller, and O. A. von
Lilienfeld, “Fast and Accurate Modeling of Molecular Atomization Energies with Machine Learning,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 108, no. 5, pp. 058 301–5, Jan. 2012.
 J. C. Snyder, M. Rupp, K. Hansen, K. R. Müller, and
K. Burke, “Finding Density Functionals with Machine
Learning,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 108, no. 25, pp.
253 002–5, Jun. 2012.
 L. F. Arsenault, A. Lopez-Bezanilla, O. A. von Lilienfeld,
and A. J. Millis, “Machine learning for many-body physics: The case of the Anderson impurity model,” Physical
Review B, vol. 90, no. 15, pp. 155 136–16, Oct. 2014.
 A. Lopez-Bezanilla and O. A. von Lilienfeld, “Modeling electronic quantum transport with machine learning,”
Physical Review B, vol. 89, no. 23, pp. 235 411–5, Jun.
 A. P. Bartók, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Csányi,
“Gaussian Approximation Potentials: The Accuracy of
Quantum Mechanics, without the Electrons,” Physical
Review Letters, vol. 104, no. 13, pp. 136 403–4, Apr. 2010.
Parrinello,
“Generalized
Network Representation of High-Dimensional Potential-
Energy Surfaces,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 98, no. 14,
pp. 146 401–4, Apr. 2007.
 A. V. Shapeev, “Moment Tensor Potentials:
of systematically improvable interatomic potentials,”
arXiv.org, Dec. 2015.
 T. Stecher, N. Bernstein, and G. Csányi, “Free Energy
Surface Reconstruction from Umbrella Samples Using
Gaussian Process Regression,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 4079–4097, Sep.
 A. De Vita and R. Car, “A Novel Scheme for Accurate Md
Simulations of Large Systems,” MRS Proceedings, vol.
491, p. 473, Jan. 1997.
 G. Csányi, T. Albaret, M. C. Payne, and A. De Vita,
““Learn on the Fly”: A Hybrid Classical and Quantum-
Mechanical Molecular Dynamics Simulation,” Physical
Review Letters, vol. 93, no. 17, pp. 175 503–4, Oct. 2004.
 E. V. Podryabinkin and A. V. Shapeev, “Active learning
of linear interatomic potentials,” arXiv.org, Nov. 2016.
 B. Haasdonk and H. Burkhardt, “Invariant kernel functions for pattern analysis and machine learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 35–61, May 2007.
 C. K. I. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen, “Gaussian processes for machine learning,” the MIT Press, 2006.
 C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, ser. Information Science and Statistics.
NY: Springer, 2006.
 M. Krejnik and A. Tyutin, “Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Spaces With Odd Kernels in Price Prediction,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1564–1573, Sep. 2012.
 Z. Li, J. R. Kermode, and A. De Vita, “Molecular Dynamics with On-the-Fly Machine Learning of Quantum-
Mechanical Forces,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 114,
no. 9, pp. 096 405–5, Mar. 2015.
 M. Caccin, Z. Li, J. R. Kermode, and A. De Vita, “A
framework for machine-learning-augmented multiscale
atomistic simulations on parallel supercomputers,” International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, Jun. 2015.
 V. Botu and R. Ramprasad, “Adaptive machine learning framework to accelerate ab initiomolecular dynamics,” International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, Dec.
 C. A. Micchelli and M. Pontil, “Kernels for multi-task
learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
University at Albany State University of New
York, Albany, United States, Jan. 2005.
 M. A. Alvarez, L. Rosasco, and N. D. Lawrence, “Kernels
for Vector-Valued Functions: a Review,” Jun. 2011.
 W. Kohn,
“Density Functional and Density Matrix
Method Scaling Linearly with the Number of Atoms,”
Physical Review Letters, vol. 76, no. 17, pp. 3168–3171,
Apr. 1996.
 E. Prodan and W. Kohn, “Nearsightedness of electronic
matter,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 102, no. 33, pp. 11 635–11 638, Aug. 2005.
 T. Bayes and M. Price, “An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances. by the late rev. mr. bayes,
frs communicated by mr. price, in a letter to john canton,
amfrs,” Philosophical Transactions (1683-1775), 1763.
 G. Ferré, J. B. Maillet, and G. Stoltz, “Permutationinvariant distance between atomic conﬁgurations,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 143, no. 10, pp.
104 114–13, Sep. 2015.
 V. Botu and R. Ramprasad, “Learning scheme to predict atomic forces and accelerate materials simulations,”
Physical Review B, vol. 92, no. 9, pp. 094 306–5, Sep.
 A. P. Bartók, R. Kondor, and G. Csányi, “On representing chemical environments,” Physical Review B, vol. 87,
no. 18, pp. 184 115–16, May 2013.
 A. P. Bartók and G. Csányi, “Gaussian approximation
potentials: A brief tutorial introduction,” International
Journal of Quantum Chemistry, vol. 115, no. 16, pp.
1051–1057, Apr. 2015.
 M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices; 3rd ed., ser. Pure and
applied mathematics series.
San Diego, CA: Elsevier,
 S. Aubert and C. S. Lam, “Invariant integration over the
unitary group,” Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 44,
no. 12, pp. 6112–21, 2003.
 J. Mercer, “Functions of positive and negative type, and
their connection with the theory of integral equations,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series a-
Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character, vol. 83, no. 559, pp. 69–70, Nov. 1909.
 E. J. Fuselier Jr, “Reﬁned error estimates for matrixvalued radial basis functions,” Ph.D. dissertation, Texas
A&M University, May 2006.
 I. Macêdo and R. Castro, Learning divergence-free and
curl-free vector ﬁelds with matrix-valued kernels.
Instituto Nacional de Matematica Pura e Aplicada, 2008.
 S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, H. E. Sauceda, I. Poltavsky,
K. Schütt, and K. R. Müller, “Machine Learning of
Accurate Energy-Conserving Molecular Force Fields,”
arXiv.org, Nov. 2016.
 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, “Generalized
Gradient Approximation Made Simple,” Physical Review
Letters, vol. 77, no. 18, pp. 3865–3868, Oct. 1996.
 Y. Mishin, “Atomistic modeling of the γ and γ’-phases
of the Ni–Al system,” Acta Materialia, vol. 52, no. 6, pp.
1451–1467, Apr. 2004.
 F. Bianchini, J. R. Kermode, and A. De Vita, “Modelling defects in Ni–Al with EAM and DFT calculations,”
Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, pp. 1–15, Apr. 2016.
 F. Bianchini, A. Glielmo, J. R. Kermode, and A. De Vita,
“In Preparation.”
 J. von Pezold, L. Lymperakis, and J. Neugebeauer,
“Hydrogen-enhanced local plasticity at dilute bulk H concentrations: The role of H-H interactions and the formation of local hydrides,” Acta Materialia, vol. 59, no. 8,
pp. 2969–2980, May 2011.
 W. J. Szlachta, A. P. Bartók, and G. Csányi, “Accuracy
and transferability of Gaussian approximation potential
models for tungsten,” Physical Review B, vol. 90, no. 10,
pp. 104 108–6, Sep. 2014.
 M. I. Mendelev, S. Han, D. J. Srolovitz, G. J. Ackland, D. Y. Sun, and M. Asta, “Development of new
interatomic potentials appropriate for crystalline and liquid iron,” Philosophical Magazine, vol. 83, no. 35, pp.
3977–3994, Dec. 2003.
 A. Glielmo, P. Sollich, and A. De Vita, “In Preparation.”
 M. Elstner,
D. Porezag,
G. Jungnickel,
J. Elsner,
M. Haugk, T. Frauenheim, S. Suhai, and G. Seifert,
“Self-consistent-charge density-functional tight-binding
method for simulations of complex materials properties,”
Physical Review B, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 7260–7268, Sep.
 F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, “Computer simulation
of local order in condensed phases of silicon,” Physical
review, vol. B31, no. 8, pp. 5262–5271, 1985.
 V. L. Deringer and G. Csányi, “Machine-learning based
interatomic potential for amorphous carbon,” arXiv.org,
Nov. 2016.
 A. Jones and B. Leimkuhler, “Adaptive stochastic methods for sampling driven molecular systems,” The Journal
of Chemical Physics, vol. 135, no. 8, pp. 084 125–12, 2011.