SpotTune: Transfer Learning through Adaptive Fine-tuning
Yunhui Guo∗1,2, Honghui Shi1, Abhishek Kumar†1, Kristen Grauman3, Tajana Rosing2, Rogerio Feris1
1IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2University of California, San Diego, 3The University of Texas at Austin
Transfer learning, which allows a source task to affect
the inductive bias of the target task, is widely used in computer vision. The typical way of conducting transfer learning with deep neural networks is to ﬁne-tune a model pretrained on the source task using data from the target task.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive ﬁne-tuning approach,
called SpotTune, which ﬁnds the optimal ﬁne-tuning strategy per instance for the target data. In SpotTune, given
an image from the target task, a policy network is used
to make routing decisions on whether to pass the image
through the ﬁne-tuned layers or the pre-trained layers. We
conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Our method outperforms
the traditional ﬁne-tuning approach on 12 out of 14 standard datasets. We also compare SpotTune with other stateof-the-art ﬁne-tuning strategies, showing superior performance.
On the Visual Decathlon datasets, our method
achieves the highest score across the board without bells
and whistles.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown remarkable success in many
computer vision tasks, but current methods often rely on
large amounts of labeled training data . Transfer learning, where the goal is to transfer knowledge from
a related source task, is commonly used to compensate for
the lack of sufﬁcient training data in the target task .
Fine-tuning is arguably the most widely used approach for
transfer learning when working with deep learning models. It starts with a pre-trained model on the source task
and trains it further on the target task. For computer vision
tasks, it is a common practice to work with ImageNet pretrained models for ﬁne-tuning . Compared with training
from scratch, ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained convolutional neural
network on a target dataset can signiﬁcantly improve performance, while reducing the target labeled data requirements .
∗This work was done when Yunhui Guo was an intern at IBM Research.
†Abhishek Kumar is now with Google Brain. The work was done when he
was at IBM Research.
Figure 1. Given a deep neural network pre-trained on a source task,
we address the question of where to ﬁne-tune its parameters with
examples of the target task. We propose a novel method that decides, per training example, which layers of the pre-trained model
should have their parameters ﬁxed, i.e., shared with the source
task, and which layers should be ﬁne-tuned to improve the accuracy of the model in the target domain.
There are several choices when it comes to realizing the
idea of ﬁne-tuning of deep networks in practice. A natural
approach is to optimize all the parameters of the deep network using the target training data (after initializing them
with the parameters of the pre-trained model). However, if
the target dataset is small and the number of parameters is
huge, ﬁne-tuning the whole network may result in overﬁtting . Alternatively, the last few layers of the deep network can be ﬁne-tuned while freezing the parameters of the
remaining initial layers to their pre-trained values .
This is driven by a combination of limited training data in
the target task and the empirical evidence that initial layers
learn low-level features that can be directly shared across
various computer vision tasks. However, the number of initial layers to freeze during ﬁne-tuning still remains a manual design choice which can be inefﬁcient to optimize for,
especially for networks with hundreds or thousands of lay-
 
ers. Further, it has been empirically observed that current
successful multi-path deep architectures such as ResNets
 behave like ensembles of shallow networks . It is
not clear if restricting the ﬁne-tuning to the last contiguous
layers is the best option, as the ensemble effect diminishes
the assumption that early or middle layers should be shared
with common low-level or mid-level features.
Current methods also employ a global ﬁne-tuning strategy, i.e., the decision of which parameters to freeze vs ﬁnetune is taken for all the examples in the target task. The
assumption is that such a decision is optimal for the entire
target data distribution, which may not be true, particularly
in the case of insufﬁcient target training data. For example,
certain classes in the target task might have higher similarity with the source task, and routing these target examples through the source pre-trained parameters (during inference) might be a better choice in terms of accuracy. Ideally, we would like these decisions to be made individually
for each layer (i.e., whether to use pre-trained parameters or
ﬁne-tuned parameters for that layer), per input example, as
illustrated in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose SpotTune, an approach to learn
a decision policy for input-dependent ﬁne-tuning. The policy is sampled from a discrete distribution parameterized by
the output of a lightweight neural network, which decides
which layers of a pre-trained model should be ﬁne-tuned or
have their parameters frozen, on a per instance basis. As
these decision functions are discrete and non-differentiable,
we rely on a recent Gumbel Softmax sampling approach
 to train the policy network. At test time, the policy decides whether the features coming out of a layer go
into the next layer with source pre-trained parameters or the
ﬁne-tuned parameters.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We propose an input-dependent ﬁne-tuning approach
that automatically determines which layers to ﬁne-tune
per target instance. This is in contrast to current ﬁnetuning methods which are mostly ad-hoc in terms of
determining where to ﬁne-tune in a deep neural network (e.g., ﬁne-tuning last k layers).
• We also propose a global variant of our approach that
constrains all the input examples to ﬁne-tune the same
set of k layers which can be distributed anywhere in
the network. This variant results in fewer parameters in
the ﬁnal model as the corresponding set of pre-trained
layers can be discarded.
• We conduct extensive empirical evaluation of the proposed approach, comparing it with several competitive
baselines. The proposed approach outperforms standard ﬁne-tuning on 12 out of 14 datasets. Moreover,
we show the effectiveness of SpotTune compared to
other state-of-the-art ﬁne-tuning strategies. On the Visual Decathlon Challenge , which is a competitive benchmark for testing the performance of multidomain learning algorithms with a total of 10 datasets,
the proposed approach achieves the highest score compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Transfer Learning. There is a long history of transfer
learning and domain adaptation methods in computer vision
Early approaches have concentrated on shallow
classiﬁers, using techniques such as instance re-weighting
 , model adaptation , and feature space alignment . In the multi-task setting, knowing which
tasks or parameters are shareable is a longstanding challenge .
More recently, transfer learning
based on deep neural network classiﬁers has received signiﬁcant attention in the community . Finetuning a pre-trained network model such as ImageNet on
a new dataset is the most common strategy for knowledge
transfer in the context of deep learning. Methods have been
proposed to ﬁne-tune all network parameters , only the
parameters of the last few layers , or to just use the pretrained model as a ﬁxed feature extractor with a classiﬁer
such as SVM on top . Kornblith et al. have studied
several of these options to address the question of whether
better ImageNet models transfer better. Yosinski et al. 
conducted a study on the impact of transferability of features from the bottom, middle, or top of the network with
early models, but it is not clear whether their conclusions
hold for modern multi-path architectures such as Residual
Networks or DenseNets . Yang et al. have
recently proposed to learn relational graphs as transferable
representations, instead of unary features. More related to
our work, Li et al. investigated several regularization
schemes that explicitly promote the similarity of the ﬁnetuned model with the original pre-trained model. Different
from all these methods, our proposed approach automatically decides the optimal set of layers to ﬁne-tune in a pretrained model on a new task. In addition, we make this
decision on a per-instance basis.
Dynamic Routing. Our proposed approach is related
to conditional computation methods , which aim
to dynamically route information in neural networks with
the goal of improving computational efﬁciency.
et al. used sparse activation policies to selectively execute neural network units on a per-example basis. Shazeer
et al. introduced a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts
layer, where a trainable gating network determines a sparse
combination of sub-networks (experts) to use for each example. Wu, Nagarajan et al. proposed BlockDrop , a
method that uses reinforcement learning to dynamically se-
lect which layers of a Residual Network to execute, exploiting the fact that ResNets are resilient to layer dropping .
Veit and Belongie investigated the same idea using
Gumbel Softmax for on-the-ﬂy selection of residual
blocks. Our work also explores dynamic routing based on
the Gumbel trick. However, unlike previous methods, our
goal is to determine the parameters in a neural network that
should be frozen or ﬁne-tuned during learning to improve
accuracy, instead of dropping layers to improve efﬁciency.
3. Proposed Approach
Given a pre-trained network model on a source task (e.g.,
ImageNet pre-trained model), and a set of training examples with associated labels in the target domain, our goal
is to create an adaptive ﬁne-tuning strategy that decides,
per training example, which layers of the pre-trained model
should be ﬁne-tuned (adapted to the target task) and which
layers should have their parameters frozen (shared with the
source task) during training, in order to improve the accuracy of the model in the target domain. To this end, we ﬁrst
present an overview of our approach in Section 3.1. Then,
we show how we learn our adaptive ﬁne-tuning policy using
Gumbel Softmax sampling in Section 3.2. Finally, in Section 3.3, we present a global policy variant of our proposed
image-dependent ﬁne-tuning method, which constraints all
the images to follow a single ﬁne-tuning policy.
3.1. SpotTune Overview
Although our approach could be applied to different deep
neural network architectures, in the following we focus
on a Residual Network model (ResNet) . Recently, it
has been shown that ResNets behave as ensembles of shallow classiﬁers and are resilient to residual block swapping
 . This is a desirable property for our approach, as later
we show that SpotTune dynamically swaps pre-trained and
ﬁne-tuned blocks to improve performance.
Consider the l-th residual block in a pre-trained ResNet
xl = Fl(xl−1) + xl−1.
In order to decide whether or not to ﬁne-tune a residual
block during training, we freeze the original block Fl and
create a new trainable block ˆFl, which is initialized with the
parameters of Fl. With the additional block ˆFl, the output
of the l-th residual block in SpotTune is computed as below:
xl = Il(x) ˆFl(xl−1) + (1 −Il(x))Fl(xl−1) + xl−1
where Il(x) is a binary random variable, which indicates
whether the residual block should be frozen or ﬁne-tuned,
conditioned on the input image. During training, given an
input image x, the frozen block Fl trained on the source
task is left unchanged and the replicated block ˆFl, which
is initialized from Fl, can be optimized towards the target dataset. Hence, the given image x can either share the
frozen block Fl, which allows the features computed on the
source task to be reused, or ﬁne-tune the block ˆFl, which
allows x to use the adapted features. Il(x) is sampled from
a discrete distribution with two categories (freeze or ﬁnetune), which is parameterized by the output of a lightweight
policy network. More speciﬁcally, if Il(x) = 0, then the lth frozen block is re-used. Otherwise, if Il(x) = 1 the l-th
residual block is ﬁne-tuned by optimizing ˆFl.
Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of our proposed Spot-
Tune method, which allows each training image to have its
own ﬁne-tuning policy. During training, the policy network
is jointly trained with the target classiﬁcation task using
Gumbel Softmax sampling, as we will describe next. At
test time, an input image is ﬁrst fed into a policy network,
whose output is sampled to produce routing decisions on
whether to pass the image through the ﬁne-tuned or pretrained residual blocks. The image is then routed through
the corresponding residual blocks to produce the ﬁnal classiﬁcation prediction. Note that the effective number of executed residual blocks is the same as the original pre-trained
model. The only additional computational cost is incurred
by the policy network, which is designed to be lightweight
(only a few residual blocks) in comparison to the original
pre-trained model.
3.2. Training with the Gumbel Softmax Policy
SpotTune makes decisions as to whether or not to freeze
or ﬁne-tune each residual block per training example. However, the fact that the policy Il(x) is discrete makes the network non-differentiable and therefore difﬁcult to be optimized with backpropagation. There are several ways that
allow us to “back-propagate” through the discrete nodes .
In this paper, we use a recently proposed Gumbel Softmax
sampling approach to circumvent this problem.
The Gumbel-Max trick is a simple and effective way
to draw samples from a categorical distribution parameterized by {α1, α2, ..., αz}, where αi are scalars not conﬁned
to the simplex, and z is the number of categories. In our
work, we consider two categories (freeze or ﬁne-tune), so
z = 2, and for each residual block, α1 and α2 are scalars
corresponding to the output of a policy network.
A random variable G is said to have a standard Gumbel
distribution if G = −log(−log(U)) with U sampled from
a uniform distribution, i.e. U ∼Unif . Based on the
Gumbel-Max trick , we can draw samples from a discrete distribution parameterized by αi in the following way:
we ﬁrst draw i.i.d samples Gi, ..., Gz from Gumbel(0, 1)
and then generate the discrete sample as follows:
X = arg max
[log αi + Gi].
Figure 2. Illustration of our proposed approach. The policy network is trained to output routing decisions (ﬁne-tune or freeze parameters)
for each block in a ResNet pre-trained on the source dataset. During learning, the ﬁne-tune vs. freeze decisions are generated based on a
Gumbel Softmax distribution, which allows us to optimize the policy network using backpropagation. At test time, given an input image,
the computation is routed so that either the ﬁne-tuned path or the frozen path is activated for each residual block.
differentiable. However, we can use the Gumbel Softmax
distribution , which adopts softmax as a continuous
relaxation to arg max. We represent X as a one-hot vector
where the index of the non-zero entry of the vector is
equal to X, and relax the one-hot encoding of X to a
z-dimensional real-valued vector Y using softmax:
exp((log αi + Gi)/τ)
j=1 exp((log αj + Gj)/τ)
for i = 1, .., z
where τ is a temperature parameter, which controls the discreteness of the output vector Y . When τ becomes closer
to 0, the samples from the Gumbel Softmax distribution become indistinguishable from the discrete distribution (i.e,
almost the same as the one-hot vector).
Sampling our ﬁne-tuning policy Il(x) from a Gumbel
Softmax distribution parameterized by the output of a policy network allows us to backpropagate from the discrete
freeze/ﬁne-tune decision samples to the policy network, as
the Gumbel Softmax distribution is smooth for τ > 0 and
therefore has well-deﬁned gradients with respect to the parameters αi. By using a standard classiﬁcation loss lc for
the target task, the policy network is jointly trained with the
pre-trained model to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁne-tuning strategy
that maximizes the accuracy of the target task.
Similar to , we generate all freeze/ﬁne-tune decisions for all residual blocks at once, instead of relying
on features of intermediate layers of the pre-trained model
to obtain the ﬁne-tuning policy.
More speciﬁcally, suppose there are L residual blocks in the pre-trained model.
The output of the policy network is a two-dimensional matrix β ∈RL×2. Each row of β represents the logits of
a Gumbel-Softmax Distribution with two categories, i.e,
βl,0 = log α1 and βl,1 = log α2. After obtaining β, we
use the straight-through version of the Gumbel-Softmax estimator . During the forward pass, we sample the ﬁnetuning policy Il(x) using Equation 3 for the l-th residual
block. During the backward pass, we approximate the gradient of the discrete samples by computing the gradient of
the continuous softmax relaxation in Equation 4. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.
3.3. Compact Global Policy Variant
In this section, we consider a simple extension of the
image-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning policy, which constrains all the
images to ﬁne-tune the same k blocks that can be distributed
anywhere in the ResNet.
This variant reduces both the
memory footprint and computational costs, as k can be set
to a small number so most blocks are shared with the source
task, and at test time the policy network is not needed.
Consider a pre-trained ResNet model with L residual
blocks. For the l-th block, we can obtain the number of images that use the ﬁne-tuned block and the pre-trained block
based on the image-speciﬁc policy. We compute the fraction of images in the target dataset that uses the ﬁne-tuned
block and denote it as vl ∈ . In order to constrain our
method to ﬁne-tune k blocks, we introduce the following
Moveover, in order to achieve a deterministic policy, we
add another loss le:
−vl log vl.
The additional loss le pushes vl to be exactly 0 or 1, so
that a global policy can be obtained for all the images. The
ﬁnal loss is deﬁned below:
l = lc + λ1lk + λ2le,
where lc is the classiﬁcation loss, λ1 is the balance parameter for lk, and λ2 is the the balance parameter for le. The
additional losses push the policy network to learn a global
policy for all the images. As opposed to manually selecting k blocks to ﬁne-tune, the global-k variant learns the
k blocks that can achieve the best accuracy on the target
dataset. We leave for future work the task of ﬁnding the optimal k, which could be achieved e.g., by using reinforcement learning with a reward proportional to accuracy and
inversely proportional to the number of ﬁne-tuned blocks.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets and metrics. We compare our SpotTune method
with other ﬁne-tuning and regularization techniques on 5
public datasets, including three ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
benchmarks: CUBS , Stanford Cars and Flowers
 , and two datasets with a large domain mismatch from
ImageNet: Sketches and WikiArt . The statistics
of these datasets are listed in Table 1. Performance is measured by classiﬁcation accuracy on the evaluation set.
We also report results on the datasets of the Visual
Decathlon Challenge , which aims at evaluating visual recognition algorithms on images from multiple visual domains. There are a total of 10 datasets as part of
this challenge: (1) ImageNet, (2) Aircraft, (3) CIFAR-100,
(4) Describable textures, (5) Daimler pedestrian classiﬁcation, (6) German trafﬁc signs, (7) UCF-101 Dynamic Images, (8) SVHN, (9) Omniglot, and (10) Flowers. The images of the Visual Decathlon datasets are resized isotropically to have a shorter side of 72 pixels, in order to alleviate the computational burden for evaluation. Following
 , the performance is measured by a single scalar score
i=1 αimax{0, Emax
−Ei}2, where Ei is the test
error on domain Di, and Emax
is the error of a reasonable
baseline algorithm. The coefﬁcient αi is 1000(Emax
so a perfect classiﬁer receives score 1000. The maximum
score achieved across 10 domains is 10000. Compared with
average accuracy across all the 10 domains, the score S is
a more reasonable measurement for comparing different algorithms, since it considers the difﬁculty of different domains, which is not captured by the average accuracy .
In total, our experiments comprise 14 datasets, as the
Flowers dataset is listed in both sets described above. We
note that for the experiments in Table 2, we use the full
resolution of the images, while those are resized in the Vi-
Evaluation
Stanford Cars
Table 1. Datasets used to evaluate SpotTune against other ﬁnetuning baselines.
sual Decathlon experiments to be consistent with other approaches.
Baselines. We compare SpotTune with the following ﬁnetuning and regularization techniques:
• Standard Fine-tuning: This baseline ﬁne-tunes all
the parameters of the pre-trained network on the target dataset .
• Feature Extractor: We use the pre-trained network as
a feature extractor and only add the classiﬁcation layer for each newly added dataset.
• Stochastic Fine-tuning: We randomly sample 50% of
the blocks of the pre-trained network to ﬁne-tune.
• Fine-tuning last-k (k = 1, 2, 3): This baseline ﬁnetunes the last k residual blocks of the pre-trained network on the target dataset . In our experiments, we consider ﬁne-tuning the last one (k = 1), last
two (k = 2) and the last three (k = 3) residual blocks.
• Fine-tuning ResNet-101: We ﬁne-tune all the parameters of a pre-trained ResNet-101 model on the target
dataset. SpotTune uses ResNet-50 instead (for the experiments in Table 2), so this baseline is more computationally expensive and can ﬁne-tune twice as many
residual blocks. We include it as the total number of
parameters during training is similar to SpotTune, so
it will verify any advantage is not merely due to our
having 2x residual blocks available.
• L2-SP : This is a recently proposed state-of-theart regularization method for ﬁne-tuning. The authors
recommend using an L2 penalty to allow the ﬁne-tuned
network to have an explicit inductive bias towards the
pre-trained model, sharing similar motivation with our
Regarding the methods that have reported results on the
Visual Decathlon datasets, the most related to our work
are models trained from Scratch, Standard Fine-tuning, the
Feature Extractor baseline as described above, and Learning without Forgetting (LwF) , which is a recently proposed technique that encourages the ﬁne-tuned network
to retain the performance on ImageNet or previous tasks,
while learning consecutive tasks. Other methods include
Piggyback , Residual Adapters and its variants ,
Stanford Cars
Feature Extractor
Standard Fine-tuning
Stochastic Fine-tuning
Fine-tuning last-3
Fine-tuning last-2
Fine-tuning last-1
Fine-tuning ResNet-101
SpotTune (running ﬁne-tuned blocks)
SpotTune (global-k)
Table 2. Results of SpotTune and baselines on CUBS, Stanford Cars, Flowers, WikiArt and Sketches.
Deep Adaptation Networks (DAN) , and Batch Norm
Adaptation (BN Adapt) , which are explicitly designed
to minimize the number of model parameters, while our
method sits at the other end of the spectrum, with a focus
on accuracy instead of parameter reduction. We also compare with training from scratch using Residual Adapters
(Scratch+), as well as the high-capacity version of Residual
Adapters described in , which have a similar number of
parameters as SpotTune.
Pre-trained model. For comparing SpotTune with ﬁnetuning baselines in Table 2, we use ResNet-50 pre-trained
on ImageNet, which starts with a convolutional layer followed by 16 residual blocks. The residual blocks contain
three convolutional layers and are distributed into 4 segments (i.e, ) with downsampling layers in between. We use the pre-trained model from Pytorch which
has a classiﬁcation accuracy of 75.15% on ImageNet. For
the Visual Decathlon Challenge, in order to be consistent
with previous works, we adopt ResNet-26 with a total of
12 residual blocks, organized into 3 segments (i.e., ). The channel size of each segment is 64, 128, 256, respectively. We use the ResNet-26 pre-trained on ImageNet
provided by .
Policy network architecture.
For the experiments with
ResNet-50 (Table 2), we use a ResNet with 4 blocks for the
policy network. The channel size of each block is 64, 128,
256, 512, respectively. For the Visual Decathlon Challenge
with ResNet-26, the policy network consists of a ResNet
with 3 blocks. The channel size of each block is 64, 128,
256, respectively.
Implementations details. Our implementation is based on
Pytorch. All models are trained on 2 NVIDIA V100 GPUs.
For comparing SpotTune with ﬁne-tuning baselines, we use
SGD with momentum as the optimizer. The momentum rate
is set to be 0.9, the initial learning rate is 1e-2 and the batch
size is 32. The initial learning rate of the policy network is
1e-4. We train the network with a total of 40 epochs and the
learning rate decays twice at 15th and 30th epochs with a
factor of 10.
For the Visual Decathlon Challenge, we also use SGD
with momentum as the optimizer. The momentum rate is
0.9 and the initial learning rate is 0.1. The batch size is 128.
The initial learning rate of the policy network is 1e-2. We
train the network with a total of 110 epochs and the learning
rate decays three times at 40th, 60th and 80th epochs with
a factor of 10. We freeze the ﬁrst macro blocks (4 residual blocks) of the ResNet-26 and only apply the adaptive
ﬁne-tuning for the rest of the residual blocks. This choice
reduces the number of parameters and has a regularization
effect. The temperature of the Gumbel-Softmax distribution
is set to 5 for all the experiments. Our source code will be
publicly available.
4.2. Results and Analysis
SpotTune vs. Fine-tuning Baselines
The results of SpotTune and the ﬁne-tuning baselines are
listed in Table 2.
Clearly, SpotTune yields consistently
better results than other methods.
Using the pre-trained
model on ImageNet as a feature extractor (with all parameters frozen) can reduce the number of parameters when the
model is applied to a new dataset, but it leads to bad performance due to the domain shift. All the ﬁne-tuning variants
(Standard Fine-tuning, Stochastic Fine-tuning, Fine-tuning
last-k) achieve higher accuracy than the Feature Extractor
baseline, as expected. Note that the results of Fine-tuning
last-k show that manually deciding the number of layers
to ﬁne-tune may lead to worse results than standard ﬁnetuning. The Fine-tuned ResNet-101 has higher capacity and
thus performs better than the other ﬁne-tuning variants. Although it has twice as many ﬁne-tuned blocks and is signiﬁcantly more computationally expensive than SpotTune,
it still performs worse than our method in all datasets, except in WikiArt. We conjecture this is because WikiArt
has more training examples than the other datasets. To test
this hypothesis, we evaluated both models when 25% of
the WikiArt training data is used. In this setting, SpotTune
achieves 61.24% accuracy compared to 60.20% of the ﬁnetuned ResNet-101. This gap increases even more when 10%
of the data is considered (49.59% vs. 47.05%).
By inducing the ﬁne-tuned models to be close to the pretrained model, L2-SP achieves better results than other ﬁnetuning variants, but it is inferior to SpotTune in all datasets.
However, it should be noted that L2-SP is complementary
to SpotTune and can be combined with it to further improve
the results.
SpotTune is different from all the baselines in two aspects.
On one hand, the ﬁne-tuning policy in SpotTune
is specialized for each instance in the target dataset. This
implicitly takes the similarities between the images in the
target dataset and the source dataset into account. On the
other hand, sharing layers with the source task without parameter reﬁnement reduces overﬁtting and promotes better
re-use of features extracted from the source task. We also
consider two variants of SpotTune in the experiments. The
ﬁrst one is SpotTune (running ﬁne-tuned blocks) in which
during testing all the images are routed through the ﬁnetuned blocks. With this setting, the accuracy drops on all
the datasets. This suggests that certain images in the target
data can beneﬁt from reusing some of the layers of the pretrained network. The second variant is SpotTune (globalk) in which we set k to 3 in the experiments. Generally,
SpotTune (global-3) performs worse than SpotTune, but is
around 3 times more compact and, interestingly, is better
than Fine-tuning last-3. This suggests that it is beneﬁcial to
have an image-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning strategy, and manually
selecting the last k layers is not as effective as choosing the
optimal non-contiguous set of k layers for ﬁne-tuning.
Visualization of Policies
To better understand the ﬁne-tuning policies learned by
the policy network, we visualize them on CUBS, Flowers,
WikiArt, Sketches, and Stanford Cars in Figure 3. The polices are learned on a ResNet-50 which has 16 blocks. The
tone of red of a block indicates the number of images that
were routed through the ﬁne-tuned path of that block. For
example, a block with a dark tone of red and a 75% level
of ﬁne-tuning (as shown in the scale depicted in the right
of Figure 3) means 75% of the images in the test set use
the ﬁne-tuned block and the remaining 25% images share
the pre-trained ImageNet block. The illustration shows that
different datasets have very different ﬁne-tuning policies.
SpotTune allows us to automatically identify the right policy for each dataset, as well as for each training example,
which would be infeasible through a manual approach.
Figure 3. Visualization of policies on CUBS, Flowers, WikiArt,
Sketches and Stanford Cars. Note that different datasets have very
different policies. SpotTune automatically identiﬁes the right ﬁnetuning policy for each dataset, for each training example.
Visualization of Block Usage
Besides the learned policies for each residual block, we are
also interested in the number of ﬁne-tuned blocks used by
each dataset during testing. This can reveal the difference of
the distribution of each target dataset and can also shed light
on how the policy network works. In Figure 4, we show the
distribution of the number of ﬁne-tuned blocks used by each
target dataset. During testing, for each dataset we categorize
the test examples based on the number of ﬁne-tuned blocks
they use. For example, from Figure 4, we can see around
1000 images in the test set of the CUBS dataset use 7 ﬁnetuned blocks.
We have the following two observations based on the
results. First, for a speciﬁc dataset, different images tend
to use a different number of ﬁne-tuned blocks. This again
validates our hypothesis that it is more accurate to have an
image-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning policy rather than a global ﬁnetuning policy for all images. Second, the distribution of
ﬁne-tuned blocks usage differs signiﬁcantly across different
target datasets. This demonstrates that based on the characteristics of the target dataset, standard ﬁne-tuning (which
optimizes all the parameters of the pre-trained network towards the target task) may not be the ideal choice when conducting transfer learning with convolutional networks.
Figure 5 shows example images that use a different number of ﬁne-tuned blocks on CUBS and Flowers. We observe
that images that use a small number of ﬁne-tuned blocks
tend to have a cleaner background (possibly due to similarity with ImageNet data), while images that use a large number of ﬁne-tuned blocks often have a more complex background. An interesting area for future work is to quantify
the interpretability of both pre-trained and ﬁne-tuned convolutional ﬁlters using e.g., Network Dissection , in order
to better understand these visual patterns.
Scratch+ 
Feature Extractor
Fine-tuning 
BN Adapt. 
Series Res. adapt. 
Parallel Res. adapt. 
Res. adapt. (large) 
Res. adapt. decay 
Res. adapt. ﬁnetune all 
PiggyBack 
SpotTune (Global-k)
Table 3. Results of SpotTune and baselines on the Visual Decathlon Challenge. The number of parameters is speciﬁed with respect to a
ResNet-26 model as in .
Figure 4. Distribution of the number of ﬁne-tuned blocks used by
the test examples in the datasets. Different tasks and images require substantially different ﬁne-tuning for best results, and this
can be automatically inferred by SpotTune.
Figure 5. Example images that use a small and large number of
ﬁne-tuned blocks.
Visual Decathlon Challenge
We show the results of SpotTune and baselines on the
Visual Decathlon Challenge in Table 3.
Among all the
baselines, SpotTune achieves the highest Visual Decathlon
score. Compared to standard ﬁne-tuning, SpotTune has almost the same amount of parameters and improves the score
by a large margin (3612 vs 3096). Considering the Visual
Decathlon datasets, and the 5 datasets from our previous experiments, SpotTune shows superior performance on 12 out
of 14 datasets over standard ﬁne-tuning. Compared with
other recently proposed methods on the Visual Decathlon
Challenge , SpotTune sets the new state
of the art for the challenge by only exploiting the transferability of the features extracted from ImageNet, without
changing the network architecture. This is achieved without bells and whistles, i.e., we believe the results could be
even further improved with more careful parameter tuning,
and the use of other techniques such as data augmentation,
including jittering images at test time and averaging their
predictions.
In SpotTune (Global-k), we ﬁne-tune 3 blocks of the
pre-trained model for each task which greatly reduces the
number of parameters and still preserves a very competitive
score. Although we focus on accuracy instead of parameter reduction in our work, we note that training our globalk variant with a multi-task loss on all 10 datasets, as well
as model compression techniques, could further reduce the
number of parameters in our method. We leave this research
thread for future work.
5. Conclusion
We proposed an adaptive ﬁne-tuning algorithm called
SpotTune which specializes the ﬁne-tuning strategy for
each training example of the target dataset.
that our method outperforms the key most popular and
widely used protocols for ﬁne-tuning on a variety of public
benchmarks.
We also evaluated SpotTune on the Visual
Decathlon challenge, achieving the new state of the art, as
measured by the overall score across the 10 datasets.
Acknowledgements.
We would like to thank Professor Song Han for helpful discussions.
This work is in
part supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/
Interior Business Center (DOI/IBC) contract number
D17PC00341.
This work is also in part supported by
CRISP, one of six centers in JUMP, an SRC program
sponsored by DARPA, and NSF CHASE-CI #1730158.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding
any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing
the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements, either expressed
or implied, of IARPA, DOI/IBC, or the U.S. Government.