Rich environments for active learning:
a definition
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C. Dunlap
University of Colorado at Denver
Rich Environments for Active Learning, or REALs, are comprehensive instructional systems that
evolve from and are consistent with constructivist philosophies and theories. To embody a constructivist
view of learning, REALs:
• promote study and investigation within authentic contexts;
• encourage the growth of student responsibility, initiative, decision making, and intentional learning;
• cultivate collaboration among students and teachers;
• utilize dynamic, interdisciplinary, generative learning activities that promote higher-order thinking
processes to help students develop rich and complex knowledge structures; and
• assess student progress in content and learning-to-learn within authentic contexts using realistic
tasks and performances.
REALs provide learning activities that engage students in a continuous collaborative process of
building and reshaping understanding as a natural consequence of their experiences and interactions
within learning environments that authentically reflect the world around them. In this way, REALs are
a response to educational practices that promote the development of inert knowledge, such as
conventional teacher-to-student knowledge-transfer activities.
In this article, we describe and organize the shared elements of REALs, including the theoretical
foundations and instructional strategies to provide a common ground for discussion. We compare
existing assumptions underlying education with new assumptions that promote problem-solving and
higher-level thinking. Next, we examine the theoretical foundation that supports these new
assumptions. Finally, we describe how REALs promote these new assumptions within a constructivist
framework, defining each REAL attribute and providing supporting examples of REAL strategies in
Introduction
In today's complex world, simply knowing how to use tools and knowledge in a single
domain is not sufficient to remain competitive as either individuals or companies. People
must also learn to apply tools and knowledge in new domains and different situations.
Industry specialists report that people at every organizational level must be creative and
flexible problem solvers . This requires the ability to apply experience and
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dun/op
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
knowledge to address novel problems. Consequently, learning to think critically, to
analyse and synthesize information to solve technical, social, economic, political, and
scientific problems, and to work productively in groups are crucial skills for successful
and fulfilling participation in our modern, competitive society.
The purpose of this article is to describe and organize the shared elements of Rich
Environments for Active Learning, or REALs, including the theoretical foundations and
instructional strategies to provide a common ground for discussion. REALs are based on
constructivist values and theories including 'collaboration, personal autonomy,
generativity, reflectivity, active engagement, personal relevance, and pluralism' . REALs provide learning activities that, instead of transferring knowledge to
students, engage students in a continuous collaborative process of building and reshaping
understanding as a natural consequence of their experiences and authentic interactions
with the world . Advocating a
holistic approach to education, REALs reflect-, the assumption that the process of
knowledge acquisition is 'firmly embedded in the social and emotional context in which
learning takes place' .
Need for educational change
Changing society
Education is receiving increasing pressure from changing global economic circumstances
and complex societal needs. Yet, according to Lynton , 'at this time [...]
education is far from fully contributing to the economic well-being of this country
[United States]'. Public and private institutions are demanding employees who can think
critically and solve a range of problems, who can move easily from task to task, and who
can work efficiently and effectively in team situations; yet they claim that those people are
difficult to find.
The US education system, to its credit, is neither deaf to this plea nor ignorant of the need
to change how and what instruction is delivered in the classroom. Calls for restructuring
the way students learn come from a variety of institutions including the American
Association for the Advancement of Science and the National Council of Teachers
for Mathematics . Educators agree that students must learn to solve problems and
think independently . The challenge for educators is to utilize
strategies that teach content in ways that also help to develop thinking, problem-solving,
metacognitive, and life-long learning skills .
Weaknesses within the current system
There is considerable evidence that today's students are not particularly strong in the
areas of thinking and reasoning .
Bransford et al state that the 'basic problem is that traditional
instruction often fails to produce the kinds of transfer to new problem-solving situations
that most educators would like to see'. Conventional instruction often utilizes simplified,
decontextualized examples and problems, leading to an inadequate understanding of and
Volume 3 Number 2
ability to apply the knowledge acquired. Students often are not exposed to examples and
problems that make knowledge relevant to them . Instead, students
are asked to solve problems that cause them to wonder: 'Why do I need to know this?'.
Because the information presented to students has no relevance or meaning for them, they
tend to treat new information as facts to be memorized and recited rather than as tools to
solve problems relevant to their own needs . This, unfortunately,
leads to inert knowledge - knowledge that cannot be applied to real problems and
situations.
Inert knowledge
Research shows that knowledge learned but not explicitly related to relevant problemsolving remains inert . Whitehead
first coined the phrase inert knowledge in 1929 to refer to knowledge acquired in abstract
circumstances without direct relevance to the learner's needs. Inert knowledge is not
readily available for application or transfer to novel situations . It seems that
our educational system is focused on producing inert knowledge. The Cognition and
Technology Group at Vanderbilt (CTGV) specifies the following flaws in
our conventional approaches to schooling and teaching that lead to inert knowledge:
• There is a constant battle of breadth versus depth - and breadth usually wins. We
(educators) tend to fill our students with facts, and leave no time for dealing with
topics in depth. We expect our students to remember dates, formulae, algorithms,
quotations, and whole poems, yet show little practical use for that knowledge despite
the fact that we know our students have difficulty transferring the knowledge.
Robertson states that:
Students who rely on memorized algorithms for solving problems typically do not
perform as well on transfer problems as do students who rely on an understanding of the
underlying concepts, (p. 253)
• We consistently rely on decontextualized instructional strategies. In our desire to cover
as much material as possible, we focus our instructional activities on abstract basic
skills, concepts, and technical definitions. We believe that decontextualized skills have
broad applicability and are unaffected by the activities or environments in which they
are acquired and used . However, when we do this, students do not
learn when to apply those skills or within what kinds of contexts they work. We do this
despite a large body of evidence that indicates that abstracted skills are seldom
transferred from one domain to another . We fail to realize that abstracted skills have no contextual cues to relate
to new situations.
• When we do provide practice for our students, we give them arbitrary, uninteresting,
unrealistic problems to solve. The example of story problems in mathematics is overused. We can also find examples of unrealistic and over-simplified problems in the
sciences, languages, and social studies. Again, we do this in the mistaken belief that we
must emphasize decontextualized skills that are applicable everywhere. Yet these
unrealistic problems have no meaning to the students who then fail to find any
contextual cues to relate to problems they may encounter in their lives.
R Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning a definition
• We treat students passively for 12 to 16 years, rarely giving them the opportunity to
take responsibility for their own learning, to explore ideas of their own choosing, to
collaborate with one another or with teachers, or to make valuable contributions to the
learning of others. They do not learn to takl'charge of their own learning, nor do they
learn the skills necessary to become life-long learners and daily problem-solvers.
To the preceding four items cited in the CTGV article, we add a couple more to the list of
conventional educational practices that foster the production of inert knowledge:
• Students are not evaluated in authentic ways. After teaching in decontextualized ways,
we test in the same ways. We do not look at actual performance but use paper-pencil
tests to measure the quantity of knowledge learned. We fail to examine the quality of
their thinking or problem-solving.
• Finally, our current school practices often have negative effects on the morale and
motivation of students. Perelman states:
Students are forced to compete to achieve as much as they can within the periods of time
allotted for each activity. This design requires that most students fail or do less well most
of the time so that a minority of them can be labelled 'excellent.' The main functional
focus of the system is not 'learning,' it is 'screening out', (p. 72)
This has a tremendous effect on society. Drop-out rates are higher than our society can
afford. We have created an evaluation, testing, and grading sub-structure that helps
perpetuate the view that education is a game that has few winners and many losers. This
game teaches our students to focus on tests and grades rather than on problem-solving,
applying knowledge, and working collaboratively in a risk-free environment. The best
students learn early on that they succeed best by working by themselves as quickly as
possible. They learn to beat the tests and win the game.
Erroneous assumptions
We begin to change these conventional practices by calling into question some of our
basic assumptions. Berryman states that the educational practices described above
stem from five erroneous assumptions about learning that have governed education since
the beginning of the industrial age. He holds that we often assume incorrectly that:
• people easily transfer learning from one situation to another if they have learned the
fundamental skills and concepts [decontextualized];
• learners are 'receivers' of knowledge in verbal forms from books, experts, and teachers;
• learning is entirely behaviouristic, involving the strengthening of bonds between
stimuli and correct responses;
• learners are blank slates ready to be written upon and filled with knowledge; and
• skills and knowledge are best acquired independent of realistic contexts.
To begin to address the issues of transfer and instructional methods to meet employer and
societal needs, reasoning and problem-solving skill development must be a part of an
interdisciplinary program of study in education - a program
Volume 3 Number 2
or environment that places students in situations where they can practise solving
problems in a meaningful and constructive manner.
We need to look at other ways
One view of an alternative framework comes from researchers who are beginning to
emphasize the importance of anchoring or situating instruction in meaningful problemsolving environments . The Cognition and Technology Group at
Vanderbilt is a leader in the development of alternative frameworks of instruction and
schooling. The group posits two significant changes.
First, we as educators must establish new goals for learning. We must move from
emphasizing decontextualized reading and computational skills to developing independent thinkers and learners who engage in life-long learning. This does not mean that we
abandon the important skills of reading and computation; it means instead that we
should be teaching reading and computation within more situated contexts that
demonstrate the value of those skills.
New assumptions about learning
Second, in contrast to our long operative conventional assumptions (see above), we must
base our teaching on new assumptions about the nature of thinking, learning, and
instruction. We must accept that
[...] the mere accumulation of factual or declarative knowledge is not sufficient to support
problem solving. In addition to factual or declarative knowledge, students must learn why,
when, and how various skills and concepts are relevant. 
Effective problem-solving and thinking are not based solely on motivation and knowledge
of thinking strategies, but also on well-organized and indexed content knowledge.
Learners must have rich knowledge structures with many contextual links to help them
address and solve complex problems. This means that instead of trying to abstract a set of
decontextualized general skills, we must make our teaching as contextualized as possible
to provide as many possible links with other domains as possible.
Therefore, we propose the following 'new' assumptions about learning and teaching:
• People transfer learning from one situation to another with difficulty. Learning is more
likely to be transferred from complex and rich learning situations. Rich learning
activities help students think deeply about content in relevant and realistic contexts
 .
• Learners are 'constructors' of knowledge in a variety of forms. They take an active role
in forming new understandings and are not just passive receptors.
• Learning is a collaborative process. Students learn not solely from experts and
teachers, but also from each other. They test ideas with each other and help each other
build elaborate and refined knowledge structures.
• Learning is cognitive, and involves the processing of information and the constant
creation and evolution of knowledge structures. We must focus on and make visible
thinking and reasoning processes. We are not suggesting abandoning the teaching of
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
content to teach only thinking and reasoning, because 'knowledge of concepts,
theories, and principles [. . .] empowers people to think effectively' .
• Learners bring their own needs and experiences to a learning situation and are ready to act
according to those needs. We must incorporate those needs and experiences into learning
activities to help students take ownership and responsibility for their own learning.
• Skills and knowledge are best acquired within realistic contexts. Morris etal{\ 979) call
this 'transfer appropriate processing.' Transfer appropriate processing means that
students must have the opportunity to practise and learn the outcomes that are
expected of them under realistic or authentic conditions.
• Assessment of students must take more realistic and holistic forms, utilizing projects
and portfolios and de-emphasizing standardized testing. Educators are increasingly
aware that conventional achievement and intelligence tests do not measure the ability
of people to perform in everyday settings and adapt to new situations .
A discussion of the foundations for these assumptions and examples of their
implementation makes up the rest of this article.
Rich Environments for Active Learning
Definition of REALs
We must implement a number of strategies in order successfully to adopt the new
assumptions about thinking, learning, instruction, and achievement described above. The
adoption of these strategies creates learning environments that we call Rich Environments
for Active Learning (REALs). REALs are comprehensive instructional systems that
 :
• evolve from and are consistent with constructivist philosophies and theories;
• promote study and investigation within authentic (i.e. realistic, meaningful, relevant,
complex, and information-rich) contexts;
• encourage the growth of student responsibility, initiative, decision-making, and
intentional learning;
• cultivate an atmosphere of knowledge-building learning communities that utilize
collaborative learning among students and teachers ;
• utilize dynamic, interdisciplinary, generative learning activities that promote high-level
thinking processes (i.e. analysis, synthesis, problem-solving, experimentation,
creativity, and examination of topics from multiple perspectives) to help students
integrate new knowledge with old knowledge and thereby create rich and complex
knowledge structures; and,
• assess student progress in content and learning-to-Iearn through realistic tasks and
performances.
It is important to note that two of the overall defining characteristics of learning
environments are integration and comprehensiveness . Hannafin
Volume 3 Number 2
describes integration as a process of linking new knowledge to old, and modifying and
enriching existing knowledge. Integration enhances the depth of learning to increase the
number of access points to that information. As we described earlier, learning
environments must go beyond general, abstracted learning to include specific learning.
Goldman et al state that:
These environments are designed to invite the kinds of thinking that help students develop
general skills and attitudes that contribute to effective problem solving, plus acquire specific
concepts and principles that allow them to think effectively about particular domains, (p. 1)
Comprehensiveness, the second defining characteristic, carries this notion further. It refers
to the importance of placing learning in broad, realistic contexts rather than in
decontextualized and compartmentalized contexts. REAL learning strategies, then, guide
and mediate an individual's learning, and support the learner's decision-making
 . Themes are used to help organize learning around interdisciplinary
contexts that focus on problem-solving or projects that link concepts and knowledge to
focused activities within the environment .
What a REAL is not
Because the phrase learning environment is broadly and carelessly used in educational
literature to describe everything from schools to classrooms to computer microworlds to
learning activities to air conditioning and furniture, we shall try to clarify what a REAL is
not before examining the attributes in more detail. We attempt to make the case that a
REAL is a more accurate description of what people generally mean when they use the
term learning environment.
First, a REAL is not a delivery technology like video, CD-ROM, or audio tapes. Clark
 defines delivery technologies as those that draw on resources and media to deliver
instruction, and affect the cost and access of instruction. Media technologies can be
integral components of REALs and, in fact, usually are. However, a REAL is not limited
to any specific media, but instead is an assortment of methods and ideas that help create
an environment that promotes and encourages active learning. Clark's point is important
from a research standpoint because instructional methods are often confounded with
media in research, and he argues strongly and convincingly that it is instructional
methods, not media, that influence learning. He contends that any necessary teaching
method can usually be designed in more than one medium. Although there are varying
degrees of acceptance and disagreement with Clark's point of view , a REAL is a set of instructional methods designed on the
assumptions that media are tools for students and teachers' to use, and that the learning
that occurs within the environment is founded on the activities and processes that
encourage thinking and reasoning, not the media that deliver information.
Second, do not confuse REALs with computer-based microworlds or learner-support
environments . Computer-based microworlds are
computer programs that are designed to apply constructivist theories. Examples include
case-based applications, simulations, intentional learning environments, and some
hypermedia resources. Developers of microworlds often refer to their programs as
learning environments because they often attempt to simulate, on a smaller simplified
R Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
scale, realistic environments. However, we contend that this limits the concept of learning
environment. Learning environments, and especially REALs, are much more
comprehensive and holistic than individual computer applications. Although some
"computer-based applications use constructivist ideas quite admirably - see especially the
Strategic Teaching Framework , and the' Transfusion
Medicine Modules - they are not
learning environments in the sense that REALs are. To create REALs, teachers must
involve their students, parents, administrators, and colleagues in planning and
implementing strategies that encourage student responsibility, active knowledge
construction, and generative learning activities on a large scale and in a variety of
methods and forms. Microworlds may play a role in a REAL through the delivery of
information, practice, finding and presenting information, stimulation of high-level
thought processes, promotion of collaboration, or exploration; but REALs involve many
more activities and demand much more flexibility than can probably ever be contained in
a single computer program. A REAL is, then, a learning community that 'includes the
content taught, the pedagogical methods employed, the sequencing of learning activities,
and the sociology of learning' .
Finally, a REAL is not the physical attributes of the classroom. It is not about air
conditioning, desks, lighting, or ergonomics. While these environmental factors are
critical in creating a smooth-operating learning environment, they are not included in our
definition or REALs .
Foundation of REALs
REALs (i.e. constructivist learning environments, information-rich learning environments, interactive-learning environments, or knowledge-building learning communities)
are not new to education. We can go back to Socrates and see that he used problems and
questions to guide students to analyse and think about their environments . Rousseau prescribed using direct experience . In the early
1900s, John Dewey proposed student-directed reforms and experiential learning.
Bruner advocated discovery or inquiry learning around realistic problems. The
notion that students should learn through practice, application, and apprenticeship has
been with us for centuries. It was not until the industrial age, when we needed places to
store children until old enough to work on assembly lines, that we began trying to mass
produce replicable results. Yet the last five to ten years have seen renewed emphasis on
reforming schools and teaching practices to replace our educational production lines with
classrooms that teach people to think and solve problems. This current effort at renewal
revolves around a set of ideas and theories referred to as constructivism.
Characteristics of constructivism
The class of theories that guides the development of REALs is called constructivist
theories . Fundamentally, constructivism asserts
that we learn through a continual process of building, interpreting, and modifying our
own representations of reality based upon our experiences with reality .
Volume 3 Number 2
Wheatley elaborates on the importance of this idea not just in learning but also in
the innovation and improvement of society:
Learning (innovation) is fostered by information gathered from new connections; from
insights gained by journeys into other disciplines or places; from active, collegial networks and
fluid, open boundaries. Learning (innovation) arises from ongoing circles of exchange where
information is not just accumulated or stored, but created. Knowledge is generated anew from
connections that weren't there before. When this information self-organizes, learning
(innovation) occurs, the progeny of information-rich, ambiguous environments, (p. 113)
TTworetical
foundation
Characteristics of
constnjcuvum
Attributes of REALs
Instructloni
ttntegiMto
Construct! vbt view
of teaming
Active knowiedfl*
construction and
mdixtd knowUdg*
responsibility
indlnftl«llY«
strategics
Reciprocal
spprtntlcvstilp
instruction
Figure I: REAL definition: Framework
Collaboration and
social negotiation
ofnteanlno
Co-openttv*
Proolefli^wweo
fitxibilly
To develop learning environments that encourage the type of learning described by
Jonassen, Wheatley, and others, REALs reflect the theories and philosophies of
constructivism. In fact, the three main characteristics of the constructivist view of learning
govern our design of REALs (see Figure 1). The first characteristic of constructivism is
the notion that knowledge is not a product to be accumulated but an active and evolving
process in which the learner attempts to make sense out of the world .
Brown et al illustrate this idea:
A concept, for example, will continually evolve with each new occasion of use, because new
situations, negotiations, and activities inevitably recast it in a new, more densely textured
form. So a concept, like the meaning of a word, is always under construction, (p. 33)
R Scott Grobinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
The second characteristic is the notion that people conditionalize their knowledge in
personal ways . That is, they acquire knowledge in forms that enable them
to use that knowledge later. Bransford et al state that:
[...] there are large differences between knowing something and spontaneously thinking to
do it or use it when one is engaged in an actual problem-solving situation, (p. 122)
Knowledge, then, is 'indexed' to the contexts in which we encounter it. We are unlikely to
use knowledge that is decontextualized because we can see no relevance - no contextual
cues cause us to remember that knowledge because it was taught without cues. A person
who indexes and conditionalizes knowledge knows when to apply that knowledge. A
person who learns in a decontextualized way often is not aware that he or she has the
applicable knowledge to solve a problem. In other words, knowledge acquired is inert.
Students must acquire concepts and theories in ways that help them use the information
later on, and appreciate the value of that information. Brown et al describe
this process as indexicalizing knowledge. They mean that rich involvement in realistic and
relevant problem-solving allows learners to develop many broad and deep indexicalized
representations that enable them to apply knowledge more spontaneously to new
situations because they can compare a known and relevant situation with a new situation.
The more links there are across related knowledge structures, the more likely students are
to apply that knowledge. The more closely the learning context resembles the actual
context, the better people will perform. Tulving and Thompson refer to this as
'encoding specificity,' which holds that successful retrieval of information is enhanced
when cues relevant to later retrieval of that information are encoded along with the
material learned. It is important to note that constructivists contend that these rich links
cannot be developed in decontextualized learning activities; rather, learning must be
placed in realistic contexts that provide cognitive conflict or puzzlement, and determine
the organization and nature of what is learned .
White theorizes that there are two kinds of links that need to be
developed while learning: internal and external. Internal associations are connections
among the criterial attributes of a principle. Internal associations reflect the learner's
understanding of the concept. External associations refer to connections between the
principle and everyday experiences or context, and indicate the 'usability' of a concept.
Learning to solve problems requires both kinds of links. Our schools are good at building
the internal links, but poor at providing the external links.
The third major characteristic of constructivism is the importance of collaboration and
social negotiation of meaning. Learning happens within a social context. Conceptual
growth comes from sharing our perspectives and testing our ideas with others, modifying
our internal representations in response to that process of negotiation . Common understandings and shared meanings are developed through interaction
among peers and teachers. This, is the cultural aspect of knowledge.
The activities of a domain are framed by its culture. Their meaning and purpose are
socially constructed through negotiations among present and past members. Activities
. thus cohere in a way that is, in theory if not always in practice, accessible to members
who move within the social framework. These coherent, meaningful, and purposeful
Volume 3 Number 2
activities are authentic, according to the definition of the term we use here. 
This social aspect of constructivism is important on an individual level as well as cultural
level, for collaborative interactions allow us to test the viability of our understandings,
theories, and conjectures .
REALs embody the characteristics of constructivism, but how? What are the critical
attributes of REALs that support a constructivist view of learning? The next section of
this article discusses each of the criterial attributes of a REAL:
A. Student responsibility and initiative.
B. Generative learning activities.
C. Authentic learning contexts.
D. Authentic assessment strategies.
E. Co-operative support.
We will illustrate each attribute with examples of functioning REALs utilizing the
strategies of reciprocal teaching, cognitive apprenticeship, anchored instruction, cognitive
flexibility theory, learning in design, and problem-based learning (PBL).
The main attributes of REALs
A. Student responsibility and initiative
The first attribute of REALs is that they are student-centred. Student-centred learning
environments place a major emphasis on developing intentional learning and life-long
learning skills. These skills include the abilities to construct higher-order questions to
guide learning, reflect on consequences and implications of actions, and monitor and
modify personal cognitive activity. This attribute is critical because students cannot
actively construct and evolve their knowledge structures without taking responsibility and
initiative for their learning.
Intentional learning
Scardamalia and her colleagues noticed that passive or immature learners have
certain characteristics that prevent them from becoming skilful problem solvers. First,
immature learners tend to organize their mental activities around topics rather than goals,
promoting decontextualization and the inability to see the relevance of the learning
activity to their lives. Second, they tend to focus on surface features, and do not examine
a topic in depth. Third, they tend to work until a task is finished. They do not take time
to examine the quality of their work, nor do they take the time to consider revisions to
their finished product or to the strategies utilized to complete the task. When the task is
finished, they forget whatever learning took place during their work on the task. Finally,
they think of learning in an additive fashion rather than transforming and enriching their
existing knowledge structures.
These characteristics are, in essence, the product of the conventional kind of schooling
that we described earlier. These behaviours prevent students from transferring their
R Scott Grab/nger and Joanna C Dun/op
Rich environments for active learning a definition
knowledge to new problems because they have learned content and strategies in a
decontextualized context. Palincsar states that:
To achieve transfer it is necessary to attend to the context in which instruction and practice
occur; transfer is likely to occur to the extent that there are common elements between the
situation in which the children are learning this tactic and the situations in which such a
tactic would be useful, (p. 37)
Palincsar, Scardamalia, and Bereiter are leading proponents of the conviction that
students must be taught to take more responsibility for their own learning to enhance the
likelihood of transfer. They refer to this concept as intentional learning, or 'those
cognitive processes that have learning as a goal rather than an accidental outcome'
 . Palincsar and Klenk state that
'intentional learning, in contrast to incidental learning, is an achievement resulting from
the learner's purposeful, effortful, self-regulated, and active engagement'. To be
intentional learners, students must learn to learn as well as accrue knowledge. Teaching,
too, takes on a revised role, for to teach for intentional learning means to cultivate those
general abilities that facilitate life-long learning . The main skills
involved in teaching students to be more intentional are questioning, self-reflection, and
metacognition, 'or the awareness and ability to monitor and control one's activity as a
learner' .
Questioning
Scardamalia and Bereiter believe that one of the first steps in developing
intentional learners is to help students take more executive control over what they decide
to learn through the development of higher-order questioning skills. They point out that
in a typical classroom, teachers ask all the questions. Therefore, teachers are the ones
engaged in the question generation process, which involves important high-level thinking
skills and executive control decisions - the skills students need to develop actively to
construct and evolve their knowledge structures. The students are not given an
opportunity to ask questions and, therefore, do not learn to perform the analysis activities
related to question generation. Research by Scardamalia and Bereiter indicates
that students can learn to ask questions to guide their knowledge-building, thus assuming
a 'higher level of agency' and more ownership for their learning. In a student-centred
REAL, students are given more executive control over their learning to enable them to
take more ownership, to find more relevance and authenticity, and to learn life-long
learning skills.
Self-Reflection
A second skill in intentional learning is self-reflection. 'Self-reflection implies observing
and putting an interpretation on one's own actions, for instance considering one's own
intentions and motives as objects of thought' . Von Wright
writes that self-reflection involves the abstraction of meaning and is an interpretative
process aimed at the understanding of reality. To understand the world in different ways
involves modifying our conceptions of the world and our place in the world. It involves
thinking about reality in alternative ways. Von Wright goes on to describe two levels of
reflection. One level of reflection is the ability to think about consequences and
implications of actions. A second level of reflection is the ability to think about oneself as
Volume 3 Number 2
an intentional subject of one's own actions and to consider the consequences and efficacy
of those actions. This involves the ability to look at oneself in an objective way, and to
consider ways of changing future actions to improve performance. The second level of
reflection also involves metacognitive learning skills.
Metacognitive skills
'Metacognitive skills refer to the steps that people take to regulate and modify the progress
of their cognitive activity: to learn such skills is to acquire procedures which regulate
cognitive processes' . Metacognitive skills include taking
conscious control of learning, planning and selecting strategies, monitoring the progress of
learning, correcting errors, analysing the effectiveness of learning strategies, and changing
learning behaviours and strategies when necessary . These abilities
interact with developmental maturation and domain expertise. Immature learners have not
acquired the ability to regulate or modify their cognitive activity; they may have learned a
single strategy, such as memorization, and default to that one strategy in all situations. •
Studies show that the use of metacognitive strategies can improve learning skills, and that
the independent use of these metacognitive strategies can be gradually developed in
people . Blakely and Spence 
describe several basic instructional strategies that can be incorporated into classroom
activities to help students develop metacognitive behaviours:
• Students should be asked to identify consciously what they 'know' as opposed to what
they 'do not know'.
• Students should keep journals or logs in which they reflect upon their learning
processes, noting what works and what does not.
• Students should manage their own time and resources, including estimating time
required to complete tasks and activities, organizing materials and resources, and
scheduling the procedures necessary to complete an activity.
• Students must participate in guided self-evaluation using individual conferences and
checklists to help them focus on the thinking process.
REAL strategy: reciprocal teaching
One of the manifestations of a REAL that emphasizes the development of intentional
learning skills described above is reciprocal teaching. The context of reciprocal teaching is
social, interactive, and holistic. Palincsar and Klenk used reciprocal teaching with
at-risk first-grade students to develop reading skills. Palincsar and Klenk describe
reciprocal teaching as:
[. . .] an instructional procedure that takes place in a collaborative learning group and
features guided practice in the flexible application of four concrete strategies to the task of
text comprehension: questioning, summarizing, clarifying, and predicting. The teacher and
group of students take turns leading discussions regarding the content of the text they are
jointly attempting to understand, (p. 213)
These strategies are the kinds of intentional learning strategies that encourage selfregulation and self-monitoring behaviours.
R Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
The relationship of reciprocal teaching to REALs is founded on three theoretical
principles, consistent with the characteristics of constructivism described previously,
based on the work of Vygotsky as described by Palincsar and Klenk . The
first principle states that the higher cognitive processes originate from social interactions.
The second principle is Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD). Vygotsky
described the ZPD as:
[. . .] the distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent
problem-solving, and the level of potential development as determined through problemsolving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers, (p. 86)
Reciprocal teaching is designed to provide a ZPD in which students, with the help of
teachers and peers, take on greater responsibility for learning activities. Finally,
Vygotsky's third principle advocates that learning take place in a contextualized, holistic
activity that has relevance for the learners.
How, then, does reciprocal teaching work? The process begins with a text that a class
reads silently, orally, or along with the teacher depending on the skill level of the students.
Following each segment, a dialogue leader (students take turns) asks questions that deal
with content or 'wonderment' issues. The questions often stimulate further inquiry. The
other students respond to the questions, raise their own questions, and, in cases of
disagreement or confusion, re-read the text. The discussion leader is responsible for
summarizing and synthesizing the reading and discussion, and clarifying the purpose of
the reading. The leader also generates and solicits predictions about the upcoming text to
prepare for meaningful reading of the next segment. The teacher must model the
appropriate behaviour and provide scaffolding to sustain the discussion. The students, then, are involved in
the higher-level thinking and decision-making activities that usually fall within the realm
of the teacher. With the help of the teacher, students share a ZPD where they can learn
the questioning, summarizing, clarifying and predicting activities so integral to
metacognitive awareness.
Finally, why does reciprocal teaching work? Collins et al posit the following
reasons for its success (and, in a broader view, for the success of REALs):
• The reciprocal teaching model engages students in activities that help them form a new
conceptual model of the task of reading. They see reading as a process that involves
reflection and prediction rather than just the recitation of words. They learn to make
what they are reading relevant to their needs and to monitor their progress and strive
for clarification.
• The teacher and student share a problem context while the teacher models expert
strategies that the students learn to use independently.
• Scaffolding is crucial in the success of reciprocal teaching. 'Most importantly, it,
decomposes the task as necessary for the students to carry it out, thereby helping them
to see how, in detail, to go about it' .
• Finally, students learn the self-monitoring activities and thinking processes involved in
critiquing and improving their work.
Volume 3 Number 2
B. Generative learning activities
The second requirement of REALs is that students engage in generative learning
activities. People who learn through active involvement and use tools build an
'increasingly rich implicit understanding of the world' .
Generative learning requires that students 'engage in argumentation and reflection as they
try to use and then refine their existing knowledge as they attempt to make sense of
alternate points of view' . Studies indicate that knowledge is more
likely to be active and used when acquired in a problem-solving mode rather than in a
factual-knowledge mode . The concept of
generative learning is an extension of the constructivist characteristic of actively
constructing knowledge; students cannot construct or evolve their own learning without
generating something through active involvement.
Generative learning requires a shift in the traditional roles of students and instructors.
Students become investigators, seekers, and problem solvers. Teachers become facilitators
and guides, rather than presenters of knowledge. For example, rather than simply learning
what objectives and goals are, students in a teacher-education class generate lesson plans and
objectives and then manipulate and revise them to solve new teaching problems. Ideally, they
test their objectives, goals, and strategies in actual practice-teaching situations. In generative
learning, students apply the information they learn. Generative learning activities require
students to take static information and generate fluid, flexible, usable knowledge. Generative
learning, then, means that students are involved deeply and constantly with creating
solutions to authentic problems via the development and completion of projects. A REAL
strategy that relies heavily on projects is cognitive apprenticeship.
REAL strategy: cognitive apprenticeship
Cognitive apprenticeship is modelled after the traditional apprenticeship way of learning
arts and crafts. It incorporates elements of traditional apprenticeship and modern
schooling. In traditional apprenticeship, the processes of an activity are visible and
involve learning a physical and outwardly observable activity . The
expert shows an apprentice how to perform a task, then watches and coaches as the
apprentice practises portions of the task, and finally turns over more and more
responsibility to the apprentice until the apprentice can perform the task alone . Traditional apprenticeship deals with processes that are easily visible because
they involve skills and produce visible products.
The goal of cognitive apprenticeship is to make processes that are normally invisible
visible. In schooling, the process of thinking is usually invisible to both students and
teachers. For example, the practices of problem-solving, reading comprehension, and
computation are not visible processes . Brown et al point out
that the term cognitive apprenticeship emphasizes that apprenticeship techniques can
reach beyond observable physical skills to the kinds of cognitive skills associated with
learning in schools. In a cognitive apprenticeship environment, the teacher attempts to
make visible the thinking processes involved in performing a cognitive task. The teacher
first models how to perform a cognitive task by thinking aloud. Then the teacher watches,
coaches, and provides scaffolding as the students practise portions of the task. Finally, he
or she turns over more and more responsibility to students, and fades coaching and
R Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Ounlop
Rich environments for active learning a definition
scaffolding until they can perform the task alone. 'Cognitive apprenticeship supports
learning in a domain by enabling students to acquire, develop, and use cognitive tools in
an authentic domain activity' .
The differences between traditional and cognitive apprenticeship are
important because they indicate where the effort must be placed on the instructional
design of learning activities. First, in traditional apprenticeship the task is easily
observable. In cognitive apprenticeship, the thinking processes must be deliberately
brought into the open by the teacher, and the teacher must help students learn to bring
their thinking into the open. Second, in traditional apprenticeship, the tasks come from
work, and learning is situated in the workplace. In cognitive apprenticeship, the challenge
is to situate the abstract goals of school curriculum in contexts that make sense to
students. Third, in traditional apprenticeship, the skills learned are inherent in the task. In
schooling, students learn skills that are supposed to transfer to different tasks. In
cognitive apprenticeship, the challenge is to present a range of tasks to encourage
reflection and to identify common transferable elements across tasks. The goal is to help
students generalize and transfer their learning through conditionalized and indexed
knowledge (related to the second characteristic of constructivism).
Cognitive apprenticeship and generative learning are closely linked because the process of
making cognitive processes visible means that students must create or generate things that
represent those processes. Teachers must create work and tasks that represent the process
of solving a problem, writing, or computation in addition to products. To examine the
development of student thinking, an English teacher may ask for questions, themes,
concept maps, and outlines before students begin writing. Mathematics teachers are often
notorious for telling students: 'I want to see your work, not just the answer,' so they can
look for errors in the thinking process.
Generative learning is one of the simplest features of a REAL. It simply demands that
students produce something of value. It is probably the most exciting part of a REAL
because students work on projects and tasks that are relevant to them and to their peers.
It keeps students busy and happy - or active - while helping them construct and evolve
their knowledge structures.
C. Authentic learning contexts
The third attribute of REALs is that learning takes place within an authentic context. An
authentic task, activity, or goal provide learning experiences as realistic as possible, taking
into consideration the age and maturation level of the students and environmental
constraints such as safety and resource availability.
An authentic context incorporates as much fidelity as possible to what students will
encounter outside school in terms of tools, complexity, cognitive functioning, and
interactions with people . Therefore, creating an authentic
learning context requires more than just presenting students with realistic problems or
situations - it also means that students must address the problems or situations
realistically as well .
Authenticity is important to REALs for three reasons. First, realistic problems hold more
relevance to students' needs and experiences because they can relate what they are
Volume 3 Number 2
learning to problems and goals that they see every day. Therefore, it encourages students
to take ownership of the situation and their own learning. Second, because the situations
students encounter during learning are authentic and reflect the true nature of problems
in the real world, it develops deeper and richer (indexicalized and conditioned) knowledge
structures, leading to a higher likelihood of transfer to novel situations. Finally, because
complex problems require a team approach that provides natural opportunities for
learners to test and refine their ideas and to help each other understand the content, it
encourages collaboration and negotiation.
REAL strategy: anchored instruction
One of the ways to create authentic instruction in a REAL is to anchor that instruction in
a realistic event, problem, or theme .
Anchored instruction is fixed within a real-world event that is appealing and meaningful
to students and involves complex contexts that require students to
solve interconnected sub-problems. Because students are encouraged to work together to
solve these complex problems, they are exposed to multiple perspectives in an
environment that gives them an opportunity to test out their ideas, solutions, and
processes .
At the heart of the model is an emphasis on the importance of creating an anchor or focus
to generate interest, and to enable students to identify and solve problems and pay
attention to their own perception and comprehension of these problems' .
In anchored learning situations, students develop component skills and objectives in the
context of meaningful, realistic problems and problem-solving activities. These complex
contexts are called 'macrocontexts' . Addressing a key
characteristic of constructivism - indexed knowledge acquisition - the primary goal of
anchored instruction (and REALs) is to overcome the problem of inert knowledge. For
example, students in an instructional design and development class work in teams with
actual clients to develop instruction that will be delivered to another group of students.
They must define the problem, identify resources, set priorities, and explore alternative
solutions with the same skills and abilities that are required during realistic, outside-theclassroom problem-solving and decision-making activities. This is in direct contrast to the
way students develop component skills and objectives in a more conventional classroom
environment by working simplified, compartmentalized, and decontextualized problems.
Simply stated, it is the difference between providing meaningful, authentic learning
activities and 'I'm never going to use this' activities.
Anchored instruction shares many features of programmes that are case-based and
problem-based . The idea is
to let learners experience the intellectual changes that experts feel when modifying their
own understandings from working with realistic situations .
Effective anchors are intrinsically interesting, fostering ownership, and helping students
notice the features of problem situations that make particular actions relevant . The CTGV uses the following design principles when creating
anchored instruction. First, they use a video-based presentation format because of the
dramatic power of the medium and because of the use of multiple modalities, realistic
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning a definition
imagery, and omnipresence in our culture. Second they present a problem using actors
and a narrative format for interest. Third, the problem solution requires a generative
learning format in which students must identify pertinent information in the fourth
feature, embedded data design. Fifth, the problem is complex, with the possibility of
multiple solutions, and requires a team approach. Sixth, they use pairs of similar
problems in different contexts to enrich the indexicalization of knowledge structures.
Finally, they attempt to draw links across the curriculum to enhance the relevance of the
One of the CTGV's projects in anchored instruction is the Jasper Woodbury series
 . Jasper is a video-based series designed to promote problem-posing,
problem-solving, reasoning, and effective communication. Each of Jasper's adventures is
a 15- to 20-minute story in which the characters encounter a problem that the students in
the classroom must solve before they are allowed to see how the movie characters solved
the problem. The Jasper series helps students learn to break a problem into parts,
generate sub-goals, find and identify relevant information, generate and test hypotheses,
and co-operate with others.
REAL strategy: cognitive flexibility theory
Cognitive Flexibility Theory (CFT) also addresses the need for authentic learning
contexts in order to help learners develop conditionalized and indexicalized knowledge
structures .'
Essentially, the theory states that cognitive flexibility is needed in order to construct an
ensemble of conceptual and case representations necessary to understand a particular
problem-solving situation. The idea is that we cannot be said to have a full understanding
of a domain unless we have the opportunity to see different case representations .
CFT attempts to teach content in ill-structured domains, that is, in domains where the
knowledge-base is so vast and complex that multiple solutions to problems are possible
and likely. There are no clear-cut answers in ill-structured domains, so simple algorithms
often fail. Ill-structured domains include law, medicine, and education. So, CFT
emphasizes the following instructional strategies to help learners develop rich and deep
knowledge structures :
• CFT uses several cases and rich examples in their full complexity. One of the tenets of
CFT is to avoid over-simplifying knowledge and examples because this leads to future
misunderstandings that are difficult to change.
• CFT uses multiple forms of knowledge representation, providing examples in several
kinds of media. CFT encourages students to look at knowledge in several ways and
from several perspectives.
• CFT links abstract concepts to case examples and brings out the generalizable
concepts and strategies applicable to other problems or cases.
• To avoid the mistakes of over-simplification, CFT presents a number of examples to
make apparent, rather than hide, the variability of concepts and themes within the
Volume 3 Number 2
Although authentic learning contexts help students to develop knowledge that can be
transferred and applied to new problems and situations, the fact that students are
engaged in authentic activities creates some unique assessment problems. These issues will
be examined next.
D. Authentic assessment strategies
Going hand in hand with the need to develop authentic learning contexts, the fourth
REAL attribute is the use of authentic assessment strategies to evaluate student
performance. Conventional schooling relies on standardized and paper/pencil tests to
measure the quantity of knowledge that students have accrued. But traditional tests,
written reports, and grading schemes are inappropriate measures , time-consuming to administer and score , and
poor indicators of how students will perform in actual problem-solving conditions.
Williams and Dodge also state that students are often assessed on skills different from
ones that are taught, and experience problem-solving assessments that tend to be
subjective. Testing and assessment must recognize the importance of the organization of
the knowledge-base and its connectedness to contexts.
Wiggins contrasts authentic tests, which he describes as contextualized, complex
intellectual challenges against multiple-choice measures that he describes as fragmented
and static. According to Wiggins, authentic tests include the following criteria:
• The intellectual design features of tests and evaluation tasks must emphasize realistic
complexity, stress depth more than breadth, include ill-structured tasks or problems,
and require students to contextualize content knowledge.
• Standards of grading and scoring features should include complex multi-faceted
criteria that can be specified and that are reliable across multiple scorers. What
constitutes a high level of performance should be explainable to students and teachers
before they take the test. Teachers often claim that criteria are subjective, but this is
seldom the case; most criteria can be described with some thoughtful effort.
• Tests and evaluations must be diverse, and must recognize the existence of multiple
kinds of intelligences. In terms of fairness and equity, evaluations and assessments
should allow students to use their strengths within areas where their interests lie.
REAL example: learning in design
Carver et al elaborate on this theme by proposing an extensive list of behaviours
needed by students in a REAL. In their particular manifestation of a REAL, they
consider the classroom a design community in which students design instruction for other
students, documentaries for local media, and other exhibits for the community. Their
program has the same goals of high-level thinking, reflection, and transfer as the other
REAL strategies described:
The instructional virtues of these design experiences include the opportunity to develop and
coordinate a variety of complex mental skills, such as decomposing a topic into subtopics,
gathering data from a variety of sources, organizing diverse and often contradictory
information, formulating a point of view, translating ideas into a presentation targeted at a
particular audience, evaluating the design, and making revisions based on the evaluations.
 
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
Again, there are several parallels with the other examples that we have discussed. Their
REAL focuses on complex mental skills; analysing, comparing, and manipulating
information; working on authentic, community-based tasks; and working with others.
To evaluate fairly students working in this environment, teachers need a clear specification
of the skills students need for design tasks and prescriptions for how teachers can effectively
support those skills . Specification of skills and prescriptions of
support are two parts of assessment that must be linked for fair assessment. If a skill cannot
be supported by the teacher or some kind of scaffolding technique, then it cannot be fairly
evaluated. It may, in fact, be outside the ZPD (Zone of Proximal Development) and beyond
the current capability of the student. One of the teacher's jobs in a REAL is to specify skills
and performances that can be supported so the student can grow in ability. Carver et al
 break the important behaviours for their environment into:
• project-management skills, including creating a timeline, allocating resources, and
assigning team roles;
• research skills, including determining the nature of the problem, posing questions,
searching for information, developing new information, and analysing and interpreting
information;
• organization and representation skills, including choosing the organization and
structure of information, developing representations (text, audio, and graphics),
arranging structure and sequence; and juggling constraints;
• presentation skills, including transferring their design into media and arousing and
maintaining audience interest; and
• reflection skills, including evaluating the process and revising the design.
Their criteria work for their learning environment. Other models may need to revise some
of the specifics, though the five main categories provide an excellent starting place in
specifying skills targeted for assessment in authentic assessments. Goldman, Pellegrino,
and Bransford's discussion of assessment in the CTGV Jasper series suggests the
following assessment areas: assessment of complex mathematical problem-solving
(mathematics is the content domain of Jasper), measures of group problem-solving
performance, assessment of extensions into other areas of the content area, and
assessment of cross-curricular extensions. Although conducting an assessment for a
REAL is more work than conventional assessment, it is also an integral part of the
learning process rather than a periodic quantifiable measure. Authentic assessment
provides feedback and information that is useful for planning future learning activities.
Assessment in REALs means that we have to consider more varied techniques. Neuman
 , in her work with the Perseus hypermedia program, suggests several alternatives.
First, she suggests that teachers use more observations including evaluator observations
of performance processes, think-alouds by students, and automatic transaction
monitoring. Second, she suggests using interviews of students, instructors, and staff using
both questionnaires and focus groups. Finally, she suggests using document and product
analysis including assignments, syllabi, essays, journals, paths, reports, documentation,
and presentations.
Volume 3 Number 2
E. Co-operative support
The fifth and final characteristic of REALs, and one that is an important feature of
almost all the other REAL strategies described above, acknowledges the transactional
nature of knowledge and suggests that a shift be made to focus on social practice,
meaning, and patterns . 'All cooperative learning methods share the idea that
students work together to learn and are responsible for one another's learning as well as
their own' . Working in peer groups helps students refine their
knowledge through argumentation, structured controversy, and the sharing and testing of
ideas and perspectives. Additionally, students are more willing to take on the extra risk
required to tackle complex, ill-structured, authentic problems when they have the support
of others in the co-operative group. Co-operative learning and problem-solving groups
also address students' needs for scaffolding during unfamiliar learning and problemsolving activities; therefore, with the support of others in the group, students are more
likely to achieve goals they may not have been able to meet on their own.
Constructivists argue that co-operative learning and problem-solving groups facilitate
generative learning. Some of the generative activities that students engage in co-operative
groups include :
• Collective problem-solving. Groups give rise synergistically to insights and solutions
that would not come about individually.
• Displaying multiple roles. Group participation means that the members must understand many different roles. They also may play different roles within the group to gain
additional insights.
• Confronting ineffective strategies and misconceptions. Teachers do not have enough
time to hear what students are thinking or how they are thinking. Groups draw out,
confront, and discuss both misconceptions and ineffective strategies.
• Providing collaborative work skills. Students learn to work together in a give-and-take
interaction rather than just dividing the workload.
Research indicates that co-operative learning, when implemented properly, is highly
successful. Slavin provides the following four summary statements regarding
research findings in co-operative learning:
• Successful co-operative-learning strategies always incorporate the two key elements of
group goals and individual accountability.
• When both group goals and individual accountability are used, achievement effects are
consistently positive. Slavin's review found that 37 of 44 experimental/control
comparisons of at least four weeks' duration found significantly positive effects for cooperative group methods with none favouring traditional methods.
• Positive achievement effects are present to about the same degree across all US grade
levels (2-12), in all major subjects, and in urban, rural, and suburban schools. Effects
are equally positive for high, average, and low achievers.
• Positive effects of co-operative learning are consistently found on such diverse
R. Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
outcomes as self-esteem, inter-group relations, acceptance of academically handicapped students, attitudes toward school, and ability to work co-operatively.
REAL strategy: problem-based learning
Problem-based learning (PBL) embodies the definition of a rich environment for active
learning, and incorporates all attributes previously described. PBL is 'the learning that
results from the process of working toward the understanding or resolution of a problem'
 . PBL found initial acceptance in the medical field,
and has grown to become a major learning system for a number of medical, law, and
business schools. It is also being adapted for use in secondary schools and corporate
training environments . PBL reflects the REAL attribute that knowledge is
constructed rather than received, for it is based on the assumption that knowledge arises
from work with an authentic problem . Benor states that:
Problem-based learning in the context of medical education means self-directed study by of
[sic] learners who seek out information pertinent to either a real-life or a simulated
problem. The students have to understand the problem to the extent that its constituents
can be identified and defined. The learners have then to collect, integrate, synthesize and
apply this information to the given problem, using strategies that will yield a solution, describe four characteristics of PBL.
First, PBL environments include the learning goals of realistic problem-solving
behaviour, self-directed learning, content knowledge acquisition, and the development of
metacognitive skills.
Second, Savery and Duffy state that PBLs are based on problems that are generated
because they raise relevant concepts and principles that are authentic. Problems must be
authentic because it is difficult to create artificial problems that maintain the complexity
and dimensions of actual problems. Recall that we encountered the need for complexity
in the REAL strategies of anchored instruction and cognitive flexibility theory. Realistic
problems also have a motivational effect. They tend to engage learners more because they
want to know the outcome of the problem. When the learning context is similar to the
situation in which the learning is to be applied, learning transfer is more likely to occur.
Therefore, we see the continual reference to the necessity for transfer in PBL.
Third, the actual presentation of the problem is a critical component of PBLs. Problems
are encountered before any preparation or study has occurred . The
problem must be presented in a realistic way that encourages students to adopt and take
ownership for the problem . Work
on the problem begins with activating prior knowledge to enable students to understand
the structure of the new information. Learners state what they already know about the
problem domain. They use that knowledge to form hypotheses or ideas about potential
solutions. We also see this principle emphasized in intentional learning, because students
must ask themselves what they know about a subject before creating learning plans. The
data must be embedded in the problem presentation (refer back to the example of
anchored instruction) but must not highlight the critical factors in the case. Students must
Volume 3 Number 2
make their own decisions about what is critical because that is cognitively authentic - it
reflects actual job performance .
Fourth, the facilitator has a crucial role comparable to the roles described in anchored
instruction and reciprocal teaching. The facilitator interacts with the students at a
metacognitive level, helping them ask the right questions and monitor their own progress.
Facilitators avoid expressing opinion, giving information, or leading to a correct answer.
Their role is to challenge the students, and help them reflect on what they are learning.
 .
Co-operative learning is a critical component of PBL for it is used from the beginning to
the end of the problem-solution process. Members of the group listen to the problem
presentation together. They analyse the problem's components, recall what they know,
hypothesize, consider possible resources, and choose directions to go. They test and help
each other. They work together on the solutions and reach consensus on final actions.
The entire process from beginning to end is co-operative. Co-operative learning is also
used for its motivational factors.
Problem discussion also increases motivation by gaining and maintaining student interest
(attention), by relating the learning to student needs or helping students to meet personal
goals (relevance), by providing conditions conducive to student success (confidence), and
through the motivation provided by that mastery of the task(s) (satisfaction) .
PBL is the epitome of the REAL constructive learning process. Students work with
problems in a manner that fosters reasoning and knowledge application appropriate to
their levels of learning. In the process of working on the problem and with their peers,
students identify areas of learning to guide their own individualized study. The skills and
knowledge acquired by this study are applied back to the problem to evaluate the
effectiveness of learning and to reinforce learning. The learning that has occurred in work
with the problem and in individualized study is summarized and integrated into the
student's existing knowledge structure.
Conclusion
Times have changed. People now need to be able to think flexibly and-creatively, solve
problems, and make decisions within complex, ill-structured environments. Given these
changes, our assumptions on learning and education are out-dated, forcing us to modify
our assumptions based on current theoretical views of learning. These new assumptions,
supported by the theories and philosophies of constructivism, require different
instructional methods, techniques, and strategies than have been conventionally used in
classroom settings. Reflecting a constructivist view of learning, REALs provide a way for
us to address these new assumptions in order to meet the educational demands of a
changing society.
We have looked at each of the five main attributes of REALs that support the goals of
constructivism: (1) student responsibility and initiative, (2) generative learning activities,
(3) authentic learning contexts, (4) authentic assessment strategies, and (5) co-operative
support. Each REAL attribute builds upon and uses the others. None of the attributes are
R Scott Grabinger and Joanna C Dunlap
Rich environments for active learning: a definition
mutually exclusive, and no one attribute is more important than another; you cannot
implement one feature without incorporating the others to some degree. In effect, the
attributes of REALs mirror the comprehensive, integrated, and holistic nature of REALs.
The characteristics are symbiotic, with one feature both supporting and needing the
others to create a successful rich environment for active learning.