Novel Tools and Methods
Machine Learning for Neural Decoding
Joshua I. Glaser,1,2,3,7,9,10 Ari S. Benjamin,7 Raeed H. Chowdhury,4,5
Matthew G. Perich,4,5
Lee E. Miller,2,3,4,5 and Konrad P. Kording2,3,4,5,6,7,8
 
1Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, 2Department of Physical
Medicine & Rehabilitation, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, 3Shirley
Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, Illinois 60611, 4Department of Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, 5Department of Biomedical Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, 6Department of Engineering Sciences & Applied Mathematics,
McCormick School of Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, 7Department of Bioengineering,
School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
8Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, 9Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, and 10Mortimer B. Zuckerman
Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027
Despite rapid advances in machine learning tools, the majority of neural decoding approaches still use traditional methods. Modern machine learning tools, which are versatile and easy to use, have the potential to significantly improve decoding performance. This tutorial describes how to effectively apply these algorithms for
typical decoding problems. We provide descriptions, best practices, and code for applying common machine
learning methods, including neural networks and gradient boosting. We also provide detailed comparisons of
the performance of various methods at the task of decoding spiking activity in motor cortex, somatosensory
cortex, and hippocampus. Modern methods, particularly neural networks and ensembles, significantly outperform traditional approaches, such as Wiener and Kalman filters. Improving the performance of neural decoding
algorithms allows neuroscientists to better understand the information contained in a neural population and
can help to advance engineering applications such as brain–machine interfaces. Our code package is available
at github.com/kordinglab/neural_decoding.
Somatosensory cortex; Hippocampus
Significance Statement
Neural decoding is an important tool for understanding how neural activity relates to the outside world and
for engineering applications such as brain-machine interfaces. Despite many advances in machine learning,
it is still common to use traditional linear methods for decoding. Here, we present a tutorial and accompanying code package so that neuroscientists can more easily implement machine learning tools for neural
Introduction
Neural decoding uses activity recorded from the brain
to make predictions about variables in the outside world.
For example, researchers predict movements based on
activity in motor cortex , decisions based on activity in prefrontal and
parietal cortices , and spatial locations based on activity in the hippocampus . These
decoding predictions can be used to control devices
(e.g., a robotic limb) or to better understand how areas of
Received December 4, 2019; accepted July 3, 2020; First published July 31,
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: J.I.G., L.E.M., and K.P.K. designed research; J.I.G.,
A.S.B., R.H.C., and M.G.P. performed research; J.I.G. and K.P.K. analyzed
data; J.I.G., A.S.B., R.H.C., M.G.P., L.E.M., and K.P.K. wrote the paper.
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020 1–16
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
the brain relate to the outside world. Decoding is a central
tool in neural engineering and for neural data analysis.
In essence, neural decoding is a regression (or classification) problem relating neural signals to particular variables. When framing the problem in this way, it is apparent
that there is a wide range of methods that one could
apply. However, despite the recent advances in machine
learning (ML) techniques for regression, it is still common
to decode activity with traditional methods such as linear
regression. Using modern ML tools for neural decoding
has the potential to boost performance significantly and
might allow deeper insights into neural function.
This tutorial is designed to help readers start applying
standard ML methods for decoding. We describe when one
should (or should not) use ML for decoding, how to choose
an ML method, and best practices such as cross-validation
and hyperparameter optimization. We provide companion
code that makes it possible to implement a variety of
decoding methods quickly. Using this same code, we demonstrate here that ML methods outperform traditional decoding methods. In example datasets of recordings from
monkey motor cortex, monkey somatosensory cortex, and
rat hippocampus, modern ML methods showed the highest
accuracy decoding of the available methods. Using our
code and this tutorial, readers can achieve these performance improvements on their own data.
Materials and Methods
In this section, we provide (1) general background
about decoding, including when to use ML for decoding
and considerations for choosing a decoding method; (2)
the practical implementation details of using ML for decoding, including data formatting, proper model testing,
and hyperparameter optimization; and (3) methods that
we use to compare ML techniques in the Results section,
including descriptions of the specific ML techniques we
compare and datasets we use.
When to use machine learning for decoding
Machine learning is most helpful when the central research
aim is to obtain greater predictive performance. This is in
part because of the general success of machine learning for
nonlinear problems . We will demonstrate this later in this tutorial in
Results. There are multiple separate research aims for decoding that benefit from improved predictive performance,
including engineering applications and, if used carefully, for
understanding neural activity .
Engineering applications
Decoding is often used in engineering contexts, such as
for brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), where signals from
motor cortex are used to control computer cursors
 , robotic arms ,
and muscles . When the primary aim of
these engineering applications is to improve predictive
accuracy, ML should generally be beneficial.
Understanding what information is contained in neural
Decoding is also an important tool for understanding how
neural signals relate to the outside world. It can be used to
determine how much information neural activity contains
about an external variable , and how this information differs across brain areas
 , experimental conditions , and disease states . When the goal is to determine how much information
a neural population has about an external variable, regardless of the form of that information, then using ML will
generally be beneficial. However, when the goal is to determine how a neural population processes that information
or to obtain an interpretable description of how that information is represented, one should exercise care with ML,
as we describe in the next section.
Benchmarking for simpler decoding models
Decoders can also be used to understand the form of the
mapping between neural activity and variables in the outside
world . That is, if researchers aim to test whether the mapping from neural activity to behavior/stimuli (the “neural code”) has a certain
structure, they can develop a “hypothesis-driven decoder”
with a specific form. If that decoder can predict task variables with some arbitrary accuracy level, this is sometimes
held as evidence that information within neural activity indeed has the hypothesized structure. However, it is important to know how well a hypothesis-driven decoder performs
relative to what is possible. This is where modern ML methods can be of use. If a method designed to test a hypothesis
decodes activity much worse than ML methods, then a researcher knows that their hypothesis likely misses key aspects of the neural code. Hypothesis-driven decoders
should thus always be compared against a good-faith effort
to maximize performance accuracy with a good machine
learning approach.
Caution in interpreting machine learning models of
Understanding how information in neural activity relates to
external variables
It is tempting to investigate how an ML decoder, once
fit to neural data, transforms neural activity to external
J.I.G. was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants F31-EY-
025532 and T32-HD-057845, National Science Foundation NeuroNex Award
DBI-1707398, and the Gatsby Charitable Foundation. A.S.B. was supported
by NIH Grant MH-103910. M.G.P. was supported by NIH Grants F31-NS-
T32-HD-07418.
R01-NS-095251 and DGE-1324585. L.E.M. was supported by NIH Grants
R01-NS-074044 and R01-NS-095251. K.P.K. was supported by NIH
Grants R01-NS-074044, R01-NS-063399, and R01-EY-021579.
Acknowledgments: We thank Pavan Ramkumar for help with code
development.
Correspondence should be addressed to Joshua I. Glaser at joshglaser88@
gmail.com.
 
Copyright © 2020 Glaser et al.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International license, which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is
properly attributed.
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
variables. This may be especially tempting if the ML
model resembles neural function, such as in a neural network decoder. Still, high predictive performance is not
evidence that transformations occurring within the ML decoder are the same as, or even similar to, those in the
brain. In general, and unlike hypothesis-driven decoders,
the mathematical transformations of most ML decoders
are hard to interpret and themselves are not meant to represent any specific biological variable. Some recent efforts have started to investigate how ML models might be
interpreted once fit to data . However, users should be
cautious that this is an active research area and that, in
general, ML methods are not designed for mechanistic
interpretation.
Understanding what information is contained in neural
It is important to be careful with the scientific interpretation of decoding results, both for ML and other models
 . Decoding can tell us how much
information a neural population has about a variable X.
However, high decoding accuracy does not mean that a
brain area is directly involved in processing X, or that X is
the purpose of the brain area . For example, with a powerful decoder, it could be possible to accurately classify images based on recordings from the
retina, since the retina has information about all visual
space. However, this does not mean that the primary purpose of the retina is image classification. Moreover, even
if the neural signal temporally precedes the external variable, it does not necessarily mean that it is causally involved . For example, movementrelated information could reach somatosensory cortex
before movement because of an efference copy from
motor cortex, rather than somatosensory cortex being responsible for movement generation. Researchers should
constrain interpretations to address the information in
neural populations about variables of interest, but not use
this as evidence for the roles or purposes of areas.
On a more technical level, there are some decoders that
will not directly tell us what information is contained in the
neural population. As described further in the following section, some neural decoders incorporate prior information
 . If a decoder uses prior information
about the decoded variable, then the final decoded variables
will not only reflect the information contained in the neural
population, but will also reflect the prior information: the two
will be entangled .
What decoder should I use to improve predictive
performance?
Depending on the recording method, location, and variables of interest, different decoding methods may be
most effective. Neural networks, gradient boosted trees,
support vector machines, and linear methods are among
the dozens of potential candidates. Each makes different
assumptions about how inputs relate to outputs. We will
describe a number of specific methods suitable for neural
decoding later in this tutorial. Ultimately, we recommend
testing multiple methods, perhaps starting with the methods we have found to work best for our demonstration
datasets. Still, it is important to have a general understanding of differences between methods.
Different methods make different implicit assumptions
about the data
There is no such thing as a method that makes no assumptions. This idea derives from a key theorem in the ML literature called the “No Free Lunch” theorem, which essentially
states that no algorithm will outperform all others on every
problem . The fact that some
algorithms perform better than others in practice means that
their assumptions about the data are better. The knowledge
that all methods make assumptions to varying degrees can
help one be intentional about choosing a decoder.
The assumptions of some methods are very clear.
Regularized (ridge, or L2) linear regression, for example,
makes three: the change in the outputs is assumed to be
proportionate to the change in the inputs, any additional
noise on the outputs is assumed to be Gaussian noise
(implied by the mean squared error), and the regression
coefficients are assumed to pull from a Gaussian distribution . For more
complicated methods like neural networks, the assumptions are more complicated but still exist.
One crucial assumption that is built into decoders is the
form of the input/output relation. Some methods (e.g., linear regression or a Kalman filter) assume this mapping
has a fixed linear form. Others (e.g., neural networks)
allow this mapping to have a flexible nonlinear form. In the
scenario in which the mapping is truly linear, making this
linear assumption will be beneficial; it will be possible to
accurately learn the decoder when there are less data or
more noise . However, if the neural activity relates nonlinearly to the task variable, then it can be
beneficial to have a decoder that is relatively agnostic
about the overall input/output relationship, in the sense
that it can express many different types of relationships.
A challenge of choosing a model that is highly expressive or complex is the phenomenon of “overfitting,” in
which the model learns components of the noise that are
unique to the data that the model is trained on, but do not
generalize to any independent test data. To combat overfitting, one can choose a simpler algorithm that is less
likely to learn to model this noise. Alternatively, one can
apply regularization, which essentially penalizes the complexity of a model. This effectively reduces the expressivity of a model, while still allowing it to have many free
parameters . Regularization is an
important way to include the assumption that the input/
output relationship is not arbitrarily complex.
Additionally, for some neural decoding problems, it is
possible to incorporate assumptions about the output
being predicted. For example, let us say we are estimating
the kinematics of a movement from neural activity. The
Kalman filter, which is frequently used for movement
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
decoding , uses the additional information that
movement kinematics transition over time in a smooth and
orderly manner. There are also Bayesian decoders that can
incorporate prior beliefs about the decoded variables. For
example, the Naive Bayes decoder, which is frequently
used for position decoding from hippocampal activity
 , can take into account prior information about the
probability distribution of positions. Decoders with task
knowledge built in are constrained in terms of their solutions,
which can be helpful, provided this knowledge is correct.
Maximum likelihood estimates versus posterior
distributions
Different classes of methods also provide different types
of estimates. Typically, machine learning algorithms provide
maximum likelihood estimates of the decoded variable. That
is, there is a single point estimate for the value of the decoded variable, which is the estimate that is most likely to
be true. Unlike the typical use of machine learning algorithms, Bayesian decoding provides a probability distribution over all possibilities for the decoded outputs (the
“posterior” distribution), thus also providing information
about the uncertainty of the estimate . The
maximum likelihood estimate is the peak of the posterior
distribution when the prior distribution is uniform.
Ensemble methods
It is important to note that the user does not need to
choose a single model. One can usually improve on the performance of any single model by combining multiple models, creating what is called an “ensemble.” Ensembles can
be simple averages of the outputs of many models, or they
can be more complex combinations. Weighted averages
are common, which one can imagine as a second-tier linear
model that takes the outputs of the first-tier models as inputs (sometimes referred to as a “super learner”). In principle, one can use any method as the second-tier model.
Third- and fourth-tier models are uncommon but imaginable. Many successful ML methods are, at their core, ensembles . In ML competition sites like
Kaggle , most winning solutions are complicated ensembles.
Under which conditions will ML techniques improve decoding performance?
Whether ML will outperform other methods depends on
many factors. The form of the underlying neural code, the
length of the recording session, and the level of noise will all
affect the predictive accuracy of different methods to different degrees. There is no way to know ahead of time which
method will perform the best, and we recommend creating
a pipeline to quickly test and compare many ML and simpler
regression methods. For typical decoding situations, however, we expect certain modern ML methods to perform
better than simpler methods. In the demonstration that follows in Results, we show that this is true across three datasets and a wide range of variables like training data length,
number of neurons, bin size, and hyperparameters.
A practical guide (“the nitty gritty”) for using machine
learning for decoding
In any decoding problem, one has neural activity from
multiple sources that is recorded for a period of time.
While we focus here on spiking neurons, the same methods could be used with other forms of neural data, such
as the BOLD signal in fMRI, or the power in particular frequency bands of local field potential or electroencephalography signals. When we decode from the neural data,
whatever the source, we would like to predict the values
of recorded outputs (Fig. 1a).
Data formatting/preprocessing for decoding
Preparing for regression versus classification. Depending
on the task, the desired output can be variables that are
continuous (e.g., velocity or position) or discrete (e.g.,
choices). In the first case, the decoder will perform regression, while in the second case it will perform classification.
In our Python package, decoder classes are labeled to reflect this division.
In the data processing step, take note whether a prediction is desired continuously in time or only at the end of
each trial. In this tutorial, we focus on situations in which a
prediction is desired continuously in time. However, many
classification situations require only one prediction per
trial (e.g., when making a single choice per trial). If this is
the case, the data must be prepared such that many timepoints in a single trial are mapped to a single output.
Time binning divides continuous data into discrete
chunks. A number of important decisions arise from the
basic problem that time is continuously recorded, but decoding methods generally require discrete data for their
inputs (and, in the continual-prediction situation, their outputs). A typical solution is to divide both the inputs and
outputs into discrete time bins. These bins usually contain
the average input or output over a small chunk of time,
but could also contain the minimum, maximum, or the
regular sampling of any interpolation method fit to the
When predictions are desired continuously in time, one
needs to decide on the temporal resolution, R, for decoding. That is, do we want to make a prediction, for example,
every 50 or 100 ms? We need to put the input and output
into bins of length R (Fig. 1a). It is common (although not
necessary) to use the same bin size for the neural data
and output data, and we do so here. Thus, if T is the
length of the recording, we will have approximately T/R
total data points of neural activity and outputs.
Next, we need to choose the time period of neural activity used to predict a given output. In the simplest case,
the activity from all neurons in a given time bin would be
used to predict the output in that same time bin. However,
it is often the case that we want the neural data to precede
the output (e.g., in the case of making movements) or follow the decoder output (e.g., in the case of inferring the
cause of a sensation). Plus, we often want to use neural
data from more than one bin (e.g., using 500 ms of preceding neural data to predict a movement in the current
50 ms bin). In the following, we use the nomenclature that
B time bins of neural activity are being used to predict a
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
Decoding Schematic
Non-recurrent Decoders
Recurrent Decoders
. . . . . . . .
Observation Number
. . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . K
Observation Number
Evaluation
Evaluation
Figure 1. Decoding schematic. a, To decode (predict) the output in a given time bin, we used the firing rates of all N neurons in B
time bins. In this schematic, N = 4 and B = 4 (3 bins preceding the output and 1 concurrent bin). As an example, preceding bins of
neural activity could be useful for predicting upcoming movements, and following bins of neural activity could be useful for predicting preceding sensory information. Here, we show a single output being predicted. b, For nonrecurrent decoders (Wiener filter,
Wiener Cascade, Support Vector Regression, XGBoost, and Feedforward Neural Network in our subsequent demonstration), this is
a standard machine learning regression problem where N  B features (the firing rates of each neuron in each relevant time bin) are
used to predict the output. c, To predict outputs with recurrent decoders (simple recurrent neural network, GRUs, LSTMs in our
subsequent demonstration), we used N features, with temporal connections across B bins. A schematic of a recurrent neural network predicting a single output is on the right. Note that an alternative way to view this model is that the hidden state feeds back on
itself (across time points).
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
given output. For example, if we use three bins preceding
the output and one concurrent bin, then B = 4 (Fig. 1a).
Note that when multiple bins of neural data are used to
predict an output (B . 1), then overlapping neural data will
be used to predict different output times (Fig. 1a), making
them statistically dependent.
When multiple bins of neural data are used to predict an
output, then we will need to exclude some output bins. For
instance, if we are using one bin of neural data preceding
the output, then we cannot predict the first output bin, and if
we are using one bin of neural data following the output,
then we cannot predict the final output bin (Fig. 1a). Thus,
we will be predicting K total output bins, where K is less
than the total number of bins (T/R). To summarize, our decoders will be predicting each of these K outputs using B
surrounding bins of activity from N neurons.
The format of the input data depends on the form of the
Nonrecurrent decoders. For most standard regression
methods, the decoder has no persistent internal state or
memory. In this case N  B features (the firing rates of
each neuron in each relevant time bin) are used to predict
each output (Fig. 1b). The input matrix of covariates, X, has
N  B columns (one for each feature) and K rows (corresponding to each output being predicted). If there is a single
output that is being predicted, it can be put in a vector, Y, of
length K. Note that for many decoders, if there are multiple
outputs, each is independently decoded. If multiple outputs
are being simultaneously predicted, which can occur with
neural network decoders, the outputs can be put in a matrix
Y, that has K rows and d columns, where d is the number of
outputs being predicted. Since this is the format of a standard regression problem, many regression methods can easily be substituted for one another once the data have been
prepared in this way.
Recurrent neural network decoders. When using recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for decoding, we need to put
the inputs in a different format. Recurrent neural networks
explicitly model temporal transitions across time with a persistent internal state, called the “hidden state” (Fig. 1c). At
each time of the B time bins, the hidden state is adjusted as
a function of both the N features (the firing rates of all neurons in that time bin) and the hidden state at the previous
time bin (Fig. 1c). Note that an alternative way to view this
model is that the hidden state feeds back on itself (across
time points). After transitioning through all B bins, the hidden
state in this final bin is used to predict the output. In this
way, an RNN decoder can integrate the effect of neural inputs over an extended period of time. For use in this type of
decoder, the input can be formatted as a three-dimensional
tensor of size K  N  B (Fig. 1c). That is, for each row (corresponding to one of the K output bins to be predicted),
there will be N features (second tensor dimension) over B
bins (third tensor dimension) used for prediction. Within this
format, different types of RNNs, including those more sophisticated than the standard RNN shown in Figure 1c, can
be easily switched for one another.
Evaluation
(k=3 cross-validation)
c Failure modes
Training on held-out data
Mixing test and train when
preprocessing data
Using held-out data to choose among models
Model/hyperparameter
Validation
(to choose by)
(to report)
Performance on
held-out data
Figure 2. Schematic of cross-validation. a, After training a decoder on some data (green), we would like to know how well it performs on held-out data that we do not have access to (red). b, Left, By splitting the data we have into test (orange) and train (green)
segments, we can approximate the performance on held-out data. In k-fold cross-validation, we retrain the decoder k times, and
each time rotate which parts of the data are the test or train data. The average test set performance approximates the performance
on held-out data. Right, If we want to select among many models, we cannot maximize the performance on the same data we will
report as a score. (This is very similar to “p-hacking” statistical significance.) Instead, we maximize performance on “validation”
data (blue), and again rotate through the available data. c, All failure modes are ways in which a researcher lets information from the
test set “leak” into the training algorithm. This happens if you explicitly train on the test data (top), or use any statistics of the test
data to modify the train data before fitting (middle), or select your models or hyperparameters based on the performance on the test
data (bottom).
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
Applying machine learning
The typical process of applying ML to data involves
testing several methods and seeing which works best.
Some methods may be expected to work better or worse
depending on the structure of the data, and in the next
part of this tutorial we provide a demonstration of which
methods work best for typical neural spiking datasets.
That said, applying ML is unavoidably an iterative process, and for this reason we begin with the proper way to
choose among many methods. It is particularly important
to consider how to avoid overfitting our data during this
iterative process.
Compare method performance using cross-validation
Given two (or more) methods, the ML practitioner must
have a principled way to decide which method is best. It
is crucial to test the decoder performance on a separate,
held-out dataset that the decoder did not see during training (Fig. 2a). This is because a decoder typically will overfit
to its training data. That is, it will learn to predict outputs
using idiosyncratic information about each datapoint in
the training set, such as noise, rather than the aspects
that are general to the data. An overfit algorithm will describe the training data well but will not be able to provide
good predictions on new datasets. For this reason, the
proper metric to choose between methods is the performance on held-out data, meaning that the available data
should be split into separate “training” and “testing” datasets. In practice, this will reduce the amount of training
data available. In order to efficiently use all of the data, it
is common to perform cross-validation (Fig. 2b). In 10fold cross-validation, for example, the dataset is split into
10 sets. The decoder is trained on 9 of the sets, and performance is tested on the final set. This is done 10 times
in a rotating fashion, so that each set is tested once. The
performance on all test sets is generally averaged together to determine the overall performance.
When publishing about the performance of a method, it
is important to show the performance on held-out data
that was additionally not used to select between methods
(Fig. 2c). Random noise may lead some methods to perform better than others, and it is possible to fool oneself
and others by testing a great number of methods and
choosing the best. In fact, one can entirely overfit to a
testing dataset simply by using the test performance to
select the best method, even if no method is trained on
that data explicitly. Practitioners often make the distinction between the “training” data, the “validation” data
(which is used to select between methods), and the “testing” data (which is used to evaluate the true performance).
This three-way split of data complicates cross-validation
somewhat (Fig. 2b). It is possible to first create a separate
testing set, then choose among methods on the remaining data using cross-validation. Alternatively, for maximum data efficiency, one can iteratively rotate which split
is the testing set, and thus perform a two-tier nested
cross-validation.
Hyperparameter optimization
When fitting any single method, one usually has to additionally choose a set of “hyperparameters.” These are
parameters that relate to the design of the decoder itself
and should not be confused with the “normal” parameters
that are fit during optimization (e.g., the weights that are
fit in linear regression). For example, neural networks can
be designed to have any number of hidden units. Thus, the
user needs to set the number of hidden units (the hyperparameter) before training the decoder. Often, decoders have
multiple hyperparameters, and different hyperparameter values can sometimes lead to greatly different performance.
Thus, it is important to choose the hyperparameters of a decoder carefully.
When using a decoder that has hyperparameters, one
should take the following steps. First, always split the data
into three separate sets (training set, testing set, and validation
set), perhaps using nested cross-validation (Fig. 2b). Next, iterate through a large number of hyperparameter settings and
choose the best based on validation set performance. Simple
methods for searching through hyperparameters are a grid
search (i.e., sampling values evenly) and a random search
 . There are also more efficient
methods that can intelligently search through hyperparameters based on the performance of previously tested hyperparameters. The best
performing hyperparameter and method combination (on the
validation set) will be the final method, unless one is combining multiple methods into an ensemble.
Methods for our decoding comparisons and
demonstrations
In this section, we demonstrate the usage of our code
package and show which of its methods work better than
traditional methods for several neural datasets.
Code accessibility
We have prepared a Python package that implements
the machine learning pipeline for decoding problems. It
is available at github.com/kordinglab/neural_decoding
and in Extended Data 1, and it includes code to correctly
format the neural and output data for decoding, to implement many different decoders for both regression and
classification, and to optimize their hyperparameters.
Specific decoders
The following decoders are available in our package,
and we demonstrate their performance on the example
datasets below. We included both historical linear techniques (e.g., the Wiener filter) and modern ML techniques
(e.g., neural networks and ensembles of techniques).
Additional details of the methods, including equations
and hyperparameter information, can be found in a table
in Extended Data Figure 4-3.
Wiener filter. The Wiener filter uses multiple linear regression to predict the output from multiple time bins of
spikes of all neurons . That is, the
output is assumed to be a linear mapping of the number
of spikes in the relevant time bins from every neuron (Fig.
Wiener cascade. The Wiener cascade (also known as a
linear–nonlinear model) fits a linear regression (the Wiener
filter) followed by a fitted static nonlinearity ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
al., 2007). This allows for a nonlinear input–output relationship and assumes that this nonlinearity is purely a
function of the linear output. Thus, there is no nonlinear
mixing of input features when making the prediction. The
default nonlinear component is a polynomial with degree
that can be determined on a validation set.
Support vector regression. In support vector regression , the inputs are projected into a higher-dimensional
space using a nonlinear kernel, and then linearly mapped
from this space to the output to minimize an objective
function . That is, the input/output mapping is assumed to be
nonlinear, but is constrained by the kernel being used (it is
not completely flexible). In our toolbox, the default kernel
is a radial basis function.
XGBoost. XGBoost is an implementation of gradient
boosted trees .
Tree-based methods sequentially split the input space
into many discrete parts (visualized as branches on a tree
for each split) to assign each final “leaf” (a portion of input
space that is not split any more) a value in output space
 . XGBoost fits many regression trees, which
are trees that predict continuous output values. “Gradient
boosting” refers to fitting each subsequent regression tree
to the residuals of the previous fit. This method assumes
flexible nonlinear input/output mappings.
Feedforward neural network. A feedforward neural net
 connects the
inputs to sequential layers of hidden units, which then
connect to the output. Each layer connects to the next
(e.g., the input layer to the first hidden layer or the first
to second hidden layers) via linear mappings followed
by nonlinearities. Note that the Wiener cascade is a special case of a neural network with no hidden layers.
Feedforward neural networks also allow flexible nonlinear
input/output mappings.
Simple RNN. In a standard RNN , the hidden state is a linear
combination of the inputs and the previous hidden state.
This hidden state is then run through an output nonlinearity and is linearly mapped to the output. Like feedforward
neural networks, RNNs allow flexible nonlinear input/output mappings. Additionally, unlike feedforward neural networks, RNNs allow temporal changes in the system to be
modeled explicitly.
Gated recurrent unit. Gated recurrent units are a more
complex type of recurrent neural network. It has gated
units, which determine how much information can
flow through various parts of the network. In practice,
these gated units allow for better learning of long-term
dependencies.
Long short-term memory network. Like the GRU, the
long short-term memory (LSTM) network is a more
complex recurrent neural network with gated units that
further improve the capture of long-term dependencies.
The LSTM has more parameters than the GRU.
Kalman filter. Our Kalman filter for neural decoding was
based on the study by Wu et al. . In the Kalman filter, the hidden state at time t is a linear function of the hidden state at time t – 1, plus a matrix characterizing the
uncertainty. For neural decoding, the hidden state is the
kinematics (x and y components of position, velocity, and
acceleration), which we aim to estimate. Note that although
we only aim to predict position or velocity, all kinematics are
included because this allows for better prediction. Kalman
filters assume that both the input/output mapping and the
transitions in kinematics over time are linear.
Naive Bayes. The Naive Bayes decoder is a type of
Bayesian decoder that determines the probabilities of different outcomes, and it then predicts the most probable.
Briefly, it fits an encoding model to each neuron, makes
conditional independence assumptions about neurons,
and then uses Bayes’ rule to create a decoding model
from the encoding models. Thus, the effects of individual
neurons are combined linearly. This probabilistic framework can incorporate prior information about the output
variables, including the probabilities of their transitions
over time. We used a Naive Bayes decoder similar to the
one implemented in the study by Zhang et al. .
In the comparisons below, we also demonstrate an ensemble method. We combined the predictions from all
decoders except the Kalman filter and Naive Bayes decoders (which have different formats) using a feedforward
neural network. That is, the predictions of the eight methods were provided as input into a feedforward neural network that we trained to predict the true output.
Demonstration datasets
We first examined which of several decoding methods
performed the best across three datasets from motor cortex, somatosensory cortex, and hippocampus. All datasets are linked from our GitHub repository.
In the task for decoding from motor cortex, monkeys
moved a manipulandum that controlled a cursor on a
screen , and we aimed to decode the x
and y velocity of the cursor. Details of the task can be
found in the study by Glaser et al. . The 21 min recording from motor cortex contained 164 neurons. The
mean and median firing rates, respectively, were 6.7 and
3.4 spikes/s. Data were put into 50 ms bins. We used
700 ms of neural activity (the concurrent bin and 13 bins
before) to predict the current movement velocity.
The same task was used in the recording from somatosensory cortex . The recording from
S1 was 51 min and contained 52 neurons. The mean and
median firing rates, respectively, were 9.3 and 6.3 spikes/
s. Data were put into 50 ms bins. We used 650 ms surrounding the movement (the concurrent bin, 6 bins before, and 6 bins after).
In the task for decoding from hippocampus, rats
chased rewards on a platform ,
and we aimed to decode the x and y position of the rat.
From this recording, we used 46 neurons over a time period of 75 min. These neurons had mean and median firing
rates of 1.7 and 0.2 spikes/s, respectively. Data were put
into 200 ms bins. We used 2 s of surrounding neural activity (the concurrent bin, 4 bins before, and 5 bins after) to
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
predict the current position. Note that the bins used for
decoding differed in all tasks for the Kalman filter and
Naive Bayes decoders (Extended Data Fig. 4-3).
All datasets, which have been used in prior publications
 can be
negative on the test set because of overfitting on the training set. The reported R2 values are the average across the
x and y components of velocity or position.
Preprocessing. The training output was zero centered
(mean subtracted), except in SVR, where the output was
normalized (z scored), which helped algorithm performance. The training input was z scored for all methods. The
validation/testing inputs and outputs were preprocessed
using the preprocessing parameters from the training set.
Cross-validation. When determining the R2 for every
method (Fig. 3), we used 10-fold cross-validation. For
each fold, we split the data into a training set (80% of
data), a contiguous validation set (10% of data), and a
contiguous testing set (10% of data). For each fold, decoders were trained to minimize the mean squared error
between the predicted and true velocities/positions of the
training data. We found the algorithm hyperparameters
that led to the highest R2 value on the validation set using
Bayesian optimization . That is, we fit
many models on the training set with different hyperparameters and calculated the R2 on the validation set. Then,
using the hyperparameters that led to the highest validation set R2, we calculated the R2 value on the testing set.
Error bars on the test set R2 values were computed across
cross-validation folds. Because the training sets on different folds were overlapping, computing the SEM as s=
(where s is the SD and J is the number of folds) would
have underestimated the size of the error bars . We thus calculated the SEM as
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
 , which takes into
independent.
Bootstrapping. When determining how performance
scaled as a function of data size (see Fig. 5), we used single test and validation sets, and varied the amount of
training data that directly preceded the validation set. We
did not do this on 10 cross-validation folds because of
long run-times. The test and validation sets were 5 min
long for motor and somatosensory cortices, and 7.5 min
for hippocampus. To get error bars, we resampled from
the test set. Because of the high correlation between temporally adjacent samples, we did not resample randomly
from all examples (which would create highly correlated
resamples). Instead, we separated the test set into 20
temporally distinct subsets, S1–S20 (e.g., S1 is from t = 1
to t = T/20, S2 is from t = T/20 to t = 2T/20, where T is the
end time), to ensure that the subsets were more nearly independent of each other. We then resampled combinations of these 20 subsets (e.g., S5, S13, ... S2) 1000 times
to get confidence intervals of R2 values.
We investigated how the choice of machine learning
technique affects decoding performance using a number
of common machine learning methods that are included
in our code package. These ranged from historical linear
techniques (e.g., the Wiener filter) to modern machine
learning techniques (e.g., neural networks and ensembles
of techniques). We tested the performance of these techniques across datasets from motor cortex, somatosensory cortex, and hippocampus.
Performance comparison
In order to get a qualitative impression of the performance, we first plotted the output of each decoding method
for each of the three datasets (Fig. 3). In these examples,
the modern methods, such as the LSTM and ensemble,
appeared to outperform traditional methods. We next
quantitatively compared the performances of the methods, using the metric of R2 on held-out test sets. These
results confirmed our qualitative findings (Fig. 4). In particular, neural networks and the ensemble led to the best
performance, while the Wiener or Kalman filters led to the
worst performance. In fact, the LSTM decoder explained
.40% of the unexplained variance from a Wiener filter (R2
values of 0.88, 0.86, and 0.62 vs 0.78, 0.75, and 0.35).
Interestingly, while the Naive Bayes decoder performed
relatively well when predicting position in the hippocampus dataset (mean R2 just slightly less than the neural networks), it performed very poorly when predicting hand
velocities in the other two datasets. Another interesting
finding is that the feedforward neural network did almost
as well as the LSTM in all brain areas. Across cases, the
ensemble method added a reliable, but small increase to
the explained variance. Overall, modern ML methods led
to significant increases in predictive power.
Concerns about limited data for decoding
We chose a representative subset of the 10 methods to
pursue further questions about particular aspects of neural data analysis: the feedforward neural network and
LSTM (two effective modern methods), along with the
Wiener and Kalman filters (two traditional methods in
widespread use). The improved predictive performance of
the modern methods is likely because of their greater
complexity. However, this greater complexity may make
these methods unsuitable for smaller amounts of data.
Thus, we tested performance with varying amounts of
training data. With only 2 min of data for motor and somatosensory cortices, and 15 min of hippocampus data,
both modern methods outperformed both traditional
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
methods (Fig. 5a, Extended Data Fig. 5-1). When decreasing the amount of training data further, to only 1 min for
motor and somatosensory cortices and 7.5min for hippocampus data, the Kalman filter performance was sometimes
comparable to the modern methods, but the modern methods significantly outperformed the Wiener filter (Fig. 5a).
Thus, even for limited recording times, modern ML methods
can yield significant gains in decoding performance.
Besides limited recording times, neural data are often
limited in the number of recorded neurons. Thus, we compared methods using a subset of only 10 neurons. For
motor and somatosensory data, despite a general decrease in performance for all decoding methods, the
modern methods significantly outperformed the traditional methods (Fig. 5b). For the hippocampus dataset, no
method predicted well (mean R2 , 0.25) with only 10
Motor Cortex
Somatosensory Cortex
Hippocampus
Regression
Feedforward
X Velocity
X Velocity
X Position
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
Figure 3. Example decoder results. Example decoding results from motor cortex (left), somatosensory cortex (middle), and hippocampus (right), for all 11 methods (top to bottom). Ground truth traces are in black, while decoder results are in various colors.
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
neurons. This is likely because 10 sparsely firing neurons
(median firing of HC neurons was ;0.2 spikes/s) did not
contain enough information about the entire space of positions. However, in most scenarios, with limited neurons
and for limited recorded times, modern ML methods can
be advantageous.
Concerns about run-time
While modern ML methods lead to improved performance, it is important to know that these sophisticated decoding models can be trained in a reasonable amount of
time. To get a feeling for the typical timescale, consider
that when running our demonstration data on a desktop
computer using only CPUs, it took ,1 s to fit a Wiener filter, ,10 s to fit a feedforward neural, and ,8 min to fit an
LSTM. (This was for 30 min of data, using 10 time bins of
neural activity for each prediction and 50 neurons.) In
practice, these models will need to be fit tens to hundreds
of times when incorporating hyperparameter optimization
and cross-validation. As a concrete example, let us say
that we are doing fivefold cross-validation, and hyperparameter optimization requires 50 iterations per cross-validation fold. In that case, fitting the LSTM would take ;30 h,
and fitting the feedforward neural net would take ,1 h.
Note that variations in hardware and software implementations can drastically change run-time (e.g. newer software
versions have more than doubled the speed of the LSTM
reported above, and modern graphics processing units
(GPUs) can often increase speeds ;10-fold). Thus, while
modern methods do take significantly longer to train (and
may require running overnight without GPUs), that should
be manageable for most offline applications.
Concerns about robustness to hyperparameters
All our previous results used hyperparameter optimization. While we strongly encourage a thorough hyperparameter optimization, a user with limited time might just do
a limited hyperparameter search. Thus, it is helpful to
know how sensitive results may be to varying hyperparameters. We tested the performance of the feedforward
neural network while varying the following two hyperparameters: the number of units and the dropout rate (a regularization hyperparameter for neural networks). We held
the third hyperparameter in our code package, the number of training epochs, constant at 10. We found that the
performance of the neural network was generally robust
to large changes in the hyperparameters (Fig. 6). As an example, for the somatosensory cortex dataset, the peak
performance of the neural network was R2 = 0.86 with
1000 units and 0 dropout, and virtually the same (R2 =
0.84) with 300 units and 30% dropout. Even when using
limited data, neural network performance was robust to
hyperparameter changes. For instance, when training the
somatosensory cortex dataset with 1 min of training data,
the peak performance was R2 = 0.77 with 700 units and
20% dropout. A network with 300 units and 30% dropout
had R2 = 0.75. Note that the hippocampus dataset, in particular when using limited training data, did have greater
variability, emphasizing the importance of hyperparameter optimization on sparse datasets. However, for most
datasets, researchers should not be concerned that
slightly nonoptimal hyperparameters will lead to largely
degraded performance.
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Motor Cortex
Somatosensory Cortex
Hippocampus
Wiener Cascade
Kalman Filter
Feedforward NN
Simple RNN
Wiener Filter
Naive Bayes
FNN RNN GRU LSTM Ens
FNN RNN GRU LSTM Ens
FNN RNN GRU LSTM Ens
Figure 4. Decoder result summary. R2 values are reported for all
decoders (different colors) for each brain area (top to bottom).
Error bars represent the mean 6 SEM across cross-validation
folds. Xs represent the R2 values of each cross-validation fold.
The NB decoder had mean R2 values of 0.26 and 0.36 (below the
minimum y-axis value) for the motor and somatosensory cortex
datasets, respectively. Note the different y-axis limits for the hippocampus dataset in this and all subsequent figures. In Extended
Data, we include the accuracy for multiple versions of the Kalman
filter (Extended Data Fig. 4-1), accuracy for multiple bin sizes
(Extended Data Fig. 4-2), and a table with further details of all
these methods (Extended Data Fig. 4-3).
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
Discussion
Here we have provided a tutorial, code package, and demonstrations of the use of machine learning for neural decoding.
Our comparisons, which were made using the code we have
published online, show that machine learning works well on
typical neural decoding datasets, outperforming traditional decoding methods. In our demonstration, we decoded continuous-valued variables. However, these same methods can be
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Motor Cortex
Somatosensory Cortex
Hippocampus
Amount of training data (minutes)
Amount of training data (minutes)
Amount of training data (minutes)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Prediction Accuracy (R2)
Limited (10) Neurons
Limited Training Data
Kalman Filter
Feedforward NN
Wiener Filter
Figure 5. Decoder results with limited data. a, Testing the effects of limited training data. Using varying amounts of training data, we
trained two traditional methods (Wiener filter and Kalman filter), and two modern methods (feedforward neural network and LSTM). R2
values are reported for these decoders (different colors) for each brain area (top to bottom). Error bars are 68% confidence intervals
(meant to approximate the SEM) produced via bootstrapping, as we used a single test set. Values with negative R2s were not shown. b,
Testing the effects of few neurons. Using only 10 neurons, we trained two traditional methods (Wiener filter and Kalman filter), and two
modern methods (feedforward neural network and LSTM). We used the same testing set as in a, and the largest training set from a. R2
values are reported for these decoders for each brain area. Error bars represent the mean 6 SEM of multiple repetitions with different
subsets of 10 neurons. Xs represent the R2 values of each repetition. Note that the y-axis limits are different in a and b. In Extended
Data, we provide examples of the decoder predictions for each of these methods (Extended Data Fig. 5-1).
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
used for classification tasks, which often use classic decoders
such as logistic regression and support vector machines. Our
available code also includes classification methods.
We find it particularly interesting that the neural network
methods worked so well with limited data, counter to the
common perception. We believe the explanation is simply
the size of the networks. For instance, our networks have
on the order of 105 parameters, while common networks
for image classification can have
on the order of 108 parameters. Thus, the smaller size of
our networks (hundreds of hidden units) may have allowed for excellent prediction with limited data . Moreover, the fact that the tasks we used had a
low-dimensional structure, and therefore the neural data
were also likely low dimensional , might
allow high decoding performance with limited data.
In order to find the best hyperparameters for the decoding algorithms, we used a Bayesian optimization routine
Number of Units
Number of Units
Number of Units
Number of Units
Number of Units
Number of Units
Motor Cortex
Large Training Data
Limited Training Data
Somatosensory Cortex
Hippocampus
Figure 6. Sensitivity of neural network results to hyperparameter selection. In a feedforward neural network, we varied the number
of hidden units per layer (in increments of 100) and the proportion of dropout (in increments of 0.1), and evaluated the performance
of the decoder on all three datasets (top to bottom). The neural network had two hidden layers, each with the same number of hidden units. The number of training epochs was kept constant at 10. The colors show the R2 on the test set, and the colors of each
panel were put in the range: [maximum R2 – 0.2, maximum R2]. a, We used a large amount of training data (the maximum amount
used in Fig. 5a), which was 10, 20, and 37.5 min of data for the motor cortex, somatosensory cortex, and hippocampus datasets, respectively. b, Same results for a limited amount of training data: 1, 1, and 15 min of data for the motor cortex, somatosensory cortex, and hippocampus datasets, respectively.
Research Article: Methods/New Tools
July/August 2020, 7(4) ENEURO.0506-19.2020
eNeuro.org
 to search the hyperparameter space
(see Demonstration methods). Still, it is possible that, for
some of the decoding algorithms, the hyperparameters
were nonoptimal, which would have lowered overall accuracy. Moreover, for several methods, we did not attempt
to optimize all the hyperparameters. We did this to simplify the use of the methods and to decrease computational runtime during hyperparameter optimization, and
because optimizing additional hyperparameters (beyond
default values) did not appear to improve accuracy. For
example, for the neural nets we used dropout but not L1
or L2 regularization, and for XGBoost we optimized less
than half the available hyperparameters designed to avoid
overfitting. While our preliminary testing with additional
hyperparameters did not appear to change the results
significantly, it is possible that some methods did not
achieve optimal performance.
We have decoded from spiking data, but it is possible
that the problem of decoding from other data modalities
is different. One main driver of a difference may be the
distinct levels of noise. For example, fMRI signals have far
higher noise levels than spikes. As the noise level goes
up, linear techniques become more appropriate, which
may ultimately lead to a situation where the traditional linear techniques become superior. Applying the same analyses we performed here across different data modalities
is an important next step.
All our decoding was done “offline,” meaning that the
decoding occurred after the recording and was not part of
a control loop. This type of decoding is useful for determining how information in a brain area relates to an external variable. However, for engineering applications such
as BMIs , the goal is to decode information (e.g., predict
movements) in real time. Our results here may not apply
as directly to online decoding situations, since the subject
is ultimately able to adapt to imperfections in the decoder.
In that case, even relatively large decoder performance
differences may be irrelevant. Plus, there are additional
challenges in online applications, such as nonstationary
inputs . Finally, online applications are
concerned with computational runtime, which we have
only briefly addressed here. In the future, it would be valuable to test modern techniques for decoding in online applications .
Finally, we want to briefly mention the concept of feature importance, which our tutorial has not addressed.
Feature importance refers to the determination of which
inputs most affect the predictions of a machine learning
model. For decoding, feature importance methods could
be used to ask which neurons are important for making
the predictions or, if multiple brain areas are input into the
decoder, which of these brain regions matter. Three common, straightforward approaches that we would recommend are (1) to build separate decoders with individual
features to test the predictive abilities of those features;
(2) leave-one-feature-out, in which the decoder is fit while
leaving out a feature, to evaluate how removing that
feature decreases prediction performance; and (3) permutation feature importance, in which, after fitting the decoder, the values of a feature are shuffled to determine
how much prediction performance decreases. Molnar
 and Dankers et al. provide more details on
these approaches, and Molnar describes other
common feature importance methods in the machine
learning literature. These methods can facilitate some
understanding of neural activity even when the ML decoder is quite complex.
Machine learning is relatively straightforward to apply
and can greatly improve the performance of neural decoding. Its principle advantage is that many fewer assumptions need to be made about the structure of the
neural activity and the decoded variables. Best practices
like testing on held-out data, perhaps via cross-validation,
are crucial to the ML pipeline and are critical for any application. The Python package that accompanies this tutorial is designed to guide both best practices and the
deployment of specific ML algorithms, and we expect it
will be useful in improving decoding performance for new
datasets. Our hunch is that it will be hard for specialized
algorithms to compete with the standard algorithms developed by the machine learning community.