Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates
for 3D Human Action Recognition
Jun Liu†, Amir Shahroudy†, Dong Xu‡, and Gang Wang†,⋆
† School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
‡ School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of Sydney
{jliu029,amir3,wanggang}@ntu.edu.sg
 
Abstract. 3D action recognition – analysis of human actions based on
3D skeleton data – becomes popular recently due to its succinctness,
robustness, and view-invariant representation. Recent attempts on this
problem suggested to develop RNN-based learning methods to model the
contextual dependency in the temporal domain. In this paper, we extend
this idea to spatio-temporal domains to analyze the hidden sources of
action-related information within the input data over both domains concurrently. Inspired by the graphical structure of the human skeleton, we
further propose a more powerful tree-structure based traversal method.
To handle the noise and occlusion in 3D skeleton data, we introduce new
gating mechanism within LSTM to learn the reliability of the sequential
input data and accordingly adjust its eﬀect on updating the long-term
context information stored in the memory cell. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on 4 challenging benchmark datasets for
3D human action analysis.
Keywords: 3D action recognition, recurrent neural networks, long shortterm memory, trust gate, spatio-temporal analysis.
Introduction
In recent years, action recognition based on the locations of major joints of the
body in 3D space has attracted a lot of attention. Diﬀerent feature extraction
and classiﬁer learning approaches are studied for 3D action recognition . For
example, Yang and Tian represented the static postures and the dynamics of
the motion patterns via eigenjoints and utilized a Na¨ıve-Bayes-Nearest-Neighbor
classiﬁer learning. A HMM was applied by for modeling the temporal dynamics of the actions over a histogram-based representation of 3D joint locations.
Evangelidis et al. learned a GMM over the Fisher kernel representation of a
succinct skeletal feature, called skeletal quads. Vemulapalli et al. represented
the skeleton conﬁgurations and actions as points and curves in a Lie group respectively, and utilized a SVM classiﬁer to classify the actions. A skeleton-based
dictionary learning utilizing group sparsity and geometry constraint was also
⋆Corresponding author.
 
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
proposed by . An angular skeletal representation over the tree-structured set
of joints was introduced in , which calculated the similarity of these features
over temporal dimension to build the global representation of the action samples
and fed them to SVM for ﬁnal classiﬁcation.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) which are a variant of neural nets for
handling sequential data with variable length, have been successfully applied
to language modeling , image captioning , video analysis ,
human re-identiﬁcation , and RGB-based action recognition . They
also have achieved promising performance in 3D action recognition .
Existing RNN-based 3D action recognition methods mainly model the longterm contextual information in the temporal domain to represent motion-based
dynamics. However, there is also strong dependency between joints in the spatial
domain. And the spatial conﬁguration of joints in video frames can be highly
discriminative for 3D action recognition task.
In this paper, we propose a spatio-temporal long short-term memory (ST-
LSTM) network which extends the traditional LSTM-based learning to two concurrent domains (temporal and spatial domains). Each joint receives contextual
information from neighboring joints and also from previous frames to encode
the spatio-temporal context. Human body joints are not naturally arranged in
a chain, therefore feeding a simple chain of joints to a sequence learner cannot perform well. Instead, a tree-like graph can better represent the adjacency
properties between the joints in the skeletal data. Hence, we also propose a tree
structure based skeleton traversal method to explore the kinematic relationship
between the joints for better spatial dependency modeling.
In addition, since the acquisition of depth sensors is not always accurate, we
further improve the design of the ST-LSTM by adding a new gating function,
so called “trust gate”, to analyze the reliability of the input data at each spatiotemporal step and give better insight to the network about when to update,
forget, or remember the contents of the internal memory cell as the representation of long-term context information.
The contributions of this paper are: (1) spatio-temporal design of LSTM
networks for 3D action recognition, (2) a skeleton-based tree traversal technique
to feed the structure of the skeleton data into a sequential LSTM, (3) improving
the design of the ST-LSTM by adding the trust gate, and (4) achieving stateof-the-art performance on all the evaluated datasets.
Related Work
Human action recognition using 3D skeleton information is explored in diﬀerent
aspects during recent years . In this section, we limit our review to more
recent RNN-based and LSTM-based approaches.
HBRNN applied bidirectional RNNs in a novel hierarchical fashion. They
divided the entire skeleton to ﬁve major groups of joints and each group was fed
into a separated bidirectional RNN. The output of these RNNs were concatenated to represent upper-body and lower-body, then each was fed into another
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
set of RNNs. The global body representation was obtained by concatenating the
output of these two RNNs and it was fed to the next layer of RNN. The hidden
representation of the ﬁnal RNN was fed to a softmax classiﬁer layer for action
classiﬁcation.
Zhu et al. added a mixed-norm regularization term to a deep LSTM network’s cost function in order to push the network towards learning co-occurrence
of discriminative joints for action classiﬁcation. They further introduced an internal dropout technique within the LSTM unit, which was applied on all
the gate activations.
Diﬀerential LSTM added a new gating inside LSTM to keep track of
the derivatives of the memory states in order to discover patterns within salient
motion patterns. All the input features for each frame were concatenated and
fed to the diﬀerential LSTM.
Part-aware LSTM separated the memory cell to part-based sub-cells
and pushed the network towards learning the long-term context representations
individually for each part. The output of the network was learned over the concatenated part-based memory cells followed by the common output gate.
Unlike the above mentioned works, the framework proposed in this paper
does not concatenate the joint-based input features, instead it explicitly models
the dependencies between the joints and applies recurrent analysis over spatial
and temporal domains concurrently. Besides, a novel trust gate is developed to
make LSTM robust to noisy input data.
Spatio-Temporal Recurrent Networks
Human actions can be characterized by the motion of body parts over time.
In 3D human action recognition, we have three dimensional locations of the
major body joints in each frame. Recently, recurrent neural networks have been
successfully employed for skeleton-based 3D action recognition .
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks are very successful extensions of the recurrent neural networks (RNNs). They utilize the gating mechanism over an internal memory cell to learn and represent a better and more
complex representation of the long-term dependencies among the input sequential data, thus they are suitable for feature learning over a sequence of temporal
In this section, ﬁrst we will brieﬂy review the standard LSTM networks, then
describe the proposed spatio-temporal LSTM model and the skeleton-based tree
traversal. Next we will introduce an eﬀective gating scheme for LSTM to deal
with the measurement noise in the input data (body joint locations) for the task
of 3D human action recognition.
Temporal Modeling with LSTM
A typical LSTM unit contains an input gate it, a forget gate ft, an output gate
ot, and an output state ht, together with an internal memory cell state ct. The
LSTM transition equations are formulated as:
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
ct = it ⊙ut + ft ⊙ct−1
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
where ⊙indicates element-wise product, xt denotes the input to the network
at time step t, and ut denotes the modulated input. σ is the sigmoid activation
function. M : ℜD+d →ℜ4d is an aﬃne transformation consisting of model
parameters, where D is the dimensionality of input xt and d is the number of
LSTM cell state units.
Intuitively, the input gate it determines the extent to which the modulated
input information (ut) is supposed to update the memory cell at time t. The
forget gate ft determines the eﬀectiveness of the previous state of the memory
cell (ct−1) on its current state (ct). Finally, the output gate ot governs the amount
of information output from the memory cell. Readers are referred to for more
details about the mechanism of LSTM.
Spatio-Temporal LSTM
Very recent attempts on applying RNNs for 3D human action recognition show outstanding performance and prove the strengths of RNNs in modeling
the complex dynamics of the human actions in temporal space.
The main focus of these existing methods was on utilizing RNNs over temporal domain for discovering the discriminative dynamics and body motion patterns
for 3D action recognition. However, there is also discriminative information in
static postures encoded within the joints’ 3D locations in each individual frame
and the sequential nature of skeleton data makes it possible to adopt RNN-based
learning in spatial domain as well. Unlike other existing methods, which concatenated the joints information, we extend the recurrent analysis towards spatial
domain to discover the spatial dependency patterns between diﬀerent joints at
each frame.
In this fashion, we propose a spatio-temporal LSTM (ST-LSTM) model which
simultaneously models the spatial dependencies of the joints and the temporal
dependencies among the frames. As shown in Fig. 1, every ST-LSTM unit corresponds to one of the skeletal joints. Each of the units receives the hidden
representation of the previous joint and also the hidden representation of its
own joint from the previous frame. In this section we assume joints are arranged
in a chain-like sequence with the order shown in Fig. 2(a). In Section 3.3, we will
show a more advanced method to take advantage of the adjacency information
of the body joints as a tree structure.
We use j ∈{1, ..., J} and t ∈{1, ..., T} to denote the indices of joints and
frames respectively. Each ST-LSTM unit is fed with its input (xj,t, location of
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
Fig. 1. The illustration of the proposed spatio-temporal LSTM network. In the spatial
direction, body joints in a frame are fed in a sequence. In the temporal direction, the
locations of the corresponding joints are fed over time. Each unit receives the hidden
representation of previous joints and previous frames of the same joint as contextual
information.
the corresponding joint at current frame), its own hidden representation at the
previous time step (hj,t−1), and the hidden representation of the previous joint
at current frame (hj−1,t). Each unit is also equipped with two diﬀerent forget
gates corresponding to the two incoming channels of context information: f S
the spatial domain, and f T
j,t for the temporal domain. The proposed ST-LSTM
is formulated as:
cj,t = ij,t ⊙uj,t + f S
j,t ⊙cj−1,t + f T
j,t ⊙cj,t−1
hj,t = oj,t ⊙tanh(cj,t)
Tree-Structure based Traversal
Arranging joints in a simple chain ignores the kinematic dependency relations
between the joints and adds false connections between body joints which are not
strongly related. In human parsing, skeletal joints are popularly modeled as a
tree-based pictorial structure , as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). In our ST-LSTM
framework, it is also beneﬁcial to model the spatial dependency of the joints
based on their adjacency tree structure. For example, hidden representation of
the neck joint (number 2 in Fig. 2(a)) is expected to be more informative for the
right hand joints (7,8,9) than the joint number 6.
However, trees cannot be directly fed into the ST-LSTM framework. To mitigate this issue, we propose a bidirectional tree traversal method to visit joints
in a sequence which maintains the adjacency information of the skeletal tree
structure.
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
Fig. 2. (a) Skeletal joints of a human body. In the simple joint chain model, the joint
visiting order is 1-2-3-...-16. (b) Skeleton is transformed to a tree structure. (c) Tree
traversal over the spatial steps. The tree can be unfolded to a chain with the traversal,
and the joint visiting order is 1-2-3-2-4-5-6-5-4-2-7-8-9-8-7-2-1-10-11-12-13-12-11-10-14-
15-16-15-14-10-1.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(c), at the ﬁrst spatial step, the root node (central spine
joint) is fed to the network, then the network follows a depth-ﬁrst traversal in the
spatial domain. When it reaches a leaf node, it goes back. In this fashion, each
connection of the tree structure will be passed twice and the context information
is fed along both directions. Upon the end of the traversal, it gets back to the
root node.
This traversal strategy guarantees the transmission of the data in both directions (top-down and bottom-up) inside the adjacency tree structure. Therefore
each node will have the contextual information from both its descendants and
ancestors. Compared to the simple chain model described in section 3.2, this tree
traversal technique can discover stronger long-term spatial dependency patterns
based on the joints’ adjacency structure.
In addition, the input to the ST-LSTM network at each step is limited to
a single joint in a speciﬁc frame, which is much smaller in size compared to
the concatenated input features of other existing methods. As a result, we have
much fewer model parameters and this can be considered as a weight sharing
regularization inside our learning framework, which leads to better generalization
in the scenarios with limited training samples. This is an advantage in 3D action
recognition, because most of the current datasets have a small number of training
Similar to other LSTM implementations , the representation capacity
of our network can be improved by stacking multiple layers of the tree structured ST-LSTMs and constructing a deep yet completely tractable network, as
illustrated in Fig. 3.
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates
The inputs of the proposed tree-structured ST-LSTM are the 3D positions of
skeletal joints collected by sensors like Microsoft Kinect, which are not always
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
ST-LSTM units (Layer 1)
Softmax classifier
ST-LSTM units (Layer 2)
Fig. 3. A graphical model of the deep tree-structured ST-LSTM network. For clarity,
some arrows are omitted in the stacked network (better viewed in color). In this ﬁgure,
the output of the ﬁrst ST-LSTM layer is fed to the second ST-LSTM layer as its input.
The second ST-LSTM layer’s output is fed to softmax layer.
reliable due to noise and occlusion. This limits the performance of the network.
To address this issue, we propose to add a new gate to the LSTM unit which
analyzes the reliability of the input at each spatio-temporal step, based on the
estimation of the input from the available contextual information.
Our novel gating method is inspired by the works in natural language processing which predict next word based on LSTM representation of previous
words. This idea worked well because of the high dependency among the words
in a sentence. Similarly, since the skeletal joints often move together and this articulated motion follows common yet complex patterns at each spatio-temporal
step, the input data xj,t is supposed to be predictable from the contextual representations hj,t−1 and hj−1,t.
This predictability inspired us to add new mechanism to ST-LSTM to predict the input and compare it with the actual incoming input. The amount of
the estimation error is used as input to a new “trust gate”. The derived trust
value provides information to the long-term memory mechanism to learn better
decisions about when and how to remember and forget the contents of the memory cell. For example, when the trust gate ﬁnds out the current joint has wrong
3D measurements, it can block the input gate and prevent the memory cell from
updating based on current unreliable input.
Mathematically, for an input at step (j, t), we develop a function to generate
its prediction, based on the available contextual information:
pj,t = tanh
where the aﬃne transformation Mp maps the data from ℜ2d to ℜd, so the dimensionality of pj,t is d. It is worth noting that the contextual information at each
step is not limited to the hidden states of the previous spatial step but it also
includes the previous temporal step, i.e., the long-term memory information of
the same joint in previous frames and the contextual information of other visited
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
h j-1,t h j,t-1
h j-1,th j,t-1
h j-1,th j,t-1
Fig. 4. Schema of the proposed ST-LSTM with trust gate.
joints in the same frame are seamlessly incorporated. Therefore, we can expect
this function to be able to produce good predictions.
The activation of the proposed trust gate τ is a vector in ℜd, which is similar
to the activation of the input gate and the forget gate, and it will be calculated
j,t = tanh
τj,t = G(x′
j,t −pj,t)
where Mx : ℜD →ℜd is an aﬃne transformation, and the new activation function G(·) is an element-wise operation formulated as:
G(z) = exp(−λz2)
In this equation, λ > 0 is a parameter to control the spread of the Gaussian
function. G(z) produces a large response if z is close to origin, and small response
when z has a large absolute value.
Utilizing the proposed trust gate, the cell state of the ST-LSTM neuron can
be updated as:
cj,t = τj,t ⊙ij,t ⊙uj,t + (1 −τj,t) ⊙f S
j,t ⊙cj−1,t + (1 −τj,t) ⊙f T
j,t ⊙cj,t−1 (11)
If the new input xj,t cannot be trusted (because of noise or occlusion), then
we need to take advantage of more history information and try to block the
new input. In contrast, if the input is reliable, we can let the learning algorithm
update the memory cell by importing input information.
Fig. 4 depicts the scheme of the new ST-LSTM unit empowered with the
trust gate. This can be learned similar to other gates by back-propagation. The
proposed trust gate technique is theoretically general and can be applied to other
applications to deal with unreliable input data.
Learning the Classiﬁer
Since the action labels are always given at the video level, we feed them as the
training outputs of the ST-LSTM at each spatio-temporal step. The network
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
learns to predict the action class ˆy among a discrete set of classes Y using a
softmax layer. The overall prediction of a video is computed by averaging the
predictions of all the steps. Empirically, this method provides better performance
compared to the minimization of the loss at the last step only.
The objective function of our model is formulated as:
l(ˆyj,t, y)
where l(ˆyj,t, y) is the negative log-likelihood loss measuring the diﬀerence
between the true label y and the predicted result ˆyj,t at step (j, t). The objective function can be minimized using back-propagation through time (BPTT)
algorithm .
Experiments
The proposed model is evaluated on four datasets: NTU RGB+D dataset, SBU
Interaction dataset, UT-Kinect dataset, and Berkeley MHAD dataset. We conduct extensive experiments with diﬀerent conﬁgurations as follows:
(1) “ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)”: In this conﬁguration, the joints are visited
one by one in a simple chain order (see Fig. 2(a)).
(2) “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)”: The proposed tree traversal strategy (Fig.
2(c)) is adopted in this conﬁguration to fully exploit the tree-based spatial structure of human joints.
(3) “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal) + Trust Gate”: This conﬁguration involves
the trust gate to deal with noisy input.
Evaluation datasets
NTU RGB+D Dataset . To the best of our knowledge, this dataset is
currently the largest depth-based action recognition dataset. It is collected by
Kincet v2 and contains more than 56 thousand sequences and 4 million frames.
A total of 60 diﬀerent action classes including daily actions, pair actions, and
medical conditions are performed by 40 subjects aged between 10 and 35. The
3D coordinates of 25 joints are provided in this dataset. The large intra-class
and view point variations make this dataset very challenging. Due to the large
amount of samples, this dataset is highly suitable for deep learning based action
recognition.
SBU Interaction Dataset . This dataset is captured with Kinect and
contains 8 classes of two-person interactions. It includes 282 skeleton sequences in
6822 frames. Each skeleton has 15 joints. The challenges of this dataset include:
(1) in most interactions, one person is acting and the other one is reacting; and
(2) the joint coordinates in many sequences are of low accuracy.
UT-Kinect Dataset . This dataset contains 10 action classes performed
by 10 subjects, captured with a stationary Kinect. Each action was performed
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
twice by every subject. The locations of 20 joints are provided in this dataset.
The high intra-class variation and viewpoint diversity makes it challenging.
Berkeley MHAD . The MHAD dataset is captured by a motion capture
system. It consists of 659 sequences and about 82 minutes of recording. Eleven
diﬀerent action classes were performed by 7 male and 5 female subjects. The 3D
locations of 35 joints are provided in this dataset.
Implementation details
In our experiments, each video sequence is divided to T sub-sequences with the
same length, and one frame was randomly selected from each sub-sequence. Such
a method adds randomness into the process of data generation and improves the
generalization capability. We observe this strategy achieves better performance
in contrast to uniformly sampled frames. We cross-validated the performance
based on leave-one-subject-out protocol on NTU RGB+D dataset, and found
T = 20 as the optimum value.
We use Torch toolbox as the deep learning platform and an NVIDIA Tesla
K40 GPU to run our experiments. We train the network using stochastic gradient descent, and set learning rate, momentum and decay rate as 2×10−3, 0.9
and 0.95, respectively. For our network, we set the neuron size d to 128, and the
parameter λ used in G(·) to 0.5. We use two ST-LSTM layers in the stacked network, and the applied probability of dropout is 0.5. Though there are variations
in terms of sequence length, joint number, and data acquisition equipment for
diﬀerent datasets, we use the same parameter settings mentioned above. This indicates the insensitiveness of our method to the parameter settings, as it achieves
promising results on all the datasets with the same conﬁguration.
Experimental results
NTU RGB+D Dataset. This dataset has two standard evaluation protocols
 . One is cross-subject evaluation, for which half of the subjects are used for
training and the remaining are for testing. The second is cross-view evaluation,
for which two viewpoints are used for training and one is left out for testing.
Table 1. Experimental results (accuracies) on NTU RGB+D Dataset
Cross subject Cross view
Lie Group 
Skeletal Quads 
Dynamic Skeletons 
HBRNN 
Part-aware LSTM 
Deep RNN 
Deep LSTM 
ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)
ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)
ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal) + Trust Gate
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
Fig. 5. Example images with noisy skeletons from NTU RGB+D dataset.
The results are shown in Table 1. Deep RNN and deep LSTM models concatenate the joints features at each frame and then feed them to the network
to model the temporal dynamics and ignore the spatial dynamics. As can be
seen, both “ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)” and “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)” models
outperform these methods by a notable margin.
It can also be observed that the trust gate brings signiﬁcant performance
improvement, because the data acquired by Kinect is noisy and some joints are
frequently occluded in this dataset.
A notable portion of samples of this dataset are captured from side view, and
based on the design of Kinect’s body tracking mechanism, side view skeletal data
is less accurate than the front view. To further show the eﬀectiveness of trust
gate, we analyze the performance using only the samples in side views. When
using “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)”, the accuracy is 76.5%, while “ST-LSTM
(Tree Traversal) + Trust Gate” achieves 81.6%. This indicates the proposed
trust gate can eﬀectively handle severely noisy data.
To verify the eﬀectiveness of layer stacking, we decrease the network size
by using only one ST-LSTM layer, and the accuracies drop to 65.5% (crosssubject) and 77.0% (cross-view). It indicates our two-layer stacked model has
better representation strengths than a single-layer model.
The sensitivity of the proposed model to neural unit sizes and λ values are
also evaluated and the results are depicted in Fig. 6. When trust gate is used,
our model achieves better performance for all the λ values tested compared to
the model without trust gate.
Accuracy (%)
Accuracy (%)
Neuron Size (d)
Fig. 6. (a) Comparison of the performance for diﬀerent neuron size (d) values on NTU
RGB+D dataset (cross-subject). (b) Comparison of diﬀerent λ values on NTU RGB+D
dataset (cross-subject). The blue line indicates the results when diﬀerent λ values are
used for trust gate, and the red dashed line indicates the performance when trust gate
is not added.
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
Table 2. Experimental results on SBU
Interaction Dataset
Yun et al., 
Ji et al., 
CHARM 
HBRNN (reported by )
Co-occurrence LSTM 
Deep LSTM (reported by )
ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)
ST-LSTM (Tree)
ST-LSTM (Tree) + Trust Gate
Dataset (leave-one-out-cross-validation
protocol )
Histogram of 3D Joints 
Grassmann Manifold 
Riemannian Manifold 
ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)
ST-LSTM (Tree)
ST-LSTM (Tree) + Trust Gate
Finally, we evaluate the classiﬁcation performance on early stopping conditions by feeding the ﬁrst p (0 < p < 1) portion of the testing video to the
trained network on cross-subject protocol. When setting p as 0.1, 0.2, ..., 1.0, the
corresponding accuracies are 13.4%, 21.6%, 33.9%, 46.6%, 55.5%, 61.1%, 64.6%,
66.7%, 68.2%, 69.2%, respectively. We can ﬁnd that the results improve when a
larger portion of video is fed.
SBU Interaction Dataset. We follow the standard experimental protocol
of and perform 5-fold cross validation on SBU Interaction Dataset. In this
dataset, two human skeletons are provided in each frame, so our traversal visits
the joints throughout the two skeletons over the spatial steps. We summarize the
results in terms of average classiﬁcation accuracy in Table 2. In the table, 
and are both LSTM-based methods, which are more relevant to our model.
As can be seen, the proposed “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal) + Trust Gate”
model outperforms all other skeleton-based methods. “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)” yields higher accuracy than “ST-LSTM (Joint Chain)”, as the latter adds
some unreasonable links between the less related joints.
It is worth noting that deep LSTM , Co-occurrence LSTM , and
HBRNN all use the Svaitzky-Golay ﬁlter in temporal domain to smooth
the skeleton joint positions to reduce the inﬂuence of the noise in the data captured by Kinect. However, even without trust gate (which aims at handling noisy
input), the “ST-LSTM (Tree Traversal)” model outperforms HBRNN and deep
LSTM, and achieves comparable result (88.6%) to Co-occurrence LSTM. Once
the trust gate is utilized, the accuracy jumps to 93.3%. We do not adopt any
skeleton normalization operation, such as translation or rotation of the skeleton , and achieve state-of-the-art performance. We notice that obtained
very similar result (93.4%) on SBU dataset. However, their method utilized both
RGB and depth images, while our method just uses the skeleton data.
UT-Kinect Dataset. There are two popular protocols on UT-Kinect dataset.
First is the leave-one-out-cross-validation protocol . Second is proposed in ,
for which half of the subjects are used for training and the remaining are used
for testing. We use both protocols to evaluate the proposed method more extensively.
On the ﬁrst protocol, our model achieves superior performance over other
skeleton-based methods by a large margin, as shown in Table 3. On the second
Spatio-Temporal LSTM with Trust Gates for 3D Human Action Recognition
evaluation protocol (Table 4), our model achieves competitive result (95.0%) to
Elastic functional coding (94.9%), which is an extension of the Lie Group
model .
Berkeley MHAD. We follow the protocol in on MHAD dataset, in
which 384 sequences corresponding to the ﬁrst 7 subjects are used for training
and the 275 sequences of the remaining 5 subjects are used for testing. The
results are shown in Table 5. Our method achieves the accuracy of 100% without
preliminary smoothing operations, which are adopted in .
Besides, we have tested our model on MSR Action3D dataset following the protocol in , and achieved an accuracy of 94.8%, which is slightly
superior to 94.5% achieved by HBRNN .
Eﬀectiveness of Trust Gate
To better study the eﬀectiveness of the trust gate in the proposed network model,
we speciﬁcally evaluate noisy samples from MSR Action3D dataset. We manually
rectify some noisy joints of these samples by referring to the corresponding depth
maps, and compared the activations of the trust gates on noisy and rectiﬁed
inputs. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the activation of the trust gate is smaller when a
noisy joint is fed, compared to the corresponding rectiﬁed joint. This shows how
the network reduces the impact of the noisy input data.
To comprehensively evaluate the trust gate, we also manually add noise to
one joint for all testing samples on MHAD dataset. Note that MHAD dataset was
captured with motion capture system, thus the skeleton joints are much more
accurate than those collected by Kinect. We add noise to the right foot joint by
moving the joint away from the original position. The direction of the translation
vector is randomly chosen and the norm is also a random value around 30cm
(this is a signiﬁcant noise in the scale of human bodies). For each video, we add
noise to the same joint at the same time step, and then analyze the eﬀect in
Magnitude of trust gate
Change of trust gate
Joint step
Fig. 7. Behavior of trust gate when inputting noisy data. (a) j3′ is a noisy joint location,
and j3 is the corresponding rectiﬁed joint position. In the histogram, the blue bar is
the magnitude of the trust gate when inputting the noisy joint j3′. The red bar is the
magnitude of the corresponding trust gate when j3′ is rectiﬁed to j3. (b) The diﬀerence
between the trust gate calculated when inputting the original data and that calculated
when the noise is imposed at the jN-th spatial step and tN-th time step.
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Dong Xu, and Gang Wang
Table 4. Experimental results on UT-
Kinect Dataset (half-vs-half protocol
Skeleton Joint Features 
Lie Group (reported by )
Elastic functional coding 
ST-LSTM (Tree) + Trust Gate
Experimental
MHAD Dataset
Vantigodi et al. 
Oﬂi et al. 
Vantigodi et al. 
Kapsouras et al. 
HBRNN 
ST-LSTM (Tree) + Trust Gate
We measure the diﬀerence in the magnitude of the trust gate activations
between the original data and the noisy ones. For all the testing samples, we
perform the same procedure, then calculate the average diﬀerence. The result is
depicted in Fig. 7(b). We can see when the noisy data is fed to the network, the
magnitude of the trust gate is reduced. This shows how the network ignores the
noisy input, and tries to prevent it from aﬀecting the network. In this experiment,
we observe the overall accuracy does not drop after adding the noise.
Conclusion
In this paper we propose to extend the RNN-based 3D action recognition to
spatio-temporal domain. A new ST-LSTM network is introduced which analyses
the 3D location of each individual joint in each video frame, at each processing
step. For better representation of the structured input to the network, a skeleton
tree traversal algorithm is proposed which takes the adjacency graph of body
joints into account and improves the performance of the network by arranging
the most related joints together in the input sequence. Due to the unreliability of the 3D input data, a new gating mechanism is also proposed to improve
the robustness of the network against noise and occlusion. The provided experimental results validate the proposed contributions and prove the eﬀectiveness of
our method by achieving superior performance over the existing state-of-the-art
methods on four evaluated datasets.
Acknowledgement. The research is supported by Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Tier 2 ARC28/14, and Singapore A*STAR Science and Engineering Research Council PSF1321202099. This research was carried out at the
Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab at Nanyang Technological University.
The ROSE Lab is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore,
under its Interactive Digital Media (IDM) Strategic Research Programme. We
also would like to thank NVIDIA for the GPU donation.