IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 12. NO. 7. JULY 1990
Scale-Space and Edge Detection Using Anisotropic
PIETRO PERONA AND JITENDRA MALIK
Abstracf-The scale-space technique introduced by Witkin involves
generating coarser resolution images by convolving the original image
with a Gaussian kernel. This approach has a major drawback: it is
difficult to obtain accurately the locations of the “semantically mean-
ingful” edges at coarse scales. In this paper we suggest a new definition
of scale-space, and introduce a class of algorithms that realize it using
a diffusion process. The diffusion coefficient is chosen to vary spatially
in such a way as to encourage intraregion smoothing in preference to
interregion smoothing. It is shown that the “no new maxima should be
generated at coarse scales” property of conventional scale space is pre-
served. As the region boundaries in our approach remain sharp, we
obtain a high quality edge detector which successfully exploits global
information. Experimental results are shown on a number of images.
The algorithm involves elementary, local operations replicated over the
image making parallel hardware implementations feasible.
Zndex Terms-Adaptive filtering, analog VLSI, edge detection, edge
enhancement, nonlinear diffusion, nonlinear filtering, parallel algo-
rithm, scale-space.
1. INTRODUCTION
HE importance of multiscale descriptions of images
T has been recognized from the early days of computer
vision, e.g., Rosenfeld and Thurston . A clean for-
malism for this problem is the idea of scale-space filtering
introduced by Witkin and further developed in Koen-
derink [ll], Babaud, Duda, and Witkin [l], Yuille and
Poggio , and Hummel [71, [SI.
The essential idea of this approach is quite simple:
embed the original image in a family of derived images
I ( x , y, t ) obtained by convolving the original image
Io(x, y ) with a Gaussian kernel G(x, y; t ) of variance t:
Z ( X , Y , f) = 41(x, y ) * G(x, y ; f).
Larger values of t , the scale-space parameter, corre-
spond to images at coarser resolutions. See Fig. 1.
As pointed out by Koenderink [ 111 and Hummel ,
this one parameter family of derived images may equiv-
alently be viewed as the solution of the heat conduction,
or diffusion, equation
I, = AZ = (Zxx + IJy)
Manuscript received May 15, 1989; revised February 12, 1990. Rec-
ommended for acceptance by R. J . Woodham. This work was supported
by the Semiconductor Research Corporation under Grant 82-11-008 to P.
Perona, by an IBM faculty development award and a National Science
Foundation PYI award to J . Malik, and by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency under Contract N00039-88-C-0292.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Califomia, Berkeley, CA 94720.
IEEE Log Number 90361 10.
Fig. 1. A family of l-D signals I ( x , t ) obtained by convolving the original
one (bottom) with Gaussian kernels whose variance increases from bot-
tom to top (adapted from Witkin ).
with the initial condition I ( x , y, 0) = Zo(x, y), the orig-
inal image.
Koenderink motivates the diffusion equation formula-
tion by stating two criteria.
I ) Causality: Any feature at a coarse level of resolu-
tion is required to possess a (not necessarily unique)
“cause” at a finer level of resolution although the reverse
need not be true. In other words, no spurious detail should
be generated when the resolution is diminished.
2) Homogeneity and Isotropy: The blurring is required
to be space invariant.
These criteria lead naturally to the diffusion equation
formulation. It may be noted that the second criterion is
only stated for the sake of simplicity. We will have more
to say on this later. In fact the major theme of this paper
is to replace this criterion by something more useful.
It should also be noted that the causality criterion does
not force uniquely the choice of a Gaussian to do the blur-
ring, though it is perhaps the simplest. Hummel has
made the important observation that a version of the max-
imum principle from the theory of parabolic differential
equations is equivalent to causality. We will discuss this
further in Section IV-A.
This paper is organized as follows: Section I1 critiques
the standard scale space paradigm and presents an addi-
tional set of criteria for obtaining ‘‘semantically meaning-
ful” multiple scale descriptions. In Section I11 we show
that by allowing the diffusion coefficient to vary, one can
satisfy these criteria. In Section IV-A the maximum prin-
ciple is reviewed and used to show how the causality cri-
terion is still satisfied by our scheme. In Section V some
0162-8828/90/0700-0629$01 .OO 0
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 12. NO. 7. JULY 1990
experimental results are presented. In Section VI we com-
pare our scheme with other edge detection schemes. Sec-
tion VI1 presents some concluding remarks.
11. WEAKNESSES
OF THE STANDARD
SCALE-SPACE
We now examine the adequacy of the standard scale-
space paradigm for vision tasks which need “semanti-
cally meaningful” multiple scale descriptions. Surfaces
in nature usually have a hierarchical organization com-
posed of a small discrete number of levels [ 131. At the
finest level, a tree is composed of leaves with an intricate
structure of veins. At the next level, each leaf is replaced
by a single region, and at the highest level there is a single
blob corresponding to the treetop. There is a natural range
of resolutions (intervals of the scale-space parameter) cor-
responding to each of these levels of description. Fur-
thermore at each level of description, the regions (leaves,
treetops, or forests) have well-defined boundaries.
In the standard scale-space paradigm the true location
of a boundary at a coarse scale is not directly available in
the coarse scale image. This can be seen clearly in the
1-D example in Fig. 2. The locations of the edges at the
coarse scales are shifted from their true locations. In 2-D
images there is the additional problem that edge junc-
tions, which contain much of the spatial information of
the edge drawing, are destroyed. The only way to obtain
the true location of the edges that have been detected at a
coarse scale is by tracking across the scale space to their
position in the original image. This technique proves to
be complicated and expensive [SI.
The reason for this spatial distortion is quite obvious-
Gaussian blurring does not “respect” the natural bound-
aries of objects. Suppose we have the picture of a treetop
with the sky as background. The Gaussian blurring pro-
cess would result in the green of the leaves getting
“mixed” with the blue of the sky, long before the treetop
emerges as a feature (after the leaves have been blurred
together). Fig. 3 shows a sequence of coarser images ob-
tained by Gaussian blurring which illustrates this phe-
nomenon. It may also be noted that the region boundaries
are generally quite diffuse instead of being sharp.
With this as motivation, we enunciate the criteria
which we believe any candidate paradigm for generating
multiscale “semantically meaningful” descriptions of
images must satisfy.
I ) Causaliry: As pointed out by Witkin and Koender-
ink. a scale-space representation should have the property
that no spurious detail should be generated passing from
finer to coarser scales.
2) Immediate Localization: At each resolution, the re-
gion boundaries should be sharp and coincide with the
semantically meaningful boundaries at that resolution.
3) Piecewise Smoothing: At all scales, intraregion
smoothing should occur preferentially over interregion
smoothing. In the tree example mentioned earlier, the leaf
regions should be collapsed to a treetop before being
merged with the sky background.
Fig. 2. Position of the edges (zeros of the Laplacian with respect to x )
through the linear scale space of Fig. 1 (adapted from Witkin ).
Fig. 3 . Scale-space (scale parameter increasing from top to bottom, and
from left to right) produced by isotropic linear diffusion (0. 2. 4, 8, 16.
32 iterations of a discrete 8 nearest-neighbor implementation. Compare
to Fig. 12.
111. ANISOTROPIC
There is a simple way of modifying the linear scale-
space paradigm to achieve the objectives that we have put
forth in the previous section. In the diffusion equation
framework of looking at scale-space, the diffusion coef-
ficient c is assumed to be a constant independent of the
space location. There is no fundamental reason why this
must be so. To quote Koenderink [ 1 1, p. 3641, “ . . . I do
not permit space variant blurring. Clearly this is not es-
sential to the issue, but it simplifies the analysis greatly.”
We will show how a suitable choice of c ( x , y, t ) will
enable us to satisfy the second and third criteria listed in
the previous section. Furthermore this can be done with-
out sacrificing the causality criterion.
Consider the anisotropic diffusion equation
I, = div ( c ( x , y, t ) V l ) = c ( x , y. r ) A l + V c VI ( 3 )
where we indicate with div the divergence operator, and
with V and A respectively the gradient and Laplacian op-
erators, with respect to the space variables. It reduces
to the isotropic heat diffusion equation I, = cAZ if
c ( x , y, t ) is a constant. Suppose that at the time (scale)
t, we knew the locations of the region boundaries appro-
priate for that scale. We would want to encourage
smoothing within a region in preference to smoothing
across the boundaries. This could be achieved by setting
the conduction coefficient to be 1 in the interior of each
region and 0 at the boundaries. The blurring would then
take place separately in each region with no interaction
between regions. The region boundaries would remain
Of course. we do not know in advance the region
boundaries at each scale (if we did the problem would
already have been solved!). What can be computed is a
PERONA AND MALIK: SCALE-SPACE AND EDGE DETECTION
Fig. 4. The qualitative shape of the nonlinearity g ( . ).
current best estimate of the location of the boundaries
(edges) appropriate to that scale.
Let E ( x , y , t ) be such an estimate: a vector-valued
function defined on the image which ideally should have
the following properties:
1) E ( x , y , t ) = 0 in the interior of each region.
2) E ( x , y , t) = Ke(x,
y , t ) at each edge point, where
e is a unit vector normal to the edge at the point, and K
is the local contrast (difference in the image intensities on
the left and right) of the edge.
Note that the word edge as used above has not been
formally defined-we mean here the perceptual subjective
notion of an edge as a region boundary. A completely
satisfactory formal definition is likely to be part of the
solution, rather than the problem definition!
If an estimate E ( x , y , t ) is available, the conduction
coefficient c ( x , y , t ) can be chosen to be a function c =
g ( )I E 11 ) of the magnitude of E . According to the previ-
ously stated strategy g ( ) has to be a nonnegative
monotonically decreasing function with g ( 0 ) = 1 (see
Fig. 4). This way the diffusion process will mainly take
place in the interior of regions, and it will not affect the
region boundaries where the magnitude of E is large.
It is intuitive that the success of the diffusion process
in satisfying the three scale-space goals of Section I1 will
greatly depend on how accurate the estimate E is as a
“guess” of the position of the edges. Accuracy though is
computationally expensive and requires complicated al-
gorithms. We are able to show that fortunately the sim-
plest estimate of the edge positions, the gradient of the
brightness function, i.e., E ( x , y, t ) = VZ(x, y , t ) , gives
excellent results.
There are many possible choices for g ( ), the most ob-
vious being a binary valued function. In the next section
we show that in case we use the edge estimate E ( x , y , t )
= VZ(x, y , t ) the choice of g( ) is restricted to a subclass
of the monotonically decreasing functions.
IV. PROPERTIES
OF ANISOTROPIC
We first establish that anisotropic diffusion satisfies the
causality criterion of Section I1 by recalling a general re-
sult of the partial differential equation theory, the maxi-
mum principle. In Section IV-B we show that a diffusion
in which the conduction coefficient is chosen locally as a
function of the magnitude of the gradient of the brightness
function, i.e.,
will not only preserve, but also sharpen, the brightness
edges if the function g ( . ) is chosen properly.
A. The Maximum Principle
The causality criterion requires that no new features are
introduced in the image in passing from fine to coarse
scales in the scale-space. If we identify “features” in the
images with “blobs” of the brightness function Z(x, y , t )
for different values of the scale parameter t, then the birth
of a new “blob” would imply the creation of either a
maximum or a minimum which would have to belong
either to the interior or the top face Z(x, y , tf) of the scale
space ( q is the coarsest scale of the scale-space). There-
fore the causality criterion can be established by showing
that all maxima and minima in the scale-space belong to
the original image.
The diffusion equation (3) is a special case of a more
general class of elliptic equations that satisfy a maximum
principle. The principle states that all the maxima of the
solution of the equation in space and time belong to the
initial condition (the original image), and to the bound-
aries of the domain of interest provided that the conduc-
tion coefficient is positive. In our case, since we use adi-
abatic boundary conditions, the maximum principle is
even stronger: the maxima only belong to the original im-
age. A proof of the principle may be found in ; to
make the paper self-contained we provide an easy proof
in the Appendix, where the adiabatic boundary case is also
treated, and weaker hypotheses on the conduction coeffi-
cient are used. A discrete version of the maximum prin-
ciple is proposed in Section V.
B. Edge Enhancement
With conventional low-pass filtering and linear diffu-
sion the price paid for eliminating the noise, and for per-
forming scale space, is the blurring of edges. This causes
their detection and localization to be difficult. An analysis
of this problem is presented in .
Edge enhancement and reconstruction of blurry images
can be achieved by high-pass filtering or running the dif-
fusion equation backwards in time. This is an ill-posed
problem, and gives rise to numerically unstable compu-
tational methods, unless the problem is appropriately con-
strained or reformulated .
We will show here that if the conduction coefficient is
chosen to be an appropriate function of the image gradient
we can make the anisotropic diffusion enhance edges while
runningfonvard in time, thus enjoying the stability of dif-
fusions which is guaranteed by the maximum principle.
We model an edge as a step function convolved with a
Gaussian. Without loss of generality, assume that the edge
is aligned with the y axis.
The expression for the divergence operator simplifies
div ( c ( x , y , t)VZ) = -
Y , t ) & ) .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE. VOL. 12, NO. 7. JULY 1990
Fig. 6. A choice of the function 4 ( . ) that leads to edge enhancement.
negative. This may be a source of concern since it is
known that constant-coefficient diffusions running back-
wards are unstable and amplify noise generating ripples.
In our case this concern is unwarranted: the maximum
principle guarantees that ripples are not produced. Exper-
quickly shrink, and the process keeps stable.
imentally one observes that the areas where 4r (1,) < O
Fig. 5 . (TOP to bottom) A mollified step edge and its 1st. 2nd, and 3rd
derivatives.
V. EXPERIMENTAL
Our anisotropic diffusion, scale-space, and edge detec-
tion ideas were tested using a simple numerical scheme
that is described in this section.
Equation (3) can be discretized on a square lattice, with
brightness values associated to the vertices, and conduc-
We choose c to be a function of the gradient of I: c ( x ,
g ( z x ) . I,
Then the 1-D version of the diffusion equation (3) be-
y, t ) = g(z,(x, y, t ) ) as in (4). Let 4(z,)
denote the flux c
4 = - 4(Ix) = 4r(4) 4,.
We are interested in looking at the variation in time of
the slope of the edge: a/at(Z,). If c( ) > 0 the function
I ( ) is smooth, and the order of differentiation may be
I:, + 4' * L,.
Suppose the edge is oriented in such a way that I, > 0.
At the point of inflection I,, = 0, and I,,, << 0 since the
point of inflection corresponds to the point with maximum
slope (see Fig. 5). Then in a neighborhood of the point
of inflection a/at(Z,) has sign opposite to 4r(Z,). If
4r (I,) > 0 the slope of the edge will decrease with time;
if, on the contrary 4' (I,) < 0 the slope will increase with
Notice that this increase in slope cannot be caused by a
scaling of the edge, because this would violate the max-
imum principle. The edge becomes sharper.
There are several possible choices of 4 ( . ), for exam-
ple, g(Z,) = C / ( 1 + ( I , / K ) ' + " ) with a > 0 (see Fig.
6). Then there exists a certain threshold value related to
K, and a, below which 4( - ) is monotonically increasing,
and beyond which 4 ( ) is monotonically decreasing, giv-
ing the desirable result of blurring small discontinuities
and sharpening edges. Notice also that in a neighborhood
of the steepest region of an edge the diffusion may be
thought of as running "backwards" since +'(I,) in (5) is
tion coefficients to the arcs (see Fig. 7). A 4-nearest-
neighbors discretization of the Laplacian operator can be
= r:,j + h [ C N
V N I + cs
+ CE . VEI + cw
o W l ] : , j
1 /4 for the numerical scheme to be sta-
ble, N , S, E, Ware the mnemonic subscripts for North,
South, East, West, the superscript and subscripts on the
square bracket are applied to all the terms it encloses, and
the symbol V (not to be confused with V, which we use
for the gradient operator) indicates nearest-neighbor dif-
V N I ; , j E Ii- 1.j - 1j.j
V S 1 i . j E I l + ~ , j - ';,I
V E Z j , j = Zi,j+I - z;,j
v U / z ; , j = I ; , j - l - z ; , j .
The conduction coefficients are updated at every itera-
tion as a function of the brightness gradient (4):
PERONA AND MALIK: SCALE-SPACE AND EDGE DETECTION
Fig. 7. The structure of the discrete computational scheme for simulating
the diffusion equation (see Fig. 8 for a physical implementation). The
brightness values I,,, are associated with the nodes of a lattice, the con-
duction coefficients c to the arcs. One node of the lattice and its four
North, East, West, and South neighbors are shown.
Fig. 8. The structure of a network realizing the implementation of aniso-
tropic diffusion described in Section V, and more in detail in . The
charge on the capacitor at each node of the network represents the bright-
ness of the image at a pixel. Linear resistors produce isotropic linear
diffusion. Resistors with an I-V characteristic as in Fig. 6 produce an-
isotropic diffusion.
The value of the gradient can be computed on different
neighborhood structures achieving different compromises
between accuracy and locality. The simplest choice con-
sists in approximating the norm of the gradient at each arc
location with the absolute value of its projection along the
direction of the arc:
cb,l = g( 1 v N 1 : , ~ l )
CktJ = g( I VsI:,Jl)
ck, = 8( 1 V E Z , J I )
clv,, = s(l VwC,,I).
This scheme is not the exact discretization of (3), but
of similar diffusion equation in which the conduction ten-
sor is diagonal with entries g ( I I, \ ) and g ( I Iy 1 ) instead
of g ( 11 VI 11 ) and g ( )I VI (1 ). This discretization scheme
preserves the property of the continuous equation (3) that
the total amount of brightness in the image is preserved.
Additionally the “flux” of brightness through each arc of
the lattice only depends on the values of the brightness at
the two nodes defining it, which makes the scheme a nat-
ural choice for analog VLSI implementations . See
Fig. 8. Less crude approximations of the gradient yielded
perceptually similar results at the price of increased com-
putational complexity.
It is possible to verify that, whatever the choice of the
approximation of the gradient, the discretized scheme still
satisfies the maximum (and minimum) principle provided
that the function g is bounded between 0 and 1 .
We can in fact show this directly from (7), using the
facts X E [ 0 , 1/41, and c E [ 0 , 11, and defining ( I M ) : ,
5 max { ( I , I N , IS, ZE, Zw):,,}, and ( I m ) f , j
min { (1, IN,
Is, I E , Iw):,, } , the maximum and minimum of the neigh-
bors of Z,,, at iteration t . We can prove that
(LJ, 5 C,? 5 ( I d : , ,
i.e., no (local) maxima and minima are possible in the
interior of the discretized scale-space. In fact:
= I:,, + X[CN
* V N I + CS
+ CE * V E I + CW * VwI]:,,
= If,,( - A(cN + CS + CE + cW):,,)
+ X(C, . I N + CS * IS + CE
I E + c W . Zw):,,
5 IM:J(l - X ( c N + CS + CE + cW):,J)
and, similarly:
+ X I m : , J ( ~ ~
+ CS + CE + C W ) : , ~ = Im:,.
The numerical scheme used to obtain the pictures in this
paper is the one given by equations (7), (8), and (lo),
using the original image as the initial condition, and adi-
abatic boundary conditions, i.e., setting the conduction
coefficient to zero at the boundaries of the image. A con-
stant value for the conduction coefficient c (i.e., g ( * ) =
1 ) leads to Gaussian blurring (see Fig. 3).
Different functions were used for g ( - ) giving percep-
tually similar results. The images in this paper were ob-
tained using
g(vI) = & m I / K ) ~ )
(Fig. 9), and
(Figs. 12-14). The scale-spaces generated by these two
functions are different: the first privileges high-contrast
edges over low-contrast ones, the second privileges wide
regions over smaller ones.
The constant K was fixed either by hand at some fixed
value (see Figs. 9-14), or using the “noise estimator”
described by Canny : a histogram of the absolute val-
ues of the gradient throughout the image was computed,
l t E E TRA\ShLTlOhS Oh PATTkRh ANALYSIS AND MACHINI- INTELLIGFNCb VOL
12 NO 7 JULY 1990
Fig. 9. Effect of anisotropic ditfusion (b) on the Canaletto image (a) .
Notice that the edges remain sharp until their disappearance
and K was set equal to the 90% value of its integral at
every iteration (see Fig. 12(b)).
The computational scheme described in this section has
been chosen for its simplicity. Other numerical solutions
of the diffusion equation, and multiscale algorithms may
be considered for efficient software implementations.
VI. COMPARISON
TO OTHER EDGE DETECTION
This section is devoted to comparing the anisotropic dif-
fusion scheme that we present in this paper with previous
work on edge detection, image segmentation, and image
restoration.
We will divide edge detectors in two classes: fixed-
neighborhood edge detectors, and energyiprobability
"global" schemes.
Fig. 12. From left to right (a) original image, (b) scale-space using an-
isotropic diffusion (10. 20. 80 iterations), (c) edges of the same. (d)
edges at comparable scales detected using the Canny detector (convo-
lution kernels of variance 1. 2. 4 pixels).
PERONA AND MALlK SCALE-SPACk AND EDGE DErECTlON
Banner.000.30
Banner.500.30
Fig. 13. Scale-space using anisotropic diffusion. Three dimensional plot
ofthe brightness in Fig. 12. (a) Original image. (b) after smoothing with
anisotropic diffusion.
160, 220. 280. 320. 400 iterations.
Fig. 14. Scale-space using anisotropic ditfusion. Original image (top left)
and coarser scale images after (left to right, top to bottom) 20, 60. 120,
A . Fixed Neighborhood Detectors
This class of detectors makes use of local information
typically examine a small window of the im-
age and try to be clever about deciding if and where there
is an edge. This decision is ambiguous and difficult.
We pick Canny's scheme as a representative of this
class of detectors. The image is convolved with direc-
tional derivatives of a Gaussian-the idea is to do smooth-
ing parallel to the edge and thus reduce noise without
blurring the edge too much. There are two major difficul-
ties: 1) the inevitable tradeoff between localization accu-
racy and detectability that comes from using linear filter-
ing 2) the complexity of combining outputs of filters at
multiple sales. Anisotropic diffusion is a nonlinear pro-
cess, hence in principle is not subject to limitation 1). The
complication of multiple scale, multiple orientation filters
is avoided by locally adaptive smoothing.
We can thus summarize the advantages of the scheme
we propose over linear fixed-neighborhood edge detec-
Locality: The shape and size of the neighborhood
where smoothing occurs are determined locally by the
brightness pattern of the image, and adapt to the shape
and size of the regions within which smoothing is re-
quired. In schemes based on linear smoothing or fixed-
neighborhood processing the shape and size of the areas
where smoothing occurs are constant throughout the im-
age. This causes distortions in the shape of the meaning-
ful regions, and in the loss of structures like edge junc-
tions (see Figs. 10(b), 12(d), 15) which contain much of
the information that allows a three-dimensional interpre-
tation of the edge line-drawing [ 121.
Simplicig: The algorithm consists in identical nearest-
neighbor operations (4-8 differences, a function evalua-
tion or a table look-up, and 4-8 sums) iterated over the
nodes of a 4 (8) connected square lattice. By comparison
the Canny detector requires a number of convolutions
(each involving large neighborhoods at a time) as a pre-
processing stage, and a stage of cross-scale matching.
Moreover with our algorithm the edges are made sharp by
the diffusion process discussed in Section IV-B, so that
edge thinning and linking are almost unnecessary, espe-
cially at coarse scales of resolution (compare Fig. 17 to
Fig. 16). For edge detectors based on convolution this is
an essential, delicate, and expensive step since linear low-
pass filtering has the effect of blurring the edges. The sim-
plicity of the computations involved in anisotropic diffu-
sion makes it a good candidate for digital hardware im-
plementations.
Parallelism: The structure of the algorithm is parallel
which makes it cheap to run on arrays of simple parallel
processors.
On sequential machines, anisotropic diffusion is com-
putationally more expensive than convolution-based de-
tectors. This is because in the diffusion process a contin-
uum of scales are generated instead of a small fixed
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTER !N ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 12, NO. I. JULY 1990
Fig. 15. Scale-space using linear convolution. The edges are distorted and
the junctions disappear. Images generated using the Canny detector and
smoothing Gaussian kernels of variance (top left to bottom right) 1 /2,
1, 2, 4, 8, 16 pixels. Compare to Fig. 17 where anisotropic diffusion
preserves edge junctions, shape, and position.
B. Energy-Based Methods for Image Reconstruction
and Segmentation
A number of methods have appeared in the literature
where the edge detectiodimage segmentation process is
performed by the minimization of an energy function of
with Z indicating the set of the nodes of a lattice, N ( i ) c
Z indicating the nodes neighboring node i, and z a function
defined on the lattice, typically the brightness function
 . An equivalent formulation is based on finding max-
ima of a Markov probability distribution function defined
on the space of all images:
Pz( z‘) = - e
where the function U( * ) has the form of (14) , .
Because the exponential function is monotonic the max-
ima of the probability distribution and the minima of the
energy function coincide, and we can limit our attention
to the schemes based on minimizing the energy.
The energy function (14) is the sum of two terms: the
a priori term (the sum of the “clique” functions V con-
taining the a priori knowledge about the image space-
see any one of , , for a complete discussion),
and a term depending on the data available (the sum of
the functions W i ) . V ( e
* ) is typically an even function
depending only on the value of the difference of its ar-
guments (with abuse of notation V(zi, z j ) = V ( z j - z j ) ) .
It has minimum at zero and it is monotonic on the positive
and negative semilines assigning higher energy ( e lower
probability) to the pairs i , j of lattice nodes whose bright-
ness difference I( zi - z, \( is bigger. We will show that the
Fig. 16. Edges detected by thresholding the gradient in Fig. 14. Linking
is not necessary. Thinning is only for the finer scales. Compare to Fig.
17 where thinning and linking have been used.
Fig. 17. Edges detected in Fig. 14 using a thinning and linking stage 141.
approximation of anisotropic diffusion that we suggest in
Section V may be seen as a gradient descent of the a priori
part of the energy function
The steepest descent strategy for finding minima of a
function consists of starting from some initial state, and
then changing iteratively the state following the opposite
of the gradient vector. The gradient of the energy func-
tion, which may be computed from (16) differentiating
with respect to the zi, is the vector of components
VU,(Z) = 2 , E, qz; - Z j )
J E N ( I )
PERONA AND MALIK: SCALE-SPACE AND EDGE DETECTION
Fig. 18. (a) The local energy function proposed by , , typically
is equal to the square of the nearest-neighbor brightness difference, and
saturates at some threshold value. (b) The first derivative of the energy
function (a). (c), (d) The anisotropic diffusion conduction coefficient and
flux function as a function of the brightness gradient magnitude, propor-
tional to the nearest neighbor brightness difference in the discrete case.
(b) and (d) have the same role.
therefore the gradient descent algorithm is
where A is some "speed" factor.
Suppose that V( - ) is differentiable in the origin and
define+(.) = -k Since V ( . ) i s e v e n , + ( . ) i s a n o d d
function and + ( O ) = 0. Then we may write +(s) = s
c(s) for some function c( ) even and positive. Substi-
tuting into (1 8) we obtain
which is exactly the anisotropic diffusion algorithm de-
fined by (7), (8), and (10) if the neighborhood structure
is given by natural nearest-neighbor cliques of a square
lattice. The flux functions obtained by differentiating the
local energy functions V( ) of , , are similar
to the shape of flux function that the analysis in Section
IV-B suggests. See Fig. 18.
To summarize: anisotropic diffusion may be seen as a
gradient descent on some energy function. The data (the
original image) are used as the initial condition. In the
energy-based methods , [ 161, the closedness of the
solution to the data is imposed by a term in the energy
function. This makes the energy function nonconvex and
more complicated optimization algorithms than gradient
descent are necessary. Most of the algorithms that have
been proposed (simulated annealing for example) appear
too slow for vision applications. Perhaps the only excep-
tion is the GNC algorithm proposed by Blake and Zisser-
man which does not guarantee to find the global op-
timum for generic images, but appears to be a good
compromise between speed and accuracy.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have introduced a tool, anisotropic diffusion, that
we believe will prove useful in many tasks of early vision.
Diffusion based algorithms involve simple, local, identi-
cal computations over the entire image lattice. Implemen-
tations on massively parallel architectures like the con-
nection machine would be almost trivial. Implementations
using hybrid analog-digital networks also seem feasible.
We have shown that the simplest version of anisotropic
diffusion can be applied with success to multiscale image
segmentation. As a preprocessing step it makes thinning
and linking of the edges unnecessary, it preserves the edge
junctions, and it does not require complicated comparison
of images at different scales since shape and position are
preserved at every single scale.
In images in which the brightness gradient generated by
the noise is greater than that of the edges, and the level
of the noise varies significantly across the image the
scheme that we have described proves insufficient to ob-
tain a correct multiscale segmentation. In this case a global
noise estimate does not provide an accurate local esti-
mate, and the local value of the gradient provides too par-
tial a piece of information for distinguishing noise-related
and edge-related gradients. Moreover, the abscissa K of
the peak of the flux function + ( ) has to be set according
to the typical contrast value, if this changes considerably
through the image the value of K has to be set locally. To
tackle these difficulties anisotropic diffusion should be
implemented using local contrast and noise estimates.
PROOF OF THE MAXIMUM
Call A an open bounded set of W" (in our case A is the
plane of the image, a rectangle of a*), and T = ( a , b )
an interval of R. Let D be the open cylinder of R""
formed by the product D = A x T = { (x, t ) :x E A , t E
T } . Call aD the boundary of D, 0 its closure, and aTD,
a,D, and aBD the top, side, and bottom portions of aD:
aTD = {(x, + E A ,
a , D = { ( ~ , t ) : ~ ~ ~ , t = b }
a s D = ( ( x , t ) : x E a A , t E T }
and, for convenience, call asBD the side-bottom bound-
asBD = asD U aBD.
The following theorems hold.
Theorem: Consider a functionf : Rn + ' -, R that is con-
tinuous on 0,
and twice differentiable on D U aTD. Iff
satisfies the differential inequality
C(x, t)fr - c(x, t ) A f - vc . V f I
on D, with C: Pn+' + [; + continuous on 0,
and differ-
entiable on D U aTD, then it obeys the maximum prin-
ciple, i.e., the maximum offin D is reached on the bot-
tom-side boundary asBD of D:
maxf = maxf
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE. VOL. 12, NO. 7. JULY 1990
Corollary: Consider a function f satisfying the hy-
potheses of the previous theorem, and such thatfis twice
differentiable on asD, and V,f
= 0 (where V, indicates
the gradient operator along the x direction). Then
m_ax f = maxf.
The following proof is adapted from John [ 101.
Pro08 First consider f satisfying the stricter condi-
C ( X , t)J - C(X, t ) A f - VC * Vf < 0.
By hypothesis fis continuous on E,
a compact set, hence
it has a maximum in it. Call p = ( y , T ) this maximum.
Suppose that p E D. Since f is twice continuously dif-
ferentiable in D we can write the first three terms of the
Taylor expansion off about p :
f ( p + Eo) = f ( p ) + €of% + E 2 V T X f V
where U E R” + ‘ , E E some neighborhood of zero, and Xf
indicates the n + 1 X n + 1 Hessian matrix off. For the
sake of compactness, unlike in the rest of the paper, Vf
in (22) indicates the gradient offwith respect to the space
coordinates and the time coordinate. Since p is a point
where f has a maximum, the gradient Vf in the first order
term of the expansion (22) is equal to zero therefore the
second term cannot be positive, Vu E Rn
+ I : o T X f o I
0; the Hessian matrix is therefore negative semidefinite,
which implies that the entries on its diagonal are either
equal to zero or negative. The Laplacian is a sum of en-
tries on the diagonal and therefore Af I
0. This would
mean that at p
C ( X , t)J - c(p)Af - VC * Af 2 0
contradicting the hypothesis.
Similarly, if p E a,D the first derivative with respect to
t off could only be positive or equal to zero, while the
first derivatives with respect to the x variables would have
to be equal to zero, and the second derivatives with re-
spect to the x variables could only be equal to zero or
negative, giving the same inequality at p as above. This
would again contradict the hypothesis. So, iff satisfies
(21), then it obeys the maximum principle.
Iff satisfies the weak inequality (20) the function g de-
fined as g = f - X ( t - a ) satisfies the strict inequality
(21), and therefore the maximum principle, for any X >
0. Observe thatf= g + X ( t - a ) I
g + X(b - a ) on
and because of this
m3xf 5 max ( g + ~
= max ( g + ~
max ( f + X(b - a ) ) .
Letting X -, 0 we obtain the thesis.
Notice that the maximum principle also guarantees that
there are no local maxima off in D U d,D. The same
technique used in the proof restricting D to be a cylinder
contained in the neighborhood where the local maximum
is a strict maximum may be used to see that the existence
of one at p E D U dTD would violate the differential in-
The corollary may be proven along the same lines: since
fis, by hypothesis, differentiable on 8,Done can use (21),
and (22) for any p E d,D, with o in an appropriate hemi-
sphere so that p + E Z I E D.
If a function f satisfies the differential equation
C ( X , t)J - C(X, t ) Af - VC
with the hypotheses already stated on the functions C( )
and c ( ), the arguments above can be run for f and h =
-fproving that both a maximum and minimum principle
have to be satisfied.
The diffusion equation (3) is a special case of (23) (set
C(x, t ) = 1, and f = I), hence the scale-space brightness
function Z(x, y , t ) obeys the maximum principle provided
that the conduction coefficient c never takes negative value
(in fact the condition that c does not take negative value
wherefhas a maximum is sufficient) and is differentiable.
If adiabatic (V,f = 0) boundary conditions are used then
the hypotheses of the corollary are satisfied too, and the
maxima may only belong to the initial condition.
Solutionsfof (3) have an additional property if the con-
duction coefficient is constant along the space axes: c =
c( t ) . In this case, all spatial derivatives off are solutions
of (3), and therefore satisfy the hypotheses of the maxi-
mum principle. So the causality criterion is satisfied by
all such functions: the components of the gradient, the
Laplacian, etc. It is important to notice that this is not
true in general for solutions of (3) when the conduction
coefficient varies in scale and space. We show in Section
IV-B that in fact anisotropic diffusion can increase the
contrast (i.e., the magnitude of the gradient) of edges in
the image.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to L. Semenzato, A. Casotto, P. Kube,
and B. Baringer who gave very friendly assistance in set-
ting up the software simulations, and taking the pictures.
R. Brodersen kindly provided the photographic equip-
ment. B. Hummel pointed to us the result by Niremberg.