The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie
Explanations:
An Experiment Using Commercial Meta-data
Nava Tintarev and Judith Masthoﬀ
University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, U.K.
Abstract. This paper studies the properties of a helpful and trustworthy explanation in a movie recommender system. It discuss the results of
an experiment based on a natural language explanation prototype. The
explanations were varied according to three factors: degree of personalization, polarity and expression of unknown movie features. Personalized
explanations were not found to be signiﬁcantly more Eﬀective than nonpersonalized, or baseline explanations. Rather, explanations in all three
conditions performed surprisingly well. We also found that participants
evaluated the explanations themselves most highly in the personalized,
feature-based condition.
Introduction
Recommender systems represent user preferences for the purpose of suggesting
items to purchase or examine, i.e. recommendations. Our work focuses on explanations of recommended items , explaining how a user might relate to
an item unknown to them. More concretely, we investigate explanations in the
movie domain with the aim of helping users make qualiﬁed decisions, i.e. Eﬀective
explanations. An explanation may be formulated along the lines of “You might
(not) like Item A because...”. The justiﬁcation following may depend on the
underlying recommendation algorithm (e.g. content-based, collaborative-based),
but could also be independent. Our approach is algorithm independent, as it
aims to explain a randomly selected item rather than the recommendation. In
this way we implicitly diﬀerentiate between explaining the way the recommendation engine works (Transparency), and explaining why the user may or may
not want to try an item (Eﬀectiveness). In addition, since items are selected randomly the explanation can vary in polarity: being positive, neutral or negative.
The experiment described in this paper measures how diﬀerent explanations
aﬀect the likelihood of trying an item (Persuasion) versus making informed decisions (Eﬀectiveness) and inspiring user trust (Trust). We investigate the eﬀects
diﬀerent types of explanations have on these three explanation aims.
As in a study by Bilgic and Mooney , we deﬁne an Eﬀective explanation as
one which helps the user make a correct estimate of their valuation of an item.
Persuasion only reﬂects a user’s initial rating of item, but not their ﬁnal rating
W. Nejdl et al. (Eds.): AH 2008, LNCS 5149, pp. 204–213, 2008.
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie Explanations
after trying it. While the user might initially be satisﬁed or dissatisﬁed, their
opinion may change after exposure. As in , Eﬀectiveness can be measured by
(1) the user rating the item on the basis of the explanation, (2) the user trying
the item, (3) the user re-rating the item. While it would be preferable if users
could actually try the item, in an experimental setting step 2 may be approximated by e.g. allowing users to read item reviews written by other users. The
metric suggested by is optimized when the mean diﬀerence between the two
ratings (step 1 - step 3) is close to zero, has a low standard deviation, and there
is a strong positive correlation between the two ratings. If an explanation helps
users make good decisions, getting more (accurate and balanced) information or
trying the item should not change their valuation of the item greatly.
Although did not explicitly consider the direction of skew, the diﬀerence
between the two ratings may be either positive (over-estimation of the item) or
negative (under-estimation). Over-estimation may result in false positives; users
trying items they do not end up liking. Particularly in a high investment recommendation domain such as real-estate, a false positive is likely to result in
a large blow to trust in the system. Under-estimation may on the other hand
lead to false negatives; users missing items they might have appreciated. If a
user recognizes an under-estimation due to previous knowledge or subsequent
exposure, this may lead to a loss of trust as well. Likewise, an under-estimation
may needlessly decrease an e-commerce site’s revenue.
Factors That May Impact Explanation Eﬀectiveness
Features and Personalization
Users like to know what it is about a particular item that makes it worthy (or
not) of recommendation. Bilgic and Mooney did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant result
for Eﬀectiveness for an ‘Inﬂuence based explanation’ which listed other books
previously rated highly by the user as inﬂuential for the recommendation. Other
work surveying a similar type of interface suggests that users would like to know
the explicit relationship between a recommended item and similar items used
to form the recommendation . An explanation based on item features may be
one way to do this, e.g. “You have rated books with the same author highly in
the past.”
Using item features also makes it possible to personalize explanations, as
diﬀerent users may place diﬀerent importance on diﬀerent feature, and have individual tastes with regard to these features (i.e. not everyone has the same
favorite actor). The seminal study by Herlocker et al. on explanation interfaces shows a strong persuasive eﬀect for an explanation interface referring to
a particular movie feature, namely “favorite actor or actress”. This feature (favorite actor/actress) may be more important to some users than others since a
high variance in acceptance for this type of explanation was found. Qualitative
feedback from focus groups also shows that users vary with regard to which
movie features they ﬁnd important .
N. Tintarev and J. Masthoﬀ
If it is the case that some features are more important for particular users,
it would seem plausible that explanations that tailor which features to describe
would be more Persuasive and Eﬀective than explanations with randomly selected
features, and non-feature based explanations. In the real-estate domain Carenini
and Moore have shown that user-tailored evaluative arguments (such as “the house
has a good location” for a user who cares about location) increase users’ likelihood
to adopt a particular house compared to non-tailored arguments .
While similar, our work diﬀers from the studies in and , which primarily considered the Persuasive power of arguments and explanations, but did not
study Eﬀectiveness. Arguably varied the polarity of the evaluative arguments,
but given the domain (real-estate) it was diﬃcult for them to consider the ﬁnal
valuation of the items. Our aim is therefore to consider how user-tailoring of
item features can aﬀect explanation Eﬀectiveness, Persuasion as well as Trust.
An explanation may contain both positive and negative information, and in that
sense may have a polarity in a similar way as a numerical rating of an item. 
showed that manipulating a rating prediction can alter the user valuation of
a movie, causing either an over- or underestimation. Modifying the polarity of
an explanation is likely to lead to a similar skew in Eﬀectiveness. In the study
by Herlocker et al participants were most likely to see a movie if they saw
an explanation interface consisting of a barchart of how similar users had rated
the item. This bar chart had one bar for “good”, a second for “ok” and a third
for “bad” ratings. A weakness of this result is a bias toward positive ratings in
the used dataset1. Bilgic and Mooney later showed that using this type of
histogram causes users to overestimate their valuation of the items (books).
We have analyzed online movie reviews mined from the Amazon website, to
see if we could distinguish the properties of reviews that are considered helpful
 . We found that users were more prone to write positive reviews and that
negative reviews were considered signiﬁcantly less helpful by other users than
positive ones. Similar correlations between item rating and review helpfulness
were found in other domains such as digital cameras and mobile phones . All
of this makes us consider whether negative explanations are likely to be found
less helpful by users, or may instead help mitigate users’ overly optimistic beliefs
about items.
The Herlocker et al study considered an interface which looked at recommendation conﬁdence, which portrays to which degree the system has suﬃcient
information to make a strong recommendation. Their study did not ﬁnd that
conﬁdence displays had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on how likely a participant was to
see a movie. McNee et al also studied the eﬀect of conﬁdence displays on
user acceptance. They found that users that were already familiar with their
1 MovieLens - 
The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie Explanations
recommender system (MovieLens) were less satisﬁed with the system overall after being exposed to conﬁdence displays. On the other hand, more experienced
users also found the conﬁdence display more valuable than new users.
As part of a larger study comparing diﬀerent types of explanation interfaces
we held three focus groups (comprising of 23 participants) discussing the conﬁdence display used in . We found that many participants found information
about conﬁdence displays confusing. They did not understand what to do with
the conﬁdence rating or felt that the system should not make predictions if it
was not conﬁdent. This raised the question of how lack of conﬁdence would
aﬀect explanation Eﬀectiveness, Persuasion as well as Trust. In particular, we
were curious how users would react to missing information. In real data-sets as
our data retrieved from Amazon’s e-Commerce Service (ECS), detailed feature
meta-data is sometimes missing. Is it better to refrain from presenting these
items to users altogether, to talk about another feature which might not be
as important to the user, or candidly state that the system is missing certain
information?
Other Factors
Eﬀectiveness of explanations can also be aﬀected by a number of other factors.
If the quality of the information used to form the recommendation or recommendation accuracy are compromised this is likely to lead to poor Eﬀectiveness.
Likewise, the nature of the recommended object and presentation of the recommended items are likely to be contributing factors. While these are highly
relevant topics, they will not be discussed further in this paper. We conduct a
study where no recommendation engine is used, in a single domain (movies),
with all items presented in the same manner (one stand-alone item).
Experiment
This experiment is based on a prototype system which dynamically generates
natural language explanations2 for movie items based on meta-data retrieved
from Amazon (ECS)3. The aim of this experiment was to see if using movie
features (e.g. lead actors/actresses), and personalization could aﬀect the Eﬀectiveness of explanations. We studied if explanation polarity, and clearly stating
that some information is missing could aﬀect Eﬀectiveness. We also wanted to
know whether the eﬀect was the same for Persuasion. When we help users make
decisions that are good for them (Eﬀectiveness), will they end up buying/trying
fewer items (Persuasion)? Likewise, we are interested in the eﬀects these factors
have on user Trust.
2 Realized with simpleNLG, a simple and ﬂexible natural language generation system
created by Ehud Reiter. See also 
3 The used meta-data considers the ﬁnding of focus groups and analysis of online
movie reviews as well as which features are readily available via Amazon’s
ECS e.g. actors, directors, genre, average rating, and certiﬁcation (e.g. rated PG).
N. Tintarev and J. Masthoﬀ
First, participants entered their movie preferences: which genres they were in
the mood for, which they would not like to see, how important they found movie
features (elicited in previous studies ), and their favourite actors/directors.
The user model in our prototype can weigh the movies’ features, according to
feature utility as well as the participant’s genre preferences.
Fifty-nine movies were pre-selected as potential recommendations to participants. Thirty are present in the top 100 list in the Internet Movie Database
(IMDB4) and the other twenty-nine were selected at random, but all were present
in both the MovieLens 100.000 ratings dataset5 and Amazon.com.
Each participant evaluated ten recommendations and explanations for movies
selected at random from the pre-selected set. Note that the explanations tell
the user what they might think about the item, rather than how the item was
selected. Moreover, these explanations diﬀer from explanations of recommendations as they may be negative, positive, or neutral, as the movies shown to
the user are selected at random. Since we did not want the users to have any
pre-existing knowledge of the movies they rated, we prompted them to request
a new recommendation and explanation if they felt they might have seen the
movie. Next, we followed the experimental design of for each movie:
1. Participants were shown the title and cover image of the movie and explanation, and answered the following questions:
– How much do you think you would like this movie?
– How good do you think the explanation is?
2. Participants read movie reviews on Amazon.com, care was taken to diﬀerentiate between our explanation facility and Amazon.
3. They re-rated the movie, the explanation and their trust of our system:
“Given everything you’ve seen so far how much do you now trust the explanation facility in this system?”
On all questions, participants selected a value on a Likert scale from 1 (bad)
to 7 (good), or opted out by saying they had “no opinion”. They could give
qualitative comments to justify their response. In a between subjects design,
participants were assigned to one of three degrees of personalization:
1. Baseline: The explanation is neither personalized, nor describes item features. This is a generic explanation that could apply to anyone, e.g. “This
movie is one of the top 100 movies in the Internet Movie Database (IMDB).”
or “This movie is not one of the top 100 movies in the Internet Movie
Database (IMDB).” No additional information is supplied about the movie.
2. Random choice, feature based: The explanation describes item features,
but the movie feature is selected at random, e.g. “This movie belongs to your
preferred genre(s): Action & Adventure. On average other users rated this
movie 4/5.0”. The feature ‘average rating’ may not be particularly important
to the user.
4 
5 
The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie Explanations
3. Personalize choice, feature based: The explanation describes the item
feature that is most important to the participant, e.g. “Although this movie
does not belong to any of your preferred genre(s), it belongs to the genre(s):
Documentary. This movie stars Liam Neeson your favorite actor(s)”. For
this user, the most important feature is leading actors.
Our previous ﬁndings suggest that genre information is important to most
if not all users, so both the second and third condition contain a sentence regarding the movie genre in a personalized way. This sentence notes that the movie
belongs to some of the user’s disliked genres (negative polarity), preferred genres (positive polarity), or lists the genres it belongs to though they are neither
disliked nor preferred (neutral polarity). In negative explanations, the movie belongs to a genre the user dislikes. We do not explicitly state what the user may
think of the item, e.g. “You might like/dislike this movie” as this is likely to
bias their rating. Also, there are times when Amazon is missing information.
An example explanation for a negative explanation with unknown information
is: “Unfortunately this movie belongs to at least one genre you do not want to
see: Horror. Director information is unknown.”. Seventeen movies lack director
information and their explanations explicitly state that this is missing.
Also, a movie may star one of the user’s favorite actors or director in which
case this will also be mentioned as a “favorite”, e.g. “This movie starts Ben
Kingsley, Ralph Fiennes and Liam Neeson your favorite actor(s).”
Fifty-one students and university staﬀparticipated in the experiment. Of
these, ﬁve were removed based on users’ comments suggesting that they had either rated movies for which they had a pre-existing opinion, or Amazon’s reviews
instead of our explanations. Of the remaining, 25 were male, 21 female and the
average age was 26.5. Participants were roughly equally distributed among the
three conditions (14, 17 and 15 respectively).
We hypothesize that personalizedfeature based explanations will be more Eﬀective than random choice feature based explanations and the baseline explanations.
Results and Discussion
Table 1 summarizes the means of all the recorded values.
Table 1. Means (and StDev) of user ratings and percentage “no opinions”. First ratings are given after viewing the explanation, second ratings after viewing the Amazon
Explanation
Explanation
3.45 (1.26)
4.11 (1.85)
2.85 (1.85) 0% 2.69 (1.94)
Random choice
3.85 (1.87)
4.43 (2.02)
2.56 (1.74)
Personalized
3.61 (1.65)
4.37 (1.93)
3.14 (1.99) 0% 2.91 (1.60)
N. Tintarev and J. Masthoﬀ
Fig. 1. First and second movie ratings - the distribution is considered with regard to
percentage of ratings in each condition
Enough to Form an Opinion? Since our explanations are very short we ﬁrst
considered whether they were suﬃcient for the user to form an opinion of the
movie. In Table 1 we note the percentage of no-opinions in each condition. We
see that this is small though perhaps not negligible. The percentage for the ﬁrst
movie as well as for the ﬁrst explanation is smallest in the personalized condition.
In Figure 1 we consider the actual ratings of the movie. We see that the ﬁrst
and second rating of the movie are distributed beyond the mean rating of 4,
suggesting that participants are able to form polarized opinions.
Are Personalized Explanations More Eﬀective? Next we considered Effectiveness. Similar to the metric described by we consider the mean of the
diﬀerence between the two movie ratings. Unlike (who considered the signed
values) we consider the absolute, or unsigned, diﬀerence between the two ratings
in Table 2. Independent samples t-tests show no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
means of the three conditions. This suggests that the degree of personalization
or using item features does not increase explanation Eﬀectiveness.
Figure 2 graphically depicts the signed distribution of Eﬀectiveness. We see
here that under-estimation is more frequent than overestimation in all three
conditions. We also note the peak at zero in the random choice, feature based
Table 2. Eﬀectiveness over absolute values with “no-opinions” omitted, and Pearson’s
correlations between the two movie ratings
Correlation
1.38 (1.20)
Random choice
1.14 (1.30)
Personalized
1.40 (1.21)
The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie Explanations
Fig. 2. Distribution of (signed) Eﬀectiveness - “no opinions” omitted
condition. Around 40% of explanations in this condition are perfectly Eﬀective,
i.e. the diﬀerence between the two ratings is zero.
We investigated this further and found that the random choice condition has
signiﬁcantly higher initial ratings than the other two conditions. We compared
this condition with the personalized condition to see if there was any factor that
could cause this. The percentage of shown movies that were in the top 100 in
IMDB was comparable, and the distribution of movie titles did not show an
evident skew. In the personalized condition most participants chose “actors” as
their most preferred movie feature (75%) while the participants in the random
choice condition received explanations describing the four movie features in fairly
equal proportions. The explanations in the random choice condition have fewer
mentions of favorite actors and directors, more explanations with unknown information, and fewer movies in the participants’ preferred genres than in the
personalized condition. All of this, except the diﬀerence in features mentioned,
would be expected to lead to a lower initial rating rather than the found higher
rating. With regards to features, we speculated that the diﬀerence may be due
to the feature “average rating by other users” being mentioned more often, as we
observed a positive bias of average ratings on the Amazon website. However, we
found that mentioning this feature correlated more with low ratings of movies.
So, we have not yet found a satisfactory explanation.
Since did not consider the sign of the diﬀerence between the two ratings,
their metric of Eﬀectiveness also requires that the two ratings are correlated.
This correlation is still interesting for our purposes. Table 2 shows a signiﬁcant
and positive correlation between these two ratings for all three conditions. That
is, explanations in all three conditions perform surprisingly well.
Explanations and User Satisfaction. In Table 1 we see that the second set
of explanation ratings are higher than the ﬁrst. This may be partly due to some
participants confounding our explanations with the Amazon reviews, thus rating
our explanation facility higher. The mean rating for trust and explanations is
low overall, but users rate the ﬁrst explanation rating signiﬁcantly highest in the
personalized condition (independent sample t-tests, p<0.001). This suggests that
while the personalized explanations may not help users make better decisions,
users may still be more satisﬁed. This is conﬁrmed by the qualitative comments.
Participants in the personalized condition appreciated when their preferred feature was mentioned: “...explanation lists main stars, which attracts me a little
to watch the movie...”. Participants felt that vital information was missing in
N. Tintarev and J. Masthoﬀ
particular in the random choice condition: “...I indicated that Stanley Kubrick is
one of my favorite directors in one of the initial menus but the explanation didn’t
tell me he directed this. That would have piqued my interest. The explanation
didn’t have this important detail so a loss of trust happened here...” Another
participant in the random choice condition had set actors as the most important feature and left the following comment for an explanation with information
about the director: “...not much useful information in the explanation - I do not
know many directors, so do not really care who directs a movie.”. In contrast,
participants in the baseline condition expressed that they were dissatisﬁed with
the explanation: “Not very helpful explanation even if it is top 100...”
Trust, Classiﬁcation and Completeness. In Table 1 we see that the mean
trust is low in all three conditions, but seems best in the personalized feature
based condition. Many participants felt that the genres were misclassiﬁed, and
that this reduced their trust in the explanation facility. Although the genre classiﬁcation is automatically retrieved from the Amazon ECS there are two things
we could change in our explanations to mitigate these eﬀects. In our prototype
when a movie belongs to any of the users’ favorite genres, only preferred genres
are mentioned in the explanation even if the movie belongs to other genres as
well. Similarly for disliked genres, only these are mentioned. A ﬁrst improvement
would be to mention all the genres a movie belongs to. Secondly, the genre explanations can be improved by considering even more detailed genre speciﬁcation
such as “Period Drama” rather than just “Drama” for costume dramas.
We received similar feedback for actors, where we only mention the user’s
favorite actor in the explanation: “Benicio del Toro is in it, but so are others
who aren’t listed and who I really like...”. That is, users might like to hear the
names of all the leading actors even if only one is known to be their favorite.
Certainty and Polarity. None of the seven users for which director information was missing noted this, nor were there any explicit complaints about
negative explanations where the movie belonged to a genre the user did not like.
Conclusions
In all three conditions participants largely have an opinion of the movie, and in
all conditions there was more underestimation than overestimation. The mean
Eﬀectiveness deviated ca 1.5 from the optimum discrepancy of zero on a 7 point
scale (StD < 1.5), regardless of the degree of personalization or whether or not
the explanation used features such as actors. In light of this under-estimation
we reconsider the fact that movie ratings in general, and their Amazon reviews
in particular, tend to lean toward positive ratings. If Amazon reviews are overly
positive, this may have aﬀected our results.
Since there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between conditions w.r.t. Eﬀectiveness
we consider the factors that the three conditions share, which is that they all
expose the participant to the movie title and movie cover. A number of participants justify their ratings in terms of the image in their qualitative comments,
The Eﬀectiveness of Personalized Movie Explanations
in particular for the baseline explanation. So it is fair to assume that at least
some participants use the image to form their judgment.
We are now planning a repeated experiment accounting for the factors discussed in this paper. Firstly, the experiment will consider explanations without
images. Secondly, explanations regarding genre and actor will be more detailed
and complete. Thirdly, a clearer distinction will be made between the personalized and random choice condition. Explanations in the random choice condition
will describe all the genres of the movie, but not relate them to the user’s preferences. Likewise it will list all the lead actors, and the director, but will not relate
whether they are the user’s favorites. We will consider alternative sources for
approximating the user’s true evaluation of the item, or repeat the experiment
in a domain which does not have as strong a positive bias as Amazon. A ﬁnal
evaluation in which participants will view the movie they rate is also planned.
Acknowledgments. This research was partially supported by the EPSRC platform grant (EP/E011764/1).