Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1568–1575,
Austin, Texas, November 1-5, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Transfer Learning for Low-Resource Neural Machine Translation
Barret Zoph*
Deniz Yuret
Jonathan May and Kevin Knight
Information Sciences Institute
Computer Engineering
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Koc¸ University
Computer Science Department
 
 
University of Southern California
{jonmay,knight}@isi.edu
The encoder-decoder framework for neural
machine translation (NMT) has been shown
effective in large data scenarios, but is much
less effective for low-resource languages. We
present a transfer learning method that signiﬁcantly improves BLEU scores across a range
of low-resource languages. Our key idea is
to ﬁrst train a high-resource language pair
(the parent model), then transfer some of the
learned parameters to the low-resource pair
(the child model) to initialize and constrain
training. Using our transfer learning method
we improve baseline NMT models by an average of 5.6 BLEU on four low-resource language pairs. Ensembling and unknown word
replacement add another 2 BLEU which brings
the NMT performance on low-resource machine translation close to a strong syntax based
machine translation (SBMT) system, exceeding its performance on one language pair. Additionally, using the transfer learning model
for re-scoring, we can improve the SBMT system by an average of 1.3 BLEU, improving
the state-of-the-art on low-resource machine
translation.
Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) is a promising paradigm for extracting translation knowledge from parallel text.
NMT systems have achieved competitive accuracy rates under large-data training conditions for language pairs
This work was carried out while all authors were at USC’s
Information Sciences Institute.
*This author is currently at Google Brain.
Table 1: NMT models with attention are outperformed by standard string-to-tree statistical MT (SBMT) when translating lowresource languages into English. Train/test bitext corpus sizes
are English token counts.
Single-reference, case-insensitive
BLEU scores are given for held-out test corpora.
such as English–French. However, neural methods
are data-hungry and learn poorly from low-count
events. This behavior makes vanilla NMT a poor
choice for low-resource languages, where parallel
data is scarce. Table 1 shows that for 4 low-resource
languages, a standard string-to-tree statistical MT
system (SBMT) strongly outperforms NMT, even when NMT
uses the state-of-the-art local attention plus feedinput techniques from Luong et al. .
In this paper, we describe a method for substantially improving NMT results on these languages.
Our key idea is to ﬁrst train a high-resource language pair, then use the resulting trained network
(the parent model) to initialize and constrain training
for our low-resource language pair (the child model).
We ﬁnd that we can optimize our results by ﬁxing
certain parameters of the parent model and letting
the rest be ﬁne-tuned by the child model. We report NMT improvements from transfer learning of
5.6 BLEU on average, and we provide an analysis
of why the method works. The ﬁnal NMT system
approaches strong SBMT baselines in all four language pairs, and exceeds SBMT performance in one
of them. Furthermore, we show that NMT is an exceptional re-scorer of ‘traditional’ MT output; even
NMT that on its own is worse than SBMT is consistently able to improve upon SBMT system output
when incorporated as a re-scoring model.
We provide a brief description of our NMT model
in Section 2. Section 3 gives some background on
transfer learning and explains how we use it to improve machine translation performance. Our main
experiments translating Hausa, Turkish, Uzbek, and
Urdu into English with the help of a French–English
parent model are presented in Section 4. Section 5
explores alternatives to our model to enhance understanding. We ﬁnd that the choice of parent language
pair affects performance, and provide an empirical
upper bound on transfer performance using an arti-
ﬁcial language. We experiment with English-only
language models, copy models, and word-sorting
models to show that what we transfer goes beyond
monolingual information and that using a translation model trained on bilingual corpora as a parent
is essential. We show the effects of freezing, ﬁnetuning, and smarter initialization of different components of the attention-based NMT system during
transfer. We compare the learning curves of transfer
and no-transfer models, showing that transfer solves
an overﬁtting problem, not a search problem. We
summarize our contributions in Section 6.
NMT Background
In the neural encoder-decoder framework for MT
 , we use a recurrent
neural network (encoder) to convert a source sentence into a dense, ﬁxed-length vector. We then use
another recurrent network (decoder) to convert that
vector to a target sentence. In this paper, we use
a two-layer encoder-decoder system (Figure 1) with
long short-term memory (LSTM) units . The models were trained
to optimize maximum likelihood (via a softmax
layer) with back-propagation through time (Werbos,
Additionally, we use an attention mechanism that allows the target decoder to look back at
Figure 1: The encoder-decoder framework for neural machine
translation (NMT) . Here, a source sentence C B A (presented in reverse order as A B C) is translated into a target sentence W X Y Z. At each step, an evolving
real-valued vector summarizes the state of the encoder (blue,
checkerboard) and decoder (red, lattice). Not shown here are
the attention connections present in our model used by the decoder to access encoder states.
the source encoder, speciﬁcally the local attention
model from Luong et al. . In our model we
also use the feed-input input connection from Luong
et al. where at each timestep on the decoder
we feed in the top layer’s hidden state into the lowest
layer of the next timestep.
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning uses knowledge from a learned
task to improve the performance on a related task,
typically reducing the amount of required training
data .
learning models discover multiple levels of representation, some of which may be useful across tasks,
which makes them particularly suited to transfer
learning . For example, Cires¸an et
al. use a convolutional neural network to recognize handwritten characters and show positive effects of transfer between models for Latin and Chinese characters. Ours is the ﬁrst study to apply transfer learning to neural machine translation.
There has also been work on using data from
multiple language pairs in NMT to improve performance. Recently, Dong et al. showed that
sharing a source encoder for one language helps
performance when using different target decoders
Table 2: Our method signiﬁcantly improves NMT results for
the translation of low-resource languages into English. Results
show test-set BLEU scores. The ‘NMT’ row shows results without transfer, and the ‘Xfer’ row shows results with transfer. The
‘Final’ row shows BLEU after we ensemble 8 models and use
unknown word replacement.
for different languages. In that paper the authors
showed that using this framework improves performance for low-resource languages by incorporating
a mix of low-resource and high-resource languages.
Firat et al. used a similar approach, employing a separate encoder for each source language,
a separate decoder for each target language, and
a shared attention mechanism across all languages.
They then trained these components jointly across
multiple different language pairs to show improvements in a lower-resource setting.
There are a few key differences between our work
and theirs. One is that we are working with truly
small amounts of training data. Dong et al. 
used a training corpus of about 8m English words for
the low-resource experiments, and Firat et al. 
used from 2m to 4m words, while we have at most
1.8m words, and as few as 0.2m. Additionally, the
aforementioned previous work used the same domain for both low-resource and high-resource languages, while in our case the datasets come from
vastly different domains, which makes the task
much harder and more realistic.
Our approach
only requires using one additional high-resource
language, while the other papers used many. Our
approach also allows for easy training of new lowresource languages, while Dong et al. and Firat et al. do not specify how a new language
should be added to their pipeline once the models are
trained. Finally, Dong et al. observe an average BLEU gain on their low-resource experiments of
+1.16, and Firat et al. obtain BLEU gains of
+1.8, while we see a +5.6 BLEU gain.
The transfer learning approach we use is simple
and effective. We ﬁrst train an NMT model on a
SBMT Decoder
Table 3: Our transfer method applied to re-scoring output nbest lists from the SBMT system.
The ﬁrst row shows the
SBMT performance with no re-scoring and the other 3 rows
show the performance after re-scoring with the selected model.
Note: the ‘LM’ row shows the results when an RNN LM trained
on the large English corpus was used to re-score.
large corpus of parallel data (e.g., French–English).
We call this the parent model. Next, we initialize an
NMT model with the already-trained parent model.
This new model is then trained on a very small parallel corpus (e.g., Uzbek–English). We call this the
child model. Rather than starting from a random position, the child model is initialized with the weights
from the parent model.
A justiﬁcation for this approach is that in scenarios where we have limited training data, we need a
strong prior distribution over models. The parent
model trained on a large amount of bilingual data
can be considered an anchor point, the peak of our
prior distribution in model space. When we train the
child model initialized with the parent model, we ﬁx
parameters likely to be useful across tasks so that
they will not be changed during child model training. In the French–English to Uzbek–English example, as a result of the initialization, the English
word embeddings from the parent model are copied,
but the Uzbek words are initially mapped to random
French embeddings. The parameters of the English
embeddings are then frozen, while the Uzbek embeddings’ parameters are allowed to be modiﬁed,
i.e. ﬁne-tuned, during training of the child model.
Freezing certain transferred parameters and ﬁne tuning others can be considered a hard approximation to
a tight prior or strong regularization applied to some
of the parameter space. We also experiment with
ordinary L2 regularization, but ﬁnd it does not signiﬁcantly improve over the parameter freezing described above.
Our method results in large BLEU increases for
a variety of low resource languages. In one of the
Language Pair
Spanish–English
French–English
German–English
Table 4: Data used for a low-resource Spanish–English task.
Sizes are English-side token counts.
four language pairs our NMT system using transfer beats a strong SBMT baseline.
Not only do
these transfer models do well on their own, they also
give large gains when used for re-scoring n-best lists
(n = 1000) from the SBMT system. Section 4 details these results.
Experiments
To evaluate how well our transfer method works we
apply it to a variety of low-resource languages, both
stand-alone and for re-scoring a strong SBMT baseline.
We report large BLEU increases across the
board with our transfer method.
For all of our experiments with low-resource languages we use French as the parent source language
and for child source languages we use Hausa, Turkish, Uzbek, and Urdu. The target language is always English. Table 1 shows parallel training data
set sizes for the child languages, where the language
with the most data has only 1.8m English tokens.
For comparison, our parent French–English model
uses a training set with 300 million English tokens
and achieves 26 BLEU on the development set. Table 1 also shows the SBMT system scores along with
the NMT baselines that do not use transfer. There is
a large gap between the SBMT and NMT systems
when our transfer method is not used.
The SBMT system used in this paper is a stringto-tree statistical machine translation system . In this system
there are two count-based 5-gram language models.
One is trained on the English side of the
WMT 2015 English–French dataset and the other is
trained on the English side of the low-resource bitext. Additionally, the SBMT models use thousands
of sparsely-occurring, lexicalized syntactic features
 .
For our NMT system, we use development sets for
Hausa, Turkish, Uzbek, and Urdu to tune the learn-
French–English
German–English
Table 5: For a low-resource Spanish–English task, we experiment with several choices of parent model: none, French–
English, and German–English. We hypothesize that French–
English is best because French and Spanish are similar.
ing rate, parameter initialization range, dropout rate,
and hidden state size for all the experiments. For
training we use a minibatch size of 128, hidden state
size of 1000, a target vocabulary size of 15K, and
a source vocabulary size of 30K. The child models
are trained with a dropout probability of 0.5, as in
Zaremba et al. . The common parent model
is trained with a dropout probability of 0.2.
learning rate used for both child and parent models is 0.5 with a decay rate of 0.9 when the development perplexity does not improve. The child
models are all trained for 100 epochs. We re-scale
the gradient when the gradient norm of all parameters is greater than 5. The initial parameter range
is [-0.08, +0.08]. We also initialize our forget-gate
biases to 1 as speciﬁed by J´ozefowicz et al. 
and Gers et al. . For decoding we use a beam
search of width 12.
Transfer Results
The results for our transfer learning method applied
to the four languages above are in Table 2. The parent models were trained on the WMT 2015 French–English corpus for 5 epochs.
Our baseline NMT systems (‘NMT’ row) all receive
a large BLEU improvement when using the transfer
method (the ‘Xfer’ row) with an average BLEU improvement of 5.6. Additionally, when we use unknown word replacement from Luong et al. 
and ensemble together 8 models (the ‘Final’ row)
we further improve upon our BLEU scores, bringing
the average BLEU improvement to 7.5. Overall our
method allows the NMT system to reach competitive scores and outperform the SBMT system in one
of the four language pairs.
Figure 2: Our NMT model architecture, showing six blocks of parameters, in addition to source/target words and predictions.
During transfer learning, we expect the source-language related blocks to change more than the target-language related blocks.
Language Pair
Train Size
Uzbek–English
French–English
15.0 (+4.3)
French′–English
French–English
20.0 (+6.7)
Table 6: A better match between parent and child languages should improve transfer results. We devised a child language called
French′, identical to French except for word spellings. We observe that French transfer learning helps French′ (13.3→20.0) more
than it helps Uzbek (10.7→15.0).
Re-scoring Results
We also use the NMT model with transfer learning as a feature when re-scoring output n-best lists
(n = 1000) from the SBMT system. Table 3 shows
the results of re-scoring.
We compare re-scoring
with transfer NMT to re-scoring with baseline (i.e.
non-transfer) NMT and to re-scoring with a neural
language model. The neural language model is an
LSTM RNN with 2 layers and 1000 hidden states. It
has a target vocabulary of 100K and is trained using
noise-contrastive estimation . Additionally, it is trained using dropout with a dropout probability of 0.2 as suggested by Zaremba et al. . Re-scoring with the
transfer NMT model yields an improvement of 1.1–
1.6 BLEU points above the strong SBMT system; we
ﬁnd that transfer NMT is a better re-scoring feature
than baseline NMT or neural language models.
In the next section, we describe a number of additional experiments designed to help us understand
the contribution of the various components of our
transfer model.
We analyze the effects of using different parent models, regularizing different parts of the child model,
and trying different regularization techniques.
Different Parent Languages
In the above experiments we use French–English as
the parent language pair. Here, we experiment with
different parent languages. In this set of experiments
we use Spanish–English as the child language pair.
A description of the data used in this section is presented in Table 4.
Our experimental results are shown in Table 5,
where we use French and German as parent languages. If we just train a model with no transfer on
a small Spanish–English training set we get a BLEU
score of 16.4. When using our transfer method we
get Spanish–English BLEU scores of 31.0 and 29.8
via French and German parent languages, respectively. As expected, French is a better parent than
German for Spanish, which could be the result of
the parent language being more similar to the child
language. We suspect using closely-related parent
language pairs would improve overall quality.

Figure 3: Uzbek–English learning curves for the NMT attention model with and without transfer learning. The training perplexity converges to a similar value in both cases. However, the
development perplexity for the transfer model is signiﬁcantly
Effects of having Similar Parent Language
Next, we look at a best-case scenario in which the
parent language is as similar as possible to the child
Here we devise a synthetic child language (called
French′) which is exactly like French, except its vocabulary is shufﬂed randomly. (e.g., “internationale”
is now “pomme,” etc). This language, which looks
unintelligible to human eyes, nevertheless has the
same distributional and relational properties as actual French, i.e.
the word that, prior to vocabulary reassignment, was ‘roi’ (king) is likely to share
distributional characteristics, and hence embedding
similarity, to the word that, prior to reassignment,
was ‘reine’ (queen). French should be the ideal parent model for French′.
The results of this experiment are shown in Table 6.
We get a 4.3 BLEU improvement with an
unrelated parent (i.e.
French–parent and Uzbek–
child), but we get a 6.7 BLEU improvement with
a ‘closely related’ parent (i.e. French–parent and
French′–child). We conclude that the choice of parent model can have a strong impact on transfer models, and choosing better parents for our low-resource
languages (if data for such parents can be obtained)
could improve the ﬁnal results.
Ablation Analysis
In all the above experiments, only the target input
and output embeddings are ﬁxed during training. In
this section we analyze what happens when different

 
 
Uzbek–English learning curves for the transfer
model with and without dictionary-based assignment of Uzbek
word types to French word embeddings (from the parent
model). Dictionary-based assignment enables faster improvement in early epochs. The model variants converge, showing
that the unaided model is able to untangle the initial random
Uzbek/French word-type mapping without help.
parts of the model are ﬁxed, in order to determine the
scenario that yields optimal performance. Figure 2
shows a diagram of the components of a sequenceto-sequence model. Table 7 shows the effects of allowing various components of the child NMT model
to be trained. We ﬁnd that the optimal setting for
transferring from French–English to Uzbek–English
in terms of BLEU performance is to allow all of the
components of the child model to be trained except
for the input and output target embeddings.
Even though we use this setting for our main
experiments, the optimum setting is likely to be
language- and corpus-dependent. For Turkish, experiments show that freezing attention parameters as
well gives slightly better results. For parent-child
models with closely related languages we expect
freezing, or strongly regularizing, more components
of the model to give better results.
Learning Curve
In Figure 3 we plot learning curves for both a transfer and a non-transfer model on training and development sets. We see that the ﬁnal training set perplexities for both the transfer and non-transfer model
are very similar, but the development set perplexity
for the transfer model is much better.
The fact that the two models start from and converge to very different points, yet have similar training set performances, indicates that our architecture
Target Input
Target Output
Embeddings
Embeddings
Embeddings
Table 7: Starting with the parent French–English model (BLEU =24.4, PPL=6.2), we randomly assign Uzbek word types to French
word embeddings, freeze various parameters of the neural network model (), and allow Uzbek–English (child model) training
to modify other parts (1). The table shows how Uzbek–English BLEU and perplexity vary as we allow more parameters to be
re-trained.
and training algorithm are able to reach a good minimum of the training objective regardless of the initialization. However, the training objective seems
to have a large basin of models with similar performance and not all of them generalize well to the development set. The transfer model, starting with and
staying close to a point known to perform well on a
related task, is guided to a ﬁnal point in the weight
space that generalizes to the development set much
Dictionary Initialization
Using the transfer method, we always initialize
input language embeddings for the child model
with randomly-assigned embeddings from the parent (which has a different input language). A smarter
method might be to initialize child embeddings with
similar parent embeddings, where similarity is measured by word-to-word t-table probabilities. To get
these probabilities we compose Uzbek–English and
English–French t-tables obtained from the Berkeley Aligner . We see from Figure 4 that this dictionary-based assignment results
in faster improvement in the early part of the training. However the ﬁnal performance is similar to our
standard model, indicating that the training is able
to untangle the dictionary permutation introduced by
randomly-assigned embeddings.
Different Parent Models
In the above experiments, we use a parent model
trained on a large French–English corpus.
might hypothesize that our gains come from exploit-
Transfer Model
French–English Parent
English–English Parent
EngPerm–English Parent
Table 8: Transfer for Uzbek–English NMT with parent models
trained only on English data. The English–English parent learns
to copy English sentences, and the EngPerm–English learns to
un-permute scrambled English sentences. The LM is a 2-layer
LSTM RNN language model.
ing the English half of the corpus as an additional
language model resource.
Therefore, we explore
transfer learning for the child model with parent
models that only use the English side of the French–
English corpus. We consider the following parent
models in our ablative transfer learning scenarios:
• A true translation model (French–English Parent)
word-for-word
(English–English Parent)
• A model that unpermutes scrambled English
(EngPerm–English Parent)
• (The parameters of) an RNN language model
The results, in Table 8, show that transfer learning
does not simply import an English language model,
but makes use of translation parameters learned
from the parent’s large bilingual text.
Conclusion
Overall, our transfer method improves NMT scores
on low-resource languages by a large margin and allows our transfer NMT system to come close to the
performance of a very strong SBMT system, even
exceeding its performance on Hausa–English.
addition, we consistently and signiﬁcantly improve
state-of-the-art SBMT systems on low-resource languages when the transfer NMT system is used for rescoring. Our experiments suggest that there is still
room for improvement in selecting parent languages
that are more similar to child languages, provided
data for such parents can be found.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ARL/ARO (W911NF-
10-1-0533), DARPA (HR0011-15-C-0115), and the
Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of
Turkey (T ¨UB˙ITAK) (grants 114E628 and 215E201).