Associations between Socioeconomic Status and Major
Complications in Type 1 Diabetes: The Pittsburgh Epidemiology
of Diabetes Complication (EDC) Study
Aaron M. Secrest1, Tina Costacou1, Bruce Gutelius2, Rachel G. Miller1, Thomas J.
Songer1, and Trevor J. Orchard1,*
1Department of Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
2Bureau of Tobacco Control, New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, New
York, NY 10013, USA
Purpose—To understand the effect of socioeconomic status (SES) on the risk of complications
in type 1 diabetes (T1D), we explored the relationship between SES and major diabetes
complications in a prospective, observational T1D cohort study.
Methods—Complete data were available for 317 T1D persons within 4 years of age 28 (ages 24–
32) in the Pittsburgh Epidemiology of Diabetes Complications Study. Age 28 was selected to
maximize income, education, and occupation potential, and minimize the effect of advanced
diabetes complications on SES.
Results—The incidences over 1–20 years follow-up of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and
coronary artery disease (CAD) were 2–3 times higher for T1D individuals without, compared to
those with a college degree (p<0.05 for both), while autonomic neuropathy (AN) incidence was
significantly higher for low income and/or non-professional participants (p<0.05 for both). HbA1c
was inversely associated only with income level. In sex- and diabetes duration-adjusted Cox
models, lower education predicted ESRD (HR=2.9, 95% CI, 1.1–7.7) and CAD (HR=2.5, 1.3–
4.9), whereas lower income predicted AN (HR=1.7, 1.0–2.9) and lower extremity arterial disease
(HR=3.7, 1.1–11.9).
Conclusions—These associations, partially mediated by clinical risk factors, suggest that lower
SES T1D individuals may have poorer self-management and, thus, more diabetes complications.
autonomic neuropathy; coronary artery disease; diabetes complications; end-stage renal disease;
prospective study; socioeconomic status; type 1 diabetes
Socioeconomic status (SES) is inversely associated with many chronic diseases in the
general population, with disadvantaged individuals faring worse than others,(1–3) and this
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
*Corresponding author: Dr. Trevor J. Orchard, MD 3512 Fifth Avenue, 2nd Floor Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Phone: 412-383-1032 Fax:
412-383-1020 .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
 
Ann Epidemiol. 2011 May ; 21(5): 374–381. doi:10.1016/j.annepidem.2011.02.007.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
health inequality is becoming more pronounced over time.(4) In diabetes, however, studies
evaluating the relationship between SES and diabetes complications have produced varied
Studies in type 1 diabetes either show an increased rate of complications in lower SES
groups(5) or no effect of SES.(6,7) In particular, the extent to which SES correlates with the
vascular complications of type 1 diabetes (T1D), such as nephropathy and coronary artery
disease (CAD), is unclear. At present, the best available evidence suggests that lower
education is associated with heart disease, particularly in T1D women.(8)
Another concern is that studies vary widely in their design (cross-sectional vs. prospective)
and their definitions of diabetes and SES measures. Cross-sectional evaluation of SES
associations makes it difficult to evaluate whether SES causes, or results from, advanced
diabetes complications.(5,8–10) Also, when studies examine the independent contribution of
different SES measures, some SES measures appear to be more predictive than others
depending on the outcome of interest.(11)
We therefore sought to evaluate the relationship(s) between three SES measures (household
income, education, and occupation) and incident diabetes complications in a cohort of
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study population
The Pittsburgh Epidemiology of Diabetes Complications (EDC) Study is a prospective study
of risk factors for complications resulting from childhood-onset (age<17 years) type 1
diabetes. Participants (n=658) were either diagnosed or seen within 1 year of diagnosis at
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh between 1950 and 1980 and placed on continuous insulin
therapy at diagnosis. Since initial examination in 1986–1988, participants have been
followed biennially by survey and by examination for the first 10 years and again at 18
years. The follow-up time for this analysis ranged from 1.0–19.8 years. Study protocols
were approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board.
Socioeconomic status (SES) variables
EDC study variables for SES include occupation, education level, and household income.
For this analysis, each SES measure was evaluated at age 28 to allow for maximal
representation of educational attainment, along with a reasonable establishment of relative
occupational and financial standing in each participant. In addition, this age was chosen to
minimize the effect of advanced diabetes complications on education, income potential, and
occupation status. To obtain an “Age 28” cohort, clinical and survey data were collected
from the EDC study cycle at which participants were closest to age 28, with the age range
limited to ±4 years (ages 24–32). This “Age 28” data was then considered as baseline for
subsequent incidence analyses. Complete clinical and SES data were available for 317
participants. The majority (60%) of those excluded from this analysis were too old (age>32)
at initial examination in 1986–1988. The majority (78%) of those excluded from this
analysis were either too old (age>32) at baseline examination in 1986–88 (60%) or too
young (age<24) prior to last follow-up (18%). The remaining (22%) EDC participants were
excluded due to missing SES data.
Occupation was defined on the basis of self-reported work title and categorized according to
the Hollingshead Index of social position.(12) Education was defined as the self-reported
highest educational level categorized as follows: some high school, high school graduate,
some college, college graduate, and education beyond college graduation. All study
Secrest et al.
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
participants had at least some high school education. Household income was self-reported
using categories of annual pre-tax income (in US dollars) earned by each household. For this
study, these categorical income measures were grouped into one of five income categories
based on their Age 28 study cycle. For EDC Study cycles 1–3 , annual
household income categories were as follows: 1=≤$10,000, 2=$10,001–20,000, 3=$20,001–
30,000, 4=$30,001–40,000, and 5=>$40,000. For EDC Study cycles 4–10 ,
income categories were: 1=≤$20,000, 2=$20,001–30,000, 3=$30,001–40,000, 4=$40,001–
50,000, and 5=>$50,000.
Complication measures
Diabetes complications assessed in this study included coronary artery disease (CAD), endstage renal disease (ESRD), proliferative retinopathy, lower extremity arterial disease
(LEAD), and autonomic neuropathy (AN). CAD was defined as EDC physician-diagnosed
angina, ischemic electrocardiogram (ECG) changes, fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction
confirmed by either Q waves on ECG or hospital records, angiographic stenosis (≥50%
blockage), coronary artery bypass surgery, angioplasty, or CAD death.
Creatinine was assayed using an Ectachem 400 Analyzer (Eastman Kodak, Rochester, NY),
and serum and urinary albumin were measured by immunonephelometry.(13) Albumin
excretion rates (AER) were calculated using urinary albumin levels from at least 2 validated
timed sample collections. Degree of renal disease was categorized as normal (AER<20 μg/
min), microalbuminuria (20–200 μg/min), or overt nephropathy (ON, >200 μg/min). ESRD
was defined as renal failure or transplantation.
Proliferative retinopathy was classified by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Fundus
Photography Reading Center based on the modified Arlie House system using stereoscopic
fundus photographs.(14) For participants refusing fundus photographs (n=43), proliferative
retinopathy was defined as receiving laser phototherapy for proliferative retinopathy.
Resting ankle-brachial systolic blood pressures were taken in the supine position with a
Doppler blood-flow detector. The right and left tibialis posterior and dorsalis pedis pressures
were compared with the arm pressure, and ankle-to-brachial index (ABI) was calculated
using the arm pressure measurement taken closest in time to the ankle pressure. ABI < 0.9
on either side at rest was considered evidence of LEAD. In addition, LEAD also included a
history of claudication as determined by the ROSE questionnaire(15) or self-reported history
of amputation for a vascular cause. Autonomic neuropathy (AN) was defined as an R-R
interval expiration-inspiration (E/I) ratio < 1.1.
Clinical measures
Height and weight were measured to determine body mass index. Blood pressure was
measured with a random-zero sphygmomanometer after a 5-min rest according to the
Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program protocol.(16) Hypertension was defined as
systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg, or
antihypertensive medication use. An ever smoker was defined as having smoked ≥100
cigarettes in their lifetime. Depressive symptoms were assessed using the Beck Depression
Inventory.(17)
Fasting blood samples were taken to measure glycosylated hemoglobin and lipids. For
analysis purposes, original HbA1 values were converted to Diabetes Complications and
Control Trial (DCCT)-aligned HbA1c values using the following regression equation derived
from duplicate assays: DCCT HbA1c = 0.14 + 0.83(EDC HbA1). Total cholesterol and
triglycerides were measured enzymatically, and HDL cholesterol was assessed after a
heparin and manganese chloride precipitation method.(18) Non-HDL cholesterol was
Secrest et al.
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
calculated as the difference between total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol. Intensive insulin
therapy was defined as either ≥3 daily insulin injections or use of an insulin pump.
Statistical analysis
Individuals in the lowest occupation category (8X-9X) included full-time students,
homemakers, retired persons, and those who were disabled. Full-time students at the Age 28
study cycle were reclassified to their occupation from the next study cycle (n=6). Similarly,
when available, homemakers at the Age 28 study cycle were reclassified as their occupation
from the study cycle immediately before or after if they worked at those time-points (n=25).
No one listed their occupation as “retired” in their Age 28 study cycle. Disabled individuals
(n=2) were excluded, as the disability resulted from advanced diabetes complications.
Missing education (n=10) or income (n=17) data from the Age 28 study cycle were imputed
only if the respective variables were the same in the study cycles before and after the Age 28
All three SES variables were dichotomized for analysis. Occupation was classified as either
professional (Hollingshead 1A-3C) or non-professional (Hollingshead 4A-7X), education as
those with or without a college degree, and income was classified in two ways: 1) lowest
income category vs. other 4 categories, and 2) highest income category vs. other 4
categories.
Associations between dichotomous SES variables and complications were analyzed using
the χ2 or Fisher's exact tests, as appropriate, adjusting for multiple comparisons using the
Bonferroni correction. The Student's t test (or Mann-Whitney U) was used to compare
continuous variables by SES group. Spearman's correlations were performed between each
SES measure. Multivariable Cox regression analysis was used to assess the association
between SES measures and time to complication development (excluding individuals with
the specific complication at “age 28” baseline) to adjust for sex, diabetes duration, and
univariately significant clinical measures for each complication. Since age and diabetes
duration are highly correlated in this cohort, and age was selected to be within a narrow
range (24–32 years), only diabetes duration was included multivariable models. The
proportional hazards assumption was assessed visually and verified by testing timedependent interaction variables. A p-value ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Analyses were completed with either SPSS 17.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL) or SAS 9.2 (SAS
Institute, Cary, NC).
Demographic and clinical characteristics stratified by socioeconomic measures for the EDC
“Age 28” study population are shown in Table 1. Overall, the mean age (± SD) and diabetes
duration in this cohort were 28.4 (± 1.6) and 20.1 (± 4.4) years, respectively. Age, diabetes
duration, sex, and race were similar across SES groups. Married individuals tended to have a
higher household income or a professional occupation. Clinically, HbA1c decreased with
increasing income level (p=0.01). Blood pressure did not differ by any SES groupings;
however, the proportion with hypertension decreased as income increased (p=0.02). Lower
non-HDL cholesterol was associated with both a college degree and a professional
occupation (p<0.05 for both). BMI was not associated with any SES measure. Daily insulin
dose at baseline was significantly lower for all three high SES measures, and those with
more education or better employment were also significantly more likely to be on intensive
insulin therapy by age 28. Albumin excretion rates were significantly lower for all three high
SES measures.
Secrest et al.
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The prevalences of diabetes-related complications by age 28 are also shown in Table 1.
Presence of overt nephropathy did not differ by SES status. CAD and LEAD presence at age
28 was very low and did not differ by SES status, nor did presence of proliferative
retinopathy (PR) or autonomic neuropathy (AN). Depression was more common in the
lowest income group and in individuals without a college degree (p<0.05 for both). Smoking
was much less common in all three high SES categories (p<0.01 for all).
All three SES measures (both dichotomous and ordinal) were highly correlated with each
other (all correlations p≤0.003). Education and occupation were the most correlated (r=0.54,
p<0.001), and education and income were the least correlated (r=0.17, p=0.003).
The median follow-up time for determining the incidence of each complication after age 28
varied from 8.5 to 12.3 years (range 1.0–19.8 years for all complications). Education at age
28 was the only significant SES measure associated with developing either ESRD (P=0.01)
or CAD (p=0.002) (Table 2). Interestingly, LEAD was only associated with income at age
28 (p=0.04), but not with education or occupation (p=0.23 and 0.55, respectively) (Table 2).
Both low income level and non-professional occupation were significantly associated with
AN (p=0.02 and 0.03, respectively) (Table 2). Although AN occurred more frequently in
those with lower education, this was not significant (p=0.07). None of the three SES
measures was associated with developing PR in this cohort (Table 2).
Unadjusted and adjusted Cox proportional hazards model results are shown in Table 3 for
incident ESRD, CAD, LEAD, and AN, as these complications were all significantly
associated with at least one SES measure. Type 1 diabetic individuals without a college
degree by age 28 were three times as likely to develop ESRD and more than twice as likely
to develop CAD as those with a college degree, even after adjusting for sex and diabetes
duration (HR=2.9, 95% CI 1.1–7.7, and HR=2.5, 1.3–4.9, respectively). However, these
associations with education were partially mediated by other significant clinical variables
and became non-significant for ESRD (Table 3, Model 2).
LEAD was only associated with low income in both unadjusted and in sex- and diabetes
duration-adjusted Cox models; however, unlike the other complications, the association
between income and LEAD persisted even after adjusting for all other significant clinical
factors (Table 3, Model 2). Adjusting for sex and diabetes duration, low income T1D
individuals were also nearly two times more likely to develop AN compared to those with
high income in the age 28 cohort (HR=1.7, 95% CI 1.0–2.9), but this association was largely
explained by adjusting for other significant clinical measures (Table 3, Model 2). Neither
education nor occupation at age 28 was related to AN. PR was not associated with any SES
measures in unadjusted and adjusted Cox modeling (data not shown).
DISCUSSION
Our data indicate that SES is a robust predictor for diabetes complications in a large cohort
of childhood-onset type 1 diabetes. Education levels at baseline predicted both incident
ESRD and incident CAD. The relationship with incident ESRD became attenuated for
education (HR=2.9 reduced to 2.1) after adjusting for other key potential mediators, while
income was unaffected by such adjustment (HR=3.3 to 3.8). However, income at age 28, not
education, was predictive of both incident LEAD and incident AN. Adjusting for clinical
risk factors for each major complication considerably attenuated the strength of these SES
associations, except for that between low income and LEAD. PR was not associated with
any of the SES measures.
Use of age 28 to determine SES was reported recently in the general population
(Framingham Offspring Study);(19) however, this strategy is even more important in a
Secrest et al.
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
population with childhood-onset type 1 diabetes with an average diabetes duration of 20
years by age 28. Furthermore, examining multiple SES measures and multiple outcomes
concurrently in a large type 1 diabetes population allowed for a robust assessment of the
effect of specific SES measures on specific outcomes in this population.
These results largely confirm previous findings in type 1 diabetes.(8,20,21) Multiple studies
now have shown that various SES measures are associated with poor glycemic control, even
in young (age<18 years) type 1 diabetic individuals.(22–24) Chronic hyperglycemia is
highly predictive of major diabetes complications and early mortality.(25) Similarly, both
low social class (determined by residence) and low education are associated with multiple
cardiovascular risk factors in type 1 diabetes, namely, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and
smoking status.(6,26,27)
With 10 years of follow-up, Muhlhauser et al found that low social status (a composite of
baseline education and occupation levels) was significantly predictive of a composite
measure of major complications (blindness, amputation, and renal replacement therapy),
even after adjusting for other known risk factors, such as HbA1c, smoking, blood pressure,
cholesterol, and presence of overt nephropathy and retinopathy.(21) This suggests that while
our SES associations with diabetes complications were often explained by other known risk
factors, these SES associations may persist with increased incidence or longer follow-up, as
seen in the persistent association between income and both ESRD and LEAD, despite
adjusting for known risk factors. However, access to care varies dramatically between
Germany and the United States, and the attenuation to non-significance of SES measures
and incident CAD, ESRD, and AN might be real. In other words, low SES in the United
States might merely reflect poor self-care, possibly due to inadequate access to diabetes
education or inability to afford good self-care (i.e., testing costs), and not be truly predictive
of future diabetes complications.
The reasons for the different SES associations with different diabetes complications are
unclear. The primary role of education in predicting major cardiovascular and renal events
makes logical sense, as type 1 diabetes requires a large amount of self-care, and diabetes
education clearly improves glycemic control.(23) However, we cannot fully explain why
income is the primary SES measure associated with AN and LEAD, as these are also more
prevalent with poor glycemic control. Likewise, PR was not associated with any SES
measure, perhaps due to the high overall prevalence of PR in this cohort (>60%).
The Pittsburgh EDC study has several strengths for evaluating associations between various
SES measures and diabetes complications. Specifically, the prospective design with biennial
follow-up allowed us to obtain three different socioeconomic measures at or around age 28
for this cohort. This prospective nature also allowed for a median 8–12 years (depending on
complication) of follow-up after age 28, longer than other SES studies in type 1 diabetes.
(20,21,28) Access to concurrent demographic, clinical, and complication data for each
individual at age 28 permitted adjustment for known risk factors and to minimize
confounding.
This study, however, also has limitations. The sample size was small for both CAD and
ESRD incidences. Thus, it is possible our data failed to reveal the significance of an SES
measure that indeed does contribute to incident CAD or ESRD in type 1 diabetes. While
income or occupation level might have been significant with a larger sample size, the
relative importance of these measures with education is unlikely to change. Also, this EDC
cohort consists of individuals with long-standing diabetes (mean diabetes duration = 20
years). Therefore, these SES associations with complications might, in part, result from
outdated diabetes education and care practices, and may not be generalizable to individuals
Secrest et al.
Ann Epidemiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
recently diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. In addition, whether our participants had health
insurance was not determined in the first two EDC study cycles . Thus,
we cannot be sure that those who later developed diabetes complications in this cohort were
more likely to be uninsured at their age 28 visit. However, by the third study cycle , >90% of our cohort had health insurance, increasing to 95% by the 1994–1996 study
cycle. Thus, it is unlikely that health insurance coverage was a major confounder in this
population.
In conclusion, socioeconomic status in early adulthood predicts future diabetes
complications in type 1 diabetes, after adjustment for sex and diabetes duration. However,
much of these relationships can be explained by known risk factors for complications (i.e.,
metabolic control, smoking status, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and/or presence of
subclinical renal damage), suggesting that individuals with low SES and type 1 diabetes are
more likely to have poorer management of their diabetes. These findings indicate that
special efforts must be made to ensure that T1D individuals with low SES receive adequate
diabetes education and follow-up to reduce their risk of complications.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases at the National
Institutes of Health (grant numbers R01-DK034818 and F30-DK082137 to A.M.S.).
Abbreviations
albumin excretion rate
coronary artery disease
diastolic blood pressure
Epidemiology of Diabetes Complications
end-stage renal disease
intensive insulin therapy
lower extremity artery disease
high density lipoprotein cholesterol
overt nephropathy
systolic blood pressure