Proceedings of the Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 612–618
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 711, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
CHRF ++: words helping character n-grams
Maja Popovi´c
Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany
 
shown to correlate very well with human relative rankings of different machine
translation outputs, especially for morphologically rich target languages. However,
its relation with direct human assessments
is not yet clear. In this work, Pearson’s
correlation coefﬁcients for direct assessments are investigated for two currently
available target languages, English and
Russian. First, different β parameters (in
range from 1 to 3) are re-investigated with
direct assessment, and it is conﬁrmed that
β = 2 is the optimal option. Then separate character and word n-grams are investigated, and the main ﬁnding is that, apart
from character n-grams, word 1-grams
and 2-grams also correlate rather well with
direct assessments.
Further experiments
show that adding word unigrams and bigrams to the standard CHRF score improves the correlations with direct assessments, though it is still not clear which
option is better, unigrams only (CHRF+)
or unigrams and bigrams (CHRF++). This
should be investigated in future work on
more target languages.
Introduction
Recent investigations 
have shown that the character n-gram F-score
(CHRF) represents a very promising evaluation
metric for machine translation, especially for morphologically rich target languages – it is fast, it
does not require any additional tools or information, it is language independent and tokenisation
independent, and it correlates very well with human relative rankings (RR) . In order to produce these rankings, human
annotators have to decide which sentence translation is better/worse than another without giving
any note about the absolute quality of any of the
evaluated translations. This type of human judgment has been the ofﬁcal evaluation metric and
gold standard for all automatic metrics at WMT
shared tasks from 2008 until 2016.
Another type of human judgment, direct human
assessment (DA) , has become
additional ofﬁcial evaluation metric for WMT-16,
and the only one for WMT-17. These assessments
consist of absolute quality scores for each translated sentence. Contrary to RR, the relation between CHRF and DA has still not been investigated
systematically. Preliminary experiments in previous work shown that, concerning DA, the main advantage of character-based Fscore CHRF in comparison to word-based F-score
WORDF is better correlation for good translations
for which WORDF often assigns too low scores.
In this work, we systematically investigate relations between DA and both character and word
n-grams, as well as their combinations.
scores are calculated for all available translation
outputs from the WMT-15 and WMT-16 shared
tasks which contain two target
languages, English (translated from Czech, German, Finnish, Romanian, Russian and Turkish)
and Russian (translated from English), and then
compared with DAs on segment level using Pearsons’s correlation coefﬁcient.
n-gram based F-scores
The general formula for an n-gram based F-score
ngrFβ = (1 + β2)
ngrP · ngrR
β2 · ngrP + ngrR
where ngrP and ngrR stand for n-gram precision and recall arithmetically averaged over all ngrams from n = 1 to N:
n-gram precision: percentage of n-grams in
the hypothesis which have a counterpart in
the reference;
n-gram recall: percentage of n-grams in the
reference which are also present in the hypothesis.
and β is a parameter which assigns β times more
weight to recall than to precision.
WORDF is then calculated on word n-grams
and CHRF is calculated on character n-grams. As
for maximum n-gram length N, previous work
reported that there is no need to go beyond
N=4 for WORDF and N=6 for
CHRF .
CHRF++ score is obtained when the word ngrams are added to the character n-grams and
averaged together.
The best maximum n-gram
lengths for such combinations are again N=6 for
character n-grams and N=2 or N=1 for word ngrams, which will be discussed in Section 4.3.
Motivation for adding word n-grams to
A preliminary experiment on a small set of texts
reported in previous work with
different target languages and different types of
DA1 shown that for poorly rated sentences, the
standard deviations of CHRF and WORDF scores
are similar – both metrics assign relatively similar (low) scores. On the other hand, for the sentences with higher human rates, the deviations for
CHRF are (much) lower. In addition, the higher
the human rating is, the greater is the difference
between the WORDF and CHRF deviations. These
results indicate that CHRF is better than WORDF
mainly for segments/systems of higher translation
quality – the CHRF scores for good translations are
more concentrated in the higher range, whereas
the WORDF scores are often too low.
In order to further investigate these premises,
scatter plots in Figure 1 are produced for CHRF
and WORDF with DA for the Russian→English
and English→Russian WMT-16 data.
1none of them equal to the variant used in WMT
Figure 1 conﬁrms the ﬁndings from previous
work, since a number of WORDF values is indeed
pessimistic – high DA but low WORDF, whereas
CHRF values are more concentrated, i.e. correlate
better with DA values. However, these plots raised
another question – are CHRF scores maybe too
optimistic (i.e. segments with high CHRF score
and low DA score)? Certainly not to such extent
as WORDF scores are pessimistic, but still, could
some combination of character and word n-grams
improve the correlations of CHRF?
Pearson correlations with direct
assessments
In order to explore combining CHRF with word ngrams, the following experiments are carried out
in terms of calculating Pearson’s correlation coef-
ﬁcient between DA and different n-gram F-scores:
1. As a ﬁrst step, β parameter is re-investigated
for DA, both for CHRF and WORDF in order
to check if β = 2 is a good option for DA, too;
2. Individual character and word n-grams are
investigated in order to see if some are better than others and to which extent;
3. Finally, various combinations of character
and word n-grams were explored and the
results are reported for the most promising
β parameter revisited
Previous work reported that the
best β parameter both for CHRF and for WORDF
is 2 in terms of Kendall’s τ segment level correlation with human relative rankings (RR). However,
this parameter has not been tested for direct human assessments (DA) – therefore we tested several β in terms of Pearson correlations with DA.
It is conﬁrmed that putting more weight on precision is not good, and the results for β = 1,2,3 are
reported in Table 1. Both for CHRF and WORDF,
the correlations for β = 2,3 are comparable, and
better than for β =1. Since there is almost no difference between 2 and 3, and putting too much
weight to recall could jeopardise some other applications such as system tuning or system combination decided to use CHRF1 because CHRF3 lead
to generation of too long sentences), we decided
to choose β = 2 which will be used for all further
experiments.
"ru-en.wf2.for-plot"
(a) Russian→English, WORDF
"en-ru.wf2.for-plot"
(b) English→Russian, WORDF
"ru-en.cf2.for-plot"
(c) Russian→English, CHRF
"en-ru.cf2.for-plot"
(d) English→Russian, CHRF
Figure 1: Scatter plots for (a)(b) WORDF and (c)(d) CHRF with DA for (a)(c) Russian→English and
(b)(d) English→Russian WMT-16 texts conﬁrm that WORDF values are overly pessimistic – a number of
WORDF points lies in the lower right quadrant, i.e. a number of segments with high DA values has a low
WORDF value. On the other hand, CHRF points are more concentrated, especially for morphologically
rich Russian. However, are some of them too optimistic? (i.e. segments with high CHRF scores and low
DA scores)
Individual character and word n-grams
Individual n-grams were also investigated in previous work, however (i) only character n-grams
and (ii) only compared with RR, not with DA. In
this work, we carried out systematic investigation
on both character and word n-grams’ correlations
with DA, and the results are reported in Table 2.
It should be noted that, to the best of our knowledge, word n-grams with order less than 4 have
not been investigated yet in the given context of
correlations with RR or DA. Implicitly, the ME-
TEOR metric is based
on word unigrams with additional information and
generally correlates better with human rankings
than the BLEU metric based
on uni-, bi-, 3- and 4-gram precision.
The results show that, similarly to the correlations with RR, the best character n-grams are of
the middle lengths i.e. 3 and 4. The main ﬁnding
is, though, that the best word n-grams are the short
ones, namely unigrams and bigrams.
Following these results for individual n-grams,
several different experiments have been carried
out, involving different character n-gram weights,
combining character and word n-grams with different weights, etc., however no consistent improvements have been noticed in comparison to
the standard uniform n-gram weights, not even by
removing or setting low weight for character unigrams. The only noticeable improvement was observed when word 4-grams and 3-grams were removed.
The emergence of CHRF++
Findings reported in the previous section raised
the following questions: (i) are word 3-grams and
4-grams the ”culprits” for overly pessimistic behaviour of WORDF described in Section 3? (ii)
Could the ”good guys”, i.e. word unigrams and
Table 1: Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients of CHRF and WORDF with direct human assessments (DA)
for different β parameters. Bold represents the best character level value and underline represents the
best word level value. The best β values are 2 and 3.
word1-gram
word2-gram
word3-gram
word4-gram
Table 2: Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients of CHRF and WORDF with direct human assessments (DA)
for individual character and word n-grams. Bold represents the best character level value and underline
represents the best word level value.
bigrams diminish potentially too optimistical behaviour of CHRF?
In order to get the answers, the Pearson correlations are calculated for CHRF combined with four
WORDFs with different maximum n-gram lengths,
i.e. N=1,2,3,4 and the results are presented in Table 3. In addition, correlations are presented also
for CHRF and two variants of WORDF (usual N=4
and the best N=2).
First, it can be seen that removing word 3-grams
and 4-grams improves the correlation for WORDF
which becomes closer to CHRF (and even better
for one of the two German→English texts). Furthermore, it can be seen that adding word unigrams and bigrams to CHRF improves the correlations of CHRF in the best way. Therefore this
is the variant which is chosen to be the CHRF++.
Next best option (CHRF+) is to add only word unigrams i.e. words, and this one is the best one for
translation into Russian. Possible reasons are morphological richness of Russian as well as rather
free word order, however the test set in this experiment is too small to draw any conclusions. Both
CHRF++ and CHRF+ should be further tested on
more texts and on more morphologically rich languages.
Scatter plots presented in Figure 2 visualise the
improvement of correlations by CHRF++: WORDF
with N=4 (a) is, as already shown, too pessimistic.
Lowering the maximum n-gram length to 2 (b)
moves a number of pessimistic points upwards,
thus improving the correlation. When added to
slightly overly optimistic CHRF (c), the points for
both metrics are moved more towards the middle
Conclusions
The results presented in this work show that
adding short word n-grams, i.e.
unigrams and
bigrams to the character n-gram F-score CHRF
improves the correlation with direct human assessments (DA). Since the amount of available
texts with DA is still small, it is still not possible to conclude which variant is better: adding
only unigrams (CHRF+) or unigrams and bigrams
(CHRF++). This is especially hard to conclude for
translation into morphologically rich languages,
since only Russian was available until now.
order to explore both CHRF+ and CHRF++ more
systematically, both are submitted to the WMT-17
metrics task for translations from English.
translation into English, only CHRF++ is submitted since it outperformed the other variant for English. For Chinese, only the raw CHRF has been
submitted since the concept “Chinese words” is
generally not clear. Further work should include
more data and more distinct target languages.
The tool for calculating CHRF++ (as well as
CHRF+ and CHRF since it is possible to change
maximum n-gram lengths) is publicly available
at It is a
Python script which requires (multiple) reference
translation(s) and a translation hypothesis (output)
in the raw text format. It is language independent
and does need tokenisation or any similar preprocessing of the text. The default β is set to 2, but
it is possible to change. It provides both segment
level scores as well as document level scores in
two variants: micro- and macro-averaged.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the TraMOOC
project funded from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 644333.