The value of vital sign trends for detecting clinical deterioration
on the wards
Matthew M Churpek, MD, MPH, PhD1,*, Richa Adhikari, MPH1, and Dana P Edelson, MD,
1Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
Aim—Early detection of clinical deterioration on the wards may improve outcomes, and most
early warning scores only utilize a patient’s current vital signs. The added value of vital sign
trends over time is poorly characterized. We investigated whether adding trends improves accuracy
and which methods are optimal for modelling trends.
Methods—Patients admitted to five hospitals over a five-year period were included in this
observational cohort study, with 60% of the data used for model derivation and 40% for validation.
Vital signs were utilized to predict the combined outcome of cardiac arrest, intensive care unit
transfer, and death. The accuracy of models utilizing both the current value and different trend
methods were compared using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).
Results—A total of 269,999 patient admissions were included, which resulted in 16,452
outcomes. Overall, trends increased accuracy compared to a model containing only current vital
signs (AUC 0.78 vs. 0.74; p<0.001). The methods that resulted in the greatest average increase in
accuracy were the vital sign slope (AUC improvement 0.013) and minimum value (AUC
improvement 0.012), while the change from the previous value resulted in an average worsening of
the AUC (change in AUC −0.002). The AUC increased most for systolic blood pressure when
trends were added (AUC improvement 0.05).
Conclusion—Vital sign trends increased the accuracy of models designed to detect critical
illness on the wards. Our findings have important implications for clinicians at the bedside and for
the development of early warning scores.
*Corresponding author and requests for reprints (Matthew M Churpek), Mail: University of Chicago Medical Center, Section of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, 5841 South Maryland Avenue, MC 6076, Chicago, IL 60637,
 ; Office: (773) 702-1092; Fax: (773) 702-6500.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions: Study concept and design: M.C., D.P.E.; acquisition of data: D.P.E.; analysis and interpretation of data: all
authors; first drafting of the manuscript: M.C.; critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: all authors;
statistical analysis: R.A, M.C.; obtained funding: M.C., D.P.E.; administrative, technical, and material support: all authors; study
supervision: M.C., D.P.E. Dr. Churpek had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data
and the accuracy of the data analysis.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 
Resuscitation. 2016 May ; 102: 1–5. doi:10.1016/j.resuscitation.2016.02.005.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
vital signs; heart arrest; hospital rapid response team; physiologic monitoring; quality
improvement; early diagnosis; decision support techniques
INTRODUCTION
Early detection of critical illness is key to achieving timely transfer to the intensive care unit
(ICU) and decreasing the rate of preventable in-hospital cardiac arrest. Vital signs have been
shown to be the most accurate predictors of clinical deterioration.1 Early warning scores
consisting of vital sign severity thresholds have been implemented across the United States
and around the world in order to accurately detect high-risk ward patients.2, 3 These scores
typically utilize only the current vital sign values and rarely include trends of vital signs over
time.3, 4 Although clinicians often include the trend in a patient’s condition over time when
assessing a patient, the additional value of vital sign trends to risk scores containing a
patient’s current values is poorly characterized, but has the potential to increase accuracy
and decrease false alarms.
Although the idea of including vital sign trends in early warning scores sounds intuitive and
straightforward, the low frequency of monitoring (e.g., every four hours), interventions
provided to patients, and manual assessment of some of the variables add additional
complexity. For example, treatments are often administered in an attempt to “normalize”
vital signs, such as acetaminophen for fever and fluid boluses for hypotension. In addition,
vital signs may be collected soon after a patient was ambulatory, which may cause a patient
to meet the systemic inflammatory response criteria, or may not be accurately quantified,
such as always inputting a respiratory rate of 18.5, 6 Therefore, simply including the change
of a vital sign since last collection may not adequately capture a patient’s true physiologic
trajectory and additional methods, such as including vital sign variability, the most deranged
previous values, and even smoothing the trajectory, may prove to be more accurate.
The aim of this study was to utilize a large, multicentre dataset to compare the accuracy of
different methods of modelling vital sign trends for detecting clinical deterioration on the
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Population and Data Sources
The study population and data sources have been described previously.1, 7 Briefly, we
included all ward patients at the University of Chicago and four NorthShore University
HealthSystem hospitals between November 2008 and January 2013. Patient vital sign data,
which were both time- and location-stamped, were obtained from the Electronic Data
Warehouse at NorthShore and the electronic health record (EPIC, Verona, WI) at the
University of Chicago. Demographic information was obtained from administrative
databases and cardiac arrest data were collected from quality improvement databases and
manually checked for accuracy. Based on general impracticability and minimal harm,
Churpek et al.
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
waivers of consent were granted by the University of Chicago Institutional Review Board
(IRB #16995A) and NorthShore University HealthSystem (IRB #EH11-258).
Primary Outcome
The primary outcome of interest was the development of critical illness on the wards,
defined as the composite outcome of a ward cardiac arrest, ward to ICU transfer, or death. If
a patient experienced multiple events during the same ward stay (e.g., a cardiac arrest
followed immediately by a ward to ICU transfer), the time of the first event was used for the
composite outcome. Patients with multiple ward stays during the same admission (e.g. ward
to ICU transfers who were later transferred back out to the wards) had each ward stay
analysed separately.
Predictor variables
The predictor variables utilized in this study were commonly collected vital signs and their
trends over time (i.e., temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, diastolic
blood pressure, and systolic blood pressure). The following trend variables were investigated
in this study: change in current value from the previous value (delta), mean of the previous
six values (mean), standard deviation of the previous six values (SD), slope of the previous
six values (slope), minimum value prior to current value (minimum), maximum value prior
to current value (maximum), and an exponential smoothing method (smoothed): (s0 = x0, st
= αxt + (1 − α)st−1). The smoothed method involves taking a weighted average of the current
and prior values, with a weight of assigned to the current values and a weight of 1− for the
previous values. Thus, a weight of 1 would include only the current vital sign value and a
weight of 0 would include only previous values for the smoothed variable. We chose to use
the previous six values for the mean, SD, and slope variables because vital signs are
typically collected every four hours so this would utilize approximately 24 hours of data and
to standardize the amount of data used for each time point for each patient.
Statistical analysis
We divided the cohort into two subsets in order to develop the models in the training set
(60% of the data) and estimate accuracy in the validation set (40% of the data). Because
vital signs change over time during a patient’s ward stay, discrete time survival analysis was
utilized to model these data.1, 8 Based on the fact that vital signs were collected every four
hours on average in this dataset, four-hour time intervals were chosen for the discrete-time
model. Thus, variable values at the beginning of each time block were used to predict
whether an event occurred during that four-hour time block. We have previously utilized
discrete-time models to develop early warning scores, and its advantages include the ability
to model time-varying predictors and to remove the bias that may occur if sicker patients
receive more frequent vital signs.1 All models were fit in the training cohort only and then
accuracy was tested in the validation cohort. Ten-fold cross-validation was used in the
training cohort to choose the smoothing factor (α) for each vital sign’s smoothed trend
variable based on the α that maximized the model AUC.
For each variable investigated in the study (i.e., all current and trend variables for each vital
sign), univariate models were fit using that predictor variable alone, bivariable models were
Churpek et al.
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
fit using that variable plus the current value, and a full model was fit for each vital sign that
utilized the current value and all trend variables. Finally, a full model was fit that included
all current and trend variables for all the vital signs, and this full model’s accuracy was
compared to a model fit using only current vital sign values. All models in the study used
restricted cubic splines with three knots, with knot placement as recommended by Harrell,
for all continuous variables.9 This flexible method allows the probability of the event to
increase at both low and high values of each variable. If any individual vital signs were
missing for model estimation then the previous value was pulled forward. If no prior values
were available then a median value was imputed, similar to prior work in this area.1, 10 For
trend values, if fewer than six data points were available then the trend variables were
calculated using all available data points, and if no prior values were available then the
current value was imputed, except for the delta, SD, slope variables where a median value
was imputed.
Model accuracy was compared in the validation cohort by calculating predicted probabilities
from each model and then calculating the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) based on outcomes occurring within 24 hours of each vital sign observation
time.11 This metric was used because it is a standard way of comparing early warning scores
in the literature.1, 12, 13 All analyses were performed using Stata version 13.1 (StataCorps;
College Station, Texas), and two-sided p-values <0.05 were considered statistically
significant.
A total of 269,999 patient admissions were included in the study, which resulted in 16,452
outcomes (424 ward cardiac arrests, 13,188 ICU transfers, and 2,840 deaths on the ward)
occurring during the study period. Our study population was 60% female, 52% white, and
had an average age of 60 years. Additional details have been described elsewhere.1, 14
During univariate analysis, respiratory rate was the most accurate vital sign when using the
current value (AUC 0.70 (95% CI 0.70–0.70), and the trend values were more accurate than
the current value for the variability in respiratory rate (AUC 0.71 (95% CI 0.71–0.71) for
SD), smoothed heart rate (AUC 0.64 (95% CI 0.64–0.65) vs. 0.63 (95% CI 0.63–0.64) for
the current value), diastolic blood pressure slope (AUC 0.61 (95% CI 0.61–0.61) vs. 0.60
(95% CI 0.59–0.60) for the current value), and minimum oxygen saturation (AUC 0.60
(95% CI 0.60–0.60) vs. 0.59 (95% CI 0.59–0.59) for the current value). The results from the
bivariate models, which include both the current value and the trend value, are shown in
Figures 1,2,3,4,5, 6. As shown in Supplemental Figure 1, the methods that resulted in the
greatest average increase in accuracy were the vital sign slope (AUC improvement 0.013),
minimum value (AUC improvement 0.012), and SD (AUC improvement 0.01), while the
change from the previous value (delta) resulted in an average worsening of the AUC when
added to the current value (change in AUC −0.002).
When comparing a model that utilized all trend variables compared to a model only utilizing
the current value (Supplemental Figure 2), systolic blood pressure had the most
improvement in accuracy (AUC increase of 0.05), followed by oxygen saturation and
Churpek et al.
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
respiratory rate (AUC increase of 0.04 for both models). Finally, the model containing all the
trend variables of all vital signs had a higher AUC than a model containing only current
values of the vital signs (AUC 0.78 vs. 0.74; p<0.001). This increase in accuracy by adding
trends was similar across the individual outcomes (0.77 (95% CI 0.76–0.78) vs. 0.74 (95%
CI 0.73–0.75) for cardiac arrest, 0.77 (95% CI 0.77–0.77) vs. 0.73 (95% CI 0.73–0.73) for
ICU transfer, and 0.90 (95% CI 0.89–0.90) vs. 0.87 (95% CI 0.87–0.87) for death).
DISCUSSION
In this large, multicentre study evaluating the value of vital sign trends, we found that
trajectories of these variables significantly improved the accuracy of detecting clinical
deterioration compared to the current vital sign values alone. The optimal method of
modelling trend varied across the different vital signs. Importantly the simplest method,
taking the difference from the previous value, was the least accurate method of modelling
trends of the different techniques we studied. Methods such as the vital sign slope, vital sign
variability, and the most deranged values since admission were more accurate for most of the
vital signs studied. These findings have important implications for clinicians interpreting
vital sign trends at the bedside, as well as for the development of early warning scores.
Accuracy is paramount with these scores in order to get critical care resources to the bedside
while avoiding alarm fatigue, and our study shows that trends in physiology are important.
There are currently over 100 different published early warning scores and there are likely
many more in use in hospitals across the country.2–4 Most scores, such as the commonly
cited Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS),15 only utilize a patient’s current vital sign
values when calculating a score.3, 4 The few scores that include trends over time typically
utilize the change since the last vital sign observation. The fact that that this method was
never the best way to model trends for any of the vital signs in our study has important
implications for these scores and suggests that different methods to incorporate trends are
needed to improve accuracy. Although calculating trends over time and vital sign variability
would be error-prone to do by hand, electronic health records are commonplace in the
United States and could provide a means to calculate these variables automatically.16–19
Our finding that trends of vital signs are independent predictors of critical illness in ward
patients is consistent with other studies.17, 20 For example, Escobar and colleagues
developed a prediction model for ICU transfer and death on the wards using vital sign,
laboratory, demographic, and additional patient data.17 They also found that trends in vital
signs, such as the variability of respiratory rate and minimum oxygen saturation, were
independent predictors of clinical deterioration in addition to the most recent vital sign
values. Their final model, which also contained patient comorbidity and laboratory data, had
an AUC of 0.78 for their combined outcome in the validation dataset. In addition, Mao et al.
developed a model in a single-centre study to predict ward to ICU transfer by utilizing both
current and previous vital signs and laboratory values.20 The highest weighted variables in
their final model included the maximum respiratory rate and the lowest oxygen saturation,
and they also used exponential smoothing, as we did in our study, to improve the final
predictions of their model. Groups in other areas have also studied trends in the ICU, in the
pre-hospital setting, and in various disease states with mixed results.21–26 Our study extends
Churpek et al.
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
these findings by directly comparing multiple methods for modelling trends for predicting
clinical deterioration in ward patients. Because no single method for modelling trends was
best for all vital signs, careful consideration is needed when incorporating these trends in
early warnings scores.
Although we studied many different methods for modelling vital sign trend data, including
those proposed by other groups, there are many more methods available. In particular, there
are many techniques that are useful when data are more frequently updated than ward vital
signs. For example, Hravnak and colleagues have used continuous vital sign data to study
the accuracy of an integrated monitoring system in a step-down unit, which detected
deterioration six hours earlier than the Modified Early Warning Score.27 In addition, groups
have published from the MIMIC II dataset, which includes frequent vital signs in ICU
patients, and have shown that vital sign trends can accurately predict clinical instability.28 In
our study, data was only updated approximately every four hours, much less frequently than
in the studies noted above, so we did not pursue these other methods.
Our study has several limitations. First, we only investigated vital signs that were collected
intermittently, and other time series methods may be more accurate for vital signs collected
at a higher rate than our study. Second, our outcome of interest was a composite outcome of
ICU transfer, cardiac arrest, and death, and it is possible that the optimal method for
capturing vital sign trends may differ for other outcomes. Third, we did not have access to
code status or to whether particular ICU transfers were elective vs. non-elective. Accounting
for these factors may alter the accuracy measures in the study. Fourth, this study utilized data
from five hospitals in Illinois, and these findings need to be externally validated in other
hospital settings and countries. Finally, the trend metrics are complex and would require
automated calculation if implemented in real-time to detect clinical deterioration.
CONCLUSIONS
In this large, multicentre study, we found that adding trends of vital signs significantly
increased the accuracy of models designed to detect critical illness on the wards. Our
findings have important implications for clinicians interpreting vital sign trends at the
bedside, as well as for the development of early warning scores. Accuracy is paramount with
these scores in order to get the right people to the bedside while avoiding alarm fatigue, and
our study shows that trends in physiology are important.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Conflicts of Interest/ Sources of Funding: This research was funded in part by an institutional Clinical and
Translational Science Award grant (UL1 RR024999; PI: Solway). Dr. Churpek is supported by a career
development award from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (K08 HL121080). Drs. Churpek and
Edelson have a patent pending (ARCD. P0535US.P2) for risk stratification algorithms for hospitalized patients. In
addition, Dr. Edelson has received research support and honoraria from Philips Healthcare (Andover, MA), research
support from the American Heart Association (Dallas, TX) and Laerdal Medical (Stavanger, Norway), and an
Churpek et al.
Resuscitation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
honorarium from Early Sense (Tel Aviv, Israel). She has ownership interest in Quant HC (Chicago, IL), which
develops products for risk stratification of hospitalized patients.
We would like to thank Timothy Holper, Justin Lakeman, and Contessa Hsu for assistance with data extraction and
technical support, Poome Chamnankit, MS, CNP, Kelly Bhatia, MSN, ACNP, and Audrey Seitman, MSN, ACNP
for performing manual chart review of cardiac arrest patients, Nicole Twu, MS for administrative support,
Christopher Winslow, MD and Ari Robicsek, MD, and Robert Gibbons, PhD for introducing us to discrete-time
survival analysis.