Unusual localisation eﬀects in quantum percolation
Gerald Schubert,1 Alexander Weiße,2 and Holger Fehske1
1Institut f¨ur Physik, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universit¨at Greifswald, 17487 Greifswald, Germany
2School of Physics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
 
We present a detailed study of the quantum site percolation problem on simple cubic lattices,
thereby focussing on the statistics of the local density of states and the spatial structure of the
single particle wavefunctions.
Using the Kernel Polynomial Method we reﬁne previous studies
of the metal-insulator transition and demonstrate the non-monotonic energy dependence of the
quantum percolation threshold. Remarkably, the data indicates a “fragmentation” of the spectrum
into extended and localised states. In addition, the observation of a chequerboard-like structure of
the wavefunctions at the band centre can be interpreted as anomalous localisation.
PACS numbers: 71.23.An, 71.30.+h, 05.60.Gg, 72.15.Rn
Disordered structures attracted continuing interest
over the last decades, and besides the Anderson localisation problem1 quantum percolation2,3 is one of the
classical subjects of this ﬁeld. Current applications concern e.g. transport properties of doped semiconductors4
and granular metals5, metal-insulator transition in twodimensional n-GaAs heterostructures6, wave propagation
through binary inhomogeneous media7, superconductorinsulator and (integer) quantum Hall transitions8,9, or
the dynamics of atomic Fermi-Bose mixtures10. Another
important example is the metal-insulator transition in
perovskite manganite ﬁlms and the related colossal magnetoresistance eﬀect, which in the meantime are believed
to be inherently percolative.11
In disordered solids the percolation problem is characterised by the interplay of pure classical and quantum
eﬀects. Besides the question of ﬁnding a percolating path
of “accessible” sites through a given lattice the quantum
nature of the electrons imposes further restrictions on
the existence of extended states and, consequently, of a
ﬁnite DC-conductivity. As a particularly simple model
describing this situation we consider a tight-binding oneelectron Hamiltonian,
icj + H.c.) ,
on a simple cubic lattice with N = L3 sites and random
on-site energies ǫi drawn from the bimodal distribution
p(ǫi) = p δ(ǫi −ǫA) + (1 −p) δ(ǫi −ǫB) .
The two energies ǫA and ǫB could, for instance, represent
the potential landscape of a binary alloy ApB1−p, where
each site is occupied by an A or B atom with probability p
or 1−p, respectively. In the limit ∆= (ǫB−ǫA) →∞the
wavefunction of the A sub-band vanishes identically on
the B-sites, making them completely inaccessible for the
quantum particles. We then arrive at a situation where
non-interacting electrons move on a random ensemble of
lattice points, which, depending on p, may span the entire
lattice or not. The corresponding Hamiltonian reads
icj + H.c.) ,
where the summation extends over nearest-neighbour Asites only and, without loss of generality, ǫA is chosen to
Within the classical percolation scenario the percolation threshold pc is deﬁned by the occurrence of an inﬁnite cluster A∞of adjacent A sites. For the simple cubic
lattice this site-percolation threshold is pc = 0.3117.12 In
the quantum case, the multiple scattering of the particles
at the irregular boundaries of the cluster can suppress the
wavefunction, in particular, within narrow channels or
close to dead ends of the cluster. Hence, this type of disorder can lead to absence of diﬀusion due to localisation,
even if there is a classical percolating path through the
crystal. On the other hand, for ﬁnite ∆the tunnelling between A and B sites may cause a ﬁnite DC-conductivity
although the A sites are not percolating. Naturally, the
question arises whether the quantum percolation threshold pq, given by the probability above which an extended
wavefunction exists within the A sub-band, is larger or
smaller than pc. Previous results13 for ﬁnite values of ∆
indicate that the tunnelling eﬀect has a marginal inﬂuence on the percolation threshold as soon as ∆≫4tD,
where D denotes the spatial dimension of the hypercubic
In the theoretical investigation of disordered systems
it turned out that distribution functions for the random quantities take the centre stage.1,14 The distribution
f(ρi(E)) of the local density of states (LDOS),
|ψn(ri)|2 δ(E −En) ,
is particularly suited because ρi(E) measures the local
amplitude of the wavefunction at site ri.
It therefore
contains direct information about the localisation properties. In contrast to the (arithmetically averaged) mean
DOS, ρme(E) = ⟨ρi(E)⟩, the LDOS becomes critical at
the localisation transition.15,16 The probability density
f(ρi(E)) was found to have essentially diﬀerent properties for extended and localised phases.17 For an extended
state at energy E the amplitude of the wavefunctions
is more or less uniform. Accordingly f(ρi(E)) is sharply
peaked and symmetric about ρme(E). On the other hand,
if states become localised, the wavefunction has considerable weight only on a few sites. In this case the LDOS
strongly ﬂuctuates throughout the lattice and the corresponding LDOS distribution is very asymmetric and has
a long tail. Above the localisation transition the distribution of the LDOS is singular, i.e., mainly concentrated
at ρi = 0. Nevertheless the rare but large LDOS-values
dominate the mean DOS ρme(E), which therefore cannot be taken as a good approximation of the most probable value of the LDOS. Such systems are referred to
as “non-self-averaging”. Of course, for practical calculations the recording of entire distributions is a bit inconvenient. Instead the mean DOS ρme(E) together with
the (geometrically averaged) so-called “typical” DOS,
ρty(E) = exp⟨ln ρi(E)⟩, is frequently used to monitor the
transition from extended to localised states. The typical
DOS puts suﬃcient weight on small values of ρi and a
comparison to ρme(E) therefore allows to detect the localisation transition. This has been shown for the pure
Anderson model16,18,19 and for even more complex situations, where the eﬀects of correlated disorder20, electronelectron interaction21,22 or electron-phonon coupling23,24
were taken into account.
In this paper we employ the typical-DOS concept to
analyse the nature of the eigenstates (extended or localised) of the Hamiltonians (1) and (3). Using the Kernel Polynomial Method18,25, an eﬃcient high-resolution
Chebyshev expansion technique, in a ﬁrst step, we calculate the LDOS for a large number of samples, Kr, and
sites, Ks. The mean DOS is then simply given by
whereas the typical DOS is obtained from the geometric
ρty(E) = exp
We classify a state at energy E with ρme(E) ̸= 0 as localised if ρty(E) = 0 and as extended if ρty(E) ̸= 0.
Before discussing possible localisation phenomena let
us investigate the behaviour of the mean DOS for the
quantum percolation models (1) and (3). Figure 1 shows
that as long as ǫA and ǫB do not diﬀer too much there
exists an asymmetric (if p ̸= 0.5) but still connected electronic band.13 At about ∆≃4tD this band separates
into two sub-bands centred at ǫA and ǫB, respectively.
The most prominent feature in the split-band regime is
the series of spikes at discrete energies within the band.
As an obvious guess, we might attribute these spikes to
eigenstates on islands of A or B sites being isolated from
FIG. 1: (Colour online) Mean (solid line) and typical (dashed
line) DOS of the Hamiltonian (1) on a 503 lattice with periodic
boundary conditions (PBC). Results are obtained using M =
32768 Chebyshev moments and Ks×Kr = 32×32 realisations.
all A sites
FIG. 2: (Colour online) Mean (solid line) and typical (dashed
line) DOS for the quantum percolation model in the limit
∆→∞. While in the upper left panel all A-sites are taken
into account, the other three panels show data for the restricted model (3) on the spanning cluster A∞only (note
that ρty is smaller in the former case because there are more
sites with vanishing amplitude of the wavefunction). System
sizes were adapted to ensure that A∞always contains the
same number of sites, i.e., N = 573 for p = 0.405, 463 for
p = 0.70, and 423 for p = 0.92. Again we used M = 32768
and Ks × Kr = 32 × 32.
the main cluster.2,26 It turns out, however, that some of
the spikes persist, even if we neglect all ﬁnite clusters
and restrict the calculation to the spanning cluster of A
sites, A∞. This is illustrated in the upper panels of Fig. 2,
where we compare the DOS of the models (1) [at ∆→∞]
and (3). Increasing the concentration of accessible sites
the mean DOS of the spanning cluster is evocative of the
DOS of the simple cubic lattice, but even at large values
of p a sharp peak structure remains at E = 0 (cf. Fig. 2,
lower panels).
To elucidate this eﬀect, which partially is not ac-
FIG. 3: (Colour online) Left: Mean (solid line) and typical
(dashed line) DOS for the model (3) with p = 0.33 on a 1003
lattice (PBC, M = 32768). Data obtained from an average
over 100 random initialisations of sites for Kr = 100 realisations of disorder. Note that ρty < 10−5 holds in the whole
band. Right: Some cluster conﬁgurations related to the special energies at which the peaks in ρme occur.
counted for in the literature2,13,27,28, in more detail,
in Fig. 3 we ﬁxed p at 0.33, shortly above the classical percolation threshold, and increased the ensemble size.
Besides the most dominant peaks at E/t =
2, in addition we can resolve distinct spikes at
2, . . . These special
energies coincide with the eigenvalues of the tight-binding
model on small clusters of the geometries shown in the
right part of Fig. 3. In accordance with Refs. 2 and 29
we can thus argue that the wavefunctions, which correspond to these special energies, are localised on some
“dead ends” of the spanning cluster.
The assumption that the distinct peaks correspond to
localised wavefunctions is corroborated by the fact that
the typical DOS vanishes or, at least, shows a dip at these
energies. Occurring also for ﬁnite ∆(Fig. 1), this eﬀect
becomes more pronounced as ∆→∞and in the vicinity
of the classical percolation threshold pc. From the study
of the Anderson model1 we know that localisation leads
at ﬁrst to a narrowing of the energy window containing
extended states. The corresponding mobility edges have
been mapped out with high precision.19,30 For the percolation problem, in contrast, with decreasing p the typical
DOS indicates both localisation from the band edges and
localisation at particular energies within the band. Since
ﬁnite cluster wavefunctions like those shown in Fig. 3 can
be constructed for numerous other, less probable geometries31, Chayes et al.29 argued that an inﬁnite discrete
series of such spikes might exist within the spectrum.
The picture of localisation in the quantum percolation
model is then quite remarkable. If we generalise our numerical data for the peaks at E = 0 and E/t = ±1,
it seems as if there is an inﬁnite discrete set of energies
with localised wavefunctions, which is dense within the
entire spectrum. In between there are continua of delocalised states, but to avoid mixing, their density goes
to zero close to the localised states. Facilitated by the
large special weight of the peak (up to 10% close to pc)
this is clearly observed at E = 0, and we suspect similar
behaviour at E/t = ±1. For the other discrete spikes the
(Colour online) Amplitudes of the wavefunction,
|ψn(ri)|, of the quantum percolation model (3) on A∞of a 143
lattice with occupation probability p = 0.45. Exact diagonalisation results are presented at three characteristic energies
E/t = 0, 1, and 0.66 corresponding to anomalously localised,
localised, and delocalised states, respectively.
resolution of our numerical data is still too poor and the
system size might be even too small to draw a deﬁnite
conclusion.
In order to understand the internal structure of the
extended and localised states we calculated the amplitudes of the wavefunction at speciﬁc energies for a random sample of the quantum percolation model (3) restricted to A∞. Figure 4 visualises the spatial variation
of |ψn(ri)| on a 143 lattice with PBC and an occupation probability p = 0.45 well above the classical percolation threshold. The ﬁgure clearly indicates that the state
with E/t = 0.66 is extended, i.e. the spanning cluster is
quantum mechanically “transparent”. On the contrary,
at E = t, the wavefunction is completely localised on a
ﬁnite region of the spanning cluster. Here the scattering of the particle at the random surface of the spanning
cluster results in states, where the wavefunction vanishes
identically except for some ﬁnite domains on loose ends
(like those shown in Fig. 3), where it takes the values
(±1, ∓1), (±1, ∓1, 0, ∓1, ±1), . . . Note that these regions
are part of the spanning cluster, connected to the other
sites by a site with wavefunction amplitude zero. A particularly interesting behaviour is observed at E = 0. The
eigenstate E = 0 is highly degenerate and we can form
wavefunctions that span the entire lattice in a chequerboard structure with zero and non-zero amplitudes (see
Fig. 4). Although these states are extended in the sense
that they are not conﬁned to some region of the cluster,
they are localised in the sense that they do not contribute
FIG. 5: (Colour online) Amplitudes |ψn(ri)| of a localised
state on a 213 lattice with p = 0.33 obtained by exact diagonalisation of the model (3). E/t = 3.456 was chosen in order
to avoid any of the special cluster conﬁgurations discussed
to the DC-conductivity. This is caused by the alternating
structure which suppresses the nearest-neighbour hopping, and in spite of the high degeneracy, the current
matrix element between diﬀerent E = 0 states is zero.
Hence, having properties of both classes of states these
states are called anomalously localised.4,32 The chequerboard structure is also observed for the hypercubic lattice
in 2D but with reduced spectral weight, compared to the
3D case. Another indication for the robustness of this
feature is its persistence for mismatching boundary conditions, e.g., periodic (antiperiodic) boundary conditions
for odd (even) values of the linear extension L. In these
cases the chequerboard is matched to itself by a manifold
of sites with vanishing amplitude.
In the past most of the methods used in numerical
studies of Anderson localisation have also been applied
to the percolation models (1) or (3) in order to determine the quantum percolation threshold pq, deﬁned as
the probability p below which all states are localised (see,
e.g., Refs. 3,33 and references therein). However, so far
the results for pq are far less precise than, e.g., the values
of the critical disorder reported for the Anderson model.
For the simple cubic lattice numerical estimates of quantum site-percolation thresholds range from 0.4 to 0.5. In
Figs. 1-3 we presented data for ρty which shows that
pq > pc. In fact, within numerical accuracy, we found
ρty = 0 for p = 0.33 > pc. Figure 5 displays the amplitude of a typical state obtained by exact diagonalisation
for a ﬁxed realisation of disorder. Bearing in mind that
we have used PBC, the support of the wavefunction appears to be a ﬁnite (connected) region of the spanning
cluster A∞, i.e., the state is clearly localised.
To get a more detailed picture we calculated the normalised typical DOS, R(p, E) = ρty/ρme, in the whole
concentration-energy plane. Figure 6 presents such kind
of phase diagram of the quantum percolation model (3).
The data supports a ﬁnite quantum percolation threshold pq ≳0.4 > pc (cf. also Refs. 13,33,34,35), but as the
FIG. 6: (Colour online) Normalised typical DOS R = ρty/ρme
in the concentration-energy plane for the model (3) on a 503
lattice for p ≥0.5 and a 1003 lattice for p < 0.5. We used
M = 16384 Chebyshev moments and averaged over Ks×Kr =
32 × 32 realisations.
discussion above indicated, for E = 0 and E = ±t the
critical value pq(E) is 1, and the same may hold for the
set of other “special” energies. The transition line between localised and delocalised states, pq(E), might thus
be a rather irregular (fractal?) function. On the basis
of our numerical treatment, however, we are not in the
position to answer this question with full rigour.
N=53³ ; M = 32768
Kr×Ks=32×32
FIG. 7: (Colour online) Characteristic probability distributions of the LDOS.
Finally let us come back to the characterisation of extended and localised states in terms of distribution functions. Figure 7 displays the probability distribution,
F[ρi(E)] =
for three typical energies E/t = 3.5, 1.6, and 0 cor-
responding to localised, extended, and anomalously localised states at p = 0.45, respectively. The diﬀerences
in F[ρi(E)] are signiﬁcant. The slow increase of F[ρi(E)]
observed for localised states corresponds to an extremely
broad LDOS-distribution, with a very small most probable (or typical) value of ρi(E). This is in agreement with
the ﬁndings for the Anderson model.18,19 Accordingly the
jump-like increase found for extended states is related to
an extremely narrow distribution of the LDOS centred
around the mean DOS, where ρme coincides with the
most probable value. At E = 0, the probability distribution exhibits two steps, leading to a bimodal distribution
density. Here the ﬁrst (second) maximum is related to
sites with a small (large) amplitude of the wavefunction
– a feature that substantiates the chequerboard structure
discussed above.
To summarise, we have demonstrated the value and
power of the probability distribution approach to quantum percolation. As for standard Anderson localisation
the typical density of states can serve as a kind of order
parameter diﬀerentiating between extended and localised
states. Our numerical data corroborates previous results
in favour of a quantum percolation threshold pq > pc
and a fragmentation of the spectrum into extended and
localised states. The latter refers to a discrete but dense
set of localised states separated by continua of delocalised
states. Accordingly the function pq(E) is rather irregular. At the band centre, so-called anomalous localisation
is observed, which manifests itself in a chequerboard-like
structure of the wavefunction. Even though the Kernel
Polynomial Method allows for the study of very large
clusters with high energy resolution, the quantum percolation problem certainly deserves further investigation.
It is a pleasure to acknowledge useful discussions with
A. Alvermann, F.X. Bronold, G. Wellein and W. Weller.
Special thanks go to LRZ M¨unchen, NIC J¨ulich and
HLRN (Zuse-Institut Berlin) for granting resources on
their supercomputing facilities.
1 P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 .
2 S. Kirkpatrick and T. P. Eggarter, Phys. Rev. B 6, 3598
3 A. Mookerjee, I. Dasgupta, and T. Saha, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
B 9, 2989 .
4 M. Inui, S. A. Trugman, and E. Abrahans, Phys. Rev. B
49, 3190 .
5 M. V. Feigel’mann, A. Ioselevich, and M. Skvortsov ,
URL 
6 S. Das Sarma, M. P. Lilly, E. H. Hwang, L. N. Pfeiffer,
 
7 Y. Avishai and J. Luch, Phys. Rev. B 45, 1974 .
 
9 N. Sandler,
and J. Kondev ,
 
Sanchez-Palencia,
Zakrzewski,
Lewenstein
 
11 T. Becker, C. Streng, Y. Luo, V. Moshnyaga, B. Damaschke, N. Shannon, and K. Samwer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
237203 .
12 D. W. Heermann and D. Stauﬀer, Z. Phys. B 44, 339
13 C. M. Soukoulis, Q. Li, and G. S. Grest, Phys. Rev. B 45,
7724 .
14 R. Abou-Chacra, P. W. Anderson, and D. J. Thouless, J.
Phys. C 6, 1734 .
15 R. Haydock and R. L. Te, Phys. Rev. B 49, 10845 .
16 V. Dobrosavljevi´c, A. A. Pastor, and B. K. Nikoli´c, Europhys. Lett. 62, 76 .
17 A. D. Mirlin and Y. V. Fyodorov, J. Phys. I (France) 4,
655 .
18 G. Schubert, A. Weiße, and H. Fehske , URL
 
Alvermann,
 
20 G. Schubert, A. Weiße, and H. Fehske , URL
 
21 V. Dobrosavljevi´c and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78,
3943 .
22 K. Byczuk, W. Hofstetter, and D. Vollhardt , URL
 
23 F. X. Bronold and H. Fehske, Phys. Rev. B 66, 073102
24 F. X. Bronold, A. Alvermann, and H. Fehske, Philos. Mag.
B 1, 63 .
25 R. N. Silver, H. R¨oder, A. F. Voter, and D. J. Kress, J. of
Comp. Phys. 124, 115 .
26 R. Berkovits and Y. Avishai, Phys. Rev. B 53, R16125
27 T. Odagaki, N. Ogita, and H. Matsuda, J. Phys. C 13, 189
28 C. M. Soukoulis, E. N. Economou, and G. S. Grest, Phys.
Rev. B 36, 8649 .
29 J. T. Chayes, L. Chayes, J. R. Franz, J. P. Sethna, and
S. A. Trugman, J. Phys. A 19, L1173 .
30 A. Mac Kinnon and B. Kramer, Z. Phys. B 53, 1 .
31 G. Schubert, diploma thesis, Universit¨at Bayreuth .
32 Y. Shapir, A. Aharony, and A. B. Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett.
49, 486 .
33 T. Koslowski and W. von Niessen, Phys. Rev. B 42, 10342
34 A. Kusy, A. W. Stadler, G. Ha lda´s, and R. Sikora, Physica
A 241, 403 .
35 A. Kaneko and T. Ohtsuki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 68, 1488