Neural Atentive Session-based Recommendation
Shandong University
Jinan, China
 
Pengjie Ren
Shandong University
Jinan, China
 
Zhumin Chen
Shandong University
Jinan, China
 
Zhaochun Ren
Data Science Lab, JD.com
Beijing, China
 
Shandong University
Jinan, China
 
Shandong University
Jinan, China
 
Given e-commerce scenarios that user proﬁles are invisible, sessionbased recommendation is proposed to generate recommendation
results from short sessions. Previous work only considers the
user’s sequential behavior in the current session, whereas the
user’s main purpose in the current session is not emphasized. In
this paper, we propose a novel neural networks framework, i.e.,
Neural Attentive Recommendation Machine (NARM), to tackle
this problem. Speciﬁcally, we explore a hybrid encoder with an
attention mechanism to model the user’s sequential behavior and
capture the user’s main purpose in the current session, which
are combined as a uniﬁed session representation later. We then
compute the recommendation scores for each candidate item with
a bi-linear matching scheme based on this uniﬁed session representation. We train NARM by jointly learning the item and session
representations as well as their matchings. We carried out extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets. Our experimental
results show that NARM outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on
both datasets. Furthermore, we also ﬁnd that NARM achieves a
signiﬁcant improvement on long sessions, which demonstrates its
advantages in modeling the user’s sequential behavior and main
purpose simultaneously.
Session-based recommendation, sequential behavior, recurrent neural networks, attention mechanism
INTRODUCTION
A user session is kicked oﬀwhen a user clicks a certain item; within
a user session, clicking on the interesting item, and spending more
time viewing it. After that, the user clicks another interesting one
to start the view again. Such iterative process will be completed until the user’s requirements are satisﬁed. Current recommendation
research confronts challenges when recommendations are merely
from those user sessions, where existing recommendation methods
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
CIKM’17 , November 6–10, 2017, Singapore.
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4918-5/17/11...$15.00
DOI: 
(a) The global recommender
(b) The local recommender
Figure 1: Two diﬀerent recommenders. The global recommender models the user’s whole sequential behavior
to make recommendations while the local recommender
captures the user’s main purpose to make recommendations.
The numbers above the items denote the recommendation
scores produced by each recommender. In (b), the item in
the red dashed box is more relevant to the current user’s
intention. And the red line is thicker when the item is more
important.
 cannot perform well. To tackle this problem, sessionbased recommendation is proposed to predict the next item
that the user is probably interested in based merely on implicit
feedbacks, i.e., user clicks, in the current session.
Hidasi et al. apply recurrent neural networks (RNN) with
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) for session-based recommendation.
The model considers the ﬁrst item clicked by a user as the initial
input of RNN, and generates recommendations based on it. Then
the user might click one of the recommendations, which is fed
into RNN next, and the successive recommendations are produced
based on the whole previous clicks. Tan et al. further improve
this RNN-based model by utilizing two crucial techniques, i.e.,
data augmentation and a method to account for shifts in the
input data distribution. Though all above RNN-based methods
show promising improvements over traditional recommendation
approaches, they only take into account the user’s sequential
behavior in the current session, whereas the user’s main purpose
in the current session is not emphasized. Relying only on the user’s
sequential behavior is dangerous when a user accidentally clicks
on wrong items or s/he is attracted by some unrelated items due
to curiosity. Therefore, we argue that both the user’s sequential
behavior and main purpose in the current session should be
considered in session-based recommendation.
Suppose that a user wants to buy a shirt on the Internet. As
shown in Figure 1, during browsing, s/he tends to click on some
shirts with similar styles to make a comparison, meanwhile s/he
might click a pair of suit pants by accident or due to curiosity.
After that, s/he keeps looking for suitable shirts. In this case, if
we only consider about his/her sequential behavior, another shirt
or suit pants even a pair of shoes might be recommended because
many users click them after clicking some shirts and suit pants,
as shown in Figure 1(a). Assume that the recommender is an
experienced human purchasing guide, the guide could conjecture
that this user is very likely to buy a short sleeve shirt at this time
because most of his/her clicked items are related to it. Therefore,
more attention would be paid to the short sleeve shirts that the
user has clicked and another similar shirt would be recommended,
as shown in Figure 1(b). Ideally, in addition to considering about
the user’s entire sequential behavior, a better recommender should
also take into account the user’s main purpose which is reﬂected
by some relatively important items in the current session. Note
that the sequential behavior and the main purpose in one session
are complementary to each other because we can not always
conjecture a user’s main purpose from a session, e.g., when the
session is too short or the user just clicks something aimlessly.
To tackle the above problem, we propose a novel neural networks framework, namely Neural Attentive Recommendation Machine (NARM). Speciﬁcally, we explore a hybrid encoder with an
attention mechanism to model the user’s sequential behavior and
capture the user’s main purpose in the current session, which are
combined as a uniﬁed session representation later. With this itemlevel attention mechanism, NARM learns to attend diﬀerentially to
more and less important items. We then compute the recommendation scores for each candidate item with a bi-linear matching
scheme based on the uniﬁed session representation. NARM is
trained by jointly learning the item and session representations
as well as their matchings.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel NARM model to take into account
both the user’s sequential behavior and main purpose in
the current session, and compute recommendation scores
by using a bi-linear matching scheme.
• We apply an attention mechanism to extract the user’s
main purpose in the current session.
• We carried out extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets. The results show that NARM outperforms stateof-the-art baselines in terms of recall and MRR on both
datasets. Moreover, we ﬁnd that NARM achieves better
performance on long sessions, which demonstrates its
advantages in modeling the user’s sequential behavior and
main purpose simultaneously.
RELATED WORK
Session-based recommendation is a typical application of recommender systems based on implicit feedbacks, where no explicit preferences (e.g., ratings) but only positive observations (e.g.,
clicks) are available . These positive observations are
usually in a form of sequential data as obtained by passively
tracking users’ behavior over a sequence of time. In this section, we
brieﬂy review the related work on session-based recommendation
from the following two aspects, i.e., traditional methods and deep
learning based methods.
Traditional Methods
Typically, there are two traditional modeling paradigms, i.e., general recommender and sequential recommender.
General recommender is mainly based on item-to-item recommendation approaches. In this setting, an item-to-item similarity matrix is pre-computed from the available session data. Items
that are often clicked together (i.e., co-occurrence) in sessions
are considered to be similar. Linden et al. propose an itemto-item collaborative ﬁltering method to personalize the online
store for each customer. Sarwar et al. analyze diﬀerent itembased recommendation generation algorithms and compare their
results with basic k-nearest neighbor approaches. Though these
methods have proven to be eﬀective and are widely employed, they
only take into account the last click of the session, ignoring the
information of the whole click sequence.
Sequential recommender is based on Markov chains which
utilizes sequential data by predicting users’ next action given
the last action . Zimdars et al. propose a sequential
recommender based on Markov chains and investigate how to
extract sequential patterns to learn the next state using probabilistic decision-tree models. Shani et al. present a Markov
Decesion Processes (MDP) aiming to provide recommendations
in a session-based manner and the simplest MDP boil down to
ﬁrst-order Markov chains where the next recommendation can
be simply computed through the transition probabilities between
items. Mobasher et al. study diﬀerent sequential patterns for
recommendation and ﬁnd that contiguous sequential patterns are
more suitable for sequential prediction task than general sequential patterns. Yap et al. introduce a new Competence Score
measure in personalized sequential pattern mining for next-item
recommendations. Chen et al. model playlists as Markov chains,
and propose logistic Markov Embeddings to learn the representations of songs for playlists prediction. A major issue with applying
Markov chains in the session-based recommendation task is that
the state space quickly becomes unmanageable when trying to
include all possible sequences of potential user selections over all
Deep Learning based Methods
Deep learning has recently been applied very successfully in areas
such as image recognition , speech recognition and
neural language processing . Deep models can be
trained to learn discriminative representations from unstructured
data . Here, we focus on the related work that uses deep
learning models to solve recommendation tasks.
Neural network recommenderis mostly focusing on the classical collaborative ﬁltering user-item setting. Salakhutdinov et al.
 ﬁrst propose to use Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) for
Collaborative Filtering (CF). In their work, RBM is used to model
user-item interactions and to perform recommendations. Recently,
denoising auto-encoders have been used to perform CF in a similar manner . Wang et al. introduce a hierarchical
representation model for the next basket recommendation which
is based on encoder-decoder mechanism. Deep neural networks
have also been used in cross-domain recommendations whereby
items are mapped to a joint latent space . Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) have been devised to model variable-length sequence data. Recently, Hidasi et al. apply RNN to sessionbased recommendation and achieve signiﬁcant improvements over
traditional methods. The proposed model utilizes session-parallel
mini-batch training and employs ranking-based loss functions for
learning the model. Tan et al. further study the application
of RNN in session-based recommendation. They propose two
techniques to improve the performance of their model, namely
data augmentation and a method to account for shifts in the input
data distribution. Zhang et al. also use RNN for the click
sequence prediction, they consider historical user behaviors as
well as hand-crafted features for each user and item.
Though a growing number of publications on session-based
recommendation focus on RNN-based methods, unlike existing
studies, we propose a novel neural attentive recommendation
model that combines both the user’s sequential behavior and
main purpose in the current session, which to the best of our
knowledge, is not considered by existing researches. And we apply
the attention mechanism to session-based recommendation for the
ﬁrst time.
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the session-based recommendation task. Then we describe the proposed NARM in detail.
Session-based Recommendation
Session-based recommendation is the task of predicting what a
user would like to click next when his/her current sequential
transaction data is given. Here we give a formulation of the sessionbased recommendation problem.
Let [x1,x2, ..., xn−1, xn] be a click session, where xi ∈I (1 ≤
i ≤n) is the index of one clicked item out of a total number of m
items. We build a model M so that for any given preﬁx of the click
sequence in the session, x = [x1,x2, ..., xt−1,xt ], 1 ≤t ≤n, we get
the output y = M(x), where y = [y1,y2, ...,ym−1,ym]. We view
y as a ranking list over all the next items that can occur in that
session, where yj (1 ≤j ≤m) corresponds to the recommendation
score of item j. Since a recommender typically needs to make more
than one recommendations for the user, thus the top-k (1 ≤k ≤m)
items in y are recommended.
In this paper, we propose an improved neural encoder-decoder
architecture to address the session-based recommendation problem, named Neural Attentive Recommendation Machine
(NARM). The basic idea of NARM is to build a hidden representation of the current session, and then generate predictions based
on it. As shown in Figure 2, the encoder converts the input click
sequence x = [x1,x2, ..., xt−1,xt ] into a set of high-dimensional
Figure 2: The general framework and dataﬂow of the
encoder-decoder-based NARM.
hidden representations h = [h1, h2, ..., ht−1, ht ], which along
with the attention signal at time t (denoted as αt ), are fed to the
session feature generator to build the representation of the current
session to decode at timet (denoted as ct ). Finally ct is transformed
by a matrix U (as part of the decoder) into an activate function to
produce a ranking list over all items, y = [y1,y2, ...,ym−1,ym], that
can occur in the current session.
The role of αt is to determine which part of the hidden representations should be emphasized or ignored at time t. It should
be noted that αt could be ﬁxed over time or changes dynamically
during the prediction process. In the dynamic setting, αt can be a
function of the representations of hidden states or the input item
embeddings. We adopt the dynamic setting in our model, more
details will be described in §3.4.
The basic idea of our work is to learn a recommendation model
that takes into consideration both the user’s sequential behavior
and main purpose in the current session. In the following part
of this section, we ﬁrst describe the global encoder in NARM
which is used to model the user’s sequential behavior (§3.3). Then
we introduce the local encoder which is used to capture the
user’s main purpose in the current session (§3.4). Finally we
show our NARM which combines both of them and computes
the recommendation scores for each candidate item by using a bilinear matching scheme (§3.5).
Global Encoder in NARM
In the global encoder, the inputs are entire previous clicks while the
outputis the feature of the user’s sequential behavior in the current
session. Both the inputs and output are uniformly represented by
high-dimensional vectors.
Figure 3(a) shows the graphical model of the global encoder
in NARM. We use a RNN with Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
rather than a standard RNN because Hidasi et al. demonstrate
that GRU can outperform the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
 units for the session-based recommendation task. GRU is a
more elaborate RNN unit that aims at dealing with the vanishing
gradient problem. The activation of GRU is a linear interpolation
(a) The graphical model of the global encoder in NARM, where the last
hidden state is interpreted as the user’s sequential behavior feature c g
(b) The graphical model of the local encoder in NARM, where the weighted
sum of hidden states is interpreted as the user’s main purpose feature c l
j=1 αt jhj .
Figure 3: The global encoder and the local encoder in NARM.
between the previous activation ht−1 and the candidate activation
ht = (1 −zt )ht−1 + ztbht ,
where the update gate zt is given by
zt = σ(Wzxt + Uzht−1) .
The candidate activation function bht is computed as
bht = tanh[Wxt + U(rt ⊙ht−1)] ,
where the reset gate rt is given by
rt = σ(W r xt + Ur ht−1) .
With a trivial session feature generator, we essentially use the
ﬁnal hidden state ht as the representation of the user’s sequential
However, this global encoder has its drawbacks such as a
vectorial summarization of the whole sequence behavior is often
hard to capture a preciser intention of the current user.
Local Encoder in NARM
The architecture of the local encoder is similar to the global
encoder as shown in Figure 3(b). In this encoding scheme we also
use RNN with GRU as the basic component. To capture the user’s
main purpose in the current session, we involve an item-level
attention mechanism which allows the decoder to dynamically
select and linearly combine diﬀerent parts of the input sequence,
where the weighted factors α determine which part of the input
sequence should be emphasized or ignored when making predictions, which in turn is a function of hidden states,
αtj = q(ht, hj) .
Basically, the weighted factor αtj models the alignment between
the inputs around position j and the output at position t, so it can
be viewed as a speciﬁc matching model. In the local encoder, the
function q speciﬁcally computes the similarity between the ﬁnal
hidden state ht and the representation of the previous clicked item
q(ht, hj) = vTσ(A1ht + A2hj) ,
where σ is an activate function such as sigmoid function, matrix
A1 is used to transform ht into a latent space, and A2 plays the
same role for hj.
This local encoder enjoys the advantages of adaptively focusing
on more important items to capture the user’s main purpose in the
current session.
NARM Model
For the task of session-based recommendation, the global encoder
has the summarization of the whole sequential behavior, while
the local encoder can adaptively select the important items in the
current session to capture the user’s main purpose. We conjecture
that the representation of the sequential behavior may provide
useful information for capturing the user’s main purpose in the
current session. Therefore, we use the representations of the
sequential behavior and the previous hidden states to compute the
attention weight for each clicked item. Then a natural extension
combines the sequential behavior feature and the user purpose
feature by concatenating them to form an extended representation
for each time stamp.
As shown in Figure 4, we can see the summarization hg
t is incorporated into ct to provide a sequential behavior representation
for NARM. It should be noticed that the session feature generator
in NARM will evoke diﬀerent encoding mechanisms in the global
encoder and the local encoder, although they will be combined
later to form a uniﬁed representation. More speciﬁcally, the last
hidden state of the global encoder hg
t plays a role diﬀerent from
that of the local encoder hl
t . The former has the responsibility
to encode the entire sequential behavior. The latter is used to
compute the attention weights with the previous hidden states. By
this hybrid encoding scheme, both the user’s sequential behavior
and main purpose in the current session can be modeled into a
uniﬁed representation ct , which is the concatenation of vectors cg
Figure 4: The graphical model of NARM, where the session feature ct is represented by the concatenation of vectors cg
(as computed in equation (5) and (6)). Note that hg
t play diﬀerent roles, while they have the same values. The last hidden
state of the global encoder hg
t plays a role to encode the entire input clicks while the last hidden state of the local encoder hl
is used to compute attention weights with the previous hidden states.
Figure 4 also gives a graphical illustration of the adopted decoding mechanism in NARM. Generally, a standard RNN utilizes
fully-connected layer to decode. But using fully-connected layer
means that the number of parameters to be learned in this layer is
|H | ∗|N | where |H | is the dimension of the session representation
and |N | is the number of candidate items for prediction. Thus we
have to reserve a large space to store these parameters. Though
there are some approaches to reduce the parameters such as using
a hierarchical softmax layer , and negative sampling at random
 , they are not the best choices for our model.
We propose an alternative bi-linear decoding scheme which not
only reduces the number of the parameters, but also improves the
performance of NARM. Speciﬁcally, a bi-linear similarity function
between the representations of the current session and each candidate items is used to compute a similarity score Si,
where B is a |D| ∗|H | matrix, |D| is the dimension of each item
embedding. Then the similarity score of each item is entered to
a softmax layer to obtain the probability that the item will occur
next. By using this bi-linear decoder, we reduce the number of
parameters from |N | ∗|H | to |D| ∗|H |, where |D| is usually smaller
than |N |. Moreover, the experiment results demonstrate that using
this bi-linear decoder can improve the performance of NARM (as
demonstrated in §4.4).
To learn the parameters of the model, we do not utilize the
proposed training procedure in , where the model is trained in
a session-parallel, sequence-to-sequence manner. Instead, in order
to ﬁt the attention mechanism in the local encoder, NARM process
each sequence [x1, x2, ..., xt−1, xt ] separately. Our model can be
trained by using a standard mini-batch gradient descent on the
cross-entropy loss:
L(p,q) = −
where q is the prediction probability distribution and p is the truly
distribution. At last, a Back-Propagation Through Time (BPTT)
method for a ﬁxed number of time steps is adopted to train NARM.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the datasets, the state-of-the-art
methods and the evaluation metrics employed in our experiments.
Then we compare NARMs with diﬀerent decoding schemes. Finally, we compare NARM with state-of-the-art methods.
We evaluate diﬀerent recommenders on two standard transaction
datasets, i.e., YOOCHOOSE dataset and DIGINETICA dataset.
• YOOCHOOSE1 is a public dataset released by RecSys
Challenge 2015. This dataset contains click-streams on an
e-commerce site. After ﬁltering out sessions of length 1
and items that appear less than 5 times, there remains
7981580 sessions and 37483 items.
• DIGINETICA2 comes from CIKM Cup 2016. We only used
the released transaction data and also ﬁltered out sessions
of length 1 and items that appear less than 5 times. Finally
the dataset contains 204771 sessions and 43097 items.
We ﬁrst conducted some preprocesses over two datasets. For
YOOCHOOSE, we used the sessions of subsequent day for testing
and ﬁltered out clicks from the test set where the clicked items did
not appear in the training set. For DIGINETICA, the only diﬀerence
is that we use the sessions of subsequent week for testing. Because
we did not train NARM in a session-parallel manner , a
1 
2 
Table 1: Statistics of the datasets used in our experiments. (The avg.length means the average length of the complete dataset.)
all the clicks
train sessions
test sessions
all the items
avg.length
YOOCHOOSE 1/64
YOOCHOOSE 1/4
DIGINETICA
sequence splitting preprocess is necessary. For the input session
[x1, x2, ..., xn−1, xn], we generated the sequences and corresponding labels ([x1],V (x2), ([x1, x2],V (x3), ..., ([x1,x2, ...,xn−1],V (xn))
for training on both YOOCHOOSE and DIGINETICA. The corresponding label V (xi) is the last click in the current session.
For the following reasons: (1) YOOCHOOSE is quite large, (2)
Tan et al. veriﬁed that the recommendation models do need
to account for changing user behavior over time, (3) their experimental results showed that training on the entire dataset yields
slightly poorer results than training on more recent fractions of the
datasets. Thus we sorted the training sequences of YOOCHOOSE
by time and reported our results on the model trained on more
recent fractions 1/64 and 1/4 of training sequences as well. Note
that some items that in the test set would not appear in the
training set since we trained the model only on more recent
fractions. The statistics of the three datasets (i.e., YOOCHOOSE
1/64, YOOCHOOSE 1/4 and DIGINETICA) are shown in Table 1.
Baseline Methods
We compare the proposed NARM with ﬁve traditional methods
(i.e., POP, S-POP, Item-KNN, BPR-MF and FPMC) and two RNNbased models (i.e., GRU-Rec and Improved GRU-Rec).
• POP: Popular predictor always recommends the most
popular items in the training set. Despite its simplicity, it
is often a strong baseline in certain domains.
• S-POP: This baseline recommends the most popular items
for the current session. The recommendation list changes
during the session gains more items. Ties are broken up
using global popularity values.
• Item-KNN: In this baseline, similarity is deﬁned as the
co-occurrence number of two items in sessions divided by
the square root of the product of the number of sessions in
which either item occurs. Regularization is also included
to avoid coincidental high similarities between rarely visited items .
• BPR-MF: BPR-MF optimizes a pairwise ranking objective function via stochastic gradient descent. Matrix
factorization can not be directly applied to session-based
recommendation because new sessions do not have precomputed latent representations. However, we can make
it work by representing a new session with the average
latent factors of items occurred in the session so far. In
other words, the recommendation score can be computed
as the average of the similarities between latent factors of
a candidate item and the items in the session so far.
• FPMC: FPMC is a state-of-the-art hybrid model on
the next-basket recommendation. In order to make it work
on session-based recommendation, we do not consider the
user latent representations when computing recommendation scores.
• GRU-Rec: We denote the model proposed in as GRU-
Rec, which utilizes session-parallel mini-batch training
process and also employs ranking-based loss functions for
learning the model.
• Improved GRU-Rec: We denote the model proposed in
 as Improved GRU-Rec. Improved GRU-Rec adopts
two techniques which include data augmentation and a
method to account for shifts in the input data distribution
to improve the performance of GRU-Rec.
Evaluation Metrics and Experimental Setup
Evaluation Metrics.
As recommender systems can only recommend a few items at
each time, the actual item a user might pick should be amongst the
ﬁrst few items of the list. Therefore, we use the following metrics
to evaluate the quality of the recommendation lists.
• Recall@20: The primary evaluation metric is Recall@20
that is the proportion of cases when the desired item is
amongst the top-20 items in all test cases. Recall@N does
not consider the actual rank of the item as long as it is
amongst the top-N and also usually correlates well with
other metrics such as click-through rate (CTR) .
• MRR@20: Another used metric is MRR@20 (Mean Reciprocal Rank), which is the average of reciprocal ranks of
the desire items. The reciprocal rank is set to zero if the
rank is larger than 20. MRR takes the rank of the item into
account, which is important in settings where the order of
recommendations matters.
Experimental Setup.
The proposed NARM model uses 50-dimensional embeddings
for the items. Optimization is done using Adam with the initial
learning rate sets to 0.001, and the mini-batch size is ﬁxed at 512.
There are two dropout layers used in NARM: the ﬁrst dropout layer
is between the item embedding layer and the GRU layer with 25%
dropout, the second one is between the GRU layer and the bi-linear
similarity layer with 50% dropout. We also truncate BPTT at 19
time steps as the setting in the state-of-the-art method and
the number of epochs is set to 30 while using 10% of the training
data as the validation set. We use one GRU layer in our model and
the GRU is set at 100 hidden units. The model is deﬁned and trained
in Theano on a GeForce GTX TitanX GPU. The source code of our
model is available online3.
3 
Table 2: The comparison of diﬀerent decoders in NARM.
YOOCHOOSE 1/64
YOOCHOOSE 1/4
DIGINETICA
Recall@20(%)
Recall@20(%)
Recall@20(%)
Fully-connected decoder
Bi-linear similarity decoder
Table 3: Performance comparison of NARM with baseline methods over three datasets.
YOOCHOOSE 1/64
YOOCHOOSE 1/4
DIGINETICA
Recall@20(%)
Recall@20(%)
Recall@20(%)
Improved GRU-Rec
* On YOOCHOOSE 1/4, we do not have enough memory to initialize FPMC. Our available memory is 120G.
Comparison among Diﬀerent Decoders
We ﬁrst empirically compare NARMs with diﬀerent decoders,
i.e., fully-connected decoder and bi-linear similarity decoder. The
results over three datasets are shown in Table 2. Here we only
illustrate the results on 100-dimensional hidden states because we
obtain the same conclusions on other dimension settings.
We make following observations from Table 2: (1) With regard
to Recall@20, the performance improves when using the bi-linear
similarity decoder, and the improvements are around 0.65%, 0.24%
and 4.74% respectively over three datasets. (2) And with regard to
MRR@20, the performance on the model using the bi-linear decoder becomes a little worse on YOOCHOOSE 1/64 and 1/4. But on
DIGINETICA, the model with the bi-linear decoder still obviously
outperforms the model with the fully-connected decoder.
For the session-based recommendation task, as the recommender
system recommends top-20 items at once in our settings, the actual
item a user might pick should be among the list of 20 items. Thus
we consider that the recall metric is more important than the MRR
metric in this task, and NARM adopts the bi-linear decoder in the
following experiments.
Comparison against Baselines
Next we compare our NARM model with state-of-the-art methods.
The results of all methods over three datasets are shown in Table 3.
And a more speciﬁc comparison between NARM and the best baseline (i.e., Improved GRU-Rec) over three datasets are illustrated in
We have the following observations from the results: (1) For
YOOCHOOSE 1/4 dataset, BPR-MF does not work when we use
the average of item factors occurred in the session to replace the
user factor. Besides, since we regard each session as one user in
FPMC, we do not have enough memory to initialize it. These
problems indicate traditional user-based methods are no longer
suitable for session-based recommendation. (2) Overall, three RNNbased methods consistently outperform the traditional baselines,
which demonstrates that RNN-based models are good at dealing
with sequence information in sessions. (3) By taking both the
user’s sequential behavior and main purpose into consideration,
the proposed NARM can outperform all the baselines in terms
of recall@20 over three datasets and can outperform most of the
baselines in terms of MRR@20. Take DIGINETICA dataset as an
example, when compared with the best baseline (i.e., Improved
GRU-Rec), the relative performance improvements by NARM are
around 7.98% and 9.70% respectively in terms of recall@20 and
MRR@20. (4) As we can see, the recall values on two YOOCHOOSE
datasets are not as signiﬁcantly as the results on DIGINETICA and
the obtained MRR values are very close to each other. We consider
that one of the important reasons is when we split YOOCHOOSE
dataset to 1/64 and 1/4, we do not ﬁlter out clicks from the test
set where the clicked items are not in the training set in order to
be consistent with the setting on Improved GRU-Rec . While
on DIGINETICA, we ﬁlter out these clicks from the test set, and
hence NARM outperforms the baselines signiﬁcantly in terms of
both Recall@20 and MRR@20.
In this section, We further explore the inﬂuences of using diﬀerent
session features in NARM and analyze the eﬀectiveness of the
adopted attention mechanism.
(a) YOOCHOOSE1/64
(b) YOOCHOOSE1/4
(c) DIGINETICA
Figure 5: Performance comparison between NARM and the best baseline (i.e., Improved GRU-Rec) over three datasets.
Table 4: Performance comparison among three versions of
NARM over three datasets.
(a) Performance comparison on YOOCHOOSE 1/64
NARMдlobal
NARMhybrid
(b) Performance comparison on YOOCHOOSE 1/4
NARMдlobal
NARMhybrid
(c) Performance comparison on DIGINETICA
NARMдlobal
NARMhybrid
Inﬂuence of Using Diﬀerent Features
In this part, we refer to the NARM that uses the sequential behavior feature only, the NARM that uses the user purpose feature
only, and the NARM that uses both two features as NARMдlobal,
NARMlocal and NARMhybrid respectively. As shown in Table
4, (1) NARMдlobal and NARMlocal, which only use a single
feature, do not perform well on three datasets. Besides, their
performance are very close to each other in terms of two metrics.
This indicates that merely considering the sequential behavior
or the user purpose in the current session may not be able to
learn a good recommendation model. (2) When we take into
account both the user’s sequential behavior and main purpose,
NARMhybrid performs better than NARMдlobal and NARMlocal
in terms of Recall@20 and MRR@20 on diﬀerent hidden state
dimensions over three datasets. Take DIGINETICA dataset as
an example, when compared with NARMдlobal and NARMlocal
with the dimensionality of the hidden state set to 50, the relative performance improvements by NARMhybrid are around
3.52% and 5.09% in terms of Recall@20 respectively. These results
demonstrate the advantages of considering both the sequential
behavior and the main purpose of the current user in session-based
recommendation.
Inﬂuence of Diﬀerent Session Lengths
Our NARM model is based on the assumption that when a user is
browsing online, his/her click behavior frequently revolves his/her
main purpose in the current session. However, we can hardly
capture the user’s main purpose when s/he just clicks a few items.
Therefore, our NARM model should be good at modeling long
sessions. To verify this, we make comparisons among sessions with
diﬀerent lengths on DIGINETICA. As shown in Table 5, (1) NARM
performs better when the session lengths are between 4 and 17
in general. This indicates that NARM do capture the user’s main
purpose more accuracy on long sessions. In other words, it could
Figure 6: Visualization of items weights. The depth of the color corresponds to the importance of items given by equation (7).
The numbers above the sessions is the session IDs. (Best viewed in color.)
Table 5: Performance comparison among diﬀerent session
lengths on DIGINETICA dataset. (The baseline method is
Improved GRU-Rec .)
DIGINETICA DATASET
Baseline correct
NARM correct
Performance
make a better prediction if NARM captures more user purpose
features on the basis of the existing sequential behavior features.
(2) When sessions are too long, the performance improvements of
NARM are declined. We consider the reason is that when a session
is too long, the user is very likely to click some items aimlessly, so
that the local encoder in NARM could not capture the user’s main
purpose in the current session.
Visualize the Attention Weights
To illustrate the role of the attention mechanism intuitively, we
present an example in Figure 6. The session instances are chosen
randomly from DIGINETICA. The depth of the color corresponds
to the importance of items given by equation (7). We have following observations from the example: (1) Overall, it is obvious
that not all items are related to the next click and almost all the
important items in the current session is continuous. This implies
that the users’ intentions in sessions are indeed localized, which is
one of the reasons why NARM can outperform the general RNNbased model. (2) The most important items are often near the end
of the session. This is in line with people’s browsing behavior: a
user is very likely to click other items that are related to what
s/he has clicked just now. Recall that general RNN-based models
are able to model this fact, thus they can achieve fairly good
performance in session-based recommendation. (3) In some cases,
the most important items appear in the beginning or middle of
the session (e.g., in session 7974 or 4260). In this situation, we
believe that our NARM can perform better than general RNNbased models because the attention mechanism could learn to pay
more attention to more important items regardless of its position
in one session.
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
We have proposed the neural attentive recommendation machine
(NARM) with an encoder-decoder architecture to address the
session-based recommendation problem. By incorporating an attention mechanism into RNN, our proposed approach can capture
both the user’s sequential behavior and main purpose in the
current session. Based on the sequential behavior feature and the
user purpose feature, we have applied NARM to predict a user’s
next click in the current session. We have conducted extensive
experiments on two benchmark datasets and demonstrated that
our approach can outperform state-of-the-art methods in terms
of diﬀerent evaluation metrics. Moreover, we have performed an
analysis on user click behaviors and found that users’ intentions
are localized in most sessions, which proves the rationality of our
As to future work, more item attributes, such as prices and
categories, may enhance the performance of our method in sessionbased recommendation. Meanwhile, both the nearest neighbor
sessions and the importance of diﬀerent neighbors should give new
insights. Finally, the attention mechanism can be used to explore
the importance of attributes in the current session.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. This work is supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of China (61672322, 61672324), the Natural Science
Foundation of Shandong province (2016ZRE27468) and the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University.