.A Algorithms and Combinatorics 2
Editorial Board
R. L. Graham, Murray Hill B. Korte, Bonn
L. Lovasz, Budapest
Martin Gr6tschel
Laszlo Lovasz
Alexander Schrijver
Geometric Algorithms
and Combinatorial
Optimization
Second Corrected Edition
Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg New York
London Paris Tokyo
Hong Kong Barcelona
Martin Grotschel
Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum fUr
Informationstechnik Berlin
Heilbronner StraBe 10
D-10711 Berlin, Germany
Technische Universitat Berlin
Fachbereich Mathematik
StraBe des 17. Juni 136
D-10623 Berlin, Germany
Laszl6 Lovasz
Department of Computer Science
Eotvos Lorand University
Muzeum krt. 6-8
Hungary H-1088
Department of Mathematics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520, USA
Mathematics Subject Classification :
primary 05-02, 11 Hxx, 52-02, 90 Cxx
Alexander Schrijver
CWI (Center for Mathematics
and Computer Science)
P. O. Box 4079
NL-I009 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Department of Mathematics
University of Amsterdam
Plantage Muidergracht 24
NL-1018 TV Amsterdam
The Netherlands
secondary 05 Cxx, 11 H06, 11 Hxx, 11113, 52A38, 52A41, 52B55, 68Q25,
90C05, 90C25, 90C27
With 23 Figures
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Grotschel, Martin. Geometric algorithms and combinatorial optimization 1 Martin Grotschel,
Laszlo Lovasz. Alexander Schrijver. - 2nd corr. ed.
cm. - (Algorithms and combinatorics, 2) Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-3-642-78242-8
e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-78240-4
DOL 10.1007/978-3-642-78240-4
1. Combinatorial geometry. 2. Geometry of numbers. 3. Mathematical optimization.
4. Programming (Mathematics) I. Lovasz, Laszlo, 1948-. II. Schrijver, A. III. Title
IV. Series. QA167.G76 1994 516'.13 - dc20 93-14274 CIP
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material
is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other ways, and storage in data banks.
Duplication on this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the
German Copyright Law of September 9,1965, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer-Verlag. Violations are liable for prosecution under the German
Copyright Law.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1988, 1993
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 2nd edition 1993
Media conversion and typesetting output: Universitatsdruckerei H. Sturtz AG, Wurzburg
41/3140 -5 432 10 Printed on acid-free paper
Preface to the Second Edition
Since the publication of the first edition of our book, geometric algorithms
and combinatorial optimization have kept growing at the same fast pace as
before. Nevertheless, we do not feel that the ongoing research has made this
book outdated. Rather, it seems that many of the new results build on the
models, algorithms, and theorems presented here. For instance, the celebrated
Dyer-Frieze-Kannan algorithm for approximating the volume of a convex body
is based on the oracle model of convex bodies and uses the ellipsoid method
as a preprocessing technique. The polynomial time equivalence of optimization,
separation, and membership has become a commonly employed tool in the
study of the complexity of combinatorial optimization problems and in the
newly developing field of computational convexity. Implementations of the basis
reduction algorithm can be found in various computer algebra software systems.
On the other hand, several of the open problems discussed in the first edition
are still unsolved. For example, there are still no combinatorial polynomial
time algorithms known for minimizing a submodular function or finding a
maximum clique in a perfect graph. Moreover, despite the success of the interior
point methods for the solution of explicitly given linear programs there is still
no method known that solves implicitly given linear programs, such as those
described in this book, and that is both practically and theoretically efficient.
In particular, it is not known how to adapt interior point methods to such
linear programs. (One notable exception is Alizadeh's extension of interior point
methods to semidefinite programming.)
We hope that our book will continue to be useful for those doing research in
combinatorial optimization, computational convexity and related areas, and we
are pleased that Springer-Verlag has decided to publish this second edition.
Martin GrOtschel
Lasz 16 Lovasz
Alexander Schrijver
Preface to the First Edition
Historically, there is a close connection between geometry and optImIzation.
This is illustrated by methods like the gradient method and the simplex method,
which are associated with clear geometric pictures. In combinatorial optimization,
however, many of the strongest and most frequently used algorithms are based
on the discrete structure of the problems: the greedy algorithm, shortest path
and alternating path methods, branch-and-bound, etc. In the last several years
geometric methods, in particular polyhedral combinatorics, have played a more
and more profound role in combinatorial optimization as well.
Our book discusses two recent geometric algorithms that have turned out to
have particularly interesting consequences in combinatorial optimization, at least
from a theoretical point of view. These algorithms are able to utilize the rich
body of results in polyhedral combinatorics.
The first of these algorithms is the ellipsoid method, developed for nonlinear
programming by N. Z. Shor, D. B. Yudin, and A. S. NemirovskiI. It was a great
surprise when L. G. Khachiyan showed that this method can be adapted to solve
linear programs in polynomial time, thus solving an important open theoretical
problem. While the ellipsoid method has not proved to be competitive with the
simplex method in practice, it does have some features which make it particularly
suited for the purposes of combinatorial optimization.
The second algorithm we discuss finds its roots in the classical "geometry
of numbers", developed by Minkowski.
This method has had traditionally
deep applications in number theory, in particular in diophantine approximation.
Methods from the geometry of numbers were introduced in integer programming
by H. W. Lenstra. An important element of his technique, called basis reduction,
goes in fact back to Hermite. An efficient version of basis reduction yields a
polynomial time algorithm useful not only in combinatorial optimization, but
also in fields like number theory, algebra, and cryptography.
A combination of these two methods results in a powerful tool for combinatorial optimization. It yields a theoretical framework in which the polynomial
time solvability of a large number of combinatorial optimization problems can
be shown quite easily. It establishes the algorithmic equivalence of problems
which are "dual" in various senses.
Being this general, this method cannot be expected to give running times
comparable with special-purpose algorithms. Our policy in this book is, therefore,
not to attempt to obtain the best possible running times; rather, it is to derive
just the polynomial time solvability of the problems as quickly and painlessly as
Preface to the First Edition
possible. Thus, our results are best conceived as "almost pure" existence results
for polynomial time algorithms for certain problems and classes of problems.
Nevertheless, we could not get around quite a number of tedious technical
details. We did try to outline the essential ideas in certain sections, which should
give an outline of the underlying geometric and combinatorial ideas. Those
sections which contain the technical details are marked by an asterisk in the list
of contents. We therefore recommend, for a first reading, to skip these sections.
The central result proved and applied in this book is, roughly, the following.
If K is a convex set, and if we can decide in polynomial time whether a given
vector belongs to K, then we can optimize any linear objective function over K
in polynomial time. This assertion is, however, not valid without a number of
conditions and restrictions, and even to state these we have to go through many
technical details. The most important of these is that the optimization can be
carried out in an approximate sense only (as small compensation, we only need
to test for membership in K in an approximate sense).
Due to the rather wide spread of topics and methods treated in this book, it
seems worth while to outline its structure here.
Chapters 0 and 1 contain mathematical preliminaries. Of these, Chapter 1
discusses some non-standard material on the complexity of problems, efficiency
of algorithms and the notion of oracles.
The main result, and its many versions and ramifications, are obtained by
the ellipsoid method.
Chapter 2 develops the framework necessary for the
formulation of algorithmic problems on convex sets and the design of algorithms
to solve these. A list of the main problems introduced in Chapter 2 can be found·
on the inner side of the back cover. Chapter 3 contains the description of (two
versions of) the ellipsoid method. The statement of what exactly is achieved
by this method is rather complicated, and the applications and specializations
collected in Chapter 4 are, perhaps, more interesting. These range from the main
result mentioned above to results about computing the diameter, width, volume,
and other geometric parameters of convex sets. All these algorithms provide,
however, only approximations.
Polyhedra encountered in combinatorial optimization have, typically, vertices
with small integral entries and facets with small integral coefficients. For such
polyhedra, the optimization problem (and many other algorithmic problems) can
be solved in the exact sense, by rounding an approximate solution appropriately.
While for many applications a standard rounding to some number of digits is
sufficient, to obtain results in full generality we will have to use the sophisticated
rounding technique of diophantine approximation. The basis reduction algorithm
for lattices, which is the main ingredient of this technique, is treated in Chapter
5, along with several applications. Chapter 6 contains the main applications of
diophantine approximation techniques. Besides strong versions of the main result,
somewhat different combinations of the ellipsoid method with basis reduction give
the strongly polynomial time solvability of several combinatorial optimization
problems, and the polynomial time solvability of integer linear programming in
fixed dimension, remarkable results of E. Tardos and H. W. Lenstra, respectively.
Preface to the First Edition
Chapters 7 to 10 contain the applications of the results obtained in the
previous chapters to combinatorial optimization. Chapter 7 is an easy-to-read
introduction to these applications. In Chapter 8 we give an in-depth survey of
combinatorial optimization problems solvable in polynomial time with the methods of Chapter 6. Chapters 9 and 10 treat two specific areas where the ellipsoid
method has resolved important algorithmic questions that so far have resisted
direct combinatorial approaches: perfect graphs and submodular functions.
We are grateful to several colleagues for many discussions on the topic
and text of this book, in particular to Bob Bixby, Andras Frank, Michael
JUnger, Gerhard Reinelt, Eva Tardos, Klaus Truemper, Yoshiko Wakabayashi,
and Zaw Win. We mention at this point that the technique of applying the
ellipsoid method to combinatorial optimization problems was also discovered by
R. M. Karp, C. H. Papadimitriou, M. W. Padberg, and M. R. Rao.
We have worked on this book over a long period at various institutions. We
acknowledge, in particular, the support of the joint research project of the German
Research Association (DFG) and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (MTA),
the Universities of Amsterdam, Augsburg, Bonn, Szeged, and Tilburg, Cornell
University (Ithaca), Eotvos Lorand University (Budapest), and the Mathematical
Centre (Amsterdam).
Our special thanks are due to Frau Theodora Konnerth for the efficient and
careful typing and patient retyping of the text in TEX.
March 1987
Martin GrOtschel
Laszlo Lovasz
Alexander Schrijver
Table of Contents
Chapter O.
Mathematical Preliminaries
0.1 Linear Algebra and Linear Programming
Basic Notation ........ .
Hulls, Independence, Dimension
Eigenvalues, Positive Definite Matrices
Vector Norms, Balls
Matrix Norms. . . . . . .
Some Inequalities
Polyhedra, Inequality Systems
Linear (Diophantine) Equations and Inequalities
Linear Programming and Duality
0.2 Graph Theory
Graphs ...
Digraphs . .
Walks, Paths, Circuits, Trees
Chapter 1.
Complexity, Oracles, and Numerical Computation
1.1 Complexity Theory: g> and .Kg> .
Problems . . . . . . . . . .
Algorithms and Turing Machines
Encoding ......... .
Time and Space Complexity
Decision Problems: The Classes g> and .Kg>
1.2 Oracles. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Running Time of Oracle Algorithms
Transformation and Reduction . . . .
.Kg>-Completeness and Related Notions
1.3 Approximation and Computation of Numbers
Encoding Length of Numbers
. . . . . .
Polynomial and Strongly Polynomial Computations
Polynomial Time Approximation of Real Numbers
The sections and chapters marked with • are technical. We recommend that the reader
skip these on the first reading.
Table of Contents
1.4 Pivoting and Related Procedures
Gaussian Elimination . . . . .
Gram-Schmidt Orthogonalization
The Simplex Method . . . . .
Computation of the Hermite Normal Form
Chapter 2.
Algorithmic Aspects of Convex Sets:
Formulation of the Problems . . . . . . . . .
2.1 Basic Algorithmic Problems for Convex Sets. . . .
* 2.2 Nondeterministic Decision Problems for Convex Sets
Chapter 3.
The Ellipsoid Method. . . . . . . . . . .
3.1 Geometric Background and an Informal Description
Properties of Ellipsoids
. . . . . . . .
Description of the Basic Ellipsoid Method
Proofs of Some Lemmas. . . . . . . .
Implementation Problems and Polynomiality
Some Examples
. . . . . . . .
* 3.2 The Central-Cut Ellipsoid Method
* 3.3 The Shallow-Cut Ellipsoid Method
Chapter 4.
Algorithms for Convex Bodies
4.1 Summary of Results
* 4.2 Optimization from Separation
* 4.3 Optimization from Membership
* 4.4 Equivalence of the Basic Problems .
* 4.5 Some Negative Results
* 4.6 Further Algorithmic Problems for Convex Bodies .
* 4.7 Operations on Convex Bodies
The Sum ........ .
The Convex Hull of the Union
The Intersection . . . . . .
Polars, Blockers, Antiblockers
Chapter 5.
Diophantine Approximation and Basis Reduction . . . .
5.1 Continued Fractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Simultaneous Diophantine Approximation: Formulation of the
Problems . . . . . . .
5.3 Basis Reduction in Lattices
* 5.4 More on Lattice Algorithms
Table of Contents
Chapter 6.
Rational Polyhedra. . . . . . .
6.1 Optimization over Polyhedra: A Preview
• 6.2 Complexity of Rational Polyhedra. . .
• 6.3 Weak and Strong Problems
• 6.4 Equivalence of Strong Optimization and Separation .
• 6.5 Further Problems for Polyhedra. . . . . .
• 6.6 Strongly Polynomial Algorithms .....
• 6.7 Integer Programming in Bounded Dimension
Chapter 7.
Combinatorial Optimization: Some Basic Examples.
7.1 Flows and Cuts
7.2 Arborescences
7.3 Matching.
7.4 Edge Coloring
7.5 Matroids
7.6 Subset Sums
7.7 Concluding Remarks
• Chapter 8.
Combinatorial Optimization: A Tour d'Horizon
• 8.1 Blocking Hypergraphs and Polyhedra
• 8.2 Problems on Bipartite Graphs
• 8.3 Flows, Paths, Chains, and Cuts . . .
• 8.4 Trees, Branchings, and Rooted and Directed Cuts
Arborescences and Rooted Cuts. . .
Trees and Cuts in Undirected Graphs
Dicuts and Dijoins . . . . . . . .
• 8.5 Matchings, Odd Cuts, and Generalizations
Matching .....
b-Matching . . . . . . . . . . . .
T -Joins and T -Cuts
. . . . . . . .
Chinese Postmen and Traveling Salesmen
• 8.6 Multicommodity Flows . .
• Chapter 9.
Stable Sets in Graphs
• 9.1 Odd Circuit Constraints and t-Perfect Graphs
• 9.2 Clique Constraints and Perfect Graphs
Antiblockers of Hypergraphs .
• 9.3 Orthonormal Representations
• 9.4 Coloring Perfect Graphs. . .
• 9.5 More Algorithmic Results on Stable Sets
Table of Contents
* Chapter 10.
Submodular Functions
* 10.1 Submodular Functions and Polymatroids
* 10.2 Algorithms for Polymatroids and Submodular Functions
Packing Bases of a Matroid
* 10.3 Submodular Functions on Lattice, Intersecting, and
Crossing Families
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
* 10.4 Odd Submodular Function Minimization and Extensions