Conformer: Convolution-augmented Transformer for Speech Recognition
Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, Ruoming Pang
Google Inc.
{anmolgulati, jamesqin, chungchengc, nikip, ngyuzh, jiahuiyu, weihan, shibow, zhangzd,
yonghui, rpang}@google.com
Recently Transformer and Convolution neural network (CNN)
based models have shown promising results in Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR), outperforming Recurrent neural
networks (RNNs).
Transformer models are good at capturing content-based global interactions, while CNNs exploit local features effectively. In this work, we achieve the best of
both worlds by studying how to combine convolution neural
networks and transformers to model both local and global dependencies of an audio sequence in a parameter-efﬁcient way.
To this regard, we propose the convolution-augmented transformer for speech recognition, named Conformer. Conformer
signiﬁcantly outperforms the previous Transformer and CNN
based models achieving state-of-the-art accuracies.
widely used LibriSpeech benchmark, our model achieves WER
of 2.1%/4.3% without using a language model and 1.9%/3.9%
with an external language model on test/testother.
observe competitive performance of 2.7%/6.3% with a small
model of only 10M parameters.
Index Terms: speech recognition, attention, convolutional neural networks, transformer, end-to-end
1. Introduction
End-to-end automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems based
on neural networks have seen large improvements in recent
years. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been the defacto choice for ASR as they can model the temporal
dependencies in the audio sequences effectively . Recently,
the Transformer architecture based on self-attention has
enjoyed widespread adoption for modeling sequences due to its
ability to capture long distance interactions and the high training efﬁciency. Alternatively, convolutions have also been successful for ASR , which capture local context
progressively via a local receptive ﬁeld layer by layer.
However, models with self-attention or convolutions each
has its limitations. While Transformers are good at modeling
long-range global context, they are less capable to extract ﬁnegrained local feature patterns.
Convolution neural networks
(CNNs), on the other hand, exploit local information and are
used as the de-facto computational block in vision. They learn
shared position-based kernels over a local window which maintain translation equivariance and are able to capture features like
edges and shapes. One limitation of using local connectivity is
that you need many more layers or parameters to capture global
information. To combat this issue, contemporary work ContextNet adopts the squeeze-and-excitation module in
each residual block to capture longer context. However, it is still
limited in capturing dynamic global context as it only applies a
global averaging over the entire sequence.
Recent works have shown that combining convolution and
Feed Forward Module
Multi-Head Self Attention
Convolution Module
Feed Forward Module
Conformer Blocks
10 ms rate
10 ms rate
Convolution
Subsampling
40 ms rate
40 ms rate
40 ms rate
Figure 1: Conformer encoder model architecture. Conformer
comprises of two macaron-like feed-forward layers with halfstep residual connections sandwiching the multi-headed selfattention and convolution modules. This is followed by a post
layernorm.
self-attention improves over using them individually . Together, they are able to learn both position-wise local features,
and use content-based global interactions. Concurrently, papers
like have augmented self-attention with relative position based information that maintains equivariance. Wu et al.
 proposed a multi-branch architecture with splitting the input into two branches: self-attention and convolution; and concatenating their outputs. Their work targeted mobile applications and showed improvements in machine translation tasks.
In this work, we study how to organically combine convolutions with self-attention in ASR models. We hypothesize
that both global and local interactions are important for being
parameter efﬁcient. To achieve this, we propose a novel combination of self-attention and convolution will achieve the best of
both worlds – self-attention learns the global interaction whilst
the convolutions efﬁciently capture the relative-offset-based local correlations. Inspired by Wu et al. , we introduce
a novel combination of self-attention and convolution, sandwiched between a pair feed forward modules, as illustrated in
Our proposed model, named Conformer, achieves state-ofthe-art results on LibriSpeech, outperforming the previous best
published Transformer Transducer by 15% relative improvearXiv:2005.08100v1 [eess.AS] 16 May 2020
Activation
Activation
Figure 2: Convolution module. The convolution module contains a pointwise convolution with an expansion factor of 2 projecting the
number of channels with a GLU activation layer, followed by a 1-D Depthwise convolution. The 1-D depthwise conv is followed by a
Batchnorm and then a swish activation layer.
ment on the testother dataset with an external language model.
We present three models based on model parameter limit constraints of 10M , 30M and 118M. Our 10M model shows an improvement when compared to similar sized contemporary work
 with 2.7%/6.3% on test/testother datasets. Our medium
30M parameters-sized model already outperforms transformer
transducer published in which uses 139M model parameters.
With the big 118M parameter model, we are able to achieve
2.1%/4.3% without using language models and 1.9%/3.9% with
an external language model.
We further carefully study the effects of the number of attention heads, convolution kernel sizes, activation functions,
placement of feed-forward layers, and different strategies of
adding convolution modules to a Transformer-based network,
and shed light on how each contributes to the accuracy improvements.
2. Conformer Encoder
Our audio encoder ﬁrst processes the input with a convolution
subsampling layer and then with a number of conformer blocks,
as illustrated in Figure 1. The distinctive feature of our model is
the use of Conformer blocks in the place of Transformer blocks
as in .
A conformer block is composed of four modules stacked
together, i.e, a feed-forward module, a self-attention module,
a convolution module, and a second feed-forward module in
the end. Sections 2.1, 1, and 2.3 introduce the self-attention,
convolution, and feed-forward modules, respectively. Finally,
2.4 describes how these sub blocks are combined.
2.1. Multi-Headed Self-Attention Module
We employ multi-headed self-attention (MHSA) while integrating an important technique from Transformer-XL , the relative sinusoidal positional encoding scheme. The relative positional encoding allows the self-attention module to generalize better on different input length and the resulting encoder is
more robust to the variance of the utterance length. We use prenorm residual units with dropout which helps training
and regularizing deeper models. Figure 3 below illustrates the
multi-headed self-attention block.
Multi-Head Attention with
Relative Positional
Figure 3: Multi-Headed self-attention module. We use multiheaded self-attention with relative positional embedding in a
pre-norm residual unit.
2.2. Convolution Module
Inspired by , the convolution module starts with a gating
mechanism —a pointwise convolution and a gated linear
unit (GLU). This is followed by a single 1-D depthwise convolution layer. Batchnorm is deployed just after the convolution
to aid training deep models. Figure 2 illustrates the convolution
2.3. Feed Forward Module
The Transformer architecture as proposed in deploys a feed
forward module after the MHSA layer and is composed of two
linear transformations and a nonlinear activation in between. A
residual connection is added over the feed-forward layers, followed by layer normalization. This structure is also adopted by
Transformer ASR models .
We follow pre-norm residual units and apply layer
normalization within the residual unit and on the input before
the ﬁrst linear layer. We also apply Swish activation and
dropout, which helps regularizing the network. Figure 4 illustrates the Feed Forward (FFN) module.
2.4. Conformer Block
Our proposed Conformer block contains two Feed Forward
modules sandwiching the Multi-Headed Self-Attention module
and the Convolution module, as shown in Figure 1.
This sandwich structure is inspired by Macaron-Net ,
which proposes replacing the original feed-forward layer in the
Transformer block into two half-step feed-forward layers, one
before the attention layer and one after. As in Macron-Net, we
employ half-step residual weights in our feed-forward (FFN)
modules. The second feed-forward module is followed by a
ﬁnal layernorm layer. Mathematically, this means, for input xi
to a Conformer block i, the output yi of the block is:
˜xi = xi + 1
i = ˜xi + MHSA( ˜xi)
i + Conv(x′
yi = Layernorm(x′′
where FFN refers to the Feed forward module, MHSA refers to
the Multi-Head Self-Attention module, and Conv refers to the
Convolution module as described in the preceding sections.
Our ablation study discussed in Sec 3.4.3 compares the
Macaron-style half-step FFNs with the vanilla FFN as used in
previous works. We ﬁnd that having two Macaron-net style
feed-forward layers with half-step residual connections sandwiching the attention and convolution modules in between provides a signiﬁcant improvement over having a single feedforward module in our Conformer architecture.
The combination of convolution and self-attention has been
studied before and one can imagine many ways to achieve
Activation
Figure 4: Feed forward module. The ﬁrst linear layer uses an expansion factor of 4 and the second linear layer projects it back to the
model dimension. We use swish activation and a pre-norm residual units in feed forward module.
that. Different options of augmenting convolutions with selfattention are studied in Sec 3.4.2. We found that convolution
module stacked after the self-attention module works best for
speech recognition.
3. Experiments
We evaluate the proposed model on the LibriSpeech 
dataset, which consists of 970 hours of labeled speech and
an additional 800M word token text-only corpus for building
language model. We extracted 80-channel ﬁlterbanks features
computed from a 25ms window with a stride of 10ms. We use
SpecAugment with mask parameter (F = 27), and ten
time masks with maximum time-mask ratio (pS = 0.05), where
the maximum-size of the time mask is set to pS times the length
of the utterance.
3.2. Conformer Transducer
We identify three models, small, medium and large, with 10M,
30M, and 118M params, respectively, by sweeping different
combinations of network depth, model dimensions, number of
attention heads and choosing the best performing one within
model parameter size constraints. We use a single-LSTM-layer
decoder in all our models. Table 1 describes their architecture
hyper-parameters.
For regularization, we apply dropout in each residual
unit of the conformer, i.e, to the output of each module, before
it is added to the module input. We use a rate of Pdrop = 0.1.
Variational noise is introduced to the model as a regularization. A ℓ2 regularization with 1e −6 weight is also added
to all the trainable weights in the network. We train the models
with the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98 and
ϵ = 10−9 and a transformer learning rate schedule , with
10k warm-up steps and peak learning rate 0.05/
d where d is
the model dimension in conformer encoder.
We use a 3-layer LSTM language model (LM) with width
4096 trained on the LibriSpeech langauge model corpus with
the LibriSpeech960h transcripts added, tokenized with the 1k
WPM built from LibriSpeech 960h. The LM has word-level
perplexity 63.9 on the dev-set transcripts. The LM weight λ
for shallow fusion is tuned on the dev-set via grid search. All
models are implemented with Lingvo toolkit .
3.3. Results on LibriSpeech
Table 2 compares the (WER) result of our model on LibriSpeech test-clean/test-other with a few state-of-the-art models include: ContextNet , Transformer transducer , and
QuartzNet . All our evaluation results round up to 1 digit
after decimal point.
Without a language model,
the performance of our
medium model already achieve competitive results of 2.3/5.0
on test/testother outperforming the best known Transformer,
LSTM based model, or a similar sized convolution model. With
the language model added, our model achieves the lowest word
Table 1: Model hyper-parameters for Conformer S, M, and L
models, found via sweeping different combinations and choosing the best performing models within the parameter limits.
Num Params (M)
Encoder Layers
Encoder Dim
Attention Heads
Conv Kernel Size
Decoder Layers
Decoder Dim
Table 2: Comparison of Conformer with recent published models. Our model shows improvements consistently over various
model parameter size constraints. At 10.3M parameters, our
model is 0.7% better on testother when compared to contemporary work, ContextNet(S) . At 30.7M model parameters our
model already signiﬁcantly outperforms the previous published
state of the art results of Transformer Transducer with 139M
parameters.
#Params (M)
WER Without LM
WER With LM
Transformer 
QuartzNet 
Transformer 
Transformer 
Transducer
Transformer 
ContextNet(S) 
ContextNet(M) 
ContextNet(L) 
Conformer (Ours)
Conformer(S)
Conformer(M)
Conformer(L)
error rate among all the existing models. This clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of combining Transformer and convolution in a single neural network.
3.4. Ablation Studies
3.4.1. Conformer Block vs. Transformer Block
A Conformer block differs from a Transformer block in a
number of ways, in particular, the inclusion of a convolution
block and having a pair of FFNs surrounding the block in the
Macaron-style. Below we study these effects of these differences by mutating a Conformer block towards a Transformer
block, while keeping the total number of parameters unchanged.
Table 3 shows the impact of each change to the Conformer
block. Among all differences, convolution sub-block is the most
important feature, while having a Macaron-style FFN pair is
also more effective than a single FFN of the same number of
parameters. Using swish activations led to faster convergence
in the Conformer models.
Table 3: Disentangling Conformer. Starting from a Conformer
block, we remove its features and move towards a vanilla Transformer block: (1) replacing SWISH with ReLU; (2) removing the convolution sub-block; (3) replacing the Macaron-style
FFN pairs with a single FFN; (4) replacing self-attention with
relative positional embedding with a vanilla self-attention
layer . All ablation study results are evaluated without the
external LM.
Architecture
Conformer Model
– SWISH + ReLU
– Convolution Block
– Macaron FFN
– Relative Pos. Emb.
3.4.2. Combinations of Convolution and Transformer Modules
We study the effects of various different ways of combining the
multi-headed self-attention (MHSA) module with the convolution module. First, we try replacing the depthwise convolution
in the convolution module with a lightweight convolution ,
see a signiﬁcant drop in the performance especially on the devother dataset. Second, we study placing the convolution module before the MHSA module in our Conformer model and ﬁnd
that it degrades the results by 0.1 on dev-other. Another possible way of the architecture is to split the input into parallel
branches of multi-headed self attention module and a convolution module with their output concatenated as suggested in .
We found that this worsens the performance when compared to
our proposed architecture.
These results in Table 4 suggest the advantage of placing
the convolution module after the self-attention module in the
Conformer block.
Table 4: Ablation study of Conformer Attention Convolution
Blocks. Varying the combination of the convolution block with
the multi-headed self attention: (1) Conformer architecture; (2)
Using Lightweight convolutions instead of depthwise convolution in the convolution block in Conformer; (3) Convolution before multi-headed self attention; (4) Convolution and MHSA in
parallel with their output concatenated .
Model Architecture
– Depthwise conv + Lightweight convolution
Convolution block before MHSA
Parallel MHSA and Convolution
3.4.3. Macaron Feed Forward Modules
Instead of a single feed-forward module (FFN) post the attention blocks as in the Transformer models, the Conformer block
has a pair of macaron-like Feed forward modules sandwiching
the self-attention and convolution modules. Further, the Conformer feed forward modules are used with half-step residuals.
Table 5 shows the impact of changing the Conformer block to
use a single FFN or full-step residuals.
Table 5: Ablation study of Macaron-net Feed Forward modules. Ablating the differences between the Conformer feed forward module with that of a single FFN used in Transformer
models: (1) Conformer; (2) Conformer with full-step residuals
in Feed forward modules; (3) replacing the Macaron-style FFN
pair with a single FFN.
Architecture
Single FFN
Full step residuals
3.4.4. Number of Attention Heads
In self-attention, each attention head learns to focus on different
parts of the input, making it possible to improve predictions
beyond the simple weighted average. We perform experiments
to study the effect of varying the number of attention heads from
4 to 32 in our large model, using the same number of heads
in all layers. We ﬁnd that increasing attention heads up to 16
improves the accuracy, especially over the devother datasets, as
shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Ablation study on the attention heads in multi-headed
self attention.
3.4.5. Convolution Kernel Sizes
To study the effect of kernel sizes in the depthwise convolution, we sweep the kernel size in {3, 7, 17, 32, 65} of the large
model, using the same kernel size for all layers. We ﬁnd that the
performance improves with larger kernel sizes till kernel sizes
17 and 32 but worsens in the case of kernel size 65, as show
in Table 7. On comparing the second decimal in dev WER, we
ﬁnd kernel size 32 to perform better than rest.
Table 7: Ablation study on depthwise convolution kernel sizes.
4. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced Conformer, an architecture that
integrates components from CNNs and Transformers for endto-end speech recognition. We studied the importance of each
component, and demonstrated that the inclusion of convolution
modules is critical to the performance of the Conformer model.
The model exhibits better accuracy with fewer parameters than
previous work on the LibriSpeech dataset, and achieves a new
state-of-the-art performance at 1.9%/3.9% for test/testother.
5. References
 C.-C. Chiu, T. N. Sainath, Y. Wu, R. Prabhavalkar, P. Nguyen,
Z. Chen, A. Kannan, R. J. Weiss, K. Rao, E. Gonina et al., “Stateof-the-art speech recognition with sequence-to-sequence models,”
in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 4774–4778.
 K. Rao, H. Sak, and R. Prabhavalkar, “Exploring architectures,
data and units for streaming end-to-end speech recognition with
rnn-transducer,” in 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding Workshop (ASRU).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 193–199.
 Y. He, T. N. Sainath, R. Prabhavalkar, I. McGraw, R. Alvarez,
D. Zhao, D. Rybach, A. Kannan, Y. Wu, R. Pang, Q. Liang,
D. Bhatia, Y. Shangguan, B. Li, G. Pundak, K. C. Sim, T. Bagby,
S.-Y. Chang, K. Rao, and A. Gruenstein, “Streaming End-to-end
Speech Recognition For Mobile Devices,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2019.
 T. N. Sainath, Y. He, B. Li, A. Narayanan, R. Pang, A. Bruguier,
S.-y. Chang, W. Li, R. Alvarez, Z. Chen, and et al., “A streaming
on-device end-to-end model surpassing server-side conventional
model quality and latency,” in ICASSP, 2020.
 A. Graves, “Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.3711, 2012.
 A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
 Q. Zhang, H. Lu, H. Sak, A. Tripathi, E. McDermott, S. Koo, and
S. Kumar, “Transformer transducer: A streamable speech recognition model with transformer encoders and rnn-t loss,” in ICASSP
2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 7829–7833.
 J. Li, V. Lavrukhin, B. Ginsburg, R. Leary, O. Kuchaiev, J. M. Cohen, H. Nguyen, and R. T. Gadde, “Jasper: An end-to-end convolutional neural acoustic model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03288,
 S. Kriman, S. Beliaev, B. Ginsburg, J. Huang, O. Kuchaiev,
V. Lavrukhin, R. Leary, J. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Quartznet: Deep
automatic speech recognition with 1d time-channel separable convolutions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10261, 2019.
 W. Han, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, C.-C. Chiu, J. Qin, A. Gulati,
R. Pang, and Y. Wu, “Contextnet: Improving convolutional neural
networks for automatic speech recognition with global context,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03191, 2020.
 T. N. Sainath, A.-r. Mohamed, B. Kingsbury, and B. Ramabhadran, “Deep convolutional neural networks for lvcsr,” in 2013 IEEE
international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 8614–8618.
 O. Abdel-Hamid, A.-r. Mohamed, H. Jiang, L. Deng, G. Penn,
and D. Yu, “Convolutional neural networks for speech recognition,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on audio, speech, and language
processing, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1533–1545, 2014.
 J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
 I. Bello, B. Zoph, A. Vaswani, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Attention
augmented convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 3286–
 B. Yang, L. Wang, D. Wong, L. S. Chao, and Z. Tu, “Convolutional self-attention networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03107,
 A. W. Yu, D. Dohan, M.-T. Luong, R. Zhao, K. Chen, M. Norouzi,
and Q. V. Le, “Qanet:
Combining local convolution with
global self-attention for reading comprehension,” arXiv preprint
 
 Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Lin, Y. Lin, and S. Han, “Lite transformer with
long-short range attention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11886,
 Y. Lu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Sun, B. Dong, T. Qin, L. Wang, and
T.-Y. Liu, “Understanding and improving transformer from a
multi-particle dynamic system point of view,” arXiv preprint
 
 S. Karita, N. Chen, T. Hayashi, T. Hori, H. Inaguma, Z. Jiang,
M. Someki, N. E. Y. Soplin, R. Yamamoto, X. Wang et al., “A
comparative study on transformer vs rnn in speech applications,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06317, 2019.
 Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, Q. V. Le, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Transformer-xl:
Attentive language models beyond a
ﬁxed-length context,” 2019.
 Q. Wang, B. Li, T. Xiao, J. Zhu, C. Li, D. F. Wong, and L. S. Chao,
“Learning deep transformer models for machine translation,” in
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2019, pp. 1810–1822.
 T. Q. Nguyen and J. Salazar, “Transformers without tears:
Improving the normalization of self-attention,” arXiv preprint
 
 Y. N. Dauphin, A. Fan, M. Auli, and D. Grangier, “Language
modeling with gated convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume
JMLR. org, 2017, pp. 933–941.
 L. Dong, S. Xu, and B. Xu, “Speech-transformer: a no-recurrence
sequence-to-sequence model for speech recognition,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 5884–5888.
 P. Ramachandran, B. Zoph, and Q. V. Le, “Searching for activation functions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941, 2017.
 V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books,”
in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
 D. S. Park, W. Chan, Y. Zhang, C.-C. Chiu, B. Zoph, E. D.
Cubuk, and Q. V. Le, “Specaugment: A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recognition,” arXiv preprint
 
 D. S. Park, Y. Zhang, C.-C. Chiu, Y. Chen, B. Li, W. Chan, Q. V.
Le, and Y. Wu, “Specaugment on large scale datasets,” arXiv
 
 N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 15, no. 56, pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
 K.-C. Jim, C. L. Giles, and B. G. Horne, “An analysis of noise
in recurrent neural networks: convergence and generalization,”
IEEE Transactions on neural networks, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1424–
1438, 1996.
 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
 J. Shen, P. Nguyen, Y. Wu, Z. Chen, and et al., “Lingvo: a modular and scalable framework for sequence-to-sequence modeling,”
 Y. Wang, A. Mohamed, D. Le, C. Liu, A. Xiao, J. Mahadeokar,
H. Huang, A. Tjandra, X. Zhang, F. Zhang et al., “Transformerbased acoustic modeling for hybrid speech recognition,” arXiv
 
 G. Synnaeve, Q. Xu, J. Kahn, T. Likhomanenko, E. Grave,
V. Pratap, A. Sriram, V. Liptchinsky, and R. Collobert, “End-toend asr: from supervised to semi-supervised learning with modern
architectures,” 2019.
 F. Wu, A. Fan, A. Baevski, Y. N. Dauphin, and M. Auli, “Pay
less attention with lightweight and dynamic convolutions,” arXiv