Establishing the rules for building trustworthy AI
The European Commission’s report ‘Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI’ provides a clear benchmark to evaluate
the responsible development of AI systems, and facilitates international support for AI solutions that are good for
humanity and the environment, says Luciano Floridi.
Luciano Floridi
I is revolutionizing everyone’s life,
and it is crucial that it does so in
the right way. AI’s profound and
far-reaching potential for transformation
concerns the engineering of systems that
have some degree of autonomous agency.
This is epochal and requires establishing a
new, ethical balance between human and
artificial autonomy.
Careful planning rather than beta testing
As a new kind of autonomous, smart agency,
AI could bring enormous benefits —
individually, socially and environmentally.
It could represent a force for good in a
world that is increasingly complex and
requires sophisticated solutions to deal with
large-scale and interrelated issues. The 17
UN Sustainable Development Goals show
that humanity is struggling with many
challenges, on many vital fronts, and it
would be unwise not to make use of AI
solutions. However, what processes and
decisions are going to be delegated to AI
systems, what kinds of effects the trade-offs
between human and artificial agency are
going to have, and what forms of assessment,
control, revision and redressing must be put
in place, are crucial questions that should
not be answered through trial and error. AI
should never be beta-tested on humans or
the environment. The development of AI
requires socio-political deliberation and
consensus, in view of a long-term strategy
about what kind of AI should be developed,
for what purpose, for whom, and according
to which ethical priorities. This is a main
aim of the ethics guidelines report from the
European Commission (EC).
The report, published on 8 April 2019
after several versions and more than 500
public consultations, is put together by an
independent, High-Level Expert Group
(HLEG)1. The HLEG was appointed by the
EC in June 2018 and consists of 52 experts
(disclosure: I am one of them), with relevant
expertise from academia, civil society and
industry. The work of the HLEG is expected
to inform the European Union’s (EU)
policies and legislation about AI, to support
the implementation of the EU strategy on
AI, and to serve as the steering group for the
European AI Alliance’s work.
The guidelines support a responsible
approach to the development of AI, which
should be (1) lawful, respecting all applicable
laws and regulations; (2) ethical, respecting
ethical principles and values (Fig. 1 summari­
zes the principles grounding the guidelines,
which were informed2 by the AI4People’s
research3); and (3) robust, both technically
and in terms of its social environment.
Since AI will become increasingly
important and pervasive, it must work
reliably, in ways that anyone can trust will
be for the benefit of humanity and the whole
environment. The alternative is that AI may
be misused, overused or underused3. Ethical
uncertainty breeds both reckless risk-taking
and excessive caution. This is why the
guidelines are so important. They represent
a good step in the right direction of a clear,
shared and socially preferable framework for
ethical AI.
Ethics first to inform legislation
The guidelines have been praised and
welcomed by many, but have also been
criticized4,5 for being weak, because they
are part of a mere self-regulatory strategy,
which is not legally enforced, and unhelpful,
because they are too general, and join so
many other initiatives that have so far had
little impact. These and similar criticisms
can be countered.
First, the guidelines contain principles
and clarifications that are robust, in terms of
social expectations, and consistent with the
current state of the debate on the ethics of
AI. Of course, both law and ethics about AI
are needed. The guidelines presuppose and
are aligned with the EU legislation. The EU
is at the forefront of the international debate
on AI, also thanks to the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR). Ethics can
contribute to the shaping of new legislation
(for example, about facial recognition
systems) or act as a guide in its absence.
Seven essentials for achieving trustworthy AI
Trustworthy AI should respect all applicable laws and regulations, as well as a series of requirements;
specific assessment lists aim to help verify the application of each of the key requirements:
1 Human agency and oversight: AI systems should enable equitable societies by supporting human agency and
fundamental rights, and not decrease, limit or misguide human autonomy
2 Robustness and safety: trustworthy AI requires algorithms to be secure, reliable and robust enough to deal with
errors or inconsistencies during all life cycle phases of AI systems
3 Privacy and data governance: citizens should have full control over their own data, while data concerning them
will not be used to harm or discriminate against them
4 Transparency: the traceability of AI systems should be ensured
5 Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness: AI systems should consider the whole range of human abilities,
skills and requirements, and ensure accessibility
6 Societal and environmental well-being: AI systems should be used to enhance positive social change and
enhance sustainability and ecological responsibility
7 Accountability: mechanisms should be put in place to ensure responsibility and accountability for AI systems
and their outcomes
European Commission, ref. IP/19/1893
Fig. 1 | The seven ethical principles grounding the EU ‘Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI’. Adapted
from ref. 12, European Commission.
Nature Machine Intelligence | VOL 1 | JUNE 2019 | 261–262 | www.nature.com/natmachintell
Sometimes, ethics is needed to interpret
existing legislation (for example, the GDPR).
Other times, ethics may recommend not
to do something that legislation does not
prohibit (for example, leaving a medical
decision entirely to an algorithm without
supervision or explanation), or recommend
to do something that legislation does not
require (for example, designing an algorithm
that minimizes the environmental impact
of domestic central heating). In all these
cases, compliance with the law is necessary
but insufficient, and, as the guidelines
acknowledge, it must be complemented by
a post-compliance ‘soft ethics’ approach6,
because the law provides the rules of the
game, but does not indicate how to play well
according to the rules.
Second, granted: the guidelines are not
very original or innovative, but that would
have been astonishing and perhaps a bit
concerning, after more than a half a century
of discussion on the topic7,8. There are in fact
currently more than 70 frameworks and lists
of principles about the ethics of AI9,10. This
mushrooming of declarations is generating
inconsistency and confusion, among
stakeholders, regarding which document
may be preferable. It also puts pressure on
private and public actors that develop or
deploy AI solutions to produce their own
declarations for fear to be seen to be left
behind, thus further contributing to the
noise. And it risks creating a supermarket
of principles and values, where private
and public actors may shop for the kind
of ethics that is best retrofitted to justify
their behaviours, rather than revising their
behaviours to make them consistent with
a socially accepted ethical framework.
However, the guidelines resolve these
challenges because they are the closest thing
available in the EU to a comprehensive and
authoritative standard, offering a clear frame
of reference and a common, conceptual
vocabulary. They have been designed to
establish a benchmark for what may or may
not qualify, from now on, as trustworthy AI.
Further steps for a global stage
In some cases, a regulative approach may
be premature, too prescriptive or stifle
valuable innovation. An ethical approach
leads to more flexible and still demanding
expectations. It is important to remember
that the publication of the guidelines is
also just the first step. They will contribute
to inform EU legislation and policies,
but they also represent a roadmap for
the rapid transformations enabled by AI
technology11. In June 2019, the HLEG will
issue its recommendations for the EU’s
AI research agenda, and on how the EU
may strengthen its competitiveness in the
development and deployment of AI, in line
with the guidelines. And this summer, the
EC will launch a pilot project to test the
guidelines in collaboration with stakeholders
to identify potential improvements and
promote practical applications. The HLEG
will review the outcome in early 2020 and
further refine its output. In the long run,
the EC “wants to bring this approach to AI
ethics to the global stage … [and] strengthen
cooperation with like-minded partners such
as Japan, Canada or Singapore … [as well as]
the G7 and G20”12. Some critics concede all
this but still object that one cannot become
a leader in ethical AI without becoming a
leader in AI first13,14. Yet ‘innovate first, fix
later’ is a mistake that, in the case of AI,
could also be very costly and may cause a
public backlash against AI, similar to the
one against genetically modified crops in
the past15. The climate change disaster and
the trouble with social media platforms
interfering in democracy should have taught
us to plan innovation more carefully. This is
why the EU wants to determine a long-term
strategy in which ethics is an innovation
enabler that offers a competitive advantage,
and which ensures that fundamental rights
and values are fostered, the public interest
is served, and the natural environment
thrives. Ethics-first is the right approach
to set global standards for AI. The era of
‘move fast and break things’ is over. It is time
to ‘make haste slowly’ (festina lente) in the
development of AI.
Luciano Floridi
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
e-mail: 
Published online: 7 May 2019