ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 April 2020
doi: 10.3389/frai.2020.00026
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 26
Edited by:
Shatha Qamhieh Hashem,
An-Najah National University, Palestine
Reviewed by:
Paolo Barucca,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Bertrand Kian Hassani,
University College London,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Paolo Giudici
 
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Finance,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Received: 18 December 2019
Accepted: 30 March 2020
Published: 24 April 2020
Bussmann N, Giudici P, Marinelli D
and Papenbrock J Explainable
AI in Fintech Risk Management.
Front. Artif. Intell. 3:26.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2020.00026
Explainable AI in Fintech Risk
Management
Niklas Bussmann 1,2, Paolo Giudici 3*, Dimitri Marinelli 1 and Jochen Papenbrock 1
1 FIRAMIS, Frankfurt, Germany, 2 Department of Economics and Management, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3 Fintech
Laboratory, Department of Economics and Management, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
The paper proposes an explainable AI model that can be used in ﬁntech risk management
and, in particular, in measuring the risks that arise when credit is borrowed employing
peer to peer lending platforms. The model employs Shapley values, so that AI predictions
are interpreted according to the underlying explanatory variables. The empirical analysis
of 15,000 small and medium companies asking for peer to peer lending credit reveals
that both risky and not risky borrowers can be grouped according to a set of similar
ﬁnancial characteristics, which can be employed to explain and understand their credit
score and, therefore, to predict their future behavior.
Keywords: credit risk management, explainable AI, ﬁnancial technologies, peer to peer lending, logistic regression,
predictive models
1. INTRODUCTION
Black box Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is not suitable in regulated ﬁnancial services. To overcome this
problem, Explainable AI models, which provide details or reasons to make the functioning of AI
clear or easy to understand, are necessary.
To develop such models, we ﬁrst need to understand what “Explainable” means. During this
year, some important benchmark deﬁnitions have been provided, at the institutional level. We
report some of them, in the context of the European Union.
For example, the Bank of England states that “Explainability means that an
interested stakeholder can comprehend the main drivers of a model-driven decision.” The Financial
Stability Board suggests that “lack of interpretability and auditability of AI and ML
methods could become a macro-level risk.” Finally, the UK Financial Conduct Authority establishes that “In some cases, the law itself may dictate a degree of explainability.”
The European GDPR regulation states that “the existence of automated
decision-making, should carry meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the
signiﬁcance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the data subject.” Under the
GDPR regulation, the data subject is therefore, under certain circumstances, entitled to receive
meaningful information about the logic of automated decision-making.
Finally, the European Commission High-Level Expert Group on AI presented the Ethics
Guidelines for Trustworthy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in April 2019. Such guidelines put forward a set
of seven key requirements that AI systems should meet in order to be deemed trustworthy. Among
them three related to XAI, and are the following.
• Human agency and oversight: decisions must be informed, and there must be a
human-in-the-loop oversight.
• Transparency: AI systems and their decisions should be explained in a manner adapted to the
concerned stakeholder. Humans need to be aware that they are interacting with an AI system.
• Accountability: AI systems should develop mechanisms for responsibility and accountability,
auditability, assessment of algorithms, data and design processes.
Bussmann et al.
XAI in Credit Risk Management
Following the need to explain AI models, stated by legislators
and regulators of diﬀerent countries, many established and
startup companies have started to embrace Explainable AI
(XAI) models.
From a mathematical viewpoint, it is well-known that,
while “simpler” statistical learning models, such as linear
and logistic regression models, provide a high interpretability
but, possibly, a limited predictive accuracy, “more complex”
machine learning models, such as neural networks and tree
models provide a high predictive accuracy at the expense of a
limited interpretability.
To solve this trade-oﬀ, we propose to boost machine learning
models, that are highly accurate, with a novel methodology, that
can explain their predictive output. Our proposed methodology
acts in the post-processing phase of the analysis, rather than in
the preprocessing part. It is agnostic (technologically neutral) as
it is applied to the predictive output, regardless of which model
generated it: a linear regression, a classiﬁcation tree or a neural
network model.
More precisely, our proposed methodology is based on
Shapley values . We consider a relevant application of AI in ﬁnancial
technology: peer to peer lending.
We employ Shapley values to predict the credit risk of a
large sample of small and medium enterprises which apply for
credit to a peer to peer lending platform. The obtained empirical
evidence shows that, while improving the predictive accuracy
with respect to a standard logistic regression model, we maintain
and, possibly, improve, the interpretability (explainability) of
the results.
In other words, our results conﬁrm the validity of this
approach in discriminating between defaulted and sound
institutions, and it shows the power of explainable AI in both
prediction accuracy and in the interpretation of the results.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section
2 introduces the proposed methodology. Section 3 shows
Section 4 concludes.
2. METHODOLOGY
2.1. Credit Risk in Peer to Peer Lending
Credit risk models are useful tools for modeling and predicting
individual ﬁrm default. Such models are usually grounded on
regression techniques or machine learning approaches often
employed for ﬁnancial analysis and decision-making tasks.
Consider N ﬁrms having observation regarding T diﬀerent
variables (usually balance-sheet measures or ﬁnancial ratios). For
each institution n deﬁne a variable γn to indicate whether such
institution has defaulted on its loans or not, i.e., γn = 1 if
company defaults, γn = 0 otherwise. Credit risk models develop
relationships between the explanatory variables embedded in T
and the dependent variable γ .
The logistic regression model is one of the most widely used
method for credit scoring. The model aims at classifying the
dependent variable into two groups, characterized by diﬀerent
status (defaulted vs. active) by the following model:
probability
institution
n, xi = (xi,1, ..., xi,T) is the T-dimensional vector of borrower
speciﬁc explanatory variables, the parameter α is the model
intercept while βt is the t-th regression coeﬃcient. It follows that
the probability of default can be found as:
pn = (1 + exp(α +
2.2. Machine Learning of Credit Risk
Credit risk can be measured with very diﬀerent Machine
Learning (ML) models, able to extract non-linear relations
information
In a standard data science life cycle, models are chosen
to optimize the predictive accuracy. In highly regulated
sectors, like ﬁnance or medicine, models should be chosen
explainability
2019). We improve the choice selecting models based on
their predictive accuracy, and employing a posteriori an
explanations algorithm. This does not limit the choice of the best
performing models.
To exemplify our approach we consider, without loss of
generality, the XGBoost model, one of the most popular and fast
algorithm , that implements gradient
tree boosting learning models.
2.3. Learning Model Comparison
For evaluating the performance of each learning model, we
employ, as a reference measure, the indicator γ
∈{0, 1}, a
binary variable which takes value one whenever the institutions
has defaulted and value zero otherwise. For detecting default
events represented in γ , we need a continuous measurement
p ∈ to be turned into a binary prediction B assuming value
one if p exceeds a speciﬁed threshold τ ∈ and value zero
otherwise. The correspondence between the prediction B and the
ideal leading indicator γ can then be summarized in a so-called
confusion matrix.
From the confusion matrix we can easy illustrate the
performance capabilities of a binary classiﬁer system. To this aim,
we compute the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC). The ROC
curve plots the false positive rate (FPR) against the true positive
rate (TPR), as follows:
The overall accuracy of each model can be computed as:
TP + TN + FP + FN
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 26
Bussmann et al.
XAI in Credit Risk Management
and it characterizes the proportion of true results (both
true positives and true negatives) among the total number
2.4. Explaining Model Predictions
We now explain how to exploit the information contained
in the explanatory variables to localize and cluster the
position of each individual (company) in the sample. This
information, coupled with the predicted default probabilities,
allows a very insightful explanation of the determinant of each
individual’s creditworthiness. In our speciﬁc context, information
on the explanatory variables is derived from the ﬁnancial
statements of borrowing companies, collected in a vector xn
representing the ﬁnancial composition of the balance sheet of
institution n.
We propose calculate the Shapley value associated with
each company. In this way we provide an agnostic tool
that can interpret in a technologically neutral way the
output from a highly accurate machine learning model.
model can be used as a tool
to transfer predictive
inferences into a linear space, opening a wide possibility of
using the toolbox of econometrics, hypothesis testing, and
network analysis.
We develop our Shapley approach using the SHAP computational framework, which allows to
express each single prediction as a sum of the contributions of
the diﬀerent explanatory variables.
More formally, the Shapley explanation model for each
prediction φ(ˆf (xi)) is obtained by an additive feature attribution
method, which decomposes them as:
φ(ˆf (xi)) = φ0 +
where M is the number of available explanatory variables,
R. The local functions φk(xi) are called
Shapley values.
Indeed, Lundberg and Lee prove that the only additive
feature attribution method that satisﬁes the properties of local
accuracy, missingness, and consistency is obtained attributing to
each feature xk, k = 1, . . . , M, a SHapley Additive exPlanation
(SHAP) deﬁned by
x′⊆C(x)\xk
|x′|!(M −|x′| −1)!
[ˆf (x′ ∪xk) −ˆf (x′)], (7)
where C(x) \ xk is the set of all the possible models excluding
variable xk (with m = 1, . . . , M), |x′| denotes the number of
variables included in model x′, M is the number of the available
variables, ˆf (x′ ∪xk) and ˆf (x′) are the predictions associated with
all the possible model conﬁgurations including variable xk and
excluding variable xk, respectively.
The quantity ˆf (x′ ∪xk) −ˆf (x′) deﬁnes the contribution of
variable xk to each individual prediction.
3. APPLICATION
We test our proposed model to data supplied by European
External Credit Assessment Institution (ECAI) that specializes
in credit scoring for P2P platforms focused on SME commercial
lending. The data is described by Giudici et al. to which
we refer for further details. In summary, the analysis relies on a
dataset composed of oﬃcial ﬁnancial information (balance-sheet
variables) on 15,045 SMEs, mostly based in Southern Europe,
for the year 2015. The information about the status (0 = active,
1 = defaulted) of each company 1 year later is also
provided. Using this data, Giudici , Ahelegbey et al. ,
and Giudici et al. have constructed logistic regression
scoring models that aim at estimating the probability of default
of each company, using the available ﬁnancial data from the
balance sheets and, in addition, network centrality measures that
are obtained from similarity networks.
Here we aim to improve the predictive performance of the
model and, for this purpose, we run an XGBoost tree algorithm
 . To explain the results from
the model, typically highly predictive, we employ Shapley values.
The proportion of defaulted companies within this dataset
3.2. Results
We ﬁrst split the data in a training set (80%) and a test set (20%).
We then estimate the XGBoost model on the training set,
apply the obtained model to the test set and compare it with the
optimal logistic regression model. The ROC curves of the two
models are contained in Figure 1 below.
From Figure 1 note that the XGBoost clearly improves
predictive accuracy. Indeed the calculation of the AUROC of the
two curves indicate an increase from 0.81 (best logistic regression
model) to 0.93 (best XGBoost model).
We then calculate the Shapley values for the companies in the
interpretation of the estimated credit scoring of four companies:
two that default and two that do not default.
Figure 2 clearly shows the advantage of our explainable
model. It can indicate which variables contribute more to
the prediction. Not only in general, as is typically done by
feature selection models, but diﬀerently and speciﬁcally for
each company in the test set. Note how the explanations
are rather diﬀerent (“personalized”) for each of the four
considered companies.
4. CONCLUSIONS
The need to leverage the high predictive accuracy brought
by sophisticated machine learning models, making them
interpretable, has motivated us to introduce an agnostic, postprocessing methodology, based on Shapley values. This allows
to explain any single prediction in terms of the potential
contribution of each explanatory variable.
Future research should include a better understanding of the
predictions through clustering of the Shapley values. This can
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 26
Bussmann et al.
XAI in Credit Risk Management
FIGURE 1 | Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for the logistic credit risk model and for the XGBoost model. In blue, we show the results related to the
logistic models while in red we show the results related to the XGBoost model.
FIGURE 2 | Contribution of each explanatory variable to the Shapley’s decomposition of four predicted default probabilities, for two defaulted and two non-defaulted
companies. A red color indicates a low variable importance, and a blue color a high variable importance.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 26
Bussmann et al.
XAI in Credit Risk Management
be achieved, for example, using correlation network models. A
second direction would be to extend the approach developing
model selection procedures based on Shapley values, which
would require appropriate statistical testing. A last extension
would be to develop a Shapley like measure that applies also to
ordinal response variables.
Our research has important policy implications for policy
makers and regulators who are in their attempt to protect
the consumers of artiﬁcial intelligence services. While artiﬁcial
intelligence eﬀectively improve the convenience and accessibility
of ﬁnancial services, they also trigger new risks, and among
them is the lack of model interpretability. Our empirical ﬁndings
suggest that explainable AI models can eﬀectively advance our
understanding and interpretation of credit risks in peer to
peer lending.
Future research may involve further experimentation and the
application to other case studies.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated for this study are available on request to
the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
substantial,
intellectual
contribution
for publication.
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program FIN-
TECH: A Financial supervision and Technology compliance
training programme under the grant agreement No 825215
 , and from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
Skłodowska-Curie
agreement No 750961.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In addition, the authors thank ModeFinance, a European ECAI,
for the data; the partners of the FIN-TECH European project, for
useful comments and discussions.