The continuing challenge of understanding and modeling
hemodynamic variation in fMRI
Daniel A. Handwerker1, Javier Gonzalez-Castillo1, Mark D’Esposito3,4, and Peter A.
Bandettini1,2
1Section on Functional Imaging Methods, Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of
Mental Health. 10 Center Dr., Room 1D80, MSC1148, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
2Functional MRI Facility, 10 Center Dr., Room 1D80, MSC1148, National Institute of Mental
Health, Bethesda MD, USA
3Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA
4Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA
Interpretation of fMRI data depends on our ability to understand or model the shape of the
hemodynamic response (HR) to a neural event. Although the HR has been studied almost since the
beginning of fMRI, we are still far from having robust methods to account for the full range of
known HR variation in typical fMRI analyses. This paper reviews how the authors and others
contributed to our understanding of HR variation. We present an overview of studies that describe
HR variation across voxels, healthy volunteers, populations, and dietary or pharmaceutical
modulations. We also describe efforts to minimize the effects of HR variation in intrasubject,
group, population, and connectivity analyses and the limits of these methods.
BOLD; fMRI; hemodynamic response; population studies; regional variation; blood vessels
INTRODUCTION
The hemodynamic response (HR) to neural activity is the basis of functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Neural activity changes can occur on the order of milliseconds.
When activity across a population of neurons in a voxel changes, a hemodynamic response
can be recorded using T2* weighted acquisitions in an MRI scanner. In contrast to most
direct measures of neural activity, HRs are slow (on the order of seconds) and vary in shape
and timing between voxels, cortical regions, subjects, subject populations, and experimental
Corresponding Author: Daniel A Handwerker, Bldg 10, Rm 1D80, 10 Center Dr MSC 1148, Bethesda, MD 20892-1148, Phone:
301-402-1359, Fax: 301-402-1370, .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
 
Neuroimage. 2012 August 15; 62(2): 1017–1023. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.015.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
tasks. Because hemodynamics depend on the blood vessel structure, changes in this
underlying structure will alter the HR even with consistent changes in neural activity.
Figure 1 is reprinted, with permission, from . It shows
hemodynamic responses from 20 subjects in primary sensorimotor cortex in response to a
single button press. The signal increases over several seconds and then drops below and then
returns to baseline. Although we do not fully understand in detail all the nuances of how
blood flow, volume, and oxygenation change in response to neural activity, the
hemodynamic response is highly consistent. Yet, if one looks closer, it has significant
variability. The 20 subjects in Figure 1 show a wide range of differences in response latency,
width, shape, and magnitude.
While we understand many of the hemodynamic mechanisms behind these differences in
HR, predicting the precise response shape for a given stimulus and voxel region is still
impossible. HR shape predictions are required for many fMRI statistical analyses. In
addition, it is difficult to determine if HR shape variability is neural rather or vascular in
origin. This article covers the history of our understanding of HR variation and the
development of methods to try to account for hemodynamic variation in fMRI research.
UNDERSTANDING HR VARIATION
The HR becomes central to fMRI analysis
The earliest fMRI studies used block designs to maximize signal-to-noise ratio and increase
the likelihood of response detection. The first few papers, for example, , didn’t model the HR shape. Similar to Positron Emission Tomography analyses of
the time, they created statistical measures by subtracting, magnitudes from an active
condition from magnitudes during a rest condition. Direct observation of raw time series
revealed features in the hemodynamic response that required further modeling to more
effectively extract task-related signal fluctuations. Soon after the work by Kwong et al.,
Bandettini and colleagues modeled the full time series response as a box-car function — i.e.,
zeros for the rest periods, and ones for the active periods — and convolved it with a
smoothing function. By calculating the correlation of this time series to the data, they were
able to generate more precise statistical maps . This
approach of comparing an idealized HR to BOLD time series soon became the standard way
of detecting sites of neuronal activity in fMRI experiments. Simple correlation analysis was
soon substituted by general linear model (GLM) analyses , which allow
greater flexibility for the experimental design and response modeling. The GLM remains the
primary analysis technique for most task-based fMRI studies.
While some early fMRI papers tested different HR shapes or models, the robust response
obtained with block design tasks made HR variability a less urgent concern. This started to
change with the use of event-related task designs. Contrasting hemodynamic responses to
brief stimuli let researchers answer more complex neuroscience questions. The inherently
lower signal to noise ratio of event related experiments combined with the increased
importance of subtle BOLD signal changes in response of brief events, meant that HR
variability had the potential to confound results. Although the risk that HR variation could
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
affect results was acknowledged, it was assumed to be a relatively minor concern . As described below, later studies have shown that the problem can be
serious in some contexts.
HR variation in healthy volunteers
Even before event-related fMRI started to push the temporal limits of the hardware, early
fMRI studies were determining the relative T2* vs. T2 vs. inflow contribution in activated
tissue. In addition to showing that fMRI signal changes result from a spatially variable
contribution of many factors, these early fMRI studies showed that the HR shape –
particularly the response magnitude – varied greatly depending on the vessel diameters and
density within each voxel. Another review in this issue covers this topic in more depth
 . Vessel structure differences across voxels can also cause delay differences,
as shown by the early HR delay maps produced by Lee, Glover, et. al. 1995. To produce
these delay maps, the authors collected data from a periodic flashing checkerboard task and
spatially mapped the phase differences of the responses. They saw latency delays of 4–8s in
gray matter and 8–14s in visible vessels & sulci . Later work, at
higher temporal and spatial resolutions, showed evidence of hemodynamic magnitude and
delay differences across cortical layers .
While the goal of much of this work was to identify MRI pulse sequences and field strengths
that could best localize neural activity, it also clearly showed that one of the biggest sources
of non-neural HR magnitude and latency variation in healthy volunteers was within voxel
blood vessel structure.
While the 14s phase lags from Lee, Glover et. al. 1995 are more than is typically observed in
the literature, other studies have shown HR lag variation in the order of several seconds. For
example, Buckner et al. found that when signals were averaged across regions of interest,
task responses across healthy subjects often showed a 4–6s range of time-to-peaks (with 13
subjects and a 2s TR) . In another study, Birn et al. showed
6–11s visual cortex response latency in response to a brief stimulus .
Interestingly, in this last study, these latencies were not correlated with response magnitude.
This is potentially explained by the understanding that while vessels are mostly
“downstream” they can also exist more upstream as well – having shorter latencies.
Buckner et al. not only looked at delay differences, but also evaluated HR differences across
subjects in terms of how much the HR from one subject could predict the HR on another
subject for the same region. They found that HR from one subject was able, on average, to
explain 72% of the variance in other subjects. Around the same time, Aguirre was asking
how much the hemodynamic response to a simple visuo-motor task varies within the same
subject across hours or days and across subjects. While they didn’t perform the same
variance analysis as Buckner, they did see a time-to-peak range of 2.7–6.2s across 32
volunteers. This variation didn’t correlate with reaction time. The HR shapes across subjects
in that paper have very different peak-times, widths, and post-undershoot shapes. This
variability is visibly greater than the HR shapes Buckner et. al. used to estimate HR
similarity. They also showed that the HRs estimated from a region of interest in the same
subject in multiple scans varied much less than HRs estimated from the same region of
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
interest across subjects – particularly for multiple scans in a single day .
Known causes of HR variation
As discussed above, one of the biggest causes of non-neural HR variation is vessel size and
density within a voxel. Large vessels are typically “downstream” and therefore experience
an activation-induced oxygenation change up to 3 seconds later than the capillaries within
parenchyma. Additional factors that can contribute to differences in HR shape between two
subsequent measurements of the response to the same task, in the same region of the same
subject include: thermal noise, breathing and heart rate changes, hardware instabilities,
changes in cognitive state and strategy used to approach the task. If the measurements are
performed on different days or we attempt to compare across different subjects or regions
then vascular state, region of interest selection, and tissue differences also contribute.
Past research has helped us start to understand the relative contributions of each of these
factors to HR variation so that variation of neuronal origin can be segregated from variation
due to the other non-neuronal sources. Much of the research is based on dynamic models of
BOLD contrast, which try predict how variation in regional blood flow, volume, and vessel
reactivity combine to cause observed BOLD signal changes. This special issue has another
article that covers this topic in more depth .
In the particular case of studies across populations, the major concern should be that an HR
difference is mistakenly considered a neural difference or that a true neuronal difference is
obliterated by the HR variability. Virtually every examined disease state, age difference, or
ingested substance causes changes in HR shape. Alcohol , caffeine
 , fat (oral canola oil) ,
inhaled CO2 and O2 concentration changes , and intravenous saline
 all alter HR response magnitude. Nicotine is one notable
exception with one study showing that HR magnitude remains constant across dose even
with a heart rate change . Population and case studies have
found HR differences that were likely vascular in origin in aging , dementia , and stroke . Even if variation across voxels due to vessel effects is much
larger than these group differences, a systematic change under large amounts of withingroup variance can still produce a population effect. The larger the population size, the more
likely a population effect due to HR differences will be statistically significant.
In many of these examples, the underlying assumption is that anything that can
systematically alter baseline cerebral blood flow (CBF) or hematocrit levels will alter the
HR response. While others have systematically examined the effects of baseline CBF on the
HR , an elegantly designed study by Cohen et. al. provides a
good illustration of the the effects of baseline CBF on HR responses. The authors had
volunteers breath normocapnic, hypercapnic (raises baseline CBF), and hypocapnic (lowers
baseline CBF) air. When the baseline CBF stabilized in each condition, they ran a visual
stimulation task. Thus, in the same volunteers, they had HRs at three different baseline CBF
levels. As CBF rose, the magnitude of the response to visual stimulation decreased.
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Interestingly, the onset time and time-to-peak also increased with baseline CBF. When there
was a physiologic modulation in BOLD magnitude in an individual, it appeared that time-topeak increased by 0.28s for every 1% change in the baseline BOLD signal . This lag difference could appear in any population with a baseline CBF change.
Hemodynamic response changes can be due to more than altered CBF. Arterial spin labeling
measures depend primarily on blood flow. Multiple arterial spin labeling studies have shown
lower HR response magnitude variability across scans within subjects and across subjects
than BOLD . This means that variation in volume and vessel elasticity can increase variability of
the BOLD hemodynamic response in ways that are distinct from blood flow variation.
Drug studies also show how HR variability across scans is due to more than just blood flow
variation. Caffeine, a known vasoconstrictor, is one of very few drugs whose effects on the
HR have been examined in multiple experiments. While an early study noted the CBF
baseline shift and response magnitude increase and proposed intentionally giving caffeine as
a BOLD contrast enhancer , later work creates a more
complex story . If all caffeine did was shift
the baseline CBF then the BOLD response would shift to result in a similar estimate of
oxygen metabolism in response to a task. Two groups have shown that caffeine alters the
relationship between CBF and oxygen metabolism . In addition, BOLD response is measurably better modeled as a linear system
after caffeine ingestion and caffeine alters poststimulus undershoot
dynamics . Perhaps some of these effects are neural, but it appears
that the effects of caffeine on the HR shape include more than a CBF baseline shift. Even
with this information, there is no field-wide consensus or even significant public discussions
regarding how we record or control for caffeine intake (or drug intake in general) in fMRI
Another mechanism to alter neurovascular coupling involves cyclooxygenase (COX). COX
has several key roles in how astrocytes and neurons interact to alter vessel dilation . Indomethacin, a COX inhibitor, has been shown to decrease the
BOLD response to a task despite being a vasoconstrictive drug that should lower baseline
CBF . HR magnitude also changes in humans depending on
volunteer’s specific COX-1 genotype . Given that Ibuprofen, an
over-the-counter pain reliever, is a COX inhibitor, population differences in the intake of a
drug of such common use as this have the potential to become a confound in fMRI studies.
Caffeine and COX inhibitors are just two examples, but the broader question of what other
common substances can cause similarly complex changes in the HR remains unanswered.
In population studies, there also seem to be changes that can’t simply be attributed to
baseline CBF changes. In one case, disturbed cerebrovascular reserve capacity from an
intracranial arterial occlusion, resulted in a negative HR . Aging
studies have shown conflicting reports of differences in HR time-from-peak, time-tobaseline, and fit residuals . Other potential aging related variations in BOLD signal that
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
might be hemodynamic in origin were summarized in a review article . For example, changes in vessel elasticity was implicated as causing a difference
in the time course of cerebrovascular reactivity . Some of the
challenges mentioned in that review can be generalized to other populations.
THE EFFECT OF HR VARIATION IN DATA ANALYSIS
Significance testing across varying HR shapes
Any statistical method that includes a model of the HR risks missing the aspects of the
response that are not included in the model. Some of the earliest analysis methods examined
how significance varied depending on the modeled HR shape . In most of these cases, they were trying to identify a single HR
shape that was best for most studies. Aguirre et al. suggested including a separate scan to
estimate a separate HR for each subject . They made it easy to
include these individualized estimates in GLM analyses using the VoxBo software. This
proposal was not widely adapted. Hesitance to use 6 additional minutes of scan time to
independently estimate a subject-specific HR played a role, but more prosaic issues also
mattered. There was no “push-button way” to insert a custom HR into SPM, the very widely
used fMRI data processing software. There was also skepticism that a motor HR from one
region could better estimate an HR in other brain regions of the same person despite solid
research showing this was true. Perhaps the primary reason that it was not adapted was, that
no one showed precisely, at the time, how much an HR misestimate could alter results.
When Dan Handwerker joined Mark D’Eposito’s group as a graduate student, they decided
to examine this issue. They repeated the basic experimental design of Aguirre, but designed
a task to generate robust HR’s in 4 brain regions. These responses were used to set a range
of HR shapes to simulate the effect of HR variation on GLM statistics. They discovered that
a 1 s misestimate of the HR time-to-peak could decrease the fit magnitude by 10% and a 2 s
misestimate decreases the magnitude by 38%. An accurate subject-specific HR estimate
would clearly improve statistical results compared to using the same shape in all subjects.
Still, variation across voxels within subjects were still large enough to cause non-trivial
shifts in statistics to limit the benefits of using one HR shape per subject .
While a robust enough task would still show significance, the drop is large enough to create
false negative results. Including a wider range of response HR shapes in an analysis, such as
modeled transients, increases the extent of significant activation . While these studies hypothesized neural origins of HR shape differences,
they clearly show that unmodeled variation affects significance. In addition, if there were a
systematic HR shape difference between populations it would incorrectly appear as a
response magnitude difference in many group analyses.
The basic approach to account for HR variability in GLM-based analyses is to include
multiple basis functions for each condition. For example, a Taylor expansion using an HR
and its derivatives allows for some lag and width variation around the initial HR shape
 . While beneficial, it rapidly loses effectiveness if the true HR in
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
a voxel has more than a 1s lag from the modeled HR. In addition, if all the basis functions
aren’t included in the magnitude estimates in a group analysis , the benefits of flexible HR modeling are lost . The
opposite extreme would be to deconvolve any task-locked HR with a series of sinusoids in a
GLM , without a GLM , or using a series of
lagged impulse responses in a GLM . These are powerful
methods for significance testing within subject, but they use many more degrees of freedom
and it is more challenging to design and interpret contrasts between task conditions group
statistics using these methods. Intermediate methods can model an unlimited range of lags
for a specific HR shape or use a specially designed set of basis
functions in a GLM and prior information to estimate the HR . While it is possible to compare results across several methods, no one method is
designed to handle the full range of known HR lag and shape variation observed across
voxels in individual subjects.
Correcting for non-neural magnitude differences
HR magnitude variation based on the underlying vessel structure, adds noise to group results
& can bias the foci of activation towards larger vessels. At best, this is just another source of
noise in fMRI data. For studies across populations, a vascular difference could be interpreted
as a neural difference. One robust way to address this issue is to make sure one condition of
a study shows no population difference in the same voxels that the condition of interest does
show a population difference. This is not always feasible.
A series of methods have sought to calibrate the fMRI signal to remove large vessel effects
(or more precisely, to remove blood volume variation across voxels – the primary source of
magnitude differences). Peter Bandettini and Eric Wong first proposed collecting a run with
volunteers breathing CO2 enriched air. This would cause a global BOLD signal change what
would scale with venous blood volume in each voxel. Simply dividing by vessel magnitudes
would remove spatial vascular differences . This concept was
extended to collecting BOLD/CBF data at a single or multiple
 air CO2 concentrations to calibrate responses to a more direct
measure of cerebral metabolism. A large methodological literature is being built around this
concept, but these types of methods are used in only a small fraction of population studies.
One reason is that CO2 inhalation systems might be unpleasant for volunteers, and the best
methods require a lot of scan time. Also, these calibrations involve subtraction or division of
data, decreasing the signal to noise ratio. These inconvenience factors tend to outweigh the
benefit of this type of calibration for most studies. Handwerker and D’Esposito tested
whether a more convenient, but slightly less controllable method, global signal changes
from breath hold, could be sufficient to calibrate some signal changes with aging
 . That manuscript includes a more thorough review of
earlier work in this area. We showed that breath holding revealed age-related BOLD
differences. Accounting for those global signal changes altered the HR magnitude in regions
that showed significant task-related changes with aging. While simpler to implement than
CO2 breathing, breath holding tasks still require people who are able to hold their breath for
around 20s and follow instructions. This challenge, in addition to the requirements of extra
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
scan time and the decreased SNR from dividing data for calibration, explain why this
method also hasn’t been widely adapted.
All these approaches are trying to strike a balance between an accurate and precise
calibration method and a practical protocol to add to a large population study. Until that
happens, best research practice will continue to require study designs with a dissociation
between population responses between conditions. Studies that only show a population
difference to a single condition should continue to be treated with healthy skepticism.
HR variation and brain networks
With the rapid growth of network modeling of brain connections – particularly using fMRI
data with spontaneous fluctuations – there is increased interest and attempts to derive
functional brain networks; and to assign a temporal direction to information flow between
brain regions. A recent paper, Smith, Miller et. al. 2011, provides a good summary of
existing network modeling methods and uses simulations to compare method quality. The
simulations included HR delay variation with a standard deviation of 0.5s. Since this was
well below the observed variation across voxels, they considered this a “best-case scenario
while remaining reasonably realistic.” They show that some methods are robust to this level
of HR lag variation, but lag-based methods, like Granger causality perform particularly
poorly. Even on stimulated data with best-case HR variation, none of the existing methods
perform exceptionally at assigning directionality to the connections between regions. The
best method tested, Patel's τ, showed a 65% accuracy with 50% being chance . While these results show some existing methods are robust to a best-case
scenario of random HR noise, none were tested on the full range of known HR lag
differences, other HR shape differences, or systematic HR differences between network
One well-known network directionality method that was not tested by Smith et. al. is
Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM). An appealing aspect of this method is that it attempts to
use Baysean methods to fit an optimal HR for each node and then use that model to estimate
the temporal patterns of the underlying neural activity .
Although the creators of this method have tested it using some HR variation , we decided to test the accuracy of DCM at making the simplest
possible prediction. In a two node network, do the estimated neural events of node 1 predict
the estimated neural events in node 2 or vice versa? These two models are depicted in Figure
2E. For each of the two nodes, we took a hemodynamic response function shape (Fig. 2A),
convolved it with an event-related time series of neural events (Fig. 2B), and scaled and
added it to noise (Fig. 2C,D). The HR was constant in node 1. The HR in node 2 was
identical to node 1, had a 1 sec delayed peak or onset, or a larger relative post-stimulus
undershoot. For the event-related design, there was a 50% chance of an event appearing at
each time point (sampling rate = 2 sec). The identical event pattern with no time lag was
used in both nodes. While a 1 sec HR onset delay is equivalent to a 1 sec shift in event
timing, all other cases should be null results (i.e. neither node significantly predicts the
other). To get realistic fMRI noise with minimal causality and correlation, each of the two
nodes contained spontaneous fluctuations from a single voxel taken from a different subject
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
and brain region (Fig. 2C). These data had 300 time points and were collected as part of
 . The noise time series had a correlation magnitude of r=−0.08.
Simulated data were created by adding these noise time series to the scaled synthetic
responses (Fig. 2B). The data were scaled so that the correlations between the nodes when
the HRs were identical would represent a higher (r=0.78) and lower (r=0.46) temporal
signal-to-noise ratio (TSNR). A DCM analysis in the SPM8 software package was run on
both of the networks in Figure 2E at both TNSR levels and all 4 pairings of HR shapes (Fig.
2D). The DCM analysis was also run on the noise time series (Fig. 2C). The underlying
noise time series in nodes 1 and 2 were also switched to confirm that the presented results
were a function of HR variation and not noise characteristics.
Figure 2F shows the results comparing posterior probabilities from each model. If one
model is higher than the other, it is more likely to represent the data. A typical significance
cutoff is a posterior probability greater than 0.9. As expected, neither model is significantly
better when they contain identical HR shapes or with the noise time series. The identical HR
shapes show a causality bias towards node 1 predicting node 2, but this doesn’t cross
significance. This non-significant bias might exist because there is very small bias towards
the same causal model in the noise time series (“no HRs” in Fig. 2F). With just the noise
time series, neither model fits the data well so there’s little evidence either is correct. With
the identical stimuli included, there is the same bias for the node 1 predicts node 2 causal
model as in the noise time series, but each node’s time series fits the stimulus timing better
and shows more evidence for each model. Thus, even with identical HRs, one model seems
more accurate.
When the HR in node 2 has a 1 sec peak or onset delay compared to node 1, the DCM
analysis shows node 1 probably predicts node 2. Since an HR onset delay would look
identical to a neural event delay, one would expect DCM to show this model difference. A 1
sec slower rise-time for an HR is well within the range of normal HR variation and
shouldn’t be considered to represent a delay in neural timing. When the HR in node 2 had a
larger post-stimulus undershoot, the DCM analysis shows that node 2 probably predicts
node 1. While the tested undershoot is very similar to HRs observed in real data (Figure 1),
it doesn’t perfectly fit into the standard HR estimation method used in DCM. We suspect
that, if the HR is misestimated, any systematic variation in responses could alter the
predicted timing for neural events. For all models with different HR shapes in each node, the
higher the TSNR of the data, the more likely a significant model difference will be found –
since the variability of the HR’s was more fully expressed.
While our test is on an overly simplistic model it does highlight that the hemodynamics
estimation portion of the DCM analysis shouldn’t be assumed to be accurate and cannot be
finessed away no matter how sophisticated the models. Even though DCM may model some
HR variation it is important to both examine the Bayesian priors for the HR estimation and
compare them to the actual HR shape in each voxel or region of interest.
Handwerker et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 30.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
THE CURRENT STATUS OF HR VARIATION
The challenges and solutions regarding HR variation seem to have changed little over the
history of fMRI. We now have a better understanding of the range of HR variation and some
factors that can systematically alter HR shape. We know observed HR variation is sufficient,
at best, to increase noise in most fMRI analyses and, at worst, to systematically bias results.
An array of methods have been developed to deal with some of this variation, but they are
all far from perfect and quite a few studies don’t consider HR variation at all.
Since neurovascular coupling can vary based on how the vascular and tissue composition of
voxels interact and can be altered in complex ways by disease or medication, we are not
capable of robustly separating the voxel-wise, region-wise, subject-wise, and populationwise variability into variability of hemodynamic origin and variability of neuronal origin.
While better scanners and pulse sequences will improve our temporal signal to noise ratio,
the issues surrounding HR variation will continue to fundamentally limit the conclusions we
can reach using fMRI data.
The best research uses known sources of HR variation and consistency and makes careful
assumptions where possible and necessary. Even after 20 years, we are still developing a
deeper understanding of the hemodynamic response and better methods to robustly
characterize it, work with it, calibrate it, or work around it. In addition, we are finding that
even with the dominance of the hemodynamic variability, still more subtle neuronal
information can and will be extracted in the future.
Acknowledgments
Supported by the NIMH Intramural research program. Carlton Chu helped make sure the DCM analyses were
properly run.