Enhancing Diversity in Science: Is Teaching Science
Process Skills the Answer?
Clarissa Dirks and Matthew Cunningham
Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Submitted October 20, 2005; Revised February 6, 2006; Accepted February 8, 2006
Monitoring Editor: Jo Handelsman
The Biology Fellows Program at the University of Washington aims to enhance diversity in
science by helping students succeed in the rigorous introductory biology classes and motivating
them to engage in undergraduate research. The composite Scholastic Achievement Test scores
and high school grade point averages of the Biology Fellows are comparable to those of students
who are not in the program; however, they earn, on average, higher grades in introductory
biology classes than non-Biology Fellows. Underrepresented minorities and disadvantaged
students in the program also earn higher grades in the introductory biology classes than do their
non-Biology Fellows counterparts. Analysis of the performance of Biology Fellows shows that the
program assists students who are not proficient in certain science process skills and that students
who lack these skills are at risk for failing introductory biology. This evaluation provides insight
for designing programs that aim to enhance the performance of beginning students of biology,
particularly for underrepresented minorities, who want to obtain a life science degree.
INTRODUCTION
Despite many educational initiatives that have promoted the
recruitment, fostering, and retention of women and underrepresented minorities (URMs) in Science and Engineering
(SE) disciplines in the United States, these groups are poorly
represented in these professions. Recent studies by the National Science Foundation (NSF) report that URMs lag far
behind white and Asian students in the total number of
science degrees earned . Equally alarming is that
African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics together comprise only 5.8% of all employed persons with
doctorates in SE disciplines . Moreover, women
hold 18% of all tenured positions in SE fields even though
they obtain 42% of all doctorates in these areas .
For the past 30 years, efforts to improve educational outcomes for women and URMs in science have steadily increased, but the success of these efforts is not sufficient for
future needs. Recent projections indicate that by 2050, racial/ethnic minorities will make up the majority of the U.S.
college-age population . Efforts to
attract and retain URMs in SE disciplines must increase in
order to provide adequate numbers of role models for this
rapidly growing and diverse population of students.
URMs have numerous challenges to overcome while trying to compete in a rigorous college environment. Compared with whites and Asians, far fewer URMs enter college,
and those who do are often economically disadvantaged and
academically underprepared, coming from high schools that
have not been as demanding as those attended by majority
students . As a result, many URMs exit science
relatively early in their academic years. Only 27% of URMs
and 46% of majority students who intend to major in an SE
field go on to obtain an SE degree . There are several reasons why they leave, including
pedagogical practices that leave them uninspired . Unfortunately,
many who switch or leave science majors have academic
abilities equal to or more advanced than those who stay
 . For others, the challenging and
competitive nature of introductory science courses accounts
for their early departure from SE majors.
For women, the leak in the pipeline occurs relatively late;
although women earn more SE bachelor degrees than men
and up to as many as 50% of doctorates in some SE fields,
they are still less likely to pursue academic careers as re-
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.05–10–0121
Address correspondence to: Clarissa Dirks ( ).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 5, 218–226, Fall 2006
© 2006 by The American Society for Cell Biology
search scientists . An unfavorable environment mixed with a lack of encouragement, confidence, and role models have all been cited as factors that
contribute to the departure of women from science .
Escalating concerns about the lack of diversity in SE professions prompted the establishment of numerous programs
that have developed successful strategies to help URMs and
women overcome the barriers that prevent them from obtaining science degrees and advancing into faculty positions.
Although some successful programs, such as the Minority
Access to Research Careers program and the Meyerhoff
Scholarship Program at the University of Maryland Baltimore County, use a very selective process to admit and
support only high-achieving URMs, others aim to retain
them . For
example, the Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program
(BUSP) at the University of California (UC) at Davis, and the
Biology Scholars Program (BSP) at UC Berkeley, identify all
incoming URMs and offer them supplementary instruction
for introductory science courses, direct access to paid research opportunities, and academic advising . BUSP and BSP also provide students with a social network through program seminars, workshops, and social events. Thus, these programs
develop all URMs by targeting them early and helping them
to overcome academic, financial, and social barriers that
often impede their path into science.
In an effort to help increase diversity in the sciences at the
University of Washington (UW), and with support from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, we established the Biology Fellows Program (BFP) in 2003. The BFP is based on the
successful BUSP and BSP models that aim to develop students who are not prepared for the rigorous science majors.
The overall goals of the BFP are to 1) create a sense of
community for students as they adjust to a large campus, 2)
excite students about careers in science and medicine, 3)
assist students in finding a research experience as early as
possible, and 4) help students complete the rigorous introductory biology series with competitive grades.
State regulations in California and Washington prohibit
undergraduate institutions from using race, sex, ethnicity,
color, or national origin as factors for admittance to college
or special programs, such as the BFP. Therefore, diversity
programs in these states have had to use a variety of strategies to recruit URMs. Concurrent with admission to the
UW, the Educational Opportunity Program (EOP) admits
URMs, economically disadvantaged students, and students
whose parents do not have 4-year college degrees. We specifically recruit EOP students through networking with
other campus programs and mailings to incoming freshman.
The BFP supports up to 50 students each year.
At the UW, the entry-level courses in biology consist of a
three-quarter sequence (Biology 180, 200, 220) that is required for most of the life science–related majors on campus.
A review of 1581 EOP and 915 URM students during 2001–
2003 showed, on average, 38% of URMs and 43% of EOP
students entering Biology 180 received a grade below 2.0 or
withdrew before completing the course. Fortunately, the
biology curriculum at the UW is structured so that most
students do not take introductory biology until their sophomore year, providing us with an opportunity to help prepare BFs before their first biology course. A unique feature
of the BFP is that the program aims to teach students science
process skills that we believe are needed for success in the
introductory biology courses. We hope to better prepare
students by teaching them science process skills before their
immersion in biological content. To enhance BFs’ success,
we also provide optional supplementary instruction for all
three introductory biology courses.
We evaluated the BFP to determine whether the program
has had a positive impact on its participants. Here we
present the quantitative analysis of the BFs’ performance in
the introductory biology classes and their proficiency gains
in science process skills while in the program. In addition,
we examined their engagement in undergraduate research
and other factors that may predict their success in the introductory biology classes. We also discuss the implications of
teaching students skills before immersing them in scientific
MATERIALS AND METHODS
BFP Participants
The BFP recruits freshmen, particularly targeting URMs and EOP
students, who indicate to the UW admissions office that they intend
to major in one of the following fields: biochemistry, bioengineering, biology, microbiology, neurobiology, zoology, or pre-health
sciences. One requirement for participation in the BFP is that students may not take Biology 180 before or concurrently with the first
quarter of the BFP class. However, students may take chemistry and
math while enrolled in the BFP classes and often do, because these
courses are prerequisites for Biology 180.
We define under-represented minorities as those who self-identify
as African American, Hispanic (Chicanos and Latinos), Native
American, or Pacific Islander. During the 2003–2005 academic years,
three cohorts (n  128) have completed the program. We used all
three cohorts for our demographic analyses.
To gauge our success in recruiting women, URM, and EOP students, we compared the demographics of BFP students with those
of the entire population of freshmen who enrolled between 2000 and
2004 who indicated they were interested in the above listed majors.
BFP Activities
The BFP is a two-quarter program that starts in the Winter quarter
and meets once a week for 1.5 h. Although some BFs take Biology
180 during the second quarter of the BFP, the majority wait to start
the introductory biology series until after they complete the program. All BFs are also strongly encouraged to participate in supplementary instruction sessions while taking the Introductory Biology courses. These sessions typically meet for 1 h each week and are
run by peer tutors. This instruction is offered to both BFs and
non-BFs; approximately half of the BFs take advantage of this opportunity.
In the BFP, we teach science process skills such as graphing, data
analysis, experimental design, scientific writing, and science communication (Table 1). These skills are taught using a scaffolding
approach that progressively challenges students to master these
skills, while weaving them together through individual homework
assignments and small group work in class. Students receive short
lectures providing biological content and are given small group
activities that allow them to collaboratively solve problems. Students are first taught basic experimental design, how graphs and
tables are used to present data, and the different components of a
primary journal article. This knowledge is reinforced with repeated
assignments that require students to apply this information to new
situations. Later, students are given more advanced assignments
Biology Fellows Program
Vol. 5, Fall 2006
where they must synthesize these skills by using background scientific information and related data sets to present results, draw
conclusions, and make predictions. For example, under instructor
supervision, students work in pairs to graph raw data and to answer
questions related to a scientific study. Students are then given
individual homework assignments where they must write up their
work in the form of a primary journal article. As the course
progresses, students are given more challenging assignments based
on new biological techniques and content presented to them. All
assignments require students to use science process skills that are
taught in the BFP.
The BFP also aims to create a small-campus atmosphere for BFs
within a large university. Early in the program, students are required to complete several cooperative learning activities. For example, the “Science in the News” class requires teams of four or five
students to work together to present a current science topic to the
class. Throughout the program, BFs are given numerous opportunities to work in small groups so that they develop socially as a
cohort. Another program requirement is that all students must
attend an annual undergraduate symposium where they work in
teams to present the BFP to other undergraduates on campus. BFs
are also presented with information about other UW campus programs and opportunities for undergraduate research so that they
may connect with other students and faculty on campus.
Analysis of Grades in the Introductory Biology
To assess the BFs’ performance in the introductory biology series,
we compared their grades with those achieved by the population of
non-BFs who took the courses in the same time frame. For our
analysis of Biology 180, grades were extracted from the UW student
database for all students taking the course between Winter 2003 and
Summer 2005. For analysis of performance in the series overall,
grades were extracted for all students who completed Biology 220
between Winter 2003 and Summer 2005. Grades for the previous
courses in the series (180, 200) were analyzed for this group of
students. In cases where students had repeated a course two or
more times for a numerical grade, the average of the first two
recorded grades was used in the analysis, as per UW policy.
We examined the grades of 50 BFs who have completed Biology
180. Due to the fact that many students from the 2005 BFP cohort
have not yet started the introductory biology series, this analysis
only includes BFs from the 2003 and 2004 cohorts (Table 2). We
further analyzed a subset of these BFs (33 students) who have
completed the entire series. To investigate the potential for selection
bias in the population of BFs, we also extracted several other variables for comparison: gender, ethnicity, EOP status, high school
grade point average (GPA), and Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT)
scores. t tests were performed on various dependent variables (high
school GPA, SAT scores, Biology 180/series grades) using participation in the BFP as the independent variable.
Evaluation of Science Process Skills
BFs were tested as to whether they gained proficiency in the areas
of interpreting graphs, experimental design, and data analysis over
the course of the program. The following instruments were administered to the students in a pre- and posttest manner, with students
completing the tests at the beginning and the end of the BFP,
approximately 22 wk later (these materials can be downloaded from
our Web site at 
Except where noted in the text, only the 2005 cohort was used to
assess science process skill proficiency.
Test of Integrated Process Skills (TIPS). TIPS was developed first
by Dillashaw and Okey ; a second companion version of the
test was developed in 1985 . The test consists of 36
multiple-choice questions spread among five subscales: identifying
variables, operational definitions, identifying testable hypotheses,
data and graph interpretation, and experimental design. Students
were given the two versions of the test in a cross-over design; that
is, half of the students received version 1 as a pretest and version 2
as a posttest, and the other half received version 2 as pretest and
version 1 as posttest. Within either the pre- or posttest, there were
no significant differences between the mean scores for the two
versions of the test. Not all students were able to complete the TIPS
in the time allotted, so we recorded the percent of questions answered correctly out of those attempted. The average numbers of
questions answered on the pretest and posttest were 33.9 and 35.1,
Table 1. Science process skills taught in the BFP and methods of assessment
Science process skills
Topics covered
Assessment tools
Understand graph types
Rubric, three writing assignments
Make and interpret graphs
Pre- and posttests
Convert graphs to text
Data analysis
Interpret data tables
Rubric, two writing assignments
Understand basic statistics
Summative test
Infer conclusions from data
Experimental design
Formulate hypotheses
Rubric, three writing assignments
Identify variables
Pre- and posttests
Control for variables
Know elements of experimental design
Scientific writing and communication
Produce outlines
Rubric, six writing assignments
Understand the elements of logical arguments
Graded summaries of journal articles
Identify elements of a primary article
Evaluation of oral presentations
Know types of scientific literature
Formative evaluation of poster schematics
Draw basic schematics in biology
Summative test
Give oral and poster presentations
Table 2. Gender, race/ethnicity, and EOP status of BFs and non-BFs
used in the introductory biology courses grade analysis
BFs (n  50)
Non-BFs (n  2887)
1641 (57%)
C. Dirks and M. Cunningham
CBE—Life Sciences Education
respectively. Students from the 2004 cohort took the TIPS at the end
of their time in the BFP (i.e., posttest only), whereas students from
the 2005 cohort took the TIPS at both the beginning and end of the
program (i.e., pre- and posttest). For students who completed both
pre- and posttests (n  47), the median pretest score was 92%
correct. Students scoring at the median and above (n  25) and
students scoring below the median (n  22) were analyzed separately for pre- and posttest differences by paired t test.
We also wanted to determine whether the TIPS had any predictive
value toward performance in the introductory biology series. To
examine this possibility, we performed linear regression using TIPS
posttest scores as the independent variable and the Biology 180
grade as the dependent variable for students from both the 2004 and
2005 cohorts who had completed both (n  46).
Experimental Design Quiz. We designed this instrument to test
students’ abilities to generate a hypothesis-driven experiment after
being given an imaginary scenario. Answers were open ended and
were graded using a rubric that awarded between 0 and 3 points in
each of four subject areas: the hypothesis being tested, the experiment being proposed, the understanding of variables involved, and
the structure/flow of the response. Thus, each student could receive
a maximum of 12 points. Students were given identical pre- and
posttests at the beginning and end of the program. To prevent
potential bias in grading, pre- and posttests were graded in random
order by a grader who was blind to whether they were looking at
the pre- or posttest for a given student. For students who completed
both pre- and posttests (n  41), the median pretest score was 6.
Students scoring at the median and above (n  17), and students
scoring below the median (n  24) were analyzed separately for preand posttest differences by paired t test.
Graphing Quiz. We designed this instrument to test students’ understanding of basic graphing concepts, as well as their ability to
read/interpret several different types of graphs. The quiz consisted
of 12 questions, mixed between multiple choice and short answer,
each worth one point, for a maximum of 12 points (half-points were
possible for certain answers). Students were given identical pre- and
posttests at the beginning and end of the program. For students who
completed both pre- and posttests (n  33), the median pretest score
was 9.5. Students scoring at the median and above (n  15) and
students scoring below the median (n  18) were analyzed separately for pre- and posttest differences by paired t test.
Evaluation of Attitudes toward Science
We administered the Test of Science Related Attitudes (TOSRA) to
assess students’ attitudes toward science. The TOSRA was developed by Fraser and Butts . The original test consists of 70
items; a subset of 34 questions was given to BFs, covering five of the
seven subscales of the instrument: career interest in science, adoption of scientific attitudes, attitude to scientific inquiry, normality of
scientists, and social implications of science. Items consist of positively or negatively worded statements that students then indicate
their amount of agreement or disagreement with using a five-point
Likert scale. This survey was given to BFs at both the beginning and
end of the BFP. Results were analyzed by paired t test to determine
whether there was a significant change between pre- and posttest
For all statistical tests, p  0.05 was taken to indicate significant
differences between pre- and posttest scores.
Successful Recruitment of URMs and Disadvantaged
To attract students to the BFP, we send out postcards to a
subset of incoming freshmen who indicate an interest in the
life sciences during the UW admissions process. We also
advertise at student-centered functions on campus and
through networking with relevant departments and other
on-campus programs, particularly programs serving URM
and EOP students. Students are admitted to the program
regardless of gender or ethnicity.
To determine if the recruitment methods of the BFP are
successful at reaching incoming women and disadvantaged
students who are interested in science, we compared the
demographics of BFs with non-BFs over a 5-yr period (Figure 1). Of the 128 students who have participated in the BFP
since 2003, 75% were women, 42% were EOP, and 29% were
URMs. During 2000–2004, the composition of incoming UW
freshmen who indicated on their admissions application
their intent to major in the life sciences was 64% women,
18% EOP, and 9% URMs. Thus the BFP recruits a large
percentage of the total number of women, EOP, and URM
students who are interested in life science majors.
Academic Background of Biology Fellows
To evaluate the academic qualifications of students recruited
to the BFP, we compared the SAT scores and overall high
school GPAs of BFs with those of non-BFs (Table 3); this also
allows us to address the impact that SAT scores and high
school GPAs may have on students’ grades in the introductory biology courses.
We found that BFs and non-BFs had statistically similar
mean composite SAT scores and mean overall high school
GPAs. However, BFs had slightly higher mean verbal SAT
scores than non-BFs (603 vs. 575, respectively; p  0.05), but
statistically similar mean math SAT scores.
Because non-EOP students perform better on average
than EOP students in Biology 180, we compared SAT scores
and high school GPAs of BF and non-BF students within
these two groups. Analysis of EOP students shows that BFs
had significantly higher SAT verbal scores than non-BFs (563
Demographics of BFs and recruiting population. Inner pie charts (labeled UW) represent breakdown of incoming UW freshmen between 2000 and 2004
who indicated on their application an interest in majoring in one of several life science–related majors (see text for complete
list) by gender, ethnicity, and EOP enrollment. Outer pie charts represent the same
categorical breakdown for BFs from 2003 to
Biology Fellows Program
Vol. 5, Fall 2006
vs. 518, respectively; p  0.05), but had SAT math scores and
high school GPAs that were similar to their non-BF counterparts. Among non-EOP students, BFs had significantly
higher SAT verbal scores than non-BFs (633 vs. 589, respectively; p  0.05), but had similar SAT math scores and high
school GPAs. Thus, BFs have somewhat higher verbal SAT
scores than non-BFs, regardless of EOP status.
Biology Fellows Succeed in the Introductory Biology
Although BFs and non-BFs have statistically similar composite SAT and overall high school GPAs, BFs outperform
non-BFs in Biology 180 (Table 4). The median GPA for BFs in
Biology 180 is 3.3, compared with 2.7 for non-BFs. URMs in
the BFP have a median GPA of 3.3 compared with 2.4 for
URMs who do not participate in the program. Moreover,
women and EOP students in the BFP perform better than their
non-BF counterparts. Therefore, participation in the BFP correlates with high performance in the Biology 180 class.
Given that BFs have somewhat higher SAT verbal scores
than non-BFs who took Biology 180, we attempted to adjust
for this statistically by performing an analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA). A one-way ANCOVA was performed with BFP
participation as the independent variable, Biology 180 grade
as the dependent variable, and SAT verbal score as the
covariate. SAT verbal meets the requirements of a covariate: it is a reliable measure (within individuals), it is
linearly related to the dependent variable (r  0.52), and
the slope of this regression is homogeneous across the
groups of the independent variable. After adjusting for
the effect of SAT verbal scores on Biology 180 grades,
participation in the BFP still had a significant effect on
Biology 180 grades (p  0.05). After statistical adjustment,
the mean Biology 180 grade for BFs was 2.89, compared
with 2.61 for non-BFs.
BFs also performed better than non-BFs in the subsequent
two classes of the introductory biology series, with overall
median GPAs of 3.3 and 2.9, respectively (Table 5). The BFP
URMs, women, and EOP students maintain their high performance compared with students who do not participate in
the program.
A Correlation between Science Process Skills and
Biology 180 Grades
We hypothesized that some students may be better prepared
to apply certain types of science process skills in biology and
that this may contribute to their success or failure in introductory biology courses. To examine this, we measured the
abilities of BFs in certain skill areas using the TIPS and
performed linear regression between scores on TIPS and
performance in Biology 180. We found a statistically significant relationship between Biology 180 grades and scores on
TIPS (p  0.001; r  0.75; Figure 2). Variation in TIPS scores
accounts for 55% of variance in Biology 180 grades. Therefore, the lack of certain science process skills may be an
important determinant of those who are at the greatest risk
for failing introductory biology.
Table 3. Mean  SD high school (HS) GPA, composite (C) SAT, verbal (V) SAT, and math (M) SAT scores of BFs and non-BFs
3.78  0.23 (45)
3.74  0.22 (19)a
3.8  0.24 (26)
3.75  0.24 (2348)
3.66  0.29 (453)
3.77  0.22 (1895)
1228  176 (48)
1146  171 (20)
1287  156 (28)b
1199  152 (2566)
1097  152 (487)
1223  142 
603  110 (48)d
563  93 (20)c
633  113 (28)b
575  96 (2566)
518  91 (487)
589  92 
624  84 (48)
583  88 (20)
654  69 (28)
624  81 (2566)
579  84 (487)
634  77 
a Sample size is given in parentheses.
b Statistically significant compared with non-EOP non-BFs, p  0.05.
c Statistically significant compared with EOP non-BFs, p  0.05.
d Statistically significant compared with non-BFs, p  0.05.
Table 4. A comparison of median and mean grades of BFs and non-BFs in Biology 180
All students
Mean  SDa
3.0  0.9 (50)b
3.0  0.8 (11)b
2.6  1.1 (21)b
3.3  0.6 (29)b
2.9  1.0 (35)
Mean  SDa
2.6  1.0 (2887)
2.3  1.0 (163)
2.1  1.0 (523)
2.7  0.9 (2364)
2.6  1.0 (1641)
a Sample size is given in parentheses.
b Statistically significant compared with non-BFs, p  0.05.
C. Dirks and M. Cunningham
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Students Show Gains in Science Process Skills after
Because UW introductory biology courses often use shortessay-answer exams that require students to read graphs,
analyze data, or put forth basic experimental designs, we
wanted to measure student gains in these skills while in the
BFP. We found that, on average, BFs performed better on
experimental design and graphing posttests than on pretests
(Figure 3). To assess which students made the most progress
in these areas, we separately analyzed students who scored
above and below the median on pretests. Students who
scored above the median on the pretests showed no gains on
the posttests. However, students who scored below the median on the pretests showed statistically significant increases
on the TIPS, experimental design, and graphing posttests,
with average gains of 10, 65, and 20%, respectively (Figure
3). Thus, the BFP imparts basic experimental design and
graphing skills to those students who lack these skills coming into the program.
Biology Fellows Have Positive Attitudes toward
The BFP recruits students who are motivated to major in a
life science degree, and a main goal of the program is to
foster BFs’ positive attitudes toward learning science during
their freshman year. To determine whether the BFP imparts
some additional motivation to succeed, we measured the
attitudes of BFs with the TOSRA. Of the five subscales we
measured, only students’ attitudes measured by the subscale
“normality of scientists” showed a significant change, becoming 4% more positive. Students showed no gains in the
other areas measured, but all scores were relatively high for
both the pre- and posttests. BFs have relatively positive
attitudes toward science coming into the program and maintain their enthusiasm throughout the program.
Biology Fellows Form a Community of Science
To determine if the BFP creates a social network among
participants, we used BFP yearly surveys and course evaluations to assess BFs’ views regarding their peers and the
general atmosphere of the program. Of the 67 students who
responded to the most recent survey, 57% indicated that
they occasionally see other BFs in class or on campus; another 33% report having close friendships, engaging in social
activities, or participating in study groups with other BFs.
Qualitative analysis of course evaluations and open-ended
survey questions also show that BFs benefit from the twoquarter, small-class environment. Typical remarks that reflect the social community established by participation in the
BFP include the following:
“This program makes a large university seem small and
manageable. It boosts our confidence that we can meet our
“I strongly believe that this Howard Hughes experience
has made connections between people that will be mutually
beneficial later on in the science world and in our lives.”
“The UW campus is large and the classes even larger.
Before the Hughes program I felt disconnected and relied on
second-hand rumors for information regarding my academic career. I cannot stress enough what a difference the
Hughes program has made.”
BFP students form a community of scholars by participating in undergraduate research. In a survey of the 2003 and
2004 cohorts, 73% of BFs reported that they had engaged in
undergraduate research. This is compared with 53% of seniors majoring in biology at the UW who indicated in an exit
survey that they had participated in undergraduate research
by the end of their senior year. Many BFs began their research during their freshman and sophomore years, and
Table 5. A comparison of median and mean grades of BFs and non-BFs in the introductory biology series (Biology 180, 200, and 220)
All Students
Mean  SDa
3.2  0.58 (33)b
3.2  0.43 (7)
3.0  0.72 (14)b
3.3  0.45 (19)b
3.1  0.6 (25)
Mean  SDa
2.9  0.61 (1392)
2.7  0.63 (58)
2.6  0.61 (246)
2.9  0.60 (1146)
2.9  0.6 (787)
a Sample size is given in parentheses.
b Statistically significant compared with non-BFs, p  0.05.
Relationship between TIPS scores (post-BFP) and Biology 180 grades.
Biology Fellows Program
Vol. 5, Fall 2006
57% of students in the program received funding for their
research experience. In response to an open-ended question
asking BFs if the program had helped them to find a research experience, over half of the students indicated it had.
The following are typical responses:
“Yes, the outline for writing e-mails to professors and the
information on where to find research positions was great. I
used your steps and was able to find a research position in
a couple of weeks.”
“Yes. The instructor gave us the Web sites and guided us
through the process of obtaining a research position. It was
very helpful because all of the information given to us was
new to me.”
Thus, the BFP does create a personalized environment for
BFs and provides them with useful information to connect
them with other undergraduates and opportunities on
DISCUSSION
Despite our inability to exclusively select URM and EOP
participants for the BFP, we have nonetheless successfully
recruited a relatively large number of these students to the
program. This has allowed us to assist these groups of
students who tend to do poorly in introductory biology at
the UW. The BFP functions as an important part of a UW
network of diversity programs that aim to help URM and
EOP students in all introductory science courses.
An important goal of the BFP is to help students maintain
their enthusiasm for science because many switch out of
science majors early in their undergraduate education. Reasons for leaving science differ between various groups.
URMs cite factors such as a lack of preparation when entering college, difficult introductory science courses, and inappropriate reasons for entering science, such as the influence
of others at school or home; however, the majority of white
students who leave science indicate that they get “turned off
to science” because of poor teaching and the fast pace of the
material presented . In our analysis, TOSRA scores show that BFs have generally positive
attitudes toward science coming into the program and maintain those attitudes throughout their participation. Considering that numerous BFs engage in undergraduate research
early on, it suggests they view themselves as competitive
scholars, capable of obtaining a research experience even if
they have not yet taken biology. This indicates that the
program provides these students with an environment that
helps them to build confidence and appreciate the value of
doing science. Undergraduates who participate in research reap numerous benefits such as learning a topic in
depth, thinking like a scientist, and gaining valuable skills
 . Certainly the benefits that BFs gain from their undergraduate
research experiences may impact their success in biology
in many ways. Therefore, future studies will be aimed at
better understanding how the BFP affects students’ views
about themselves in science. Long-term studies that assess
graduation rates and overall UW GPAs of BFs will help us
to address whether participation in the BFP has a lasting
effect on students beyond their first few years in college.
BFs, on average, earn relatively high grades in the rigorous introductory biology courses at the UW. For reasons that
are unknown, the majority of BFP applicants are women, so
the BFP predominantly serves women. BF women earn
higher grades in all three of the introductory biology courses
than do women who do not participate in the program.
Results of in-class assessments of TIPS (top), experimental design (middle), and graphing (bottom). Purple bars indicate
pretest means and SEM, gold bars indicate posttest means and SEM.
Above/Below median indicates groups of students whose pretest
scores were above or below the median, respectively. p values
indicate significant differences between pre- and posttest values, as
determined by paired t test.
C. Dirks and M. Cunningham
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Therefore, the BFP assists many women to continue their
pursuit of earning life science degrees. Most importantly, the
BFP helps EOP and URM students to earn, on average,
higher grades in introductory biology than those students
who do not participate in the program. In doing so, the BFP
attenuates a major barrier that historically led many students within these groups to exit science.
In our analysis, we found that BFs and non-BFs have
statistically equivalent overall high school GPAs and total
SAT scores, but we were surprised to find that BFs have
slightly higher verbal SAT scores than non-BFs. These data
suggest a potential recruitment bias in BFP students and led
us to consider this as a factor impacting their success in the
introductory biology courses. To address this, we used
ANCOVA to statistically adjust for the observed difference
in SAT verbal scores and found that participation in the BFP
was still a significant factor in determining Biology 180
grades. In other words, the success of BFs in Biology 180
cannot be explained entirely by their higher SAT verbal
scores. Another way of looking at SAT scores is from the
viewpoint of recruiting—is it a coincidence that the BFP
tends to recruit students with higher verbal SAT scores?
Perhaps high verbal SAT scores correlate with particular
social characteristics that are indicative of the types of students who might seek out or who are attracted to programs
such as the BFP. We are interested in further examining the
reasons why we inadvertently recruit students with this
attribute.
What aspects of the BFP contribute to the success of students in the introductory biology courses? The most likely
answer is that all features of the program contribute at some
level. Review of successful diversity programs shows that
these programs usually offer a subset of five main components: mentoring, financial support, academic support, psychosocial support, and professional opportunities . Although the BFP incorporates
many of these elements, one characteristic of the BFP that is
unique is its focus on teaching science process skills. Thus
far in the BFP, we have observed a robust relationship
between science process skills (as measured by TIPS) and
Biology 180 grades. A hypothesis extending from this observation is that increasing student abilities in such areas as
reading graphs, analyzing data, and designing experiments may result in higher performance in the introductory biology courses. With the most recent cohort of BFs
 , our data illustrate that a subset of students—
namely, those who demonstrate low skills coming into the
BFP—are showing learning gains in these skill areas. If
our hypothesis is true, when students in this cohort finish
taking Biology 180 we would expect to find, at least for
the students who showed skill gains in the BFP, that
students’ posttest scores on the various skills assessments
would be better predictors of Biology 180 grades than
their pretest scores.
Considering the overall achievements of the BFP, we will
continue to direct our efforts at identifying the factors that
contribute to the success of BFs in the introductory biology
classes. We believe that teaching students basic science process skills may play an important role in how students
perform in introductory biology. Assessing what kinds of
science process skills incoming freshmen lack and how they
best learn them will help us to refine our strategies for
effectively teaching them. With tailored instructional tools,
we may be able to more efficiently prepare disadvantaged
students to succeed in introductory science courses and
perhaps even close the gap between them and the majority.
Such a knowledge base will enable us to better serve all
students and hopefully increase the pool of high-achieving
URMs in biology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Robin Wright for her work that initiated this program, as
well as Robert Steiner, Barbara Wakimoto, and Bette Nicotri for
their input throughout its development. This work was funded by a
grant to the University of Washington from the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute’s Undergraduate Biological Sciences Education
Program (Grant 52003841).