HIGH-DIMENSIONAL SEQUENCE TRANSDUCTION
Nicolas Boulanger-Lewandowski
Yoshua Bengio
Pascal Vincent
Dept. IRO, Universit´e de Montr´eal
Montr´eal (QC), H3C 3J7, Canada
We investigate the problem of transforming an input sequence into a
high-dimensional output sequence in order to transcribe polyphonic
audio music into symbolic notation. We introduce a probabilistic
model based on a recurrent neural network that is able to learn realistic output distributions given the input and we devise an efﬁcient
algorithm to search for the global mode of that distribution. The resulting method produces musically plausible transcriptions even under high levels of noise and drastically outperforms previous stateof-the-art approaches on ﬁve datasets of synthesized sounds and real
recordings, approximately halving the test error rate.
Index Terms— Sequence transduction, restricted Boltzmann
machine, recurrent neural network, polyphonic transcription
1. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning tasks can often be formulated as the transformation, or transduction, of an input sequence into an output sequence:
speech recognition, machine translation, chord recognition or automatic music transcription, for example. Recurrent neural networks
(RNN) offer an interesting route for sequence transduction 
because of their ability to represent arbitrary output distributions involving complex temporal dependencies at different time scales.
When the output predictions are high-dimensional vectors, such
as tuples of notes in musical scores, it becomes very expensive to
enumerate all possible conﬁgurations at each time step. One possible
approach is to capture high-order interactions between output variables using restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM) or a tractable
variant called NADE , a weight-sharing form of the architecture
introduced in . In a recently developed probabilistic model called
the RNN-RBM, a series of distribution estimators (one at each time
step) are conditioned on the deterministic output of an RNN . In
this work, we introduce an input/output extension of the RNN-RBM
that can learn to map input sequences to output sequences, whereas
the original RNN-RBM only learns the output sequence distribution.
In contrast to the approach of designed for discrete output symbols, or one-hot vectors, our high-dimensional paradigm requires a
more elaborate inference procedure. Other differences include our
use of second-order Hessian-free (HF) optimization1 but not of
LSTM cells and, for simplicity and performance reasons, our use
of a single recurrent network to perform both transcription and temporal smoothing. We also do not need special “null” symbols since
the sequences are already aligned in our main task of interest: polyphonic music transcription.
The authors would like to thank NSERC, CIFAR and the Canada Research Chairs for funding, and Compute Canada/Calcul Qu´ebec for computing resources.
 
umontreal.ca/˜boulanni/icassp2013.
The objective of polyphonic transcription is to obtain the underlying notes of a polyphonic audio signal as a symbolic piano-roll,
i.e. as a binary matrix specifying precisely which notes occur at
each time step. We will show that our transduction algorithm produces more musically plausible transcriptions in both noisy and normal conditions and achieve superior overall accuracy compared
to existing methods. Our approach is also an improvement over the
hybrid method in that combines symbolic and acoustic models by
a product of experts and a greedy chronological search, and that
operates in the time domain under Markovian assumptions. Finally,
 employs a bidirectional RNN without temporal smoothing and
with independent output note probabilities. Other tasks that can be
addressed by our transduction framework include automatic accompaniment, melody harmonization and audio music denoising.
2. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
2.1. Restricted Boltzmann machines
An RBM is an energy-based model where the joint probability of a
given conﬁguration of the visible vector v ∈{0, 1}N (output) and
the hidden vector h is:
P(v, h) = exp(−bT
h h −hTWv)/Z
where bv, bh and W are the model parameters and Z is the usually
intractable partition function. The marginalized probability of v is
related to the free-energy F(v) by P(v) ≡e−F (v)/Z:
F(v) = −bT
log(1 + ebh+W v)i
The gradient of the negative log-likelihood of an observed vector v
involves two opposing terms, called the positive and negative phase:
∂(−log P(v))
−∂(−log Z)
where Θ ≡{bv, bh, W}. The second term can be estimated by a
single sample v∗obtained from a Gibbs chain starting at v:
∂(−log P(v))
resulting in the well-known contrastive divergence algorithm .
The neural autoregressive distribution estimator (NADE) is a
tractable model inspired by the RBM. NADE is similar to a fully
visible sigmoid belief network in that the conditional probability distribution of a visible unit vj is expressed as a nonlinear function of
the vector v<j ≡{vk, ∀k < j}:
P(vj = 1|v<j) = σ(W ⊤
:,jhj + (bv)j)
 
Fig. 1. Graphical structure of the I/O RNN-RBM. Single arrows represent a deterministic function, double arrows represent the hiddenvisible connections of an RBM, dotted arrows represent optional
connections for temporal smoothing. The x →{v, h} connections
have been omitted for clarity at each time step except the last.
hj = σ(W:,<jv<j + bh)
where σ(x) ≡(1 + e−x)−1 is the logistic sigmoid function.
In the following discussion, one can substitute RBMs with
NADEs by replacing equation (4) with the exact gradient of the
negative log-likelihood cost C ≡−log P(v):
∂(bv)j = P(vj = 1|v<j) −vj
∂(bv)k W:,khk(1 −hk)
∂(bv)j hj + vj
∂(bv)k W:,khk(1 −hk)
In addition to the possibility of using HF for training, a tractable
distribution estimator is necessary to compare the probabilities of
different output sequences during inference.
2.3. The input/output RNN-RBM
The I/O RNN-RBM is a sequence of conditional RBMs (one
at each time step) whose parameters b(t)
h , W (t) are timedependent and depend on the sequence history at time t, denoted
A(t) ≡{x(τ), v(τ)|τ < t} where {x(t)}, {v(t)} are respectively
the input and output sequences. Its graphical structure is depicted in
Figure 1. Note that by ignoring the input x, this model would reduce
to the RNN-RBM . The I/O RNN-RBM is formally deﬁned by
its joint probability distribution:
P({v(t)}) =
P(v(t)|A(t))
where the right-hand side multiplicand is the marginalized probability of the tth RBM (eq. 2) or NADE (eq. 5).
Following our previous work, we will consider the case where
only the biases are variable:
= bh + Wˆhhˆh(t−1) + Wxhx(t)
= bv + Wˆhvˆh(t−1) + Wxvx(t)
where ˆh(t) are the hidden units of a single-layer RNN:
ˆh(t) = σ(Wvˆhv(t) + Wˆhˆhˆh(t−1) + Wxˆhx(t) + bˆh)
where the indices of weight matrices and bias vectors have obvious
meanings. The special case Wvˆh = 0 gives rise to a transcription
network without temporal smoothing. Gradient evaluation is based
on the following general scheme:
1. Propagate the current values of the hidden units ˆh(t) in the RNN
portion of the graph using (13),
2. Calculate the RBM or NADE parameters that depend on ˆh(t), x(t)
(eq. 11-12) and obtain the log-likelihood gradient with respect to
h (eq. 4 or eq. 7-9),
3. Propagate the estimated gradient with respect to b(t)
backward through time (BPTT) to obtain the estimated gradient
with respect to the RNN parameters.
By setting W = 0, the I/O-RNN-RBM reduces to a regular
RNN that can be trained with the cross-entropy cost:
L({v(t)}) = 1
j ) log(1 −p(t)
where p(t) = σ(b(t)
v ) and equations (12) and (13) hold. We will use
this model as one of our baselines for comparison.
A potential difﬁculty with this training scenario stems from the
fact that since v is known during training, the model might (understandably) assign more weight to the symbolic information than the
acoustic information. This form of teacher forcing during training
could have dangerous consequences at test time, where the model is
autonomous and may not be able to recover from past mistakes. The
extent of this condition obviously depends on the ambiguousness of
the audio and the intrinsic predictability of the output sequences,
and can also be controlled by introducing noise to either x(τ) or
v(τ), τ < t, or by adding the regularization terms α(|Wxv|2 +
|Wxh|2)+β(|Wˆhv|2+|Wˆhh|2) to the objective function. It is trivial
to revise the stochastic gradient descent updates to take those penalties into account.
3. INFERENCE
A distinctive feature of our architecture are the (optional) connections v →ˆh that implicitly tie v(t) to its history A(t) and encourage
coherence between successive output frames, and temporal smoothing in particular. At test time, predicting one time step v(t) requires
the knowledge of the previous decisions on v(τ) (for τ < t) which
are yet uncertain (not chosen optimally), and proceeding in a greedy
chronological manner does not necessarily yield conﬁgurations that
maximize the likelihood of the complete sequence2. We rather favor a global search approach analogous to the Viterbi algorithm for
discrete-state HMMs. Since in the general case the partition function
of the tth RBM depends on A(t), comparing sequence likelihoods
becomes intractable, hence our use of the tractable NADE.
Our algorithm is a variant of beam search for high-dimensional
sequences, with beam width w and maximal branching factor K (Algorithm 1). Beam search is a breadth-ﬁrst tree search where only the
w most promising paths (or nodes) at depth t are kept for future
examination. In our case, a node at depth t corresponds to a subsequence of length t, and all descendants of that node are assumed to
share the same sequence history A(t+1); consequently, only v(t) is
allowed to change among siblings. This structure facilitates identifying the most promising paths by their cumulative log-likelihood. For
2Note that without temporal smoothing (Wvˆh = 0), the v(t), 1 ≤t ≤T
would be conditionally independent given x and the prediction could simply
be obtained separately at each time step t.
Algorithm 1 HIGH-DIMENSIONAL BEAM SEARCH
Find the most likely sequence {v(t), 1 ≤t ≤T} under a model m
with beam width w and branching factor K.
1: q ←min-priority queue
2: q.insert(0, m)
3: for t = 1 . . . T do
q′ ←min-priority queue of capacity w ⋆
while l, m ←q.pop() do
for l′, v′ in m.ﬁnd most probable(K) do
m′ ←m with v(t) := v′
q′.insert(l + l′, m′)
10: return q.pop()
⋆A min-priority queue of ﬁxed capacity w maintains (at most) the w
highest values at all times.
high-dimensional output however, any non-leaf node has exponentially many children (2N), which in practice limits the exploration to
a ﬁxed number K of siblings. This is necessary because enumerating the conﬁgurations at a given time step by decreasing likelihood is
intractable (e.g. for RBM or NADE) and we must resort to stochastic
search to form a pool of promising children at each node. Stochastic search consists in drawing S samples of v(t)|A(t) and keeping
the K unique most probable conﬁgurations. This procedure usually
converges rapidly with S ≃10K samples, especially with strong biases coming from the conditional terms. Note that w = 1 or K = 1
reduces to a greedy search, and w = 2NT , K = 2N corresponds to
an exhaustive breadth-ﬁrst search.
When the output units v(t)
j , 0 ≤j < N are conditionally independent given A(t), such as for a regular RNN (eq. 14), it is possible to enumerate conﬁgurations by decreasing likelihood using a
dynamic programming approach (Algorithm 2). This very efﬁcient
algorithm in O(K log K + N log N) is based on linearly growing
priority queues, where K need not be speciﬁed in advance. Since
inference is usually the bottleneck of the computation, this optimization makes it possible to use much higher beam widths w with unbounded branching factors for RNNs.
Algorithm 2 INDEPENDENT OUTPUTS INFERENCE
Enumerate the K most probable conﬁgurations of N independent
Bernoulli random variables with parameters 0 < pi < 1.
1: v0 ←{i : pi ≥1/2}
i log(max(pi, 1 −pi))
3: yield l0, v0
4: Li ←| log
5: sort L, store corresponding permutation R
6: q ←min-priority queue
7: q.insert(L0, {0})
8: while l, v ←q.pop() do
yield l0 −l, v0△R[v] ⋆
if i + 1 < N then
q.insert(l + Li+1, v ∪{i + 1})
q.insert(l + Li+1 −Li, v ∪{i + 1} \ {i})
⋆A△B ≡(A ∪B) \ (A ∩B) denotes the symmetric difference of
two sets. R[v] indicates the R-permutation of indices in the set v.
A pathological condition that sometimes occurs with beam
search over long sequences (T ≫200) is the exponential duplication of highly likely quasi-identical paths differing only at a few
RNN-RBM 
Piano-midi.de
Nottingham
JSB Chorales
Frame-level transcription accuracy obtained on four
datasets by the Nam et al. algorithm with HMM temporal smoothing , using the RNN-RBM musical language model , or the
proposed I/O RNN-NADE model.
time steps, that quickly saturate beam width with essentially useless
variations. Several strategies have been tried with moderate success
in those cases, such as committing to the most likely path every M
time steps (periodic restarts ), pruning similar paths, or pruning
paths with identical τ previous time steps (the local assumption),
where τ is a maximal time lag that the chosen architecture can reasonably describe (e.g. τ ≃200 for RNNs trained with HF). It is also
possible to initialize the search with Algorithm 1 then backtrack at
each node iteratively, resulting in an anytime algorithm .
4. EXPERIMENTS
In the following experiments, the acoustic input x(t) is constituted
of powerful DBN-based learned representations . The magnitude spectrogram is ﬁrst computed by the short-term Fourier transform using a 128 ms sliding Blackman window truncated at 6 kHz,
normalized and cube root compressed to reduce the dynamic range.
We apply PCA whitening to retain 99% of the training data variance,
yielding roughly 30–70% dimensionality reduction. A DBN is then
constructed by greedy layer-wise stacking of sparse RBMs trained
in an unsupervised way to model the previous hidden layer expectation (vl+1 ≡E[hl|vl]) . The whole network is ﬁnally ﬁnetuned
with respect to a supervised criterion (e.g. eq. 14) and the last layer
is then used as our input x(t) for the spectrogram frame at time t.
We evaluate our method on ﬁve datasets of varying complexity:
Piano-midi.de, Nottingham, MuseData and JSB chorales (see )
which are rendered from piano and orchestral instrument soundfonts,
and Poliner & Ellis that comprises synthesized sounds and real
recordings. We use frame-level accuracy for model evaluation.
Hyperparameters are selected by a random search on predeﬁned
intervals to optimize validation set accuracy; ﬁnal performance is
reported on the test set.
Table 1 compares the performance of the I/O RNN-RBM to the
HMM baseline and the RNN-RBM hybrid approach on four
datasets. Contrarily to the product of experts of , our model is
jointly trained, which eliminates duplicate contributions to the energy function and the related increase in marginals temperature, and
provides much better performance on all datasets, approximately
halving the error rate in average over these datasets.
We now assess the robustness of our algorithm to different types
of noise: white noise, pink noise, masking noise and spectral distortion. In masking noise, parts of the signal of exponentially distributed length (µ = 0.4 s) are randomly destroyed ; spectral
distortion consists in Gaussian pitch shifts of amplitude σ . The
ﬁrst two types are simplest because a network can recover from
them by averaging neighboring spectrogram frames (e.g. Kalman
smoothing), whereas the last two time-coherent types require higherlevel musical understanding. We compare a bidirectional RNN 
adapted for frame-level transcription, a regular RNN with v →ˆh
connections and the I/O RNN-NADE (w = 50, K =
10). Figure 2 illustrates the importance of temporal smoothing con-
(a) White noise
(b) Pink noise
SNR−1 (dB)
accuracy (%)
Bidirectional RNN
RNN + beam
I/O-RNN-NADE
I/O-RNN-NADE + beam
(c) Masking noise
(d) Spectral distortion
σ (semitones)
SNR−1 (dB)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
accuracy (%)
Fig. 2. Robustness to different types of noise of various RNN-based
models on the JSB chorales dataset.
SONIC 
Note events + HMM 
Linear SVM 
DBN + SVM 
BLSTM RNN 
AdaBoost cascade 
I/O-RNN-NADE
Table 2. Frame-level accuracy of existing transcription methods on
the Poliner & Ellis dataset .
nections and the additional advantage provided by conditional distribution estimators. Beam search is responsible for a 0.5% to 18%
increase in accuracy over a greedy search (w = 1).
Figure 3 shows transcribed piano-rolls for various RNNs on
an excerpt of Bach’s chorale Es ist genug with 6 dB pink noise
(Fig. 3(a)). We observe that a bidirectional RNN is unable to perform temporal smoothing on its own (Fig. 3(b)), and that even a
post-processed version (Fig. 3(c)) can be improved by our global
search algorithm (Fig. 3(d)). Our best model offers an even more
musically plausible transcription (Fig. 3(e)). Finally, we compare
the transcription accuracy of common methods on the Poliner &
Ellis dataset in Table 2, that highlights impressive performance.
5. CONCLUSIONS
We presented an input/output model for high-dimensional sequence
transduction in the context of polyphonic music transcription. Our
model can learn basic musical properties such as temporal continuity, harmony and rhythm, and efﬁciently search for the most musically plausible transcriptions when the audio signal is partially destroyed, distorted or temporarily inaudible. Conditional distribution
estimators are important in this context to accurately describe the
frequency (kHz)
MIDI note number
MIDI note number
MIDI note number
MIDI note number
Demonstration of temporal smoothing on an excerpt of
Bach’s chorale Es ist genug (BWV 60.5) with 6 dB pink noise. Figure shows (a) the raw magnitude spectrogram, and transcriptions by
(b) a bidirectional RNN, (c) a bidirectional RNN with HMM postprocessing, (d) an RNN with v →ˆh connections (w = 75) and (e)
I/O-RNN-NADE (w = 20, K = 10). Predicted piano-rolls (black)
are interleaved with the ground-truth (white) for comparison.
density of multiple potential paths given the weakly discriminative
audio. This ability translates well to the transcription of “clean” signals where instruments may still be buried and notes occluded due to
interference, ambient noise or imperfect recording techniques. Our
algorithm approximately halves the error rate with respect to competing methods on ﬁve polyphonic datasets based on frame-level accuracy. Qualitative testing also suggests that a more musically relevant metric would enhance the advantage of our model, since transcription errors often constitute reasonable alternatives.
6. REFERENCES
 D.E. Rumelhart, G.E. Hinton, and R.J. Williams, “Learning
internal representations by error propagation,” in Parallel Dist.
Proc., pp. 318–362. MIT Press, 1986.
 A. Graves, “Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks,” in ICML 29, 2012.
 P. Smolensky, “Information processing in dynamical systems:
Foundations of harmony theory,” in Parallel Dist. Proc., pp.
194–281. MIT Press, 1986.
 H. Larochelle and I. Murray, “The neural autoregressive distribution estimator,” JMLR: W&CP, vol. 15, pp. 29–37, 2011.
 Y. Bengio and S. Bengio, “Modeling high-dimensional discrete
data with multi-layer neural networks,” in NIPS 12, 2000, pp.
 N. Boulanger-Lewandowski, Y. Bengio, and P. Vincent, “Modeling temporal dependencies in high-dimensional sequences:
Application to polyphonic music generation and transcription,”
in ICML 29, 2012.
 I. Sutskever, G. Hinton, and G. Taylor, “The recurrent temporal
restricted Boltzmann machine,” in NIPS 20, 2008, pp. 1601–
 J. Martens and I. Sutskever, “Learning recurrent neural networks with Hessian-free optimization,” in ICML 28, 2011.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
Neural Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 M. Bay, A.F. Ehmann, and J.S. Downie,
“Evaluation of
multiple-F0 estimation and tracking systems,” in ISMIR, 2009.
 A.T. Cemgil, H.J. Kappen, and D. Barber, “A generative model
for music transcription,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 679–694, 2006.
 S. B¨ock and M. Schedl, “Polyphonic piano note transcription
with recurrent neural networks,” in ICASSP, 2012, pp. 121–
 G.E. Hinton, “Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence,” Neural Computation, vol. 14, no. 8, pp.
1771–1800, 2002.
 S. Richter, J.T. Thayer, and W. Ruml, “The joy of forgetting:
Faster anytime search via restarting,” in ICAPS, 2010, pp. 137–
 R. Zhou and E.A. Hansen, “Beam-stack search: Integrating
backtracking with beam search,” in ICAPS, 2005, pp. 90–98.
 J. Nam, J. Ngiam, H. Lee, and M. Slaney, “A classiﬁcationbased polyphonic piano transcription approach using learned
feature representations,” in ISMIR, 2011.
 Y. Bengio,
“Learning deep architectures for AI,”
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–127,
 G.E. Poliner and D.P.W. Ellis, “A discriminative model for
polyphonic piano transcription,” JASP, vol. 2007, no. 1, pp.
154–164, 2007.
 J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio,
“Random search for hyperparameter optimization,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 13, pp. 281–305, 2012.
 P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.A. Manzagol, “Extracting and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in ICML 25, 2008, pp. 1096–1103.
 K.J. Palom¨aki, G.J. Brown, and J.P. Barker,
“Techniques
for handling convolutional distortion with ‘missing data’ automatic speech recognition,” Speech Communication, vol. 43,
no. 1, pp. 123–142, 2004.
 M. Marolt, “A connectionist approach to automatic transcription of polyphonic piano music,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 439–449, 2004.
 M.P. Ryyn¨anen and A. Klapuri, “Polyphonic music transcription using note event modeling,” in ASPAA, 2005, pp. 319–322.
 C.G. Boogaart and R. Lienhart, “Note onset detection for the
transcription of polyphonic piano music,” in ICME, 2009, pp.