Communicated by Shimon Ullman
A Neural Model of Contour Integration in the Primary
Visual Cortex
Zhaoping Li
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Experimentalobservationssuggestthatcontourintegrationmaytakeplace
inV1.However,therehasyettobeamodelofcontourintegrationthatuses
onlyknownV1elements,operations,andconnectionpatterns.Thisarticle
introducessuchamodel,usingorientationselectivecells,localcorticalcircuits, and horizontal intracortical connections. The model is composed of
recurrently connected excitatory neurons and inhibitory interneurons, receiving visual input via oriented receptive ﬁelds resembling those found
in primary visual cortex. Intracortical interactions modify initial activity
patterns from input, selectively amplifying the activities of edges that
form smooth contours in the image. The neural activities produced by
such interactions are oscillatory and edge segments within a contour oscillate in synchrony. It is shown analytically and empirically that the
extent of contour enhancement and neural synchrony increases with the
smoothness, length, and closure of contours, as observed in experiments
on some of these phenomena. In addition, the model incorporates a feedback mechanism that allows higher visual centers selectively to enhance
or suppress sensitivities to given contours, effectively segmenting one
from another. The model makes the testable prediction that the horizontal cortical connections are more likely to target excitatory (or inhibitory)
cells when the two linked cells have their preferred orientation aligned
with (or orthogonal to) their relative receptive ﬁeld center displacements.
1 Introduction
In early stages of the visual system, individual neurons are responsive only
tostimuliintheirclassicalreceptiveﬁelds(RFs),whichareonlylargeenough
to signal a small edge or contrast segment in the input . The visual system must group separate local input elements into
meaningful global features to infer the visual objects in the scene. Sometimes local features group together into regions, as in texture segmentation;
at other times, they group into contours that may represent boundaries of
underlying objects. Although much is known about the early visual processing steps that extract local features such as oriented edges, it is still
unclear how the brain groups local features into global and more meaningful features. In this study, we model the neural mechanisms underlying the
Neural Computation 10, 903–940 
c⃝1998 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Zhaoping Li
ﬁrst stages of grouping of edge elements into contours—namely, contour
integration.
One of the ﬁrst problems for contour grouping is the abundance of candidate “edges” produced by the simple edge detection mechanism that is
believed to operate in V1 . Many of these edges are simply image contrast noise and are unlikely to belong to any signiﬁcant or relevant
object contour. It is desirable to inﬂuence the response of edge detectors
by contextual information from the surround to enhance the sensitivity to
more relevant edges. This could be the ﬁrst step toward perceptual contour grouping. Indeed, V1 cells are observed to change their responses or
sensitivities depending on the surround stimulus ; cells are more responsive
if they are stimulated by edges that are aligned with other edge elements
outside their RFs . These observations correspond well
with psychophysical observations that human sensitivity to edge segments
is also higher when they are aligned with other edges . Horizontal cortical connections linking cells of nonoverlapping RFs have been observed and hypothesized as the underlying
neural substrate . These ﬁndings suggest that simple and local neural interactions even in V1 could contribute
to primitive visual perceptual grouping as in contour integration, although
V1 cells have been observed to change their sensitivities by visual attention
 .
It is computationally desirable to understand how V1, with its small-size
RFs and ﬁnite-range neural interactions, can nevertheless enhance sensitivities to globally deﬁned contours. Models of visual algorithms have been
proposed for similar purposes. For example, Zucker, Dobbins, and Iverson used relaxation labeling techniques to
perform global curve detection or inference using only local compatibility
interactions between curve segment labels. However, modeling the contour
enhancement using known V1 neural RFs and interactions is difﬁcult and
has yet to be accomplished. It is thus not clear if all the experimentally observed contour enhancement has to be attributed to
feedback from higher visual areas. The difﬁculty in the modeling largely
stems from the dynamic stability problems associated with recurrently connected neural networks; the system has to be sensitive enough to enhance
any possible smooth contours the input may provide, but selective and stable enough so that noise is not signiﬁcantly enhanced. To overcome this
difﬁculty, previous neural models of contour enhancement have assumed
somenonneuralorbiologicallyquestionableoperationssuchasdipoleﬁelds
andtherequirementoffeedbackfromhighercenters , nonlinear rule-based interactions , input gating ,
and global activity normalizations . In fact, modeling
contour enhancement is difﬁcult even without the constraints of the neural
Neural Model of Contour Integration
hardware. Many computer vision models of edge linking need user intervention, and many more autonomous
models suffer from one or another problem. It is thus desirable to ﬁnd
out whether contour enhancement can actually be modeled using just V1
neural elements and operations, or whether contour enhancement in V1 has
to be totally attributed to top-down feedback.
This article introduces a model of contour enhancement using only V1 elements, based on experimental ﬁndings, such as orientation selective cells,
local recurrent neural circuits, and ﬁnite-range horizontal connections. The
model is studied analytically and empirically to understand how sensitivity enhancement in long-range contours is successfully carried out in
a network of neurons with ﬁnite-range interactions. The network dynamics are analyzed to reveal the temporal synchrony between cells within a
contour, as observed in experiments . Our analysis relates the extent of the contour enhancement and neural synchrony with contour characteristics such as length, curvature, and
closure. The model makes a testable prediction about the horizontal connection structure: the postsynaptic cell type is more likely to be excitatory (or
inhibitory) if two cells linked by the horizontal connection prefer orientations that are aligned (or orthogonal) to the relative displacement between
their RF centers. In addition, this model introduces a mechanism that allows
higher visual centers selectively to enhance or suppress contour sensitivities, in addition to the contour enhancement performed within V1.
Our work is mainly aimed at modeling the aspects of contour enhancement that are observed in V1. Contour integration is most likely completed
by higher visual centers, which are absent in our model. This is in contrast
to many other models that aim to build a model with the best possible performance at contour integration rather than to understand how and where
it is done in the brain. For instance, this model does not address or deﬁne
illusory contours, since V1 cells are not as evidently responsive to illusory
contours as are V2 cells , and T, L, X junction units, which are not
known to exist in V1, are required to detect many types of illusory contours.
(However, our model does help to ﬁll in the gaps in incomplete contours;
see section 3.) Also, assuming that V1 does not address contours as global
objects, the model merely enhances individual contour segments, without
deﬁning the saliency of a whole contour. Additionally, a mechanism of feedback control is provided by modeling the feedback signals and specifying
their V1 target neurons, but we do not actually model how higher visual
centers might respond to V1 outputs in order to construct the desired feedback.
The article ﬁrst presents the relevant experimental background. Then we
describe the model and analyze it to show how contours are enhanced, how
synchronization happens between contour segments, and how the contour
Zhaoping Li
enhancement and synchronization depend on contour characteristics. The
performance of the model is demonstrated by examples. Then we model the
top-down feedback and demonstrate selective enhancement, suppression,
and the effective segmentation by top-down control. Finally, we place the
model in the context of experimental ﬁndings and other models, and discuss
its limitations and possible extensions.
2 Experimental Background
Primary cortical neurons respond to input edges only within their classical
receptive ﬁelds, which are local regions in the visual ﬁeld mostly too small
to contain any visual object . RF centers are distributed visuotopically on the cortical surface and cells with overlapping
RFs, but different preferred edge orientations are grouped together into hypercolumns . Visual stimuli outside a cell’s classical
RF, in a region whose size is larger than the RF, can inﬂuence the responses
of the cell . Generally, antagonistic suppression is observed when gratings or textures are presented in the surround , although surround
facilitation and orientation contrast facilitation
have also been observed . By
placing bars in the surround of the RF of a cell and roughly aligning them
with a bar presented in the center in its preferred orientation, Kapadia et
al. demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in response to the central bar,
even when there are additional random stimuli in the background. This
enhancement of response decreases with increasing separation or misalignment between the central and surround bars, and is stronger when multiple
bars in the surround are aligned with the central bar to generate a smooth
contour . Such contextual inﬂuences will be the mechanism used for the contour enhancement in our model. Qualitatively similar
ﬁndings are observed psychophysically in humans under similar stimulus
settings . Human observers can also
easily identify a smooth contour composed of individual or even disconnected edge segments among other random edge segments scattered in the
background . The sensitivity to such contours is
enhanced when the contour closes on itself; this is called the closure effect
 . Also, responses of V1 cells are modulated by visual
attention , although earlier studies found these effects only in
higher visual areas .
Primary visual cortex is composed of many excitatory and inhibitory
neurons. Visual input is received mainly onto the dendrites of the excitatory
cells, although inhibitory neurons also receive a very small amount of direct
visual input . The excitatory cells
send outputs to higher visual areas , which in
turn feed back to V1 . There are several
Neural Model of Contour Integration
layers and different groups of excitatory cells (and inhibitory cells), and
they are likely to serve different functions; some cells are more concerned
with receiving visual inputs, whereas other cells process the signals and
send outputs to higher visual centers . It is not yet
clear what the target cell types are for the higher center feedback . Cortical neurons interact with each other locally and often
reciprocally; the excitatory connections extend somewhat longer distances
than the inhibitory ones . These neural
interactions typically link neurons with similar RF properties .
The anatomical basis for the surround effect has been postulated to be the
long-range horizontal connections linking cells up to 4 mm or more apart
in the primary visual cortex . These connections emanate from the excitatory pyramidal
cells in upper layers and contact both the excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic cells, enabling monosynaptic excitation and disynaptic inhibition
from one cortical site to another . The axonal ﬁelds of these connections are asymmetrical, extending
for greater distances along one cortical axis than another . Cells preferring similar orientations tend to be linked whether or not the relative displacements of their receptive ﬁeld centers are aligned with or orthogonal to
their preferred orientations .
The horizontal cortical connections are also implicated in the temporal
synchrony of the 40–60 Hz oscillations of neural responses . Take two neurons with nonoverlapping RFs and
aligned optimal orientations. The synchrony of their ﬁring is negligible if
two bars sweep over the two RFs independently, is signiﬁcant when the
bars sweep together, and is the strongest when a long, single, sweeping bar
extends over both RFs . Usually the degree of neural
synchrony decreases with increasing separation between neurons . The extent of the oscillatory neural activities is
not completely certain . It will be shown in our model
that for inputs that contain contours, the strength of the neural oscillation
depends on contour characteristics such as length and smoothness. Both the
synchrony and the enhancement of responses for aligned edges have been
postulated as mechanisms underlying feature linking .
3 The Contour Integration Model
This section starts by outlining the model and its neural elements. Then
the response of a single edge element is analyzed, and the enhancement
of responses that results from interactions between the elements is ana-
Zhaoping Li
Figure 1: Model visual space, hypercolumns, and edge segments. The input
space is a discrete hexagonal or Manhattan grid.
lyzed and demonstrated. Next, the dynamics of the model are studied to
reveal a tendency toward oscillations and the emergence of temporal coherence between contour elements. Finally, we introduce and demonstrate the
mechanism that allows top-down feedback control.
3.1 Model Outline. Visual inputs are modeled as arriving at discrete
spatial locations (see Figure 1). At each location i there is a model V1 hypercolumn composed of K neuron pairs. Each pair (i, θ) has RF center i and
preferred orientation θ = kπ/K for k = 1, 2, . . . , K, and is called (a neural
representation of) an edge segment. Each edge segment consists of an excitatory and an inhibitory neuron that are connected with each other. The
excitatory cell receives the visual input; its output quantiﬁes the response
or salience of the edge segment and projects to higher visual areas. The inhibitory cells are treated as interneurons. When an input image contains an
edge at i with orientation β and input strength ˆIiβ, edge segment iθ receives
input Iiθ = ˆIiβφ(θ −β), where φ(θ −β) = e−|θ−β|/(π/8) is the orientation
tuning curve for the cell centered at θ. Segments outside the hypercolumn
i receive no input contribution from ˆIiβ.
The excitatory and inhibitory cells have membrane potentials xiθ and yiθ,
respectively, and their outputs are gx(xiθ) ≥0 and gy(yiθ) ≥0, analog numbers modeling ﬁring rates. Both gx(.) and gy(.) are sigmoid-like nonlinear
and nondecreasing functions (see Figure 2). The cells for an edge segment
send their outputs gx(xiθ) and gy(yiθ) to each other. The excitatory cell excites itself with synaptic strength Jo. Its output gx(xiθ) is the edge’s response
Neural Model of Contour Integration
to visual inputs. Edge segment jθ′ at another location can excite edge iθ
monosynaptically by sending the excitatory signal Jiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) to the excitatory cell in edge iθ, and/or inhibit the edge disynaptically by directing an
excitatory signal Wiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) to the inhibitory cell. Here Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′
model the synaptic strengths of horizontal cortical connections. For any
visual input pattern Iiθ for all i, θ, the neural dynamics evolve according to:
˙xiθ = −αxxiθ −
ψ(1θ)gy(yi,θ+1θ) + Jogx(xiθ)
Jiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) + Iiθ + Io
˙yiθ = −αyyiθ + gx(xiθ) +
Wiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) + Ic,
where 1/αx and 1/αy are the membrane time constants and Ic is the background input to the inhibitory cells, which will later be used to model topdown control signal. Io is the background input to the excitatory cells and
includes a term that normalizes the activity—an inhibition that increases
with the total activities in the local edge segments. Finally, ψ(1θ) is an even
function of 1θ modeling inhibition within a hypercolumn and decreases
with |1θ|. When ψ(1θ) = 0 for 1θ ̸= 0, the inhibitory cells couple only to
the excitatory cell in the same edge segment; otherwise, an activated edge
exerts some inhibition ∝ψ(1θ) to other edges in the same hypercolumn.
 Each
neuron additionally receives some random noise input. The appendix lists
the parameters used in this model. For ease of analysis, and without loss of
generality, we use αx = αy = 1, and make gx( ) and gy( ) piecewise linear
functions with threshold and saturation. Also, the excitatory cells have a
unit gain g′
x(x) in the operating range.
Given an input pattern Iiθ, the network approaches a dynamic state after
several membrane time constants, and the response gx(xiθ) gives a saliency
map. When gx(xiθ) at location i is a unimodal function of θ (identifying θ
with θ + π), the orientation ¯θi that would be perceived in higher centers
can be modeled by ei2 ¯θi ∝P
θ gx(xiθ)ei2θ/ P
θ gx(xiθ). Two edges of different
orientations will be perceived to cross each other at location i if gx(xiθ) is a
bimodal function of θ.
3.2 A Single Edge Element. Before studying the contextual interactions
between edges, we ﬁrst analyze the input response properties of a single
edge segment iθ, ignoring the other edges. For simplicity, we omit the subscripts i and θ, and denote I = Iiθ + Io:
˙x = −x −gy(y) + Jogx(x) + I.
˙y = −y + gx(x) + Ic.
Zhaoping Li
Figure 2: (A) Model neural elements, edge elements, visual inputs, and neural
connections. Jo: self-excitatory connection; J: lateral excitatory connection between edge elements; W: lateral disynaptic inhibitory connection between edge
elements, implemented as excitatory connections from the excitatory neuron of
one edge element to the inhibitory neurons of the others. (B) Activation function
gx(x) for the excitatory cells. (C) gy(y) for the inhibitory cells.
The average neural activity is determined by the equilibrium point E =
(¯x, ¯y), which is the intersection of the two curves on which ˙x = 0 and ˙y = 0,
respectively (see Figure 3B):
˙¯x = 0 = −¯x −gy(¯y) + Jogx(¯x) + I.
˙¯y = 0 = −¯y + gx(¯x) + Ic.
Increasing I or Ic raises or lowers the output gx(¯x). The input sensitivities,
determined by solving the linearized version of the above equations, are
δgx(¯x)/δI =
1 + g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −Jog′x(¯x) .
Neural Model of Contour Integration
Figure 3: (A) Edge response gx(¯x) as a function of visual input. Three response
curves—one solid and two dashed ones—are plotted for three different cortical
inputs Ic to the inhibitory cell. (B) Equilibrium point and curves for an edge
element. The solid curve is the ˙x = 0 curve, and the dashed curve is the ˙y = 0
curve. Increasing I raises the ˙x = 0 curve, and increasing Ic raises, and somewhat deforms, the (monotonously increasing) ˙y = 0 curve, thus changing the
equilibrium point (¯x, ¯y). The neurons may approach the equilibrium point after
some transient, or oscillate around it, as discussed in section 3.6.
δgx(¯x)/δIc =
1 + g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −Jog′x(¯x) = −g′
y(¯y) · [δgx(¯x)/δI].
In cases that interest us, the output gx(¯x) increases continuously with
visual input I (see Figure 3A), that is, δgx(¯x)/δI ≥0, and this requires
x(¯x) > Jog′
x(¯x) −1. The visual input gain δgx(¯x)/δI is zero below input
Zhaoping Li
threshold where g′
x = 0 becomes nonzero after threshold where g′
x = 1, and
can decrease beyond threshold when the inhibitory gain g′
y(¯y) increases.
At high I, the activity gx(¯x) saturates when g′
x = 0 again. Qualitatively,
this sensitivity curve corresponds to physiological observations.1 Note that
threshold input value I and the edge input response curve in Figure 3A
change with Ic. This is because, as shown in equation 3.8, increasing Ic decreases the output gx(¯x).
According to equations 3.7 and 3.8, increasing I and Ic simultaneously
increases the output gx(¯x) if 1I/1Ic > g′
y(y), and decreases it otherwise. This
leads to the following consequences. First, the visual input could be directed
to both the excitatory (increasing I) and inhibitory (increasing Ic) cells as experimentally observed . Their net effect will be to increase the
edge response gx(¯x) as long as the visual input partition to the two cell types
is appropriate. Second, the effect of input from other edges via horizontal
connections can be seen as increasing I and/or Ic. Therefore, in general, the
net contextual inﬂuence on the edge can be facilitatory or suppressive, depending on relative recruitment of horizontal ﬁbers, as experimentally observed . Furthermore, since the gain g′
y(y) increases
with input level, such contextual inﬂuence is more likely to be inhibitory at
higher input levels. This is also experimentally observed . In our model, for simplicity, the visual input is directed solely
to the excitatory cells, but this could easily be generalized. The horizontal connections in the model are speciﬁed (in section 3.3) such that the net
contextual inﬂuence from appropriately aligned edges is facilitatory at all
contrast levels, although the contextual inﬂuence from less aligned edges
(these edges can still prefer similar orientations) can depend on stimulus
levels. Hence, in this model, the change in the dominance between facilitatory and suppressive contextual inﬂuences occurs only for input patterns
that are not contours, and therefore is not going to be discussed further in
this article.
3.3 InteractionsBetweenEdgeSegmentsforContourIntegration. Edge
element(jθ′)excitesorinhibitstheedgeelement(iθ)bysendinganexcitatoryto-excitatory output Jiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) or an excitatory-to-inhibitory output
Wiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′). The goal for the connection structure Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ is that
edge elements within a smooth contour should enhance each other’s activ-
1 When the segment has too strong a self-excitation—large Jog′
x(¯x)—and not enough
inhibition—small g′
y(¯y), such that g′
x(¯x) < Jog′
x(¯x) −1—the system is unstable, and
the output gx(¯x) jumps discontinuously with input I. Such cases are not considered here,
as we restrict to outputs as continuous functions of inputs for most input values.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
ities and that the isolated edge elements caused by noisy inputs should be
suppressed, or at least not enhanced. Hence:
• The connection Jiθ,jθ′ will be large if one can ﬁnd a smooth or small
curvature contour to connect (iθ) and (jθ′), and it generally decreases
with increasing curvature of the contour.
• Edge elements will inhibit each other via Wiθ,jθ′ when they are alternative choices in the route of a smooth contour.
• Both connection types will decrease with increasing distances between
the edge segments and become zero for large distances.
• The connections have translation, rotation, and reﬂection invariance.
This means the following: Let i −j be the line connecting the centers
of two edges (iθ) and (jθ′), which form angles θ1 and θ2 with this
connecting line. The connections Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ depend only on |i−j|,
θ1, and θ2, and satisfy Jiθ,jθ′ = Jjθ′,iθ and Wiθ,jθ′ = Wjθ′,iθ.
Given these requirements, connections Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ both link cells
that prefer similar orientations, as observed in experiments (see Figure 4). In addition, when the preferred orientationsoftwolinkedcellsarealignedwiththerelativedisplacementoftheirRF
centers, the postsynaptic cell type is more likely excitatory (the connection
Jiθ,jθ′); when the preferred orientations are more or less orthogonal to the relative displacement of the RF centers, the postsynaptic cell type is more likely
inhibitory (the connection Wiθ,jθ′). This provides a computational explanation to the puzzling experimental ﬁnding that some
horizontal connections link cells whose preferred orientations and relative
RF center displacement do not align, but instead are roughly orthogonal to
each other. These connections can serve to establish competition between
alternative routes of a single contour by contacting inhibitory postsynaptic
cells. This prediction (see the appendix for its derivation) of the model about
the correlation between postsynaptic cell types and the degree of alignment
between the two linked RFs has not been systematically investigated in
experiments; a test is thus desirable. This excitatory and inhibitory edge
interaction pattern is qualitatively similar to the edge compatibility function in Zucker et al. . Altogether, an edge in a smooth contour mostly
receives facilitatory inputs Jiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′) and few, if any, inhibitory inputs
Wiθ,jθ′gx(xjθ′), from other edges in the contour. This helps to enhance the
response of edges in a contour at any contrast level. Figure 5 demonstrates
the contour enhancement and noise suppression using such connections.
The higher salience of the contours emerges rather quickly after the onset of
the stimulus. For the example in Figure 5A where the visual input is weak, it
takes a duration of three membrane time constants just for individual edges
to integrate enough visual input for nonzero responses, but only another
single time constant duration for the contextual input to drive the saliencies
Zhaoping Li
of the edges in the contour signiﬁcantly higher than the background noise.
The strengths and weakness of the model are further demonstrated in Figure 5B, where the model is challenged by the difﬁculties in a natural image.
3.4 A Straight Line. We can understand the performance of the model
by analyzing some examples. In the ﬁrst example, the visual input is a
horizontal line on the x-axis
if i is on the line and θ = 0
otherwise.
The inputs Ic to the inhibitory cells of all edges are assumed to be the same.
Let us consider the simplest case when edge elements outside the line (i.e.,
when i is not on the x-axis or θ ̸= 0) are silent due to insufﬁcient excitation.
Then we can ignore all edges beyond the line, treat this system as onedimensional, and omit index θ. Let i denote the (one-dimensional) location
of the line segment; then Wij = 0, and Jij ≥0 for all i, j ̸= i, and
˙xi = −xi −gy(yi) + Jogx(xi) +
Jijgx(xj) + Iline + Io.
˙yi = −yi + gx(xi) + Ic.
If the line is inﬁnite, then by symmetry each neuron pair will have the same
equilibrium point2 E = (¯x, ¯y) determined by:
˙¯x = 0 = −¯x −gy(¯y) + Jogx(¯x) + (Iline +
gx(¯x)) + Io
= −¯x −gy(¯y) +
gx(¯x) + Iline + Io
˙¯y = 0 = −¯y + gx(¯x) + Ic.
This can be seen as either a single edge with extra external input 1I =
j̸=i Jij)gx(¯x) or a giant single “edge” with a stronger self-excitatory connection (Jo + P
j̸=i Jij) (see Figure 6). Either way, activity gx(¯x) for each edge
element in the line is enhanced (see Figures 5 and 7).
The same minimum strength of input is required to excite a segment in a
line or an isolated edge (see Figure 6A), if all segments in the line are equally
2 This equilibrium solution may or may not be stable, as studied in section 3.6. However, this does not matter, since this solution, stable or not, roughly gives the cells’ average
responses.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
Figure 4: Model connections in a hexagonal grid visual space. Top and bottom graphs depict, respectively, the connections Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ from the center
(thick) horizontal edge to other edges, denoted by their edge locations and orientations in the visual ﬁeld. The quantitative values of the connection strengths
Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ are described in the appendix. Each edge has the same connection pattern, suitably translated and rotated.
Zhaoping Li
Figure 5: Contour enhancement and noise reduction. (A) Performance for a
synthetic image. (B) Performance for an input obtained by edge detection from a
natural photo. The input and output edge strengths are denoted proportionately
by the thicknesses of the edges. The same format applies to other ﬁgures in this
article. The model outputs are the temporal averages of gx(x) over a period
of 24 membrane time constants after input onset. In A, all visible edges have
the same strength in the input and are differentially enhanced or suppressed
at the output. On average, the line and circle segments are roughly 2.5 times
as salient as the “noise” segments. For demonstration, we display the outputs
after thresholding out the weaker edges (right). Because of the discrete sampling
grid, the apparent gaps in the contours actually sit on no grid point. Hence, no
gaps exist for the contours, and no ﬁlling in is needed. Similar situations occur
in other ﬁgures in this article. In B, different edges have different input strength.
The weak contour at the chin, the brim of the hat above the eyes, and the top
of the hat (and many noisy edges) are in fact subthreshold in input strength;
however, they are more or less preserved at the model output. Since this model
has only a single scale, ﬁner edges (e.g., details around the eyes) in the photos
cannot be sampled or enhanced; a long gap in a contour (e.g., the long weak
contour at the brim of the hat above the eyes at low-input contrast) is difﬁcult to
ﬁll. Aliasing problems (e.g., the left cheek and hair lines) and artiﬁcial contour
gaps (e.g., in the brim of the hat above the eyes because no sampling point
exists at the contour location) just like those in the circle in A happen because
Neural Model of Contour Integration
excited. This is because the line segments will have zero output before they
reach threshold and so cannot excite each other. Therefore, they behave
independently as isolated edges before threshold. However, when some
line segments receive subthreshold and others have superthreshold visual
inputs, the former can give nonzero output under contextual excitation from
the latter. This leads to subthreshold activation or ﬁlling in for the weaker
or missing segments in a line (or contour; see Figure 9C).
3.5 Curvature, Contour Length, and Contour Closure. Enhancement in
contours other than lines can be understood based on the special case of a
contour of a constant nonzero curvature, namely, a circle. It is apparent that
the analysis for a straight line is also applicable here, assuming for simplicity
that the corresponding circle for the contour has a diameter larger than the
longest synaptic connection between cells. Index i again denotes the (onedimensional) location of the segments along the (one-dimensional) contour,
and |i−j| the (one-dimensional) distance between the segments i and j. The
activities of the elements along the contour are analogously enhanced.
It can be shown from Figure 6B, after some geometrical calculation, that
the response levels for a segment in a contour and an isolated segment differ
by a factor (sy −s1)/(sy −s2) where s1 = Jo −1, s2 = Jo + P
i̸=j Jij −1, and sy
is the slope of the ˙y = 0 curve. The quantity P
i̸=j Jij is the sum of horizontal
connection strengths between one contour segment to all others; hence, it
is larger for smoother contours by design, and thus the response enhancement is also larger for smooth contours.3 Furthermore, since sy is usually
smaller for smaller input strength, the contour enhancement is stronger
for low-input contrasts, which are the case in some physiological and psychophysical experiments .
Roughly, this model enhances the saliencies in a smooth contour against
Figure 5: Facing page, continued.
of a discrete sampling grid and a lack of a signal interpolation algorithm. In
addition, two accidentally aligned but different contours (e.g., the contours for
the hat, the hair line, and the cheek line near the right side of the image) can
threaten to join each other because of the lack of T, L,and X junction signals
that should prevent them. This model for contour enhancement also highlights
region boundaries and pops out novelties . Consequently, the edge
segments for the hair pieces near the surrounds of the feather (even though the
feather region is not very homogeneous), such as, the single feather across the
brim, are more likely enhanced than those inside the feather. See the discussion
in section 4.
3 It can be shown that this conclusion still holds if some contour segments exert relatively weak, nonzero suppressive components (by connection W) on other segments,
especially in curves of higher curvatures. In such cases, a modiﬁcation can be derived in
the expression above for the amount of overall contour enhancement.
Zhaoping Li
Figure 6: Response changes from an isolated edge to edges in contours. All
edges in a contour are assumed to receive the same visual input strength. (A)
Changes in response curves. The solid curve is the response from an isolated
edge, and the dashed curve is the response from edges in contours. (B) Changes
in equilibrium curves and points. The two thick curves are the ˙x = 0 (solid) and
˙y = 0 (dashed) curves for an isolated edge. Only the ˙x = 0 curve is changed,
going from an isolated edge (thick, solid curves) to edges in a contour (thin, solid
curve). Such changes can be seen as caused by either extra excitation P
j̸=i Jijgx(x)
from neighboring edge segments to a single edge (left ﬁgure) or an increase in
the self-excitation or curve slope Jo −1 →Jo + P
j̸=i Jij −1 in a giant “edge.” The
equilibrium point changes from the lower black dot to the upper one.
background by up to 200–300% near threshold and around 100% at higher
input strengths. In a contour of ﬁnite length, translation invariance (symmetry between segments) along the contour breaks down near its two ends.
There the enhancement is less since the end segments get comparatively
less excitation from other segments. In particular, this predicts that a closed
or longer contour will have higher saliency than an open or shorter one, as
Neural Model of Contour Integration
Zhaoping Li
seen in Figure 7. These predictions are expected to hold also for contours
of nonconstant curvature. Note that the line in Figure 7 is actually a closed
line by the periodic boundary condition used in the model’s visual space.
Since the line has zero curvature, its salience is higher than that of the circle.
Note that edge segments in an open and a closed contour (see Figures 7b
and 7c) have roughly the same saliency except near the ends of the open
contour, where saliency decreases. This closure effect is weak compared to
what is implied from psychophysical observation . Exactly how the saliency decays toward the ends depends on
how Jiθ,jθ′ decays with intersegment distances and the longest connection
length. Note that the model used a discrete hexagonal grid in the visual
space; the apparent small gaps in the circle and curves are the artifact of the
coarseness of the grid.
3.6 Neural Oscillations and Synchrony Between Contour Segments.
So far, we have analyzed only the equilibrium points (¯x, ¯y), which are also
roughly the average responses. Upon visual stimulation, the neurons may
either approach the equilibrium after a transient phase or sustain dynamic
activities about the equilibrium, such as oscillations. Here we show how
variations of neural activities about their averages reﬂect characteristics of
the contour.
Each edge segment, a pair of connected excitatory and inhibitory cells,
canbemodeledasaneuraloscillator oscillatingaround
the equilibrium point (¯x, ¯y). With interactions between the segments, the oscillators are coupled and exhibit collective behavior reﬂecting contour char-
Figure 7: Facing page. Model performance for input contours amid noise. Each
row is dedicated to one input condition. The left column shows the visual input,
the middle column shows the average neural responses, and the right column
shows the outputs of the segments as a function of time. The visual inputs are
presented at time zero and stay on. The neural signals in the right column are
shown superposed. In the graph, the solid curves plot outputs of the segments
along the contour, away from its ends; the dash-dotted curves plot the outputs of segments near the contour’s ends; and the dashed curves, usually the
lowest-lying ones, are the output for a single noise segment. Note the decrease in
average neural activities, the amplitudes of the oscillations, and the synchrony
between the activities of the segments, as the contours become open, shorter,
or more curled, or for segments near the contour ends. The line in the top row
is actually a closed line by the periodic boundary conditions, and so by having
zero curvature, its salience is higher than that of the circle. Also, the discrete
hexagonal grid visual space gives apparent small gaps in the circle and curves
because these “gaps” fall on no grid points; no ﬁlling in is needed. Time is in
units of the cell membrane time constant, and so a time constant of 5–10 msec
would lead to oscillation frequencies in the ﬁgures around 10–40 Hz.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
acteristics embedded in the coupling. To analyze the dynamics, denote for
simplicity xi −¯xi →xi, yi −¯yi →yi, and write as vectors X = (x1, x2, . . . , )T
and Y = (y1, y2, . . .)T. For small X and Y, we approximate by a linear expansion of equations 3.10 and 3.11 about the equilibrium point (¯xi, ¯yi):
˙X = −X −G′yY + JX
˙Y = −Y + G′xX,
where4 J is a matrix with elements (J)ij = Jog′
x(¯xj), if i = j, and (J)ij = Jijg′
otherwise; G′x and G′y are diagonal matrices with elements (G′x)ii = g′
and (G′y)ii = g′
y(¯yi). For a contour with a constant curvature (i.e., a circle), all
its segments have the same equilibrium point if they receive the same input
strength, ¯xi = ¯xj ≡¯x and ¯yi = ¯yj ≡¯y. Then G′x and G′y are proportional
to the identity matrix, and J is symmetric (since we imposed symmetry
along contour directions, i.e., Jij = Jji). Then J has an orthogonal set of
eigenvectors {Xk} and real eigenvalues λk for k = 1, 2, . . . which we order
such that λ1 ≥λ2 ≥. . . Take {Xk} as the new basis to represent X and Y; we
have X = P
k xkXk, Y = P
k ykXk, and
˙xk = −xk −g′
y(¯y)yk + λkxk
˙yk = −yk + g′
which has solution
xk(t) = xk(0)e−(1−λk/2)t cos(ωkt + φk),
where the oscillation frequency is ωk =
g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −(λk)2/4, and initial
conditions determine the amplitude xk(0) and the phase φk. The exponential
in equation 3.19 suggests that the system will be dominated by the ﬁrst oscillation mode5 X1 since λ1 ≥λk for all k. The relative oscillation amplitudes
and phases of the segments in a contour are determined by the components
of the complex vector X1.
Let us suppose for simplicity that the edge segments concerned are in
the linear operating region where g′
x(¯x) = 1. For a contour of constant
curvature with uniform inputs to its segments, matrix J is Toplitz (i.e.,
Jij = J(i+a) mod N,(j+a) mod N for all a, where N is the contour length or matrix dimension) under translation and rotation invariance of the model and
4 Here we take for simplicity that contour segments do not link to each other with
connection Wiθ,jθ′. The analysis here needs a little modiﬁcation, but the general conclusion
still holds when W connections are included.
5 From the analysis in the next paragraph, it will be apparent that it is unlikely to have
degeneracy in the ﬁrst two modes (the case when λ1 = λ2).
Zhaoping Li
has nonnegative elements. It can then be shown that the eigenvectors are
the cosine and sine waves along the contour, that is, Xk
j ∝eifkj with spatial
frequency fk and the eigenvalues are the corresponding Fourier coefﬁcients
of the row vector of the J matrix. In particular, the eigenvector X1 is the zerofrequency Fourier wave; hence, all components of X1 are equal, x1
thus all segments in a contour oscillate with the same amplitude and phase.
The eigenvalue for this mode is the zero-frequency Fourier coefﬁcient, and
thus λ1 = Jo + P
all j ̸= i on contour Jij. We can therefore relate λ1 to the characteristics of the contour, as reﬂected by the connections Jij along its length.
It follows that the strength of the oscillation is largest in a long line, decays
with increasing contour curvature (or decreasing contour length for circles),
and is weakest for an isolated edge. The isolated edge is a special case with
a single oscillator (X1 is a scalar) when λ1 = Jo. When λ1 < 2, the oscillation
is dampened and disappears after some transient phase. Otherwise, if segment couplings are sufﬁciently strong, the oscillations6 will grow until the
nonlinearity invalidates the linear analysis and constrains the oscillation to
have a ﬁnite amplitude (see the activities for the line segments in Figure 7).
These predictions are expected to hold approximately for general contours
with nonconstant curvatures or nonuniform inputs. However, because the
translation invariance is compromised in these cases (i.e., J deviates from being Toplitz and symmetric), some differences in oscillation amplitudes and
the relative phases are expected. Similarly, nonzero relative phases may
emerge between edge segments near the end of a contour, or between such
segments and those near the middle of the contour.
The role of λ1 in the oscillation frequency ω1 =
g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −(λ1)2/4
suggests a correlation between stronger contours and lower oscillation frequencies, as is the case when comparing the circle with the line in Figure 7.
However, in strong, sustained oscillations, the small-amplitude linear approximation no longer holds. The nonlinearity greatly inﬂuences the frequency and makes this prediction imprecise. With strong visual input and
contour enhancement, oscillation can be completely suppressed by the nonlinearity near the saturation region. In realistic neural systems, however, saturation can be prevented by the gain control or adaptation for large inputs
or activity levels.
Synchronization within a contour will happen even when the visual inputs are turned on at different times for different contour segments. On the
other hand, synchrony is rare between different contours even when their
visual inputs are turned on simultaneously. These are both demonstrated
6 For large enough λ1, the oscillation frequency from the linear analysis ω1
g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −(λ1)2/4 is imaginary, so the local dynamics about the equilibrium point
is in fact not oscillatory. However, the global nonlinear dynamics can be shown to be oscillatory provided that the system is not in the region of unstable self-ampliﬁcation, that
x(¯x) > λ1 −1.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
in Figure 8; segments within a line quickly reach synchrony after asynchronous stimulus onset, but circle segments and line segments become
out of synchrony within two oscillation cycles after synchronous stimulus
onset. In fact, when two contours are nearby, they tend to desynchronize
largely due to the normalizing neural interactions (see the appendix) and
the mutual suppressive couplings Wiθ,jθ′ between them. The dynamic coupling between two contours also causes frequency shifts. Furthermore, the
nature and synchrony of the oscillations of the weaker contour tend to be
distorted by the stronger contour such that some of the contour segments
oscillate in a nonsinusoidal manner (see Figure 8B). We do not discuss the
details of such dynamic coupling further because they are not used for contour integration in this model. However, synchronization within a contour
and desynchronization between contours can be exploited for the purpose
of contour segmentation (see section 4).
3.7 Control of the Contour Saliency by Top-Down Feedback: Selective
Contour Enhancement/Suppression, Filling In, and Contour Segmentation. This section shows that our model of V1 provides a mechanism by
which higher visual areas can selectively inﬂuence the response to given
contours. We just assume that the higher centers already know which segments belong to a contour and what feedback signals to send back. In the
model, the inﬂuence from higher centers is additional to, but not necessary
for, the contour-enhancing capabilities by the V1 neural circuit.
Higher visual areas are modeled as sending Ic as a feedback signal to the
inhibitory cells, to inﬂuence the edge outputs according to equation 3.8:
δgx(¯x)/δIc = −
1 + g′y(¯y)g′x(¯x) −Jog′x(¯x) .
Let Ic = Ic,background+Ic,control. The background input Ic,background is the same
for all edge segments, and can be used to modulate the overall level of visual
alertness. Higher areas can selectively enhance or suppress a given contour
by providing a negative or positive Ic,control (i.e., decreasing or increasing
Ic) for the selected contour segments (iθ). A strong enough Ic,control > 0 on
a given contour can completely suppress the outputs from that contour,
leading to the effective removal or segmentation of this contour from other
contours in the visual input.
It is not yet clear from experimental data which are the cells in V1 that
should be the target of feedback .
This model chooses the inhibitory interneurons as the targets for the reason
that it is computationally desirable not to mix visual inputs from the external world with the internal feedback signals. Given that the excitatory cells
are the visual input neurons in this model, directing the feedbacks Ic,control
to the excitatory cells would lead to a confusion between the internal and
the external. Since it targets the interneurons in this model, the feedback
Zhaoping Li
Figure 8: (A) Synchrony within a contour even with asynchronous visual onset.
Neural outputs for line segments as in the top row of Figure 7, except that the
visual input for the 17 left-most line segments starts at t = 0 (left arrow) whereas
input for the 18 right-most line segments starts at t = 7 (right arrow). The solid
curve and dashed curve correspond to one of the 17 left-most and one of the
18 right-most segments, respectively; all segments in each group have roughly
the same outputs. Note that synchrony is achieved within one oscillation cycle
after the onset of the later segments. Compare with the top row of Figure 7.
(B) Desynchronization between contours. Neural output based on visual input
as in Figure 9A, where a circle and line overlap and their inputs onset simultaneously at t = 0. The edge outputs are plotted superposed, with solid curves for
the line segments and dashed curves for the circle segments. Note that the line
segments oscillate with smaller frequencies and are more synchronized (the
solid curves for different segments are almost identical). The circle segments
differ somewhat in their oscillation amplitudes and phases, especially after two
oscillation periods, much more so than they would if the line were absent (cf.
Figure 7). This is because the strong activities in the line segments interfere with
the activities in the circle segments close to the line via local neural interactions.
The coupling between the two contours also distorts the oscillation frequencies.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
cannot completely substitute for visual stimulation. As is evident, Ic is effective only when g′
x(¯x) ̸= 0. Without visual input or excitation from
other segments, an edge segment’s membrane potential ¯x is below threshold
x(¯x) = 0. Decreasing or removing the feedback Ic merely reduces or
removes the inhibition onto this segment and is not enough to activate the
excitatory cell beyond threshold when the background (nonvisual) input
Io to the excitatory cell is too weak. However, with some, even subthreshold, visual input Iiθ or contextual excitation from neighboring edges, an
edge segment can increase its activity or become active if Ic is reduced or
removed. Therefore, this model can enhance and complete or ﬁll in a weak
and incomplete input contour under the control of the feedback (see Figure 9C), but cannot enhance or “hallucinate” any contour that does not at
least partially exist in the visual input I (see Figure 9B). See section 4 for more
detailed discussion on the targets of the feedback, the related experimental
ﬁndings, and computational considerations.
Figure 9 demonstrates central control. Without central control, Ic,control =
0,avisualinputconsistingoftwocontours,acircleandaline,andsomenoise
segments results in a salient line and circle, and less salient noise segments
(see Figure 9A). By adding Ic,control > 0 for the line and Ic,control < 0 for the
circle, the saliency of the line is suppressed, and the circle becomes most
salient. If feedback control Ic,control > 0 for the line is strong enough, then
its neural activity can be completely eliminated, effectively segmenting it
away from the circle (see Figure 9A). Without central control, the gaps in an
input line are partially ﬁlled in by the excitation from other line segments
(see Figure 9C); with reduced Ic on the line, the initially fragmented line
becomes almost completely ﬁlled in (see Figure 9C).
4 Summary and Discussion
4.1 Summary of the Motivation, Components, and Performance of the
Model. Although experimental data suggest that contour enhancement
may be ﬁrst attempted in V1 , it has been difﬁcult to
model it by a realistic model of V1, largely because of the inherent dynamic
stability problems in recurrent neural networks. The V1 network has to
be sensitive enough to amplify all possible smooth contours it may receive,
and at the same time should not have uncontrollable sensitivities that would
make the contours and noises be ampliﬁed indiscriminately. Such difﬁculties have until now prevented a realistic V1 model of contour enhancement.
Therefore, it is desirable to ﬁnd out whether contour enhancement can indeed be accomplished by V1 and thus be modeled by a realistic V1 circuit, or
whether all the observed contour sensitivity enhancements in experiments
 have to be attributed to higher visual areas and their
feedbacks to V1. It is one of the goals of this study to demonstrate and understand how contour enhancement can indeed be reasonably carried out in
a model using only the known elements of V1. Accordingly, our model uses
Zhaoping Li
Figure 9: Central feedback control. (A) Without central control, both the line
and the circle in the input (top left) are suitably enhanced against the background (top right). The bottom left graph demonstrates the selective enhancement of the circle by Ic,control = −Ic,background/5 and suppression of the line by
Ic,control = Ic,background/10 on the respective edge segments. Stronger line suppression by Ic,control = Ic,background/3 can effectively remove all responses to the line
(bottom right). (B) Lack of hallucination: the nonexisting line in the input cannot be enhanced by central control Ic,control = −Ic,background/5 to enhance both the
nonexisting line and the existing circle. (C) Gaps in the line of the input (left)
are partially ﬁlled in by the contour enhancement mechanism in V1 (center) and
more completely ﬁlled in by the central control to enhance the contours with
Ic,control = −Ic,background/3 (right).
Neural Model of Contour Integration
orientation selective cells, a local neural circuit with recurrent interactions
between excitatory and inhibitory cells, and the particular connection patterns suggested by experimental evidence . The neural interactions in the model enhance the cell activities for
edge segments belonging to smooth contours against a background of random edge segments and induce synchronized oscillatory neural activities
between segments within a contour. We show analytically and empirically
that the extent of contour enhancement and neural synchrony is stronger
for longer, smoother, and closed contours. These behaviors of the model
are consistent with experimental observations . In addition, this model introduces a mechanism that allows higher
visual areas to feed back and selectively enhance or suppress activities for
given contours, and even to achieve a crude form of contour segmentation. This model makes the following testable predictions, which have not
been systematically investigated experimentally: (1) the horizontal cortical
connections from the excitatory cells should more likely contact excitatory
or inhibitory postsynaptic cells if the two linked cells have their preferred
orientations roughly parallel or orthogonal, respectively, to their relative
RF displacement; (2) the strength of neural oscillation, as well as neural
synchrony, should increase with contour length, smoothness, and closure.
For analytical tractability and simplicity, the model adopts the following
idealizations: a 1:1 ratio between the excitatory and inhibitory cell numbers,
the lack of connections between the inhibitory cells, and the lack of direct
visual input to the interneurons. Without essential changes to the model performance, these idealizations can be relaxed to give additional complexities
in model behavior. For instance, each model cell should be seen as modeling a local group of cells of similar types. Hence, the 1:1 ratio between
the excitatory and inhibitory model cell numbers is really a ratio between
local cell groups, and the recurrent local connections between them model
the recurrent connections in the local cell groups. Also, introducing direct
visual inputs to the inhibitory cells can give additional input gain control
to allow a larger dynamic range for the system.
The recurrent local interactions between excitatory and inhibitory cells
used in this model have long been part of a “basic circuit” for the cerebral
cortical organization . They have been used, for instance,
in a model of the olfactory bulb for odor recognition and segmentation . A closely related version of this circuit is also used
in a model of visual cortical RFs and surround inﬂuences .
Our model requires a neural connection structure with both a colinear
excitatory component Jiθ,jθ′ and ﬂanking or orthogonal and disynaptically
inhibitory component Wiθ,jθ′. A similar connection structure, where the inhibitory component is modeled monosynaptically, is proposed by Zucker
Zhaoping Li
et al. . A connection structure like our colinear excitatory connection
component Jiθ,jθ′ is termed “association ﬁeld” by Field et al. and is
generic for many contour enhancement models . Experimentally, however, cortical
cells have horizontal axonal ﬁelds that extend orthogonally as well as parallel (colinearly) to the preferred orientation of the cells . The “association ﬁeld” like connections can account for only those
axons that extend in a roughly parallel direction. Our model suggests that
the orthogonally extending axons (see Figure 4) should be found to contact preferentially inhibitory postsynaptic cells (the connection Wiθ,jθ′), for
the computational purpose of mediating competition between alternative
routes of a contour. The different functions served by the different branch
directions of the horizontal axons lead naturally to the anisotropic horizontal axonal ﬁelds as observed in V1 .
The quantitative degree of anisotropy in the axonal ﬁeld is not crucial in this
model. The predicted correlation between axon directions and postsynaptic
cell types has yet to be experimentally tested.
4.2 Higher Center Feedback. The feedback control mechanism in the
model may also relate to the attentional effects observed in V1 cells . It has the desirable property that while higher areas can enhance input
contours, and even ﬁll in the gaps in an incomplete contour, they cannot
create a contour that does not exist in visual input. This property could be
exploited by the higher visual centers to test hypotheses about the visual
input and cooperate with V1 to reconstruct a coherent percept.7 A complete
model of top-down, bottom-up cooperation should include a mechanism
by which higher areas can respond to V1 outputs and construct the requisite
top-down control signals. This mechanism is left for future work.
Experimental data have suggested both excitatory and inhibitory effects of feedback signals. Most data on
feedback ﬁbers show that feedback terminals synapse onto dendritic spines
 ,
which are usually associated with excitatory cells, though earlier observations from Johnson and Burkhalter suggest that feedback ﬁbers
terminate near inhibitory interneurons. Although the evidence is not consistent or clear-cut , some points in the opposite direction
from our model construction that higher-center feedbacks are directed to the
inhibitory interneurons. Computationally, I believe that it is important not
7 In this model, the “hallucination” is prevented by setting the background input Io
sufﬁciently low such that excitation by Io alone without visual input is impossible even
with feedback enhancement. Hallucination could occur if Io is large enough.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
to mix bottom-up visual input signals with top-down feedback ones. Hence
the feedback ﬁbers should avoid the input neurons, which in this model
are the excitatory cells. Indeed, in the brain, feedback ﬁbers generally avoid
cortical layer 4, which is the input layer . Experimental
evidence also suggests that top-down feedback to V1 can modulate V1 activities, but cannot substitute for visual input to activate V1 . If hallucinations should be avoided in the visual system, then, as is
shown in section 3, it helps to send the feedback via the inhibitory interneurons, as is done in this model. More realistically, V1 has different layers
and groups of excitatory cells. Different excitatory cell groups are likely to
serve different functions, and “hallucinations” may be avoided when the
feedback ﬁbers target other excitatory cells and avoid the excitatory cells
in the input layer. It is also likely that top-down feedback ﬁrst contacts the
noninput excitatory cells, which then transform the signals to the inhibitory
interneurons. Such signal transformations may be needed in order to render
the visual representations in the higher areas in terms of the representation
in V1. It is also likely that the feedback effects are dynamically modulated
and can be excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the levels of neural activity and contextual conditions that are beyond the current model. More
consistent and informative experimental data are desired to guide our further understanding. It is more clearly established in the lateral geniculate
nucleus and the olfactory bulb that
higher-area feedback terminates mostly onto the inhibitory interneurons. It
will be interesting to explore the extent of the universality of computational
mechanisms across stages and sensory modalities. An analogous model of
higher center control and olfactory segmentation has been proposed for the
olfactory bulb .
4.3 Limitations and Extensions of the Model. As a ﬁrst attempt to
model contour integration using V1 components, this model has many
weaknesses. The degree of closure effect in particular is much weaker than
what is implied by psychophysical observations . It
is only in the edge segments near the ends of the open contour that saliencies decrease by up to 20% to 30% (see Figure 7). Saliencies of the segments
far from the ends are comparable to those in a closed contour. It is not clear
whether a stronger closure effect can be achieved by more sophisticated neurons and their interactions, or by introducing mechanisms beyond V1 and
the scope of this model. It is conceivable that closure effect can be stronger
by introducing the notion of object surfaces and adding surface saliency
to a region bounded by a closed curve. Such means are likely to involve
higher visual centers. It is desirable to ﬁnd out experimentally whether the
closure effect, so far investigated only psychophysically, is signiﬁcant in V1
without the involvement of the higher center feedback. Another noticeable
fact is that if saliencies are proportional to the temporally averaged neural
activities, the quantitative changes in saliency with contour length, curva-
Zhaoping Li
ture, and closure for reasonably smooth contours are not very signiﬁcant.
This could be a weakness or strength of this model, depending on whether
one desires sensitivity or robustness of the model performance. However, if
one uses the maximum neural activities over a time window as a measure
of saliency, then saliencies change more signiﬁcantly with contour characteristics. This model addresses only the local saliencies of individual edge
segments. One may conceivably use synchrony between segments to obtain the global saliency of a whole contour. That should make the contour
saliency more sensitive to the contour characteristics. However, this is beyond the scope of this article.
This model uses an idealized image sampling grid in a single scale, making it difﬁcult to handle cases when contours and their locations are deﬁned
in multiple scales, as is the case in many natural images. This difﬁculty is
noticeable and explained in Figure 5 for the photo input. Substantial work,
at least in the scale of simulations, will be required to make the model multiscale. Figure 5B also makes it clear that the problems of image sampling
and signal interpolation and interpretation, though beyond the contour enhancement model and probably outside V1, should be solved to give better
inputs to the model and to interpret the outputs better.
In addition to orientation and spatial location, RFs in V1 are tuned for
motion direction, motion speed, disparity, ocularity, scale, and color . Object contours can thus exist
in all these dimensions. The current model can be extended to stereo, time,
and color dimensions. The extended model will link edge segments with
compatible selectivities in these dimensions, as well as aligned orientations.
Indeed, experiments reveal that horizontal connections tend to link cells
with similar RF properties in dimensions other than orientation preference
 ,andthatactivitiesofcellswithsimilaroculardominance,
color selectivity, and other complex RF properties tend to be correlated . Such an extension has
not been carried out yet.
The interactions designed to instantiate contour integration can be explored to see whether they also account for other visual contextual phenomena such as ﬁgure-ground and texture segmentation, the tilt illusion,
and noncontour perceptual ﬁlling ins .
Given its signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation, I expect that the model will not explain
many visual phenomena beyond contour integration. For example, it does
not capture the highly ﬂexible gain control and receptive ﬁeld adaptation
observed in the primary visual cortex . However, some model
limitations can be interpreted in other ways. For example, experiments on
contextual inﬂuence on the orientation selectivity of cat V1 cells have found some data consistent but other data inconsistent
with the classical perceptual tilt illusion phenomena. This model also displays similar ambiguous results, depending on how the contextual stimuli
are placed in the visual ﬁelds.
Neural Model of Contour Integration
Recent experimental evidence suggests that V1 cells contribute to ﬁgureground distinctions , a fundamental problem that has been addressed by many models . Although our model was originally aimed at grouping edges to contours, my more recent studies ﬁnd that
the model can also signal ﬁgure-ground differences and contribute to region
grouping and the phenomena of pop-out. Since boundaries and regions are
complementary to each other, it is reasonable to expect or require a model
of boundary enhancement to signal region differences. This potential of the
model is yet to be fully explored; some early results can be found in Li
4.4 Relating to Previous Models. Many other models are related to at
least parts of our contour integration model. We relate our model to the
most representative and relevant ones, and acknowledge that many more
models exist and can be found—for instance, in the references cited in this
article. One class of models addresses the underlying computation without
using biologically plausible model elements, interactions, or algorithms.
Shashua and Ullman modeled the perceptual saliencies of contour
elements using a simple iterative network with local interactions between
image elements. The model performs well, and Figure 5A of this article is
patterned after an example of theirs. Guy and Medioni’s model lets
local image features vote on underlying global contours. The contours are
then extracted by combining the votes with several methods of combination.
Motivated by the existence in V2 of cells responsive to illusory contours , Heitger and von der Heydt suggested a model
that infers illusory occluding contours from T-junctions, corners, and line
ends extracted from the image. This inference requires a highly nonlinear
operation to check the consistency of the occluding contour interpretations
based on “end-stopped” signals. A recent model by Williams and Jacobs
 generates in the image plane a probability distribution over all the
contours that can join two separated edge fragments, modeling the linking
process as a random walk in position and orientation in the image plane.
This model can be implemented in a network with local, albeit nonneural,
interactions. However, the network has to know which edges to join before
it can complete a contour between them.
Another class of models is closer to neurobiology. For example, the model
by Grossberg and Mingolla aims for boundary or contour completion.
The algorithm requires dipole ﬁelds in V1 that prevent two perpendicular
contours crossing each other and bipolar cells in V2 that provide cooperative
feedback. The neural basis for the dipole ﬁelds is not clear, and contour enhancement necessarily requires feedback from V2. The model by Zucker et
al. used a relaxation labeling algorithm to
infer contour segments from an initial image measurement resembling that
in V1. The edge segments are labeled by their local orientations and curva-
Zhaoping Li
tures. Two segments excite or inhibit each other depending on whether they
are compatible with each other, in a way similar to our connection structure
J and W. The orientation and curvature labels are updated iteratively by the
compatibility interaction. The algorithm performs well after two iterations
and should converge to some ﬁnal conﬁguration .
Braun et al. suggested a model for contour integration that maps well
to the human contour perception in the same visual displays. This model
requires fast-adapting neural synapses and dendritic gating, which have
yet to be conﬁrmed by experiments. The model by Yen and Finkel 
uses the association ﬁeld like horizontal connections in their network, and it
works well. However, the model algorithm includes nonneural operations
such as a global normalization of unit responses after each network iteration
and a rule-based algorithm for interunit synchronization.
Compared with these models, we stress the restriction to the V1 elements and operations. Only by doing so can we ascertain whether contour
enhancement can really be ﬁrst attempted in V1 or has to be attributed
to top-down feedback. Such consideration also accounts for our decision
not to employ in this model image signals from T-junctions and corners,
for there is no evidence for such units in V1. Consequently, this model enhances existing weak contours rather than inferring (invisible) foreground
occluding (illusory) contours from visible image signals in the background.
Furthermore, we study the model analytically in addition to the empirical simulation study, so as to grasp the relationship of neural interactions,
contour characteristics, and the corresponding model behavior and to overcome the formidable dynamic stability problem for reliable contour enhancement in a recurrent neural network model of V1. This model also
avoids some of the undesirable features associated with some other models. For instance, this model does not give unreasonably high saliencies to
short segments of contours that are attached smoothly to long and smooth
contours. This is a problem for Shashua and Ullman’s model , for example, partly because an edge is deﬁned in their model as directed; that is,
an edge of orientation θ is different from another edge of orientation θ + π
at the same location. Such directed edges also appear in other nonbiological models such as Williams and Jacobs chieﬂy to suit the particular
contour enhancement algorithms. Our model is also unique in addressing
the V1 response to top-down feedback, not as a requirement for contour
integration but as an additional feature that is simple but computationally
4.5 Neural Oscillations. Oscillations do not seem to be essential to solve
the computational problem of contour enhancement and could be just an
epiphenomenon. They are intrinsic properties of recurrently interacting excitatory and inhibitory cell populations used in our model. On the other
hand, since the strength of the oscillations and degree of synchrony do correlate with characteristics of the contours, the extra information carried in
Neural Model of Contour Integration
the oscillation could be exploited for other computations such as feature
linking . This model predicts weaker and more
transient oscillations for shorter or weaker contours or for isolated edges.
This may explain the failure to observe oscillatory neural behaviors in some
experiments . There are many other models of cortical
neural oscillations and their possible roles in feature linking and segmentation . Some model neural oscillators by oscillation phase variables only , making the actual neural activity levels unavailable to study feature enhancement. Our oscillator, with its interconnected
excitatory and inhibitory cells, is suggested by models of the olfactory bulb
 . Such neural oscillator models are also
employed by many visual cortical models where both the phases and amplitudes of the oscillations can be studied . However, these visual cortical models do not address
the contour integration problem.
In summary, we have introduced a biological plausible model of contour
integration in V1. The model exhibits experimentally observed behaviors
and makes testable predictions about V1 anatomy and physiology. Extensions of the model to other visual input dimensions can be explored. This
model also provides an analytical framework to study the neural dynamics
and other visual computations in V1 . Some of the properties
and mechanisms of the model can be exploited to study other computational
problems such as hypothesis testing through top-down control, feature linking, and ﬁgure-ground segmentation.
This appendix gives the detailed model parameters and a derivation of the
model connection structure.
A.1 Model parameters. The number of orientations or edge elements at
each spatial grid point is K = 12. Equations 3.1 and 3.2 determine the model
The gain functions for the neurons are:
if Tx ≤x ≤Tx + 1
if x > Tx + 1
if 0 ≤y ≤Ly
g1Ly + g2(y −Ly)
if 0 < Ly ≤y,
Zhaoping Li
where Tx = 1, Ly = 1.2, g1 = 0.21, and g2 = 2.5.
Except for the case of Figure 5B, where variable input strengths are used
for different edges, the edge input strength for all visible edge segments in
all other cases is the same: ˆIiθ = 1.02, and ˆIiθ = 0 otherwise.
The weighting function ψ(θ) for the inhibitory cell to the local excitatory
cells at the same grid points is:
when θ = 0
when |θ| = π/K = 15o
when |θ| = 2π/K = 30o
otherwise.
The background inputs to the inhibitory cells is Ic,background = 1.0.
The central feedback control Ic,control is applied to the inhibitory cells of
the edge segments in an analogous way as the visual inputs are applied to
the excitatory cells. If the higher centers intend a control to grid point i with
orientation β, then Ic,control on the edge segment (iθ) is
Ic,control(iθ) = ˆIc,control(iβ)ψ(θ −β),
where ˆIc,control(iβ) serves a function analogous to ˆIiβ in the visual input.
The background inputs Io to the excitatory cells includes the following:
Io = Ie,background + Inormalization,
where Ie,background = 0.85, and Inormalization is a normalization current that
depends on the local edge activities, so its value for the edge element (iθ) is
Inormalization(iθ) = −2.0
θ′ gx(xjθ′)
where Si is a neighborhood of all grid point j that are no more than two grid
distance away from i. This normalization Inormalization is after the model by
Heeger for cortical cells to account for nonorientation-speciﬁc local
cortical activity normalization and nonlinearity. It can be implemented by
other inhibitory interneurons of relatively short time constants that receive
inputs from local excitatory cell pools and feed back to them. In addition,
eachneuronreceivesaninputInoise,whichisarandomnoisewithanaverage
temporal width of 0.1 and an average height of 0.1. Noise inputs to different
neurons are independent.
The self-excitatory connection is Jo = 0.8. The long-range synaptic connections Jiθ,jθ′ and Wiθ,jθ′ are determined as follows. Let the two edge elements (iθ) and jθ′ be separated by a grid distance d, and denote the angles
between the edge elements and the line connecting two edge elements by θ1
Neural Model of Contour Integration
and θ2, where |θ1| ≤|θ2| ≤π/2, and θ1,2 are positive or negative depending
on whether the edges rotate clockwise or counterclockwise toward the connecting line in no more than a π/2 angle. Denote β = 2|θ1| + 2 sin(|θ1 + θ2|),
1θ = θ −θ′ with |θ −θ′| ≤π/2, then
0.126e−(β/d)2−2(β/d)7−d2/90
if 0 < d <= 10.0 and β < π/2.69
or 0 < d <= 10.0 and β < π/1.1
and |θ1| < π/5.9 and |θ2| < π/5.9
otherwise.
if d = 0 or d ≥10 or β <
or |1θ| ≥π
3 or |θ1| < π/11.999
0.14(1 −e−0.4(β/d)1.5)e−(1θ/(π/4))1.5
otherwise.
A.2 Derivation of the Connection Structure. We derive the qualitative
structure of the neural connections, using the following computational requirements: (1) two nearby edge segments should enhance each other’s
activities if one could draw a smooth contour passing both of them; (2) a
small enough gap in a smooth contour of sufﬁcient input length and strength
should be ﬁlled by the network; (3) a smooth contour of ﬁnite length and
width in input should not grow in length or width by the network enhancement.
According to equations 3.7 and 3.8, an edge segment (jθ′) can enhance
or suppress edge segment (iθ) by sending monosynaptic excitatory input
via connection Jiθ,jθ′ or disynaptic inhibitory input via connection Wiθ,jθ′.
Hence, condition 1 above requires Jiθ,jθ′ ̸= 0 if (iθ) and (jθ′) are nearby
and roughly coaligned, as illustrated in Figure 4.
The bounds on the overall scale of the J connection can be obtained by
considering a contour of a straight line on the x-axis, as in equation 3.9. Omit
the θ variables, let the ith segment be at x = 0, origin of the x-axis, and the jth
the other contour segments. If only segment i is missing in input, condition 2
requires P
j Jijgx(xj) > Tx, or P
j Jij > Tx (for gx(xj) ≤1). If segment i and all
segments j on the positive x-axis are missing in input, condition 3 requires
j<0 Jij < Tx if the strong contour should be prevented to grow into the
positive x-axis. These requirements, together with the contour reﬂection
symmetry Jij = Jji, constrain the overall scale of J within a factor of 2.
However, a segment near and roughly parallel to the x-axis is excited by
the coaligned contour segments on the x-axis and is likely to be ﬁlled by
condition 2 since it provides an alternative route for the contour. To prevent
such a straight contour from thickening, condition 3 requires disynaptic
inhibition connections Wiθ,jθ′ connecting this segment from the nonaligned
horizontal contour segments on the x-axis. A W connection structure as in
Figure 4 results; a lower bound on the overall scale of the W connections
can then be obtained.
Condition 1 discourages W connections between coaligned segments,
Zhaoping Li
and condition 3 discourages J connections between roughly parallel segments displaced roughly orthogonally to their orientations. Our model connection is then derived from all these requirements, in addition to the space
invariance (symmetry) requirements for the computation and the local and
smoothness requirements expected as reasonable for cortical connections
(see section 2).
Acknowledgments
I thank Jochen Braun for introducing me to the topic and helping me to
appreciate the difﬁculties of dynamic stability in models of cortical circuits.
I also thank Peter Dayan for many helpful conversations, discussions, and
comments on the manuscript; and Yair Weiss, Shimon Ullman, Mriganka
Sur, Geoffrey Hinton, and William Freeman for discussions and help on
references. This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research Grant
Council and the Center for Biological and Computational Learning at MIT.