A Watermark for Large Language Models
John Kirchenbauer * Jonas Geiping * Yuxin Wen Jonathan Katz Ian Miers Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
Potential harms of large language models can be mitigated
by watermarking model output, i.e., embedding signals into
generated text that are invisible to humans but algorithmically detectable from a short span of tokens. We propose a
watermarking framework for proprietary language models.
The watermark can be embedded with negligible impact
on text quality, and can be detected using an efficient opensource algorithm without access to the language model API
or parameters. The watermark works by selecting a randomized set of “green” tokens before a word is generated, and
then softly promoting use of green tokens during sampling.
We propose a statistical test for detecting the watermark
with interpretable p-values, and derive an informationtheoretic framework for analyzing the sensitivity of the
watermark. We test the watermark using a multi-billion
parameter model from the Open Pretrained Transformer
(OPT) family, and discuss robustness and security.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as the recently developed ChatGPT, can write documents, create executable
code, and answer questions, often with human-like capabilities . As these systems become
more pervasive, there is increasing risk that they may be
used for malicious purposes . These include social engineering and election
manipulation campaigns that exploit automated bots on social media platforms, creation of fake news and web content,
and use of AI systems for cheating on academic writing and
coding assignments. Furthermore, the proliferation of synthetic data on the web complicates future dataset creation
efforts, as synthetic data is often inferior to human content
and must be detected and excluded before model training
 . For many reasons, the ability to detect and audit the usage of machine-generated text becomes
a key principle of harm reduction for large language models .
*Equal contribution . Code and demo are available at
github.com/jwkirchenbauer/lm-watermarking.
Correspondence to: John Kirchenbauer < >.
…The watermark detection algorithm
can be made public, enabling third
parties (e.g., social media
platforms) to run it themselves, or
it can be kept private and run behind
an API. We seek a watermark with the
following properties:
No watermark
With watermark
- minimal marginal probability for a
detection attempt.
- Good speech frequency and energy
rate reduction.
- messages indiscernible to humans.
- easy for humans to verify.
Extremely efficient on average term
lengths and word frequencies on
synthetic, microamount text (as little
as 25 words)
Very small and low-resource key/hash
(e.g., 140 bits per key is sufficient
for 99.999999999% of the Synthetic
Num tokens
Figure 1. Outputs of a language model, both with and without
the application of a watermark. The watermarked text, if written
by a human, is expected to contain 9 “green” tokens, yet it contains 28. The probability of this happening by random chance is
≈6×10−14, leaving us extremely certain that this text is machine
generated. Words are marked with their respective colors. The
model is OPT-6.7B using multinomial sampling. Watermark
parameters are γ, δ = (0.25, 2). The prompt is the whole paragraph marked in blue below.
In this work, we study watermarking of language
model output. A watermark is a hidden pattern in
text that is imperceptible to humans, while making
the text algorithmically identifiable as synthetic. We
propose an efficient watermark that makes synthetic
text detectable from short spans of tokens (as few as
25 tokens), while false-positives (where human text
is marked as machine-generated) are statistically improbable. The watermark detection algorithm can be
made public, enabling third parties (e.g., social media
platforms) to run it themselves, or it can be kept private
and run behind an API. We seek a watermark with the
following properties:
 
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 2 of 13.
• The watermark can be algorithmically detected without any knowledge of the model parameters or access
to the language model API. This property allows the
detection algorithm to be open sourced even when the
model is not. This also makes detection cheap and fast
because the LLM does not need to be loaded or run.
• Watermarked text can be generated using a standard
language model without re-training.
• The watermark is detectable from only a contiguous
portion of the generated text. This way, the watermark
remains detectable when only a slice of the generation
is used to create a larger document.
• The watermark cannot be removed without modifying
a significant fraction of the generated tokens.
• We can compute a rigorous statistical measure of confidence that the watermark has been detected.
1.1. Notation & Language model basics
Language models have a “vocabulary” V containing words
or word fragments known as “tokens.”
Typical vocabularies contain |V| = 50, 000 tokens or more . Consider a sequence of
T tokens {s(t)} ∈VT .
Entries with negative indices,
s(−Np), · · · , s(−1), represent a “prompt” of length Np and
s(0), · · · , s(T ) are tokens generated by an AI system in response to the prompt.
A language model (LM) for next word prediction is a function f, often parameterized by a neural network, that accepts
as input a sequence of known tokens s(−Np), · · · , s(t−1),
which contains a prompt and the first t −1 tokens already
produced by the language model, and then outputs a vector
of |V | logits, one for each word in the vocabulary. These
logits are then passed through a softmax operator to convert
them into a discrete probability distribution over the vocabulary. The next token at position t is then sampled from this
distribution using either standard multinomial sampling, or
greedy sampling (greedy decoding) of the single most likely
next token. Additionally, a procedure such as beam search
can be employed to consider multiple possible sequences
before selecting the one with the overall highest score.
1.2. A caveat: The difficulty of watermarking
low-entropy sequences
Consider the following two sequences of tokens, with
prompts in red:
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog
for(i=0;i<n;i++) sum+=array[i]
Were they produced by a human or by a language model?
Determining this is fundamentally hard because these sequences have low entropy; the first few tokens strongly
determine the following tokens.
Low entropy text creates two problems for watermarking.
First, both humans and machines provide similar if not
identical completions for low entropy prompts, making it
impossible to discern between them. Second, it is difficult
to watermark low entropy text, as any changes to the choice
of tokens may result in high perplexity, unexpected tokens
that degrade the quality of the text. Later, we rigorously define sentence entropy, and analyze its impact on watermark
detection.
2. A simple proof of concept
We start out by describing a simple “hard” red list watermark
in Algorithm 1 that is easy to analyze, easy to detect and
hard to remove. The simplicity of this approach comes at the
cost of poor generation quality on low entropy sequences.
We will discuss more sophisticated strategies later.
Algorithm 1 Text Generation with Hard Red List
Input: prompt, s(−Np) · · · s(−1)
for t = 0, 1, · · · do
Apply the language model to prior tokens
s(−Np) · · · s(t−1) to get a probability vector p(t)
over the vocabulary.
Compute a hash of token s(t−1), and use it to
seed a random number generator.
Using this seed, randomly partition the vocabulary into a “green list” G and a “red list” R of
equal size.
Sample s(t) from G , never generating any token
in the red list.
The method works by generating a pseudo-random red list
of tokens that are barred from appearing as s(t). The red list
generator is seeded with the prior token s(t−1), enabling the
red list to be reproduced later without access to the entire
generated sequence.
Detecting the watermark. While producing watermarked
text requires access to the language model, detecting the
watermark does not. A third party with knowledge of the
hash function and random number generator can re-produce
the red list for each token and count how many times the red
list rule is violated. We can detect the watermark by testing
the following null hypothesis,
H0: The text sequence is generated with
no knowledge of the red list rule.
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 3 of 13.
Because the red list is chosen at random, a natural writer is
expected to violate the red list rule with half of their tokens,
while the watermarked model produces no violations. The
probability that a natural source produces T tokens without
violating the red list rule is only 1/2T , which is vanishingly
small even for short text fragments with a dozen words. This
enables detection of the watermark (rejection of H0) for,
e.g., a synthetic tweet.
A more robust detection approach uses a one proportion
z-test to evaluate the null hypothesis. If the null hypothesis
is true, then the number of green list tokens, denoted |s|G,
has expected value T/2 and variance T/4. The z-statistic
for this test is
z = 2(|s|G −T/2)/
We reject the null hypothesis and detect the watermark if z
is above a chosen threshold. Suppose we choose to reject
the null hypothesis if z > 4. In this case, the probability of
a false positive is 3 × 10−5, which is the one-sided p-value
corresponding to z > 4. At the same time, we will detect
any watermarked sequence with 16 or more tokens (the
minimum value of T that produces z = 4 when |s|G=T).
How hard is it to remove the watermark?
The use of
the one proportion z-test makes removal of the watermark
difficult. Consider the case of a watermarked sequence
of length T = 1000. Suppose an adversary modifies 200
tokens in the sequence to add red list words and scrub the
watermark. A modified token at position t can violate the
red list rule at position t. Furthermore, the value of st
determines the red list for token st+1, and a maximally
adversarial choice of st will put st+1 in violation of the red
list rule as well. For this reason, 200 token flips can create
at most 400 violations of the red list rule. Unfortunately
for the attacker, this maximally adversarial sequence with
600 remaining green list tokens still produces a z-statistic of
2(600−1000/2)/
1000 ≈6.3, and a p-value of ≈10−10,
leaving the watermark readily detectable with extremely
high confidence. In general, removing the watermark of a
long sequence requires modifying roughly one quarter of
the tokens or more.
Note the analysis above assumes the attacker has complete
knowledge of the watermark, and each selected token is
maximally adversarial (which likely has a negative impact
on quality). Without knowledge of the watermark algorithm,
each flipped token has only a 50% chance of being in the
red list, as does the adjacent token. In this case, the attacker
above only creates 200 red list words (in expectation) by
modifying 200 tokens. Methods for keeping the watermark
algorithm secret but available via API are discussed in
Section 5.
Drawbacks of the hard red list rule. The hard red list rule
handles low entropy sequences in a simple way; it prevents
the language model from producing them. For example,
the token “Barack” is almost deterministically followed
by “Obama” in many text datasets, yet “Obama” may be
disallowed by the red list.
A better behavior is to use a “soft” watermarking rule that
is only active for high-entropy text that can be imperceptibly watermarked. As long as low-entropy sequences are
wrapped inside a passage with enough total entropy, the
passage will still easily trigger a watermark detector, solving the problem described in Section 1.2. Further, one can
combine the watermark with a beam search decoder that
“irons-in” the watermark. By searching the hypothesis space
of likely token sequences, candidates sequences with a high
density of tokens in the green list are found, resulting in a
high strength watermark with minimal perplexity cost.
3. A more sophisticated watermark
We now discuss the “soft” watermark that promotes the
use of the green list for high entropy tokens when many
good choices are available, while having little impact on the
choice of low-entropy tokens that are nearly deterministic.
To derive this watermark, we examine what happens in the
language model just before it produces a probability vector.
The last layer of the language model outputs a vector of
logits l(t). These logits get converted into a probability
vector p(t) using the softmax operator
= exp(l(t)
Rather than strictly prohibiting the red list tokens, Algorithm
2 adds a constant δ to the logits of the green list tokens.
The soft red list rule adaptively enforces the watermark in
situations where doing so will have little impact on quality,
while almost ignoring the watermark rule in the low entropy
case where there is a clear and unique choice of the “best”
word. A highly likely word with p(t)
≈1 has a much larger
logit than other candidates, and this will remain the largest
regardless of whether it is in the red list. But when the
entropy is high, there are many comparably large logits
to choose from, and the δ rule has a large impact on the
sampling distribution, strongly biasing the output towards
the green list.
3.1. Detecting the soft watermark
The process for detecting the soft watermark is identical to
that for the hard watermark. We assume the null hypothesis
(1) and compute a z-statistic using Equation (2). We reject
the null hypothesis and detect the watermark if z is greater
than a threshold. For arbitrary γ we have
z = (|s|G −γT)/
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 4 of 13.
Algorithm 2 Text Generation with Soft Red List
Input: prompt, s(−Np) · · · s(−1)
green list size, γ ∈(0, 1)
hardness parameter, δ > 0
for t = 0, 1, · · · do
Apply the language model to prior tokens
s(−Np) · · · s(t−1) to get a logit vector l(t) over
the vocabulary.
Compute a hash of token s(t−1), and use it to
seed a random number generator.
Using this random number generator, randomly
partition the vocabulary into a “green list” G of
size γ|V |, and a “red list” R of size (1 −γ)|V |.
Add δ to each green list logit. Apply the softmax operator to these modified logits to get a
probability distribution over the vocabulary.
i∈R exp(l(t)
i∈G exp(l(t)
i∈R exp(l(t)
i∈G exp(l(t)
Sample the next token, s(t), using the watermarked distribution ˆp(t).
Consider again the case in which we detect the watermark
for z > 4. Just like in the case of the hard watermark, we
get false positives with rate 3 × 10−5. In the case of the
hard watermark, we could detect any watermarked sequence
of length 16 tokens or more, regardless of the properties
of the text. However, in the case of the soft watermark our
ability to detect synthetic text depends on the entropy of
the sequence. High entropy sequences are detected with
relatively few tokens, while low entropy sequences require
more tokens for detection. Below, we rigorously analyze
the detection sensitivity of the soft watermark, and its
dependence on entropy.
4. Analysis of the soft watermark
In this section, we examine the expected number of green list
tokens used by a watermarked language model and analyze
the dependence of this quantity on the entropy of a generated
text fragment. Our analysis assumes the red list is sampled
uniformly at random. This is a deviation from the method
used in practice, which generates red lists using a pseudorandom number generator seeded with previous tokens. The
consequences of pseudo-random sampling are explored in
Section 5. We analyze the case in which text is generated
by multinomial random sampling. In our experiments, we
consider two more sampling schemes, greedy decoding and
beam search.
We need a definition of entropy that is appropriate for our
analysis. The strength of our watermark is weak when the
distribution over tokens has a large “spike” concentrated
on one or several tokens. We define the following type of
entropy to quantify this phenomenon.
Definition 4.1. Given a discrete probability vector p and a
scalar z, we define the spike entropy of p with modulus z as
Like the classical Shannon entropy, the spike entropy is
a measure of how spread out a distribution is; The spike
entropy assumes its minimal value of
1+z when the entire mass of p is concentrated at a single location, and its
maximal value of
N+z when the mass of p is uniformly
distributed. For large z, the value of
1+zpk ≈1/z when
pk > 1/z and ≈0 for pk < 1/z. For this reason, one can
interpret the spike entropy as a softened measure of the
number of entries in p greater than 1/z.
The following theorem predicts the number of green list
tokens that appear in a sequence with the watermark.
Theorem 4.2. Consider watermarked text sequences of T
tokens. Each sequence is produced by sequentially sampling a raw probability vector p(t) from the language model,
sampling a random green list of size γN, and boosting the
green list logits by δ using Equation 4 before sampling each
token. Define α = exp(δ), and let |s|G denote the number
of green list tokens in sequence s.
If a randomly generated watermarked sequence has average
spike entropy at least S⋆, i.e.,
p(t), (1 −γ)(α −1)
1 + (α −1)γ
then the number of green list tokens in the sequence has
expected value at least
1 + (α −1)γ S⋆,
Furthermore, the number of green list tokens has variance
Var |s|G ≤T
1 + (α −1)γ
1 + (α −1)γ
If we have chosen γ ≥.5, then we can use the strictly looser
but simpler bound
Var |s|G ≤Tγ(1 −γ).
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 5 of 13.
Remark. It may seem like there are a lot of messy constants
floating around in this bound. However, when we choose
2 and δ = ln(2) ≈0.7, this bound simplifies to
3TS⋆, Var |s|G ≤2
where S⋆is a bound on spike entropy with modulus 1/3. If
we study the “hard” red list rules by choosing γ = 1
letting δ →∞, we have
E |s|G ≥TS⋆, Var |s|G ≤TS⋆(1 −S⋆)
where S⋆is a bound on spike entropy with modulus 1.
4.1. Sensitivity of the watermark test
The sensitivity of the soft watermark can be computed using
standard type-II error analysis. For illustrative purposes,
we estimate the type-II (false negative) error rate of a soft
watermark with γ = .5 and δ = 2. We assume 200 tokens
are generated using OPT-1.3B using
prompts from the C4 dataset’s RealNewsLike subset . We also assume a detection threshold of z = 4
(which occurs at ∼128.2/100 tokens) which gives us a
type-I error (false positive) rate of 3 × 10−5.
Theoretical bound. Our generations have an average spike
entropy per sample of S = 0.807 over ∼500 generations.
Theorem 4.2 says that the expected number of green list
tokens per generation is at least 142.2. Indeed, the empirical average is 159.5. For sequences with entropy equal to
the mean (S = 0.807) we get σ ≤6.41 tokens, and 98.6%
sensitivity (1.4% type-II error rate), using a standard Gaussian approximation for the green list count. Note, this is a
lower bound on the sensitivity for this particular entropy.
If we use the true empirical mean of 159.5 rather than the
theoretical bound, we get a 5.3 × 10−7 type-II error rate, a
realistic approximation but not a rigorous lower bound.
Empirical sensitivity. Empirically, 98.4% of generations
are detected at the z = 4 (128 token) threshold when multinomial sampling is used. When 4-way beam search over a
greedy decoding is used, we get 99.6% empirical sensitivity.
Unlike the theoretical bounds, these are computed over all
generations, which have the same length but vary in their
individual entropies. Here, the primary source of type-II
errors is low entropy sequences, as calculations above show
that we expect a very low error rate when the entropy lies
near the mean. To validate this, we examine the subset of
375/500 generations that have spike entropy above the 25th
percentile, of which we detect 100% of generations at the
z = 4 threshold.
What do failure cases look like? We display typical success and failure cases for the watermark in Table 1. We
observe that low-entropy (undetectable) sequences typically
involve data memorization; the model regurgitates a copy
(or near copy) of human-written text which is therefore not
detectable as machine-written. A detailed exploration of
model accuracy is presented in Section 6, with more generation examples provided in Appendix A.1.
Evaluating Repetitive Text. A subtlety of the proposed
approach is that tokens in the green list are only pseudorandom, and n-grams of text that are repeated will always
be scored in the same manner. Assume a 2-gram, such as
“Barack Obama” happens to green-list “Obama”. Repetitive
usage of this 2-gram would result in a higher than expected
number of green tokens. In a worst-case scenario, humangenerated text with a high number of repetitions of this
2-gram may be erroneously flagged as machine-generated.
Two remedies are possible: The first is to simply increase
the length h of the PRNG function, thereby increasing the
variability of the green-listed words, as larger (h+1)-grams
are much less likely to be repeated.
A better remedy
(possibly used in conjunction with the first) is not to count
repeated n-grams when checking for the watermark. In
the example above, the 2-gram “Barack Obama” would
be counted on its first occurrence, and then subsequently
ignored when it appears again; it is counted as neither green
nor red, and the token counter T is not incremented.
In addition to preventing false positives, skipping repeated
n-grams can also make the detector more sensitive. A repeated n-gram is likely to be low-entropy, and so it will not
contribute to the strength of the watermark. By excluding
these from the count, we keep the green list fraction high
and maintain high sensitivity.
4.2. Impact on quality of generated text
A soft watermark has very little impact on the perplexity of
tokens with extremely high or low entropy. When the distribution produced by the language model is uniform (maximal
entropy), the randomness of the green list results in tokens
being uniformly sampled, and the perplexity remains untouched. Conversely, in the case of minimal entropy, where
all probability mass is concentrated on a single token, the
soft watermark rule has no effect and there is once again no
impact on perplexity.
The watermark rule does impact perplexity for tokens of
moderate entropy. In this case, we can provide the following
simple bound that holds uniformly over all entropy values.
Theorem 4.3. Consider a sequence s(i), −Np < i < T.
Suppose the (non-watermarked) language model produces
a probability vector p(T ) for the token at position T. The
watermarked model predicts the token at position T using
modified probability vector ˆp(T ). The expected perplexity of
the Tth token with respect to the randomness of the red list
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 6 of 13.
real completion
no watermark (NW)
watermarked (W)
...tled out of court and publicly
reconciled.\nIn the ’80s the band’s
popularity waned in the United
States but remained strong abroad.
Robin released three solo albums,
with limited success. The Bee Gees
returned with some moderate hits
in the late 1990s and were inducted
into the Rock and Roll Hall of
Fame in 1997. With his brothers,
Mr. Gibb won six Grammys.\nIn
addition to his wife and his brother
[...continues]
continued to tour, and Barry became
a television producer.\nBut in the
early ’90s, the Bee Gees’ popularity
remained high. They scored a
hit with “Don’t Stop Believing”
in 1990, and in 1992 the Bee
Ge[...continues]
’ 1990 album, “Spirits of the
Century,” was a mixed critical and
commercial success.\nWhen the
brothers were nominated for a
Grammy Award in 1990, Mr. Gibb’s
“You Should Be Dancing” and
“Massachusetts,[...continues]
... logged into their Google account
and have verified profiles that match
queries for the site.\nGoogle’s John
Mueller said there is no ranking
benefit in using different Google
Search Console and Google
Analytics accounts for each individual web site you manage. The
topic came up before, as long as
you are not spamming Google there also is no down side to using
the same accounts across multiple
we[...continues]
Analytics data to calculate ranking
sentiment.\nGoogle have a new
feature called Keyword Difficulty
Analysis that shows you the
keywords your competitors are
ranking for. It shows the demand
curve as [...continues]
+ accounts to see different numbers.\nGoogle also released
their own great blog post on the
news algorithm. They give lots
of great advice to help your site
do better.\nFinally, at the end of
September [...continues]
...1 on the season with a 2.76 GAA
and.906 save percentage.\nMar. 11
5:28 PM PT6:28 PM MT7:28 PM
CT8:28 PM ET0:28 GMT8:28 5:28
PM MST6:28 PM CST7:28 PM
EST4:28 UAE (+1)20:28 ET21:28
BRT - Sergei Bobrovsky
stopped 18 of 19 shots in the Blue
Jackets’ 2-0 loss to the Islanders
on Monday. The defeat dropped
him to 29-22-1 on the season
with a 2.74 GAA and.907 save
percentage.\nMar. 9 5:41 PM
PT6:41 PM MT7:[...continues]
stopped 28 of 30 shots in the Blue
Jackets’ 3-2 shootout loss to the
Islanders on Sunday. The loss
dropped him to 30-22-1 on the
season with a 2.76 GAA and.906
save percentage.\nMar. 10 6:15 PM
PT7:15[...continues]
stopped 30 of 34 shots in the Blue
Jackets’ 6-2 win over the Canadiens
on Monday. The victory pushed
him to 31-21-1 on the season
with a 2.72 GAA and.908 save
percentage.\nMar. 10 11:49 AM
PT12:49 PM [...continues]
...cond season at Hall Bros
Oval.\nThe defender also admitted his surprise at Young’s run to
the finals but credited the injection
of youth into the side.\n“We were
really in a building phase last year
we copped a few floggings with
all those juniors blokes coming
in,” Galvin said.\n“Now, we’ve
kept that core group together
for two years and I think we’ve
come along quicker than we
anticipated.\nROCK[...continues]
we copped a few floggings with
all those juniors blokes coming
in,” Galvin said.\n“Now, we’ve
kept that core group together
for two years and I think we’ve
come along quicker than we
anticipated.\n“Tha[...continues]
we copped a few floggings with
all those juniors blokes coming
in,” Galvin said.\n“Now, we’ve
kept that core group together
for two years and I think we’ve
come along quicker than we
anticipated.\n“Tha[...continues]
Table 1. Selected outputs from non-watermarked (NW) and watermarked (W) multinomial sampling using γ = 0.5 and δ = 2.0. The
examples in the first two rows have high entropy and correspondingly high z-scores, without any perceptible degradation in output
quality. The two lower rows are failure cases where the watermark is too weak to be detected – they have low entropy and corresponding low z-scores. Anecdotally, failure cases typically seem to involve data memorization in which the model regurgitates a near-copy
of human text. Note the output similarity between the generated and “real” human text in the bottom two rows. Memorization leads
to large, high confidence logit values that constrain the outputs. Another common factor in failure cases is templated outputs (see the
date/time formatting in row 3) that constrain model choices.
partition is
) ≤(1 + (α −1)γ)P ∗,
where P ∗= P
) is the perplexity of the
original model.
5. Private Watermarking
The watermark algorithms above are designed to be public. A watermark can also be operated in private mode, in
which the algorithm uses a random key that is kept secret and
hosted behind a secure API. If the attacker has no knowledge
of the key used to produce the red list, it becomes more difficult for the attacker to remove the watermark as the attacker
does not know which tokens are in the red list. However,
testing for the presence of the watermark now requires using
the same secure API and, if this API is public, access needs
to be monitored to prevent an adversary from making too
many queries using minor variants of the same sequence.
Let F be a pseudorandom function (PRF) that, for simplicity,
we view as accepting arbitrary length inputs and producing
output as long as needed. F could be a standard block cipher
like AES or a cryptographic hash function like SHA3. To
create a private watermark, we first choose a random key
K; a private red list for token s(t) can then be generated in
a manner similar to what was described earlier, but now by
first computing FK(s(t−h), · · · , s(t−1)), a pseudorandom
function evaluated on the prior h tokens.
An attacker can discover the watermarking rules by observing occurrences of token tuples in generated text and
tabulating the frequencies of the immediately subsequent
tokens, even if the underlying key is unknown. To tabulate
every red list in such a brute-force attack, |V|1+h tokens
need to be submitted to the detection API. When h = 1,
the red lists produced by many tokens could be discovered
(at least partially) with conceivable effort. This brute-force
method is ineffective for h ≫1, as there is now a unique
red list for each ordered combination of words. At the same
time, large values of h decrease watermark robustness when
a naive method is used. When, say, h = 5 consecutive
tokens are used to produce a red list, an adversarial change
to just one of those tokens randomizes the red list for 5
different downstream tokens, increasing the number of red
list words by 2.5 (in expectation) if γ = .5. We call this
downstream impact attack amplification. To limit amplification, we suggest using a small window (h = 2 or 3) when
using the naive watermarking rule.
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 7 of 13.
Algorithm 3 Robust Private Watermarking
Input: prompt s(−Np) · · · s(−1)
PRF F with key K
hardness parameter δ > 0
window width h > 0
for t = 0, 1, · · · do
Apply the language model to s(−Np) · · · s(t−1)
to get a logit vector l(t) over the vocabulary.
Sort the vocabulary so l(t) is in descending order. Set k = 0, the index of the most likely
Temporarily set s(t) to be the kth token in the
vocabulary. Compute
Hi = FK(s(t), s(t−i)) for 1 ≤i ≤h.
Set i⋆= arg mini>0 Hi.
Using Hi⋆as a seed, produce a random bit to
decide if token k is on the green or red list.
if green list is chosen then
keep s(t) and continue.
else if red list is chosen, and l(t)
k+1 < l(t)
choose s(t) to be the most likely (k = 0) token,
which is in the red list, and continue.
set k ←k + 1, goto to step 3.
When a wider window h is desired, more complex, robust
watermarking rules can achieve security against brute-force
attacks without attack amplification. We describe such a rule
in Algorithm 3. Here, the red list for s(t) depends on itself,
and additionally on one prior token s(t−i⋆) chosen using a
pseudo-random rule. To satisfy this self-hash condition, we
iteratively test different tokens as s(t), from highest logit to
least logit, until the red list rule is satisfied. If, during this
search, the logit of the test token falls by more than δ, we
give up and accept the token in the red list with largest logit.
Algorithm 3 has several nice security properties. When one
of the prior h tokens is changed, the watermark at position
t changes with probability only 1/h. As such, this rule is
free of attack amplification; in expectation, a change to a
token results in one additional red list token.1 Like the naive
method with h = 2, there are |V|2 unique red lists, but now
the choice of the index i⋆depends on combinations of s(t)
and all h tokens before it, which hides the choice of tokens
1When γ = .5, the flipped token is in the red list 1/2 of
the time, and one of the h downstream red lists is expected to
randomize, resulting in another 1/2 red list token.
used as input to F. For simplicity, Algorithm 3 is presented
as a greedy sampler, but can be easily extended to handle
multinomial sampling or beam search.
Boosting Watermark Privacy with Multiple Keys. A
straightforward add-on to significantly boost the difficulty
of brute-forcing a hidden watermark scheme is to have k >
1 different hidden keys, and to randomly choose one for
each generation. At detection time, we run k tests, one for
each of the possible keys. This comes at the cost of only a
minor decrease in power, as we need to correct for multiple
hypotheses, for example via Bonferroni correction. When
γ = .5 (half the vocabulary is colored green), lists should
further be constructed so that each word is green for k/2 of
the keys and red for the other k/2. In this way, the lists can
no longer be discovered by brute forced frequency analysis,
as there is no observable bias when averaging over a large
number of separately generated strings.
6. Experiments
In this section we explore the behavior of the watermark using the OPT-1.3B model . We measure
watermark strength using the rate of type-I errors (human
text falsely flagged as watermarked) and type-II errors (watermarked text not detected).
We implement the proposed watermark using the Pytorch
backend of the Huggingface library .
The generate API provides useful abstractions, including modules for warping the logit distribution that comes
out of the language model. We generate red lists using the
torch random number generator and one previous token as
described in Section 3.
Datasets and Prompts. To simulate a variety of realistic
language modeling scenarios we slice and dice a random
selection of texts from the news-like subset of the C4 dataset
 . For each random string, we trim a
fixed length of tokens from the end and treat them as a
“baseline” completion. The remaining tokens are a prompt.
For the experimental runs using multinomial sampling, we
pull examples from the dataset until we achieve at least 500
of generations with length T = 200 ± 5 tokens. In the runs
using greedy and beam search decoding, we suppress the
EOS token during generation to combat the tendency of
beam search to generate short sequences. We then truncate
all sequences to T = 200. A larger oracle language model
(OPT-2.7B) is used to compute perplexity (PPL) for the
generated completions and for the human baseline.
Watermark Strength vs Text Quality. One can achieve
a very strong watermark for short sequences by choosing
a small green list size γ and a large green list bias δ. However, creating a stronger watermark may distort generated
text. Figure 2 (left) shows the tradeoff between watermark
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 8 of 13.
Oracle Model PPL (better →)
z-score (better →)
Oracle Model PPL (better →)
z-score (better →)
Figure 2. The tradeoff between average z-score and language model perplexity for T = 200 ± 5 tokens. (left) Multinomial sampling.
(right) Greedy and beam search with 4 and 8 beams for γ = .5. Beam search promotes higher green list usage and thus larger z-scores
with smaller impact to model quality (perplexity, PPL).
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.1
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.5
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.75
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.9
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 0.5, γ : 0.25
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.25
δ : 0.5, γ : 0.25
Figure 3. The average z-score as a function of T the token length of the generated text. (a) The dependence of the z-score on the green
list size parameter γ, under multinomial sampling. (b) The effect of δ on z-score, under multinomial sampling. (c) The impact of the
green list size parameter γ on the z-score, but with greedy decoding using 8-way beam search.
strength (z-score) and text quality (perplexity) for various
combinations of watermarking parameters. We compute
results using 500 ± 10 sequences of length T = 200 ± 5
tokens for each parameter choice. Interestingly, we see that
a small green list, γ = .1 is pareto-optimal.
In addition to these quantitative results, we show examples of real prompts and watermarked outputs in Table 1 to
provide a qualitative sense for the behavior of the test statistic and quality measurement on different kinds of prompts.
Additional examples are compiled in Appendix A.1.
Ironing in the Watermark with Beam Search. Figure 2
(right) shows the tradeoff between watermark strength and
accuracy when beam search is used. Beam search has a
synergistic interaction with the soft watermarking rule. Particularly when 8 beams are used, the points in Figure 2 form
an almost vertical line, showing very little perplexity cost to
achieve strong watermarking.
Watermark Strength vs Number of Tokens. Theory predicts that the type I and type II error rates of the watermark
should decay to zero as the sequence length T increases.
Figure 3 shows the strength of the watermark, measured
using the average z-score over samples, as T sweeps from 2
to 200. Curves are shown for various values of δ and γ. The
left two charts use multinomial sampling, while the right
chart uses 8-way beam search and γ = .25. Once again, we
see the power of the beam search in achieving high green
list ratios; even for the moderate bias of δ = 2, an average
z-score greater than 5 is achieved for as few as 35 tokens.
Performance and Sensitivity for Multinomial Sampling.
To show the sensitivity of the resulting hypothesis test based
on the observed z-scores, we provide a table of error rate for
various watermarking parameters in Table 2. We also sweep
a range of thresholds in ROC charts in Figure 4. We further
report detection performance and error rates for various
cutoffs in Appendix C, and provide a comparison between
empirical z-scores and theoretical predictions. Note that
no type-I (false positive) errors were observed for any run
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 9 of 13.
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:1.000, PPL:11.6
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:1.000, PPL:12.4
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:1.000, PPL:9.1
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:1.000, PPL:10.7
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:0.998, PPL:6.2
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:0.998, PPL:6.6
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:0.985, PPL:5.4
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:0.989, PPL:5.5
δ = 0, PPL: 5.1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:1.000, PPL:1.2
δ : 10.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:1.000, PPL:1.2
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:1.000, PPL:1.2
δ : 5.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:1.000, PPL:1.3
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:0.999, PPL:1.2
δ : 2.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:1.000, PPL:1.3
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.5, AUC:0.987, PPL:1.2
δ : 1.0, γ : 0.25, AUC:0.977, PPL:1.2
δ = 0, PPL: 1.2
Figure 4. ROC curves with AUC values for watermark detection. Several choices of watermark parameter δ are shown for (a) multinomial sampling and (b) greedy decoding with 8-way beam search. (c,d) The same charts with semilog axes. Higher δ values achieve
stronger performance, but additionally we see that for a given δ, the beam search allows the watermark to capture slightly more AUC
than the corresponding parameters under the multinomial sampling scheme.
Table 2. Empirical error rates for watermark detection using multinomial sampling and beam search. Each row is averaged over ∼500
generated sequences of length T = 200 ± 5. A maximum of one type-I (false positive) error was observed for any given run. All soft
watermarks at δ = 2.0 incur at most 1.6% (8/500) type-II error at z = 4. No type-II errors occurred for the hardest watermarks with
δ = 10.0 and γ = 0.25.
shown in the error tables shown on the chatGPT web API on Dec15th 2022. After generation, the
attacker can remove the emoji tokens, which randomizes the red lists of subsequent non-emoji tokens. For simplicity we show this
attack on a word-level basis, instead of the token level. Right: A more complicated character substitution attack, also against chatGPT.
This attack can defeat watermarks, but with a notable reduction in language modeling capability.
A more scalable version of this attack is to use automated
paraphrasing. An attacker that has access to a public language model can use this model to rephrase the output of the
generated model. We provide an experimental evaluation
of this attack in Section 7.1. Here, it is crucial to note the
trade-off that an attacker is making: The attacker is using
a weaker paraphrasing model to modify the text, reducing
both watermark strength and text fluency. If the attacker
had an equally strong language model at hand, there would
be no need to use the watermarked API, the attacker could
generate their own text.
Discreet Alterations. An attacker could make small alterations, adding additional whitespaces, or misspelling a
few words to impact the computation of the hash. A wellconstructed watermark should normalize text to ignore explicit whitespaces when computing the hash. Changing the
spelling of many words is likely to severely degrade the
quality of text. When implemented carefully, surface level
alterations should not pose a serious threat to a watermark.
Tokenization Attacks..
An attacker can modify text
so that sub-word tokenization of a subsequent word
For example (again with BPE), if the text
life.\nVerrilius is modified to
Verrilius (i.e. \n is replaced), then the tokenization of
the succeeding word also switches from V err ili us to
Ver r ili us. This results in more red list tokens than
one would expect from a single insertion. The attack can
contribute to the effectiveness of a more powerful attack,
but most tokens in a default sentence will not be vulnerable.
Homoglyph and Zero-Width Attacks. This is a special
case of the discreet alteration attack. The effect of tokenization attacks can be multiplied through homoglyph attacks
 . Homoglyphs attacks
are based on the fact that unicode characters are not unique,
with multiple unicode IDs resolving to the same (or a very
similar-looking) letter. This breaks tokenization, for example the word Lighthouse (two tokens) expands to 9
different tokens if i and s are replaced with their equivalent
Cyrillic unicode characters. Security against Homoglyph
and tokenization attacks can be maintained using input normalization before the text is tested for watermarks, for example via canonicalization as in Helfrich & Neff . Otherwise, simple replacements of characters with their homoglyphs could break enough tokens to remove the watermark.
Likewise, there are zero-width joiner/non-joiner unicode
characters that encode zero-width whitespace and hence are
effectively invisible in most languages. Like homoglyphs,
these characters must be removed through canonicalization
 .
Generative Attacks. Generative attacks abuse the capability of large language models for in-context learning, and
prompt the model to change its output in a predictable and
easily reversible way. For example, the Emoji attack of
Goodside proceeds by prompting the model to generate an emoji after every token, see Figure 5, left. These
emojis can be removed, randomizing the red list for subsequent tokens. More broadly, all attacks that prompt the
model to change its output “language” in a predictable way
can potentially cause this, for example prompting the model
to replace all letters a with e, see Figure 5, right. Or, as a
reverse homoglyph attack, prompting the model to “switch
the letter i with i”, where the second i is a Cyrillic letter.
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 11 of 13.
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
unattacked, AUC:0.998, PPL:6.3
ϵ = 0.1, AUC:0.988, PPL:13.1
ϵ = 0.3, AUC:0.954, PPL:21.2
ϵ = 0.5, AUC:0.838, PPL:28.4
ϵ = 0.7, AUC:0.696, PPL:33.9
Figure 6. ROC curves for watermark detection under attack via
the T5 Attack detailed in Section 7.1, with various replacement
budgets ε. The initial, unattacked watermark is a γ = 0.5, δ =
2.0 soft watermark generated using multinomial sampling. The
attack achieves a high level of watermark degradation, but only
at ε = 0.3, which costs the attacker an average of ∼15 points of
perplexity compared the PPL of the original watermarked text.
These attacks are the strongest tools against watermarking
to our knowledge, but also require a strong LM with the
capacity to follow the prompted rule without a loss in output
quality. Additionally, this increases the cost of text generation by requiring more tokens than usual to be generated
and reducing effective context width.
A defense against these attacks is to include negative
examples of such prompts during finetuning, training
the model to reject these requests. Note that instruction
finetuning is already common (for example in ChatGPT) for
other categories of malicious prompts, using reinforcement
learning protocols (RLHF) .
7.1. Degradation Under Attack: Span Replacement
Using a LM
We study a realistic black-box attack by attempting to remove the presence of the watermark by replacing spans in
the original output text using another language model. We
treat the watermark algorithm as if it is private, mocking
seclusion behind an API. The attacker does not have access
to the locations of green list tokens and instead tries to modify the text through token replacement at random indices
until a certain word replacement budget, ε, is reached. The
budget constraint maintains a level semantic similarity between the original watermarked text and the attacked text,
otherwise the “utility” of the original text for its intended
task may be lost. Also, each span replacement in the attack
is performed via inference using a multi-million parameter
language model. While this is roughly a third the size of the
target model, it means that the attack incurs an associated
cost per step implying that a base level of efficiency with
respect to model calls would be desired in practice.
In our experiment, we adopt T5-Large 
as the replacement model and iteratively select and replace
tokens until the attacker either reaches the budget, or no
more suitable replacement candidates are returned.
Details of the T5 Span Attack. We tokenize the watermarked text using the T5 tokenizer. Then, while fewer
than εT successful replacements have been performed or a
maximal iteration count is reached:
1. Randomly replace one word from the tokenization with
2. Pass the region of text surrounding the mask token
to T5 to obtain a list of k = 20 candidate replacement token sequences via a 50-way beam search, with
associated scores corresponding to their likelihood.
3. Each candidate is decoded into a string. If one of the
k candidates returned by the model is not equal to the
original string corresponding to the masked span, then
the attack succeeds, and the span is replaced with the
After attacking a set of 500 sequences of length T = 200±5
token sequences this way, we compute updated z-scores and
tabulate error rates (Table 8 in the Appendix). We also
generate ROC plots for a range of ε budgets. While this
attack is effective at increasing the number of red list tokens
in the text, as shown in Figure 6, we only measure a decrease
in watermark strength of 0.01 AUC when ε = 0.1. While
the watermark removal is more successful at a larger budget
of 0.3, the average PPL of attacked sequences increases by
3× in addition to requiring more model calls.
8. Related Work
The idea of watermarking, defined as unseen modifications
to data that hide identifying information, has a long
history. However, watermarking of digital text has been
considered challenging in the past, due to its discrete
nature . Watermarking
is considered easier for continuous-valued data, where
watermarks can be encoded with a variety of well-studied
strategies .
In the following, we note that watermarking, as a method
that encodes enough information to identify the source of a
text fragment, is strictly a subset of steganography, the task
of embedding arbitrary hidden information into data.
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 12 of 13.
Watermarking Natural Language. Early approaches to
watermarking natural text in digital form in Atallah et al.
 pose a similar problem with similar desiderata
as in our setting, except targeted towards classical models.
Given a string of text s, Atallah et al. propose to generate text s′ with the properties that s′ has similar meaning,
contains a watermark with an extremely small false-positive
rate that is not readable by a party without knowledge of the
secret key that generated the watermark, is hard to remove
through editing of s′ and is further detectable without knowledge of s (or the scheme generating s). The actual steganography scheme described therein is limited by its rule-based
understanding of natural text to modifications of parsed syntactic tree structures. Finally, the watermark can be read by
reconstructing the tree structure, with the chance of a falsepositive for a watermark of w bits vanishing quickly at 2−w.
Rule-based watermarks were further developed in a series of
works with variants also embedding watermarks based on synonym tables instead of
only parse trees. Early developments were summarized in
Jalil & Mirza , but strong watermarks significantly
degraded the text quality due to the limited flexibility of
language models at the time.
While approaches via hierarchical language models in Wilson et al. still required human interactions, the
emergence of modern neural language models also allowed for improved
watermarking/steganography . Fang
et al. propose such a neural steganography approach
where, to encode a message of w bits, the message is first
separated into blocks of length b. Then, the vocabulary V
of a language model is partitioned at random into disjoint
sets of size |V |/2b. A generative LM can then encode the
message by generating only a token from the “allowed” set
at each position. However, this hard rule reduces the quality
of generated text, boxing the LM into only a small selection
of valid tokens at every step. Other approaches, such as
Ueoka et al. use mask-infilling models such as BERT
to edit already-generated text for the purpose of steganography. Finally, Abdelnabi & Fritz design an end-to-end
system where both encoding and decoding are handled by
text-to-text language models that are trained adversarially.
With similar motivation to our proposal, Kaptchuk et al.
 constructs a framework that adapts traditional publickey cryptographic steganography specifically for “natural”
comunication channels like text using generative models.
However, their method, Meteor, relies on a synchronized
model framework where the sender and receiver agree on
a shared generative model used to embed and decode the
hidden bits of information being sent.
Recently, Aaronson announced that he is studying
cryptographic approaches to watermarking in collaboration
with OpenAI. Their preliminary method is based only on
biasing of the LM output, as opposed to complete determination as in Fang et al. . While details are not currently
available, the description suggests that hashing of n-gram
sequences is involved. We hope to extend our comparison
to this work when more information becomes available.
Note that a separate line of work investigates watermarking
model parameters themselves. This would not be used to
watermark model output (as in this work), but to defend
against model stealing .
Approaches, such as Gu et al. , implant backdoor triggers through a finetuning process to cause biased responses
to specific inputs, a behavior detectable at verification time.
In contrast to other currently published works, we want
to focus on strategies that are simultaneously minimally
restrictive to a language model, leverage the LMs own understanding of natural text, require no usage of the LM to
decode the watermark, and can be theoretically analyzed
and validated.
Post-hoc Detection. An alternative to watermarking is to
develop detection models that perform a post-hoc analysis
of machine-generated text, for example using language
model features or finetuning existing large language models
to behave as detectors ,
see an overview in Jawahar et al. . These detectors
work because LMs still leave detectable signals in generated
text. Implementation details, such as sampling strategies,
can be reverse-engineered from text .
However, detection approaches are slowly losing ground
as LM capabilities increase, for example Gambini et al.
 note that a range of detection strategies for GPT-2
already struggle with GPT-3. Further, known detectors
are also vulnerable to adversarial attacks that degrade their
functionality .
While efforts to provide strong detectors continue, as in
Tian , ultimately language model progress may make
detection infeasible. All post-hoc detection methods require
the LM to be significantly biased away from human text in
some measurable way, such as low variation in perplexity
across sentences . Even for current LLMs, this
margin might be small. This is already problematic, as
detection schemes that operate within this small margin
are susceptible to labeling human text as false-positive, a
concern that is especially pressing for people who produce
unusual text, such as a non-native speakers, and people
who use computer tools to assist them in writing. Such
populations might be especially at risk for false-positives,
which could lead to academic problems if these detectors
are used in schools .
A Watermark for Large Language Models.
The watermarking scheme we propose is designed so that
false positives are statistically improbable, regardless of the
writing patterns of any given human.
9. Conclusion
The presented watermark has a number of nice properties
that make it a practical choice: the watermark is computationally simple to verify without access to the underlying
model, false positive detections are statistically improbable,
and the watermark degrades gracefully under attack. Further, the proposed scheme can be retro-fitted to any existing
model that generates text via sampling from a next token
distribution, without retraining. Note, however, that careful
implementation and instruction tuning against generative
attacks may be required for very large models.
There is one more important property of the proposed
method that we have not discussed: The z-statistic used
to detect the watermark depends only on the green list size
parameter γ and the hash function for generating green lists.
There is no dependence on δ or any other factor related to
how the green list is enforced. For this reason, one can
deploy the watermark using context-specific δ choices or
green list enforcement rules for different kinds of text (e.g.,
prose vs code, or small vs large models) while using the
same downstream watermark detector. One can also change
a proprietary implementation of the watermarked sampling
algorithm without any need to change the detector. Finally,
the watermarking method could be turned on only in certain
contexts, for example when a specific user seems to exhibit
suspicious behavior.
There are still a number of remaining open questions regarding watermarking. For example, what kind of robust
hashing rules are possible, and when are these rules provably optimal? What is the best way to test for the watermark
in a streaming context, or in a context where a short span
of watermarked text lives inside a longer non-watermarked
span? Are there simple sensitivity bounds that are more
accurate than those presented above for large δ and small
γ? We hope our present results are enough to convince readers that watermarks could be a practical tool for combating
malicious uses of generative models, and we leave these
additional questions for future research
10. Acknowledgements
This work was made possible by the ONR MURI program,
DARPA GARD (HR00112020007), the Office of Naval Research (N000142112557), and the AFOSR MURI program.
Commercial support was provided by Capital One Bank, the
Amazon Research Award program, and Open Philanthropy.
Further support was provided by the National Science Foundation (IIS-2212182), and by the NSF TRAILS Institute
(2229885).