Online Detection of Unusual Events in Videos via Dynamic Sparse Coding
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
 
Li Fei-Fei
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
 
Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
 
Real-time unusual event detection in video stream has
been a difﬁcult challenge due to the lack of sufﬁcient training information, volatility of the deﬁnitions for both normality and abnormality, time constraints, and statistical limitation of the ﬁtness of any parametric models. We propose a
fully unsupervised dynamic sparse coding approach for detecting unusual events in videos based on online sparse reconstructibility of query signals from an atomically learned
event dictionary, which forms a sparse coding bases. Based
on an intuition that usual events in a video are more likely
to be reconstructible from an event dictionary, whereas unusual events are not, our algorithm employs a principled
convex optimization formulation that allows both a sparse
reconstruction code, and an online dictionary to be jointly
inferred and updated. Our algorithm is completely unsupervised, making no prior assumptions of what unusual events
may look like and the settings of the cameras. The fact
that the bases dictionary is updated in an online fashion as
the algorithm observes more data, avoids any issues with
concept drift. Experimental results on hours of real world
surveillance video and several Youtube videos show that the
proposed algorithm could reliably locate the unusual events
in the video sequence, outperforming the current state-ofthe-art methods.
1. Introduction
Recently, there has been growing interests in developing systems to automatically analyze video data. Of the
many possible tasks, detecting unusual events from video
sequence is of considerable practical importance.
As is often the case, one of the major difﬁculties in video
analysis is the huge amount of data, while it is often true
that only a small portion of video contains important information. Consequently, algorithms that could automatically
detect unusual events within streaming or archival video
would signiﬁcantly improve the efﬁciency of video analysis
and save valuable human attention for only the most salient
contents. It should be noted that the deﬁnition of unusual
events is rather subjective. In this paper, we deﬁne unusual
events as those incidences that occur very rarely in the entire video sequence .
In this work, we provide a framework of using sparse
coding and online re-constructibility to detect unusual
events in videos. A query video segment is projected onto
a set of sparse coding bases conceptually constituting usual
events, which are learned and updated realtime by the algorithm, where the reconstruction error is obtained. An unusual event in a video refers to those segments whose reconstruction errors are signiﬁcantly higher than the majority of the other (usual event) segments of the video. To our
knowledge, we offer the ﬁrst treatment of unusual event detection in this framework. Compared to previous work that
are either model-based , or clustering or saliency
based , our proposed sparse coding framework is
built upon a rigorous statistical principle, offering the following advantages: 1) It makes no prior assumptions of
what unusual events may look like, hence no need to obtain prior models, templates, knowledge of the clusters; 2)
It is completely unsupervised, leveraging only on the assumption that an unusual event is unlikely to occur in the
small initial portion of a video; and 3) Our learning algorithm continues to learn and updates its bases dictionary as
the algorithm observes more data, avoiding any issues with
concept drift.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We provide a brief overview of the proposed unusual event detection approach in the remainder of this section. Section 2
provides detailed explanation of the framework, followed
by a brief review of previous works on event detection and
sparse coding in Section 3. Section 4 demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm using hours of real
world surveillance video collected at a subway station and
Youtube videos, followed by conclusions in Section 5.
1.1. Overview of Our Approach
Figure 1 provides a ﬂowchart of the proposed unusual
event detection approach. Speciﬁcally, given a video se-
Figure 1. (Best viewed in color) Flowchart of our approach. Given an input video sequence, events are deﬁned using sliding windows (displayed as colored
boxes on the video frames). Within each sliding window, spatio-temporal interest points are detected (not shown in the ﬁgure), and a dictionary is learned
using previously seen video data. For a query event, reconstruction vectors using bases in the dictionary are learned by solving a sparse coding optimization
problem. Normality of the query event is then decided using these vectors. Finally, the dictionary is updated with the addition of the query event.
quence, the proposed method employs a sliding window
along both the spatial and temporal axes to deﬁne an event.
As the sliding window scans along the spatial and temporal
axes, the video is broken into a set of events, each represented by a group of spatio-temporal cuboids. The task of
unusual event detection is therefore formulated as detecting unusual group of cuboids residing in the same sliding
window. A dictionary is ﬁrst learnt from the video using
sparse coding and later updated in an online fashion as more
data become available. Given the learned dictionary, a reconstruction weight vector is learned for each query event
and a normality measure is computed from the reconstruction vectors. The proposed algorithm only needs to scan
through the video once, and online updating of the learned
dictionary makes the algorithm capable of handling concept
drift in the video sequence. Finally, using sparse coding enables the algorithm to robustly discriminate between truly
unusual events and noisy usual events.
2. Sparse Coding for Unusual Event Detection
2.1. Video Representation
The proposed unusual event detection algorithm adopts a
representation based on spatio-temporal cuboids (though it
should be noted that the proposed approach could be applied
over a variety of video descriptors), to detecte salient points
within the video and describe the local spatio-temporal
patch around the detected interest points. There have been
several attempts in detecting spatio-temporal interest points
in video sequences . Here, we adopt the spatiotemporal interest points detected using the method in ,
and describe each detected interest point with histogram of
gradient (HoG) and histogram of optical ﬂow (HoF). Figure 2 provides several frames from the video data used in
this paper and the detected spatio-temporal interest points
within these frames.
2.2. The Proposed Method
Given a video sequence, the proposed approach employs a sliding window along both the spatial and temporal
Figure 2. Example spatio-temporal interest points detected with the
method in .
axes to deﬁne an event. Consequently, as a video is represented as a set of cuboids, those cuboids residing in a sliding window deﬁne an event. As the sliding window scans
along the spatial and temporal axes, the video is broken
into a set of events, each represented by a group of spatiotemporal cuboids. Speciﬁcally, the video is represented as
X = {X1, . . . , Xm}, with each event Xi composed of a
group of cuboids, i.e., Xi = {X1
i , . . . , Xni
i }, where ni is
the total number of cuboids within the sliding window.
A Sparse Coding Formulation
In this work, detecting unusual events in video is formulated as a sparse coding problem. The basic idea for our
approach is to represent the knowledge of usual events using the learned dictionary D, whose columns are bases for
reconstructing signals. Different from conventional settings
of sparse coding, where the input signal is a vector, the input signal in unusual event detection is an event, composed
of a group of cuboids Xi = {X1
i , . . . , Xni
i }. Therefore, the
basic unit of input signal is no longer a vector, but instead
a group of vectors, with both spatial and temporal location
information. In addition to sparsity of the reconstruction
weight vectors, we also need to consider the relationships
between these weight vectors imposed by the neighborhood
structure of cuboids that deﬁne the event.
Given dictionary D (details about learning D will be
provided later in this section), we deﬁne the following objective function that measures the normality of an event
i , . . . , Xni
i } and a speciﬁc choice of reconstruction weight vectors αi = {α1
i , . . . , αni
J(Xi,αi,D) = 1
where subscripts j and k run through {1, . . . , ni} and λ1,
λ2 are regularization parameters. We now discuss in details
of each term in Eq. (1).
Figure 3. First row: usual event (leaving subway exit); second row: unusual event (entering subway exit). From left to right: example frame and
sliding window, reconstruction vectors for 3 cuboids, plot all 3 reconstruction vectors on the same ﬁgure.
Reconstruction error. The ﬁrst term in Eq. (1) is the
reconstruction error. For a usual event, this term should
be small, due to the assumption that the learned dictionary
represents knowledge in the previously seen video data. A
small reconstruction error means the information within the
newly observed event Xi has appeared in early part of the
video, which agrees with our deﬁnition of usual events.
Sparsity regularization. The second term is the sparsity regularization.
Enforcing sparsity for reconstructing
usual events is necessary due to the fact that dictionary D is
learned to maximize the sparsity1 of reconstruction vectors
for usual events in the video. On the other hand, for unusual
events, although it is possible that a fairly small reconstruction error could be achieved, we would expect using a large
amount of video fragments for this reconstruction, resulting
in a dense reconstruction weight vector. Figure 3 presents
the reconstruction weight vectors for 2 events in the video:
the ﬁrst event is usual, and the second is unusual. Results in
Figure 3 show that the reconstruction vectors for usual event
are sparse, while the ones for unusual event are dense.
Smoothness regularization.
The third term is the
smoothness regularization, where W ∈Rn1×n1 is the adjacency matrix of {X1
i , . . . , Xni
i }, with large value corresponding to neighboring cuboids and small value corresponding to far apart cuboids. This regularization is based
on the fact that similar motions at neighboring patches are
more likely to be involved in a usual event. Consequently,
it should be of higher probability for similar reconstruction
weight vectors being assigned to neighboring cuboids in a
usual event. The adjacency matrix W adopted in this paper
1In this paper, we deﬁne sparsity as the number of zero elements in a
is the Gaussian RBF kernel function:
−||xj−xk||2
−||yj−yk||2
−||tj−tk||2
where (xj, yj) and tj are spatial and temporal locations of
the jth cuboid, σ and τ are variances of the Gaussian function. In the last column of Figure 3, where all 3 reconstruction vectors are plotted on the same image, usual event
shows a signiﬁcant amount of overlap, while the reconstruction vectors for unusual event becomes even denser.
In summary, our sparse coding scheme presented above
encapsulates the following intuitions for what we would
think of usual and unusual events. Given a dictionary of
bases corresponding to usual events, a usual event should
be reconstructible from a small number of such bases, in a
way that the reconstruction weights change smoothly over
space/time across actions in such events. On the other hand,
an unusual event is either not reconstructible from the dictionary of usual events with small error, or, even if it is reconstructible, it would necessarily build on a combination
of a large number of bases in the dictionary, and possibly
in a temporal-spatially non-smooth fashion. Crucial to this
technique, is the ability to learn a good dictionary of bases
representing usual events, and being able to update the dictionary online to adapt to changing content of the video,
which we discuss in detail in next section.
Optimization
The objective function J(Xi, αi, D) of Eq. (1) measures
the normality of event Xi with any reconstruction weight
vector αi and any dictionary D. The lower J is, the more
likely an event Xi is normal. As both αi and D are latent
variables introduced in the formulation, to properly measure
the normality of an event Xi, we need to adopt the optimal
weight vector α∗
i and dictionary D∗which minimize the
objective function for the given event Xi. Speciﬁcally, assume there are m events in the video deﬁned using the sliding window, i.e., X = {X1, . . . , Xm}, the optimal reconstruction weight vector α∗
i and dictionary D∗are learned
by solving the following optimization problem
1, . . . , α∗
α1,...,αm,D
J(Xi, αi, D)
subject to proper constraints discussed later.
look into the above optimization problem reveals that the
problem is convex with respect to the coefﬁcients α =
{α1, . . . , αm} of the sparse decomposition when the dictionary D is ﬁxed, and also convex with respect to D when
α is ﬁxed. However, it is not jointly convex with respect to
D and α. A natural solution is to alternate between these
two variables, minimizing one while clamping the other.
We note that this alternating optimization algorithm converges to local optimum. With the learned dictionary D∗,
given a newly observed event X′, the algorithm learns the
optimal reconstruction weight vector α′ for this event. Consequently, J(X′, α′, D∗) measures the normality of event
X′. An event X′ is detected as unusual if its corresponding
J(X′, α′, D∗) is larger than certain threshold.
Learning Reconstruction Weight Vector (α) with
Fixed D. With dictionary D ﬁxed, reconstruction weight
vectors for different events are independent.
Therefore,
they could be optimized independently.
Speciﬁcally, for
event Xi = {X1
i , . . . , Xni
i }, the corresponding optimization problem is as follows
Except for the second term, both two other terms in the
objective function are convex quadratic functions of αi.
For the above L1 regularized convex function, the objective is not continuously differentiable. Consequently, the
most straightforward gradient-based methods are difﬁcult
to apply . Various approaches have been proposed to
solve this problem: generic QP solvers (e.g., CVX), interior
point method , a modiﬁcation of least angle regression
(LARS) and grafting . In this paper, we adopt the
feature-sign search algorithm introduced in to solve the
above L1 regularized optimization method.
Learning Dictionary (D) with Fixed α. With ﬁxed
coefﬁcients α, the optimization problem for dictionary D
is as follows
j=1,...,ni
∀j = 1, . . . , k, dT
The constraint in (7) is introduced to prevent terms in D
from being arbitrarily large, which would result in arbitrarily small values of α . The above optimization problem
is a least squares problem with quadratic constraints. In this
work, we solve this problem using Lagrange dual.
2.3. Online Dictionary Update
As we stated in the Introduction, one contribution of our
work is to automatically learn the video dictionary and perform ongoing learning as we continue to observe the sequence.
Unlike previous work where a model for usual
events is ﬁrst learned using training data , our
fully unsupervised framework can be much more practical
in real-world scenarios.
Speciﬁcally, the above formulation needs initial training
data to learn the dictionary. In video surveillance, it is often
challenging to obtain such suitable training data. Even if
we were provided with a set of training data, we postulate
that the bases dictionary learned from the training data is
not necessarily optimal for detecting unusual events in new
query videos. We therefore propose an online dictionary
learning algorithm in this section that requires no training
data other than the video sequence itself. Our idea is to
ﬁrst learn an initial dictionary using an initial portion of the
video, and update this learned dictionary using each newly
observed event.
Assume the algorithm has observed t-th event in the
video, the optimal dictionary is the solution of the following
optimization problem
j=1,...,ni
where C = {D ∈Rm×k :
j dj ≤1, ∀j = 1, . . . , k}.
Ideally, to solve this problem, we would need all t events
{X1, . . . , Xt}. However, storing these events requires huge
space and solving the optimization problem from scratch is
time consuming. Therefore, the online algorithm we propose here aims to ﬁnding the optimal dictionary Dt given
Dt−1 and Xt.
Speciﬁcally, we use projected ﬁrst order
stochastic gradient descent, consisting of the following update :
t ∇Dl(Xt, Dt−1)
where l(Xt, Dt−1) = 1
j=1,...,nt||Xj
the learning rate, ΠC is the orthogonal projection onto C.
2.4. Unusual Event Detection
As brieﬂy mentioned in previous section, given a newly
observed event X′ and the current dictionary D∗, the proposed algorithm learns the corresponding optimal reconstruction weight vector α′. X′ is detected as an unusual
event if the following criterion is satisﬁed
J(X′, α′, D∗) > ˆϵ
where ˆϵ is a user deﬁned threshold that controls the sensitivity of the algorithm to unusual events. Combining everything together, Algorithm 1 presents our unusual event
detection method.
3. Related Works
Several attempts have been proposed in the literature on
unsupervised unusual event detection in videos . Speciﬁcally, studies the problem using tracking trajectories. However, even with the recent advances in tracking techniques, reliably tracking an object in
Algorithm 1 Unusual event detection using sparse coding
Input: video data, learning rate η, threshold ˆϵ
Learn initial dictionary using ﬁrst N frames in video
Use sliding window to obtain event Xt
Learn optimal reconstruction vectors αt for event Xt
by solving Eq. (4) with D = Dt−1
if J(Xt, αt, Dt−1) > ˆϵ then
Fire alarm for event Xt
Update dictionary D with Eq. (9)
until reach the end of video
crowded video is still a very challenging research problem.
Clustering methods have also been applied to detect
unusual events, where the detection is carried out by ﬁnding
spatially isolated clusters. The fact that these methods only
run in batch mode severely limits their applicability. proposes a simple yet effective approach that measures typical
ﬂow directions and speeds on a grid in the video frame to
detect unusual events. This algorithm is good for detecting
simple events such as moving in the wrong direction. 
proposes a database indexing algorithm, where the problem
is formulated as composing the new observed video data
using spatio-temporal patches extracted from previous visual examples. Regions in the query video that can be composed using large contiguous chunks of data from the example database are considered normal. Although this algorithm shows good performance in discriminating complex
motions, it faces scalability issues as its time and memory
complexity is linear in the size of the example database. Finally, utilizes a space-time Markov random ﬁeld to detect unusual events, where an MRF model is built for usual
events and those events that could not be described with the
learned model is considered as unusual.
On the other hand, sparse coding has shown promising results in ﬁnding succinct representations of stimuli. For
example, applying sparse coding algorithm to natural images has been shown to be capable of learning the bases
resembling the receptive ﬁelds of neurons in the visual cortex . Moreover, sparse coding has been shown to
produce localized bases when applied to other natural stimuli such as video and speech . Different from conventional sparse coding, where the bases in dictionary are
ﬁxed after training, the dictionary in our dynamic sparse
coding framework is updated online to adapt to changing
content of the video.
4. Experiments
In this section, we show the empirical performance of
the proposed unusual event detection algorithm, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
4.1. Subway Surveillance Video
The ﬁrst 2 data sets are video sequences taken from
surveillance camera at a subway station, with one camera
monitoring the exit and the other monitoring the entrance.
In both videos, there are roughly 10 people walking around
in a typical frame, with a frame size of 512 × 384. The
videos are provided by courtesy of Adam et al. and we
compare quantitatively the detection results of our approach
against the method in .
Subway Exit
The subway exit surveillance video is 43 minutes long with
64901 frames in total. To ensure a fair qualitative comparison, we follow the same deﬁnition of unusual events used
in for the same data set, though it should be noted that
the deﬁnition of unusual events is rather subjective. Specifically, 3 types of unusual events are deﬁned in the subway
exit video: (a) walking in the wrong direction (WD); (b)
loitering near the exit (LT) and (c) misc, including suddenly
stop and look around, janitor cleaning the wall, someone
gets off the train and gets on again very soon. Totally, 19
unusual events are deﬁned as ground truth.
We use a sliding window of size 80 × 80 pixels along
x and y axes, and 40 frames along t axis in our approach.
The ﬁst 5 minutes of the video, same as in , is used to
build initial dictionary. Before providing the unusual event
detection results, we ﬁrst show the dictionary learned using
our approach in Figure 4. Speciﬁcally, Figure 4 visualizes
Figure 4. Dictionary learned using our approach for subway exit surveillance video. Each row in the ﬁgure corresponds to a basis in the dictionary.
Typical activities in this dictionary include: walking to the left or right,
walking towards the camera, train leaving station, etc.
randomly selected 10 bases in the learned dictionary (the
size of the learned dictionary is 100). We observe that the
learned bases of the dictionary reﬂects our intuition about
what common and usual events are in this video: people
walking towards the camera (exiting the subway), walking to the left or right, train leaving station, etc.
provides quantitative results on unusual event detection accuracy and false alarm rate. We follow the same annotation used in , where a frame range is deﬁned for each
unusual event. For evaluation, once the algorithm detects
ST-MRF 
Table 1. Comparison of unusual event detection rate and false alarm rate
on subway exit surveillance data: GT stands for ground truth annotation;
ST-MRF refers to the method proposed in .
Figure 5. Unusual event detection in the subway exit surveillance video.
WD: wrong direction; LT: loitering; MISC: misc; FA: false alarm. The
rectangle on the ﬁgure marks the sliding window that results in the detection of unusual events. False alarms are marked using green sub-window.
at least one frame in the annotated range, the detection is
counted as correct. On the other hand, false alarm is also
measured in the same way: at least one frame is ﬁred outside the annotated range, then it is counted as false alarm2.
Figure 5 shows the detection results on the subway exit
data, including the correct detections, and false alarms. Our
method can detect an unusual event even within a crowded
scene with occlusions (e.g., Figure 5(d)). Also, we can see
that our method captures the unusual event caused by ﬁne
scale irregular motion (e.g., Figure 5(k)), or abnormal event
resulted by irregular temporal ordering of activities (e.g.,
Figure 5(j)). We also illustrate two false alarms detected by
our algorithm (Figure 5(o) & (p)). Curiously, looking closer
into the video, these two events are indeed “unusual”: Figure 5(o) is due to the ﬁrst appearance of a child, and Figure
5(p) is due to the action of a man stopping near the exit and
looking back. They are missed in ground truth annotations,
hence labeled as FA in evaluation.
Time Complexity: We implement our algorithm using
MATLAB 7.0 on a 2.60GHZ Intel CoreTM2 Duo PC with
2.0GB main memory. Learning initial dictionary took about
20 minutes. For each sliding window, learning reconstruction vectors took 0.2 seconds on average. In each frame,
there are roughly 10 sliding windows being tested for unusual events. Consequently, unusual event detection in each
frame was done in about 2 seconds.
2There are other evaluation metrics which could also be reasonable. We
use this evaluation metric to be able to compare with .
Subway Entrance
The subway entrance video is 1 hour 36 minutes long with
144249 frames in total. 66 unusual events are deﬁned, covering 5 different types: (a) walking in the wrong direction
(WD); (b) no payment (NP); (c) loitering (LT); (d) irregular interactions between people (II) and (e) misc, including
sudden stop, running fast.
We use the same sliding window as in subway exit video,
and the ﬁst 15 minutes for training as in .
6 shows the dictionary learned by our approach, where
we randomly select 12 bases out of 200 in the dictionary. This dictionary shows activities such as people walking to the left or right, walking away from the camera,
which are usual events in this video.
Quantitative com-
Figure 6. Dictionary learned using our approach for subway entrance
surveillance data. Each row in the ﬁgure corresponds to a basis in the
dictionary. Typical activities in this dictionary include: walking to the left
or right, walking away from the camera, etc.
parison results with are shown in Table 2, where our
approach achieves higher detection rate and fewer false
alarms. Moreover, as reported in , the approach in 
fails to detect abnormal activities with irregular temporal orderings, such as Figure 5(j), people getting off the train and
getting back quickly. Also, the method in results in an
order magnitude more false alarms than . Moreover, the
clustering-based method cannot detect events happening at a ﬁne local scale, such as Figure 7(e) & (f). Therefore, while achieving slightly better qualitative performance
than , our method also clearly outperforms the methods
in and by a large margin.
Figure 7 displays unusual events detected using our approach. Our method not only detects abnormalities in a
ﬁne scale (e.g., Figure 7(e) & (f)), but also unusual events
caused by irregular interactions between people (e.g., Figure 7(j)). Moreover, we can see that our method could correctly detect abnormal activities where both usual and unusual events occur in the same frame (e.g., Figure 7(g)).
Figure 7. Unusual event detection in the subway entrance surveillance
video. WD: wrong direction; NP: no payment; LT: loitering; II: irregular
interations; MISC: misc; MISS: missed unusual event; FA: false alarm.
ST-MRF 
Table 2. Comparison of unusual event detection rate and false alarm rate
on subway entrance surveillance data.
Correct Detection
False Alarm
Table 3. Comparison of unusual event detection rate and false alarm rate:
online updating dictionary vs. ﬁxed dictionary. The number before ’/’ is
for subway exit surveillance data, while the number after ’/’ is for entrance
surveillance data.
Analysis Experiment:
Online Update of the
Learned Dictionary
In our approach, the learned dictionary is updated after observing each new event using projected stochastic gradient
descent. In this section, we compare the results of our algorithm with the method using initially learned dictionary
throughout the entire video sequence. Speciﬁcally, in the
subway exit surveillance data, the second method learns an
initial dictionary using the ﬁrst 5 minutes of video and keep
this dictionary ﬁxed in the entire detection process. Similarly, in the subway entrance video data, the second method
employs the ﬁxed dictionary learned from ﬁrst 15 minutes
of video. Table 3 compares the detection accuracy and false
alarms of the two methods. The method using ﬁxed dictionary generally gives more false alarms than our approach.
This result underscores our contribution in developing an
online learning framework to update the bases dictionary.
Without the online updates, the Fixed Dictionary method
shows the inability for adapting to the changing contents of
the video, resulting in a much greater error rate.
4.2. Unusual Event Detection in Youtube Videos
The above experiment has demonstrated our model’s superiority in unusual event detection in surveillance videos,
where the camera is ﬁxed and the environment is relatively
controlled. But our framework is a general approach that
makes no assumptions of the cameras, the types of environment, or the contents of the video. In this section, we apply
our method to a number of videos “in the wild”, highlighting its application to a wide range of data. We downloaded a
number of videos from YouTube. As Figure 8 shows, these
videos have very different camera motion (rotation, zoom
in/out, fast tracking, slow motion, etc.), contains different
categories of targets (human, vehicles, animals, etc.) and
covers a wide variety of activities and environmental conditions (indoor, outdoor).
For each of the 8 Youtube videos, we use approximately
the ﬁrst 1/5 of video data to learn an initial dictionary, and
display detected unusual events in Figure 8. With no model
assumptions of what is unusual, no need for templates, no
supervision or training, our method could correctly detect
abnormal activities in these real world low-quality videos.
5. Conclusions
We propose an unsupervised algorithm to automatically
detect unusual events from a video sequence.
video segment is projected onto a set of sparse coding bases
learned by the algorithm, to obtain the reconstruction vectors. Normality is then computed based on these reconstruction vectors. Moreover, the sparse coding bases are updated
dynamically in an online fashion, to capture possible concept drift in video contents. Experimental results on two
real world surveillance videos and several Youtube videos
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
Acknowledgements
E. P. Xing is supported by NSF IIS-0713379, DBI-
0546594, Career Award, ONR N000140910758, DARPA
NBCH1080007 and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
F is partially supported by an NSF CAREER grant (IIS-
0845230), an ONR MURI grant, and the DARPA Mind’s
Eye program. We thank Juan Carlos Niebles and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.