Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 823–833,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Tree-to-Sequence Attentional Neural Machine Translation
Akiko Eriguchi, Kazuma Hashimoto, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka
The University of Tokyo, 3-7-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{eriguchi, hassy, tsuruoka}@logos.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Most of the existing Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) models focus on the
conversion of sequential data and do
not directly use syntactic information.
We propose a novel end-to-end syntactic NMT model, extending a sequenceto-sequence model with the source-side
phrase structure.
Our model has an attention mechanism that enables the decoder to generate a translated word while
softly aligning it with phrases as well as
words of the source sentence.
Experimental results on the WAT’15 Englishto-Japanese dataset demonstrate that our
proposed model considerably outperforms
sequence-to-sequence
attentional
models and compares favorably with the
state-of-the-art tree-to-string SMT system.
Introduction
Machine Translation (MT) has traditionally been
one of the most complex language processing
problems, but recent advances of Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) make it possible to perform
translation using a simple end-to-end architecture.
In the Encoder-Decoder model , a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) called the encoder reads the whole
sequence of source words to produce a ﬁxedlength vector, and then another RNN called the
decoder generates the target words from the vector.
The Encoder-Decoder model has been extended with an attention mechanism , which allows the
model to jointly learn the soft alignment between
the source language and the target language. NMT
models have achieved state-of-the-art results in
English-to-French and English-to-German trans-
Figure 1: Alignment between an English phrase
and a Japanese word.
lation tasks approaches in translation tasks for structurally distant language pairs
such as English-to-Japanese.
Figure 1 shows a pair of parallel sentences in
English and Japanese. English and Japanese are
linguistically distant in many respects; they have
different syntactic constructions, and words and
phrases are deﬁned in different lexical units. In
this example, the Japanese word “緑茶” is aligned
with the English words “green” and “tea”, and
the English word sequence “a cup of” is aligned
with a special symbol “null”, which is not explicitly translated into any Japanese words. One way
to solve this mismatch problem is to consider the
phrase structure of the English sentence and align
the phrase “a cup of green tea” with “緑茶”. In
SMT, it is known that incorporating syntactic constituents of the source language into the models
improves word alignment and translation accuracy . However, the existing
NMT models do not allow us to perform this kind
of alignment.
In this paper, we propose a novel attentional
NMT model to take advantage of syntactic infor-
mation. Following the phrase structure of a source
sentence, we encode the sentence recursively in a
bottom-up fashion to produce a vector representation of the sentence and decode it while aligning
the input phrases and words with the output. Our
experimental results on the WAT’15 English-to-
Japanese translation task show that our proposed
model achieves state-of-the-art translation accuracy.
Neural Machine Translation
Encoder-Decoder Model
NMT is an end-to-end approach to data-driven
machine translation . In other words, the NMT models directly
estimate the conditional probability p(y|x) given
a large collection of source and target sentence
pairs (x, y). An NMT model consists of an encoder process and a decoder process, and hence
they are often called Encoder-Decoder models. In
the Encoder-Decoder models, a sentence is treated
as a sequence of words.
In the encoder process, the encoder embeds each of the source words
x = (x1, x2, · · · , xn) into a d-dimensional vector
space. The decoder then outputs a word sequence
y = (y1, y2, · · · , ym) in the target language given
the information on the source sentence provided
by the encoder. Here, n and m are the lengths
of the source and target sentences, respectively.
RNNs allow one to effectively embed sequential
data into the vector space.
In the RNN encoder, the i-th hidden unit hi ∈
Rd×1 is calculated given the i-th input xi and the
previous hidden unit hi−1 ∈Rd×1,
fenc(xi, hi−1),
where fenc is a non-linear function, and the initial
hidden unit h0 is usually set to zeros. The encoding function fenc is recursively applied until the nth hidden unit hn is obtained. The RNN Encoder-
Decoder models assume that hn represents a vector of the meaning of the input sequence up to the
n-th word.
After encoding the whole input sentence into
the vector space, we decode it in a similar way.
The initial decoder unit s1 is initialized with the
input sentence vector (s1 = hn). Given the previous target word and the j-th hidden unit of the
decoder, the conditional probability that the j-th
target word is generated is calculated as follows:
p(yj|y<j, x)
where g is a non-linear function. The j-th hidden
unit of the decoder is calculated by using another
non-linear function fdec as follows:
fdec(yj−1, sj−1).
We employ Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
units in place of vanilla RNN units. The tth LSTM unit consists of several gates and two
different types of states: a hidden unit ht ∈Rd×1
and a memory cell ct ∈Rd×1,
σ(W (i)xt + U (i)ht−1 + b(i)),
σ(W (f)xt + U (f)ht−1 + b(f)),
σ(W (o)xt + U (o)ht−1 + b(o)),
tanh(W (˜c)xt + U (˜c)ht−1 + b(˜c)),
it ⊙˜ct + ft ⊙ct−1,
ot ⊙tanh(ct),
where each of it, ft, ot and ˜ct ∈Rd×1 denotes
an input gate, a forget gate, an output gate, and a
state for updating the memory cell, respectively.
W (·) ∈Rd×d and U (·) ∈Rd×d are weight matrices, b(·) ∈Rd×1 is a bias vector, and xt ∈Rd×1
is the word embedding of the t-th input word. σ(·)
is the logistic function, and the operator ⊙denotes
element-wise multiplication between vectors.
Attentional Encoder-Decoder Model
The NMT models with an attention mechanism 
have been proposed to softly align each decoder
state with the encoder states. The attention mechanism allows the NMT models to explicitly quantify how much each encoder state contributes to
the word prediction at each time step.
In the attentional NMT model in Luong et al.
 , at the j-th step of the decoder process,
the attention score αj(i) between the i-th source
hidden unit hi and the j-th target hidden unit sj is
calculated as follows:
exp(hi · sj)
k=1 exp(hk · sj),
where hi · sj is the inner product of hi and sj,
which is used to directly calculate the similarity
score between hi and sj. The j-th context vector
Figure 2: Attentional Encoder-Decoder model.
dj is calculated as the summation vector weighted
To incorporate the attention mechanism into the
decoding process, the context vector is used for the
the j-th word prediction by putting an additional
hidden layer ˜sj:
˜sj = tanh(Wd[sj; dj] + bd),
where [sj; dj] ∈R2d×1 is the concatenation of sj
and dj, and Wd ∈Rd×2d and bd ∈Rd×1 are a
weight matrix and a bias vector, respectively. The
model predicts the j-th word by using the softmax
p(yj|y<j, x) = softmax(Ws˜sj + bs),
where Ws ∈R|V |×d and bs ∈R|V |×1 are a weight
matrix and a bias vector, respectively. |V | stands
for the size of the vocabulary of the target language. Figure 2 shows an example of the NMT
model with the attention mechanism.
Objective Function of NMT Models
The objective function to train the NMT models
is the sum of the log-likelihoods of the translation
pairs in the training data:
log p(y|x),
where D denotes a set of parallel sentence pairs.
The model parameters θ are learned through
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
Attentional Tree-to-Sequence Model
Tree-based Encoder + Sequential
The exsiting NMT models treat a sentence as a
sequence of words and neglect the structure of
Figure 3: Proposed model: Tree-to-sequence attentional NMT model.
a sentence inherent in language.
We propose a
novel tree-based encoder in order to explicitly take
the syntactic structure into consideration in the
NMT model. We focus on the phrase structure of
a sentence and construct a sentence vector from
phrase vectors in a bottom-up fashion. The sentence vector in the tree-based encoder is therefore composed of the structural information rather
than the sequential data. Figure 3 shows our proposed model, which we call a tree-to-sequence attentional NMT model.
In Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar
(HPSG) , a sentence is composed
of multiple phrase units and represented as a binary tree as shown in Figure 1.
Following the
structure of the sentence, we construct a tree-based
encoder on top of the standard sequential encoder.
The k-th parent hidden unit h(phr)
for the k-th
phrase is calculated using the left and right child
hidden units hl
k as follows:
where ftree is a non-linear function.
We construct a tree-based encoder with LSTM
units, where each node in the binary tree is represented with an LSTM unit. When initializing the
leaf units of the tree-based encoder, we employ the
sequential LSTM units described in Section 2.1.
Each non-leaf node is also represented with an
LSTM unit, and we employ Tree-LSTM to calculate the LSTM unit of the parent node which has two child LSTM units. The
hidden unit h(phr)
∈Rd×1 and the memory cell
∈Rd×1 for the k-th parent node are calcu-
lated as follows:
k + b(i)),
k + b(fl)),
k + U (fr)
k + b(fr)),
k + b(o)),
tanh(U (˜c)
k + U (˜c)
k + b(˜c)),
ik ⊙˜ck + f l
ok ⊙tanh(c(phr)
where ik, f l
k, oj, ˜cj ∈Rd×1 are an input
gate, the forget gates for left and right child units,
an output gate, and a state for updating the memory cell, respectively.
k are the memory cells for the left and right child units, respectively. U (·) ∈Rd×d denotes a weight matrix, and
b(·) ∈Rd×1 represents a bias vector.
Our proposed tree-based encoder is a natural
extension of the conventional sequential encoder,
since Tree-LSTM is a generalization of chainstructured LSTM . Our encoder
differs from the original Tree-LSTM in the calculation of the LSTM units for the leaf nodes.
The motivation is to construct the phrase nodes in
a context-sensitive way, which, for example, allows the model to compute different representations for multiple occurrences of the same word in
a sentence because the sequential LSTMs are calculated in the context of the previous units. This
ability contrasts with the original Tree-LSTM, in
which the leaves are composed only of the word
embeddings without any contextual information.
Initial Decoder Setting
We now have two different sentence vectors: one
is from the sequence encoder and the other from
the tree-based encoder. As shown in Figure 3, we
provide another Tree-LSTM unit which has the ﬁnal sequential encoder unit (hn) and the tree-based
encoder unit (h(phr)
root ) as two child units and set it
as the initial decoder s1 as follows:
s1 = gtree(hn, h(phr)
where gtree is the same function as ftree with another set of Tree-LSTM parameters. This initialization allows the decoder to capture information
from both the sequential data and phrase structures. Zoph and Knight proposed a similar method using a Tree-LSTM for initializing the
decoder, with which they translate multiple source
languages to one target language. When the syntactic parser fails to output a parse tree for a sentence, we encode the sentence with the sequential
encoder by setting h(phr)
root = 0. Our proposed treebased encoder therefore works with any sentences.
Attention Mechanism in Our Model
We adopt the attention mechanism into our treeto-sequence model in a novel way.
gives attention not only to sequential hidden units
but also to phrase hidden units.
This attention
mechanism tells us which words or phrases in the
source sentence are important when the model decodes a target word. The j-th context vector dj
is composed of the sequential and phrase vectors
weighted by the attention score αj(i):
αj(i)h(phr)
Note that a binary tree has n −1 phrase nodes if
the tree has n leaves. We set a ﬁnal decoder ˜sj in
the same way as Equation (7).
input-feeding
method in our model, which
is a method for feeding ˜sj−1, the previous unit
to predict the word yj−1, into the current target
hidden unit sj,
sj = fdec(yj−1, [sj−1; ˜sj−1]),
where [sj−1; ˜sj−1] is the concatenation of sj−1
and ˜sj−1. The input-feeding approach contributes
to the enrichment in the calculation of the decoder,
because ˜sj−1 is an informative unit which can be
used to predict the output word as well as to be
compacted with attentional context vectors. Luong et al. showed that the input-feeding
approach improves BLEU scores.
We also observed the same improvement in our preliminary
experiments.
Sampling-Based Approximation to the
NMT Models
The biggest computational bottleneck of training the NMT models is in the calculation of the
softmax layer described in Equation (8), because
its computational cost increases linearly with the
size of the vocabulary.
The speedup technique
with GPUs has proven useful for sequence-based
NMT models but it is not easily applicable when dealing with tree-structured data. In order to reduce
the training cost of the NMT models at the softmax layer, we employ BlackOut , a
sampling-based approximation method. BlackOut
has been shown to be effective in RNN Language
Models (RNNLMs) and allows a model to run reasonably fast even with a million word vocabulary
with CPUs.
At each word prediction step in the training,
BlackOut estimates the conditional probability in
Equation (2) for the target word and K negative samples using a weighted softmax function. The negative samples are drawn from the
unigram distribution raised to the power β
 .
The unigram distribution is estimated using the training data and
β is a hyperparameter.
BlackOut is closely related to Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) and achieves better
perplexity than the original softmax and NCE in
RNNLMs. The advantages of Blackout over the
other methods are discussed in Ji et al. .
Note that BlackOut can be used as the original
softmax once the training is ﬁnished.
Experiments
Training Data
We applied the proposed model to the English-to-
Japanese translation dataset of the ASPEC corpus
given in WAT’15.1 Following Zhu , we extracted the ﬁrst 1.5 million translation pairs from
the training data. To obtain the phrase structures
of the source sentences, i.e., English, we used the
probabilistic HPSG parser Enju . We used Enju only to obtain a binary
phrase structure for each sentence and did not use
any HPSG speciﬁc information.
For the target
language, i.e., Japanese, we used KyTea , a Japanese segmentation tool, and
performed the pre-processing steps recommended
in WAT’15.2 We then ﬁltered out the translation
pairs whose sentence lengths are longer than 50
and whose source sentences are not parsed successfully. Table 1 shows the details of the datasets
used in our experiments. We carried out two experiments on a small training dataset to investigate
1 
WAT2015/index.html
2 
WAT2015/baseline/dataPreparationJE.html
Parsed successfully
Development
Table 1: Dataset in ASPEC corpus.
Train (small)
Train (large)
sentence pairs
|V | in English
|V | in Japanese
Table 2: Training dataset and the vocabulary sizes.
the effectiveness of our proposed model and on
a large training dataset to compare our proposed
methods with the other systems.
The vocabulary consists of words observed in
the training data more than or equal to N times.
We set N = 2 for the small training dataset and
N = 5 for the large training dataset. The out-ofvocabulary words are mapped to the special token
“unk”. We added another special symbol “eos” for
both languages and inserted it at the end of all the
sentences. Table 2 shows the details of each training dataset and its corresponding vocabulary size.
Training Details
The biases,
softmax weights,
and BlackOut
weights are initialized with zeros. The hyperparameter β of BlackOut is set to 0.4 as recommended by Ji et al. . Following J´ozefowicz
et al. , we initialize the forget gate biases of
LSTM and Tree-LSTM with 1.0. The remaining
model parameters in the NMT models in our experiments are uniformly initialized in [−0.1, 0.1].
The model parameters are optimized by plain SGD
with the mini-batch size of 128. The initial learning rate of SGD is 1.0. We halve the learning rate
when the development loss becomes worse. Gradient norms are clipped to 3.0 to avoid exploding
gradient problems .
Small Training Dataset
We conduct experiments with our proposed model and the sequential
attentional NMT model with the input-feeding approach. Each model has 256-dimensional hidden
units and word embeddings. The number of negative samples K of BlackOut is set to 500 or 2000.
Large Training Dataset
Our proposed model
has 512-dimensional word embeddings and ddimensional hidden units (d ∈{512, 768, 1024}).
K is set to 2500.
Our code3 is implemented in C++ using the
Eigen library,4 a template library for linear algebra, and we run all of the experiments on multicore CPUs.5 It takes about a week to train a model
on the large training dataset with d = 512.
Decoding process
We use beam search to decode a target sentence
for an input sentence x and calculate the sum
of the log-likelihoods of the target sentence y =
(y1, · · · , ym) as the beam score:
score(x, y) =
log p(yj|y<j, x).
Decoding in the NMT models is a generative process and depends on the target language model
given a source sentence.
The score becomes
smaller as the target sentence becomes longer, and
thus the simple beam search does not work well
when decoding a long sentence . In our preliminary
experiments, the beam search with the length normalization in Cho et al. was not effective
in English-to-Japanese translation.
The method
in Pouget-Abadie et al. needs to estimate
the conditional probability p(x|y) using another
NMT model and thus is not suitable for our work.
In this paper, we use statistics on sentence
lengths in beam search. Assuming that the length
of a target sentence correlates with the length of
a source sentence, we redeﬁne the score of each
candidate as follows:
score(x, y) = Lx,y +
log p(yj|y<j, x),(16)
Lx,y = log p(len(y)|len(x)),
where Lx,y is the penalty for the conditional probability of the target sentence length len(y) given
the source sentence length len(x).
the model to decode a sentence by considering
the length of the target sentence. In our experiments, we computed the conditional probability
3 
4 
516 threads on Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2667 v3 @
p(len(y)|len(x)) in advance following the statistics collected in the ﬁrst one million pairs of the
training dataset. We allow the decoder to generate
up to 100 words.
Evaluation
We evaluated the models by two automatic evaluation metrics, RIBES and
BLEU following WAT’15.
We used the KyTea-based evaluation script for the
translation results.6 The RIBES score is a metric
based on rank correlation coefﬁcients with word
precision, and the BLEU score is based on n-gram
word precision and a Brevity Penalty (BP) for outputs shorter than the references. RIBES is known
to have stronger correlation with human judgements than BLEU in translation between English
and Japanese as discussed in Isozaki et al. .
Results and Discussion
Small Training Dataset
Table 3 shows the perplexity, BLEU, RIBES, and
the training time on the development data with the
Attentional NMT (ANMT) models trained on the
small dataset. We conducted the experiments with
our proposed method using BlackOut and softmax. We decoded a translation by our proposed
beam search with a beam size of 20.
As shown in Table 3, the results of our proposed
model with BlackOut improve as the number of
negative samples K increases. Although the result
of softmax is better than those of BlackOut , the training time of softmax per epoch
is about three times longer than that of BlackOut
even with the small dataset.
As to the results of the ANMT model, reversing
the word order in the input sentence decreases the
scores in English-to-Japanese translation, which
contrasts with the results of other language pairs
reported in previous work . By taking syntactic information into consideration, our proposed model
improves the scores, compared to the sequential
attention-based approach.
We found that better perplexity does not always
lead to better translation scores with BlackOut as
shown in Table 3. One of the possible reasons is
that BlackOut distorts the target word distribution
6 
evaluation/automatic_evaluation_systems/
automaticEvaluationJA.html
Perplexity
Time/epoch (min.)
Proposed model
Proposed model
Proposed model (Softmax)
ANMT 
+ reverse input
ANMT 
+ reverse input
Table 3: Evaluation results on the development data using the small training data. The training time per
epoch is also shown, and K is the number of negative samples in BlackOut.
20.0 (90.1)
19.5 (85.1)
Proposed BS
20.5 (91.7)
Table 4: Effects of the Beam Search (BS) on the
development data.
by the modiﬁed unigram-based negative sampling
where frequent words can be treated as the negative samples multiple times at each training step.
Effects of the proposed beam search
shows the results on the development data of proposed method with BlackOut by
the simple beam search and our proposed beam
search. The beam size is set to 6 or 20 in the simple beam search, and to 20 in our proposed search.
We can see that our proposed search outperforms
the simple beam search in both scores.
RIBES, the BLEU score is sensitive to the beam
size and becomes lower as the beam size increases.
We found that the BP had a relatively large impact on the BLEU score in the simple beam search
as the beam size increased. Our search method
works better than the simple beam search by keeping long sentences in the candidates with a large
beam size.
Effects of the sequential LSTM units
investigated the effects of the sequential LSTMs
at the leaf nodes in our proposed tree-based encoder. Table 5 shows the result on the development data of our proposed encoder and that of an
attentional tree-based encoder without sequential
LSTMs with BlackOut .7 The results
show that our proposed encoder considerably out-
7For this evaluation, we used the 1,789 sentences that
were successfully parsed by Enju because the encoder without sequential LSTMs always requires a parse tree.
Without sequential LSTMs
With sequential LSTMs
Table 5: Effects of the sequential LSTMs in our
proposed tree-based encoder on the development
performs the encoder without sequential LSTMs,
suggesting that the sequential LSTMs at the leaf
nodes contribute to the context-aware construction
of the phrase representations in the tree.
Large Training Dataset
Table 6 shows the experimental results of RIBES
and BLEU scores achieved by the trained models
on the large dataset. We decoded the target sentences by our proposed beam search with the beam
size of 20.8 The results of the other systems are the
ones reported in Nakazawa et al. .
All of our proposed models show similar performance regardless of the value of d. Our ensemble model is composed of the three models with
d = 512, 768, and 1024, and it shows the best
RIBES score among all systems.9
As for the time required for training, our implementation needs about one day to perform one
epoch on the large training dataset with d = 512.
It would take about 11 days without using the
BlackOut sampling.
Comparison with the NMT models
of Zhu is an ANMT model with a bi-directional LSTM encoder,
and uses 1024-dimensional hidden units and 1000-
8We found two sentences which ends without eos with
d = 512, and then we decoded it again with the beam size of
1000 following Zhu .
9Our ensemble model yields a METEOR score of 53.6 with language option “-l other”.
Proposed model (d = 512)
Proposed model (d = 768)
Proposed model (d = 1024)
Ensemble of the above three models
ANMT with LSTMs 
+ Ensemble, unk replacement
+ System combination,
3 pre-reordered ensembles
ANMT with GRUs 
+ character-based decoding,
Begin/Inside representation
PB baseline
HPB baseline
T2S baseline
T2S model 
+ ANMT Rerank 
Table 6: Evaluation results on the test data.
dimensional word embeddings. The model of Lee
et al. is also an ANMT model with a bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) encoder,
and uses 1000-dimensional hidden units and 200dimensional word embeddings. Both models are
sequential ANMT models. Our single proposed
model with d = 512 outperforms the best result of
Zhu ’s end-to-end NMT model with ensemble and unknown replacement by +1.19 RIBES
and by +0.17 BLEU scores. Our ensemble model
shows better performance, in both RIBES and
BLEU scores, than that of Zhu ’s best system which is a hybrid of the ANMT and SMT
models by +1.54 RIBES and by +0.74 BLEU
scores and Lee et al. ’s ANMT system
with special character-based decoding by +1.30
RIBES and +1.20 BLEU scores.
Comparison with the SMT models
and T2S are the baseline SMT systems in
WAT’15: a phrase-based model, a hierarchical
phrase-based model, and a tree-to-string model,
respectively .
model in WAT’15 is Neubig et al. ’s treeto-string SMT model enhanced with reranking by
ANMT using a bi-directional LSTM encoder. Our
proposed end-to-end NMT model compares favorably with Neubig et al. .
Qualitative Analysis
We illustrate the translations of test data by our
model with d = 512 and several attentional relations when decoding a sentence. In Figures 4 and
5, an English sentence represented as a binary tree
is translated into Japanese, and several attentional
relations between English words or phrases and
Translation example of a short sentence and the attentional relations by our proposed
Japanese word are shown with the highest attention score α. The additional attentional relations
are also illustrated for comparison. We can see the
target words softly aligned with source words and
In Figure 4, the Japanese word “液晶” means
“liquid crystal”, and it has a high attention score
(α = 0.41) with the English phrase “liquid crystal
for active matrix”. This is because the j-th target hidden unit sj has the contextual information
about the previous words y<j including “活性マ
トリックスの” (“for active matrix” in English).
The Japanese word “セル” is softly aligned with
the phrase “the cells” with the highest attention
score (α = 0.35). In Japanese, there is no deﬁnite article like “the” in English, and it is usually
aligned with null described as Section 1.
In Figure 5, in the case of the Japanese word
“示” (“showed” in English), the attention score
with the English phrase “showed excellent performance” (α = 0.25) is higher than that with the
English word “showed” (α = 0.01). The Japanese
word “の” (“of” in English) is softly aligned with
the phrase “of Si dot MOS capacitor” with the
highest attention score (α = 0.30). It is because
our attention mechanism takes each previous context of the Japanese phrases “優れた性能” (“excellent performance” in English) and “Ｓｉドット
ＭＯＳコンデンサ” (“Si dot MOS capacitor” in
English) into account and softly aligned the target
words with the whole phrase when translating the
English verb “showed” and the preposition “of”.
Our proposed model can thus ﬂexibly learn the attentional relations between English and Japanese.
We observed that our model translated the word
“active” into “活性”, a synonym of the reference
word “アクティブ”. We also found similar examples in other sentences, where our model outputs
Figure 5: Translation example of a long sentence and the attentional relations by our proposed model.
synonyms of the reference words, e.g. “女” and “
女性” (“female” in English) and “NASA” and “航
空宇宙局” (“National Aeronautics and Space Administration” in English). These translations are
penalized in terms of BLEU scores, but they do not
necessarily mean that the translations were wrong.
This point may be supported by the fact that the
NMT models were highly evaluated in WAT’15 by
crowd sourcing .
Related Work
Kalchbrenner and Blunsom were the ﬁrst
to propose an end-to-end NMT model using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) as the source
encoder and using RNNs as the target decoder.
The Encoder-Decoder model can be seen as an extension of their model, and it replaces the CNNs
with RNNs using GRUs or
LSTMs .
Sutskever et al. have shown that making the input sequences reversed is effective in a
French-to-English translation task, and the technique has also proven effective in translation tasks
between other European language pairs . All of the NMT models mentioned
above are based on sequential encoders. To incorporate structural information into the NMT models, Cho et al. proposed to jointly learn
structures inherent in source-side languages but
did not report improvement of translation performance. These studies motivated us to investigate
the role of syntactic structures explicitly given by
existing syntactic parsers in the NMT models.
The attention mechanism has promoted NMT onto the next stage. It
enables the NMT models to translate while aligning the target with the source. Luong et al. 
reﬁned the attention model so that it can dynamically focus on local windows rather than the entire
sentence. They also proposed a more effective attentional path in the calculation of ANMT models.
Subsequently, several ANMT models have been
proposed ;
however, each model is based on the existing sequential attentional models and does not focus on
a syntactic structure of languages.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel syntactic approach that extends attentional NMT models. We
focus on the phrase structure of the input sentence and build a tree-based encoder following
the parsed tree. Our proposed tree-based encoder
is a natural extension of the sequential encoder
model, where the leaf units of the tree-LSTM
in the encoder can work together with the original sequential LSTM encoder. Moreover, the attention mechanism allows the tree-based encoder
to align not only the input words but also input
phrases with the output words. Experimental results on the WAT’15 English-to-Japanese translation dataset demonstrate that our proposed model
achieves the best RIBES score and outperforms
the sequential attentional NMT model.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions. This work
was supported by CREST, JST, and JSPS KAK-
ENHI Grant Number 15J12597.