Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3174–3187
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning Neural Templates for Text Generation
Sam Wiseman
Stuart M. Shieber
Alexander M. Rush
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
{swiseman,shieber,srush}@seas.harvard.edu
While neural, encoder-decoder models have
had signiﬁcant empirical success in text generation, there remain several unaddressed problems with this style of generation. Encoderdecoder models are largely (a) uninterpretable,
and (b) difﬁcult to control in terms of their
phrasing or content.
This work proposes a
neural generation system using a hidden semimarkov model (HSMM) decoder, which learns
latent, discrete templates jointly with learning
to generate. We show that this model learns
useful templates, and that these templates
make generation both more interpretable and
controllable. Furthermore, we show that this
approach scales to real data sets and achieves
strong performance nearing that of encoderdecoder text generation models.
Introduction
With the continued success of encoder-decoder
models for machine translation and related tasks,
there has been great interest in extending these
methods to build general-purpose, data-driven natural language generation (NLG) systems . These encoder-decoder models use a neural encoder model to represent a
source knowledge base, and a decoder model to
emit a textual description word-by-word, conditioned on the source encoding. This style of generation contrasts with the more traditional division
of labor in NLG, which famously emphasizes addressing the two questions of “what to say” and
“how to say it” separately, and which leads to systems with explicit content selection, macro- and
micro-planning, and surface realization components . Knowledge base
x (top) contains 6 records, and ˆy (middle) is a system generation; records are shown as type[value]. An induced
neural template (bottom) is learned by the system and employed in generating ˆy. Each cell represents a segment in
the learned segmentation, and “blanks” show where slots are
ﬁlled through copy attention during generation.
Encoder-decoder generation systems appear to
have increased the ﬂuency of NLG outputs, while
reducing the manual effort required.
due to the black-box nature of generic encoderdecoder models, these systems have also largely
sacriﬁced two important desiderata that are often
found in more traditional systems, namely (a) interpretable outputs that (b) can be easily controlled
in terms of form and content.
This work considers building interpretable and
controllable neural generation systems, and proposes a speciﬁc ﬁrst step: a new data-driven generation model for learning discrete, template-like
structures for conditional text generation.
core system uses a novel, neural hidden semimarkov model (HSMM) decoder, which provides
a principled approach to template-like text generation. We further describe efﬁcient methods for
training this model in an entirely data-driven way
by backpropagation through inference. Generating with the template-like structures induced by
the neural HSMM allows for the explicit representation of what the system intends to say (in the
form of a learned template) and how it is attempting to say it (in the form of an instantiated template).
We show that we can achieve performance competitive with other neural NLG approaches, while
making progress satisfying the above two desiderata. Concretely, our experiments indicate that we
can induce explicit templates (as shown in Figure
1) while achieving competitive automatic scores,
and that we can control and interpret our generations by manipulating these templates. Finally,
while our experiments focus on the data-to-text
regime, we believe the proposed methodology represents a compelling approach to learning discrete,
latent-variable representations of conditional text.
Related Work
A core task of NLG is to generate textual descriptions of knowledge base records. A common approach is to use hand-engineered templates ,
but there has also been interest in creating templates in an automated manner.
For instance,
many authors induce templates by clustering sentences and then abstracting templated ﬁelds with
hand-engineered rules , or with a
pipeline of other automatic approaches .
There has also been work in incorporating probabilistic notions of templates into generation models ,
which is similar to our approach. However, these
approaches have always been conjoined with discriminative classiﬁers or rerankers in order to actually accomplish the generation .
In addition,
these models explicitly model knowledge base
ﬁeld selection, whereas the model we present is
fundamentally an end-to-end model over generation segments.
Recently, a new paradigm has emerged around
neural text generation systems based on machine
translation .
Most of this
work has used unconstrained black-box encoderdecoder approaches. There has been some work
on discrete variables in this context, including extracting representations , incorporating discrete latent variables in text modeling , and using non-HSMM segmental models for machine translation or summarization . Dai et al. develop an approximate inference scheme for a neural HSMM using
RNNs for continuous emissions; in contrast we
maximize the exact log-marginal, and use RNNs
to parameterize a discrete emission distribution.
Finally, there has also been much recent interest in
segmental RNN models for non-generative tasks
in NLP .
The neural text generation community has also
recently been interested in “controllable” text generation , where various aspects
of the text (often sentiment) are manipulated or
transferred . In contrast, here we focus on controlling either the content of a generation or the way it
is expressed by manipulating the (latent) template
used in realizing the generation.
Overview: Data-Driven NLG
Our focus is on generating a textual description
of a knowledge base or meaning representation.
Following standard notation , let x = {r1 . . . rJ} be a
collection of records.
A record is made up of
a type (r.t), an entity (r.e), and a value (r.m).
For example, a knowledge base of restaurants
might have a record with r.t = Cuisine, r.e =
Denny’s, and r.m = American. The aim is
to generate an adequate and ﬂuent text description
ˆy1:T = ˆy1, . . . , ˆyT of x. Concretely, we consider
the E2E Dataset and the
WikiBio Dataset . We show
an example E2E knowledge base x in the top of
Figure 1. The top of Figure 2 shows an example knowledge base x from the WikiBio dataset,
where it is paired with a reference text y = y1:T at
the bottom.
The dominant approach in neural NLG has been
Frederick Parker-Rhodes was an English linguist, plant pathologist, computer
scientist, mathematician, mystic, and mycologist.
Figure 2: An example from the WikiBio dataset , with a database x (top) for Frederick Parker-
Rhodes and corresponding reference generation y (bottom).
to use an encoder network over x and then a conditional decoder network to generate y, training the
whole system in an end-to-end manner. To generate a description for a given example, a black-box
network (such as an RNN) is used to produce a distribution over the next word, from which a choice
is made and fed back into the system. The entire
distribution is driven by the internal states of the
neural network.
While effective, relying on a neural decoder
makes it difﬁcult to understand what aspects of
x are correlated with a particular system output.
This leads to problems both in controlling ﬁnegrained aspects of the generation process and in
interpreting model mistakes.
As an example of why controllability is important, consider the records in Figure 1. Given
these inputs an end-user might want to generate
an output meeting speciﬁc constraints, such as not
mentioning any information relating to customer
Under a standard encoder-decoder style
model, one could ﬁlter out this information either
from the encoder or decoder, but in practice this
would lead to unexpected changes in output that
might propagate through the whole system.
As an example of the difﬁculty of interpreting mistakes, consider the following actual generation from an encoder-decoder style system for
the records in Figure 2: ”frederick parker-rhodes
 was an english mycology and plant pathology, mathematics
at the university of uk.” In addition to not being
ﬂuent, it is unclear what the end of this sentence
is even attempting to convey: it may be attempting to convey a fact not actually in the knowledge
base (e.g., where Parker-Rhodes studied), or perhaps it is simply failing to ﬂuently realize information that is in the knowledge base (e.g., Parker-
Rhodes’s country of residence).
Traditional NLG systems , in
contrast, largely avoid these problems. Since they
typically employ an explicit planning component,
which decides which knowledge base records to
focus on, and a surface realization component,
which realizes the chosen records, the intent of the
system is always explicit, and it may be modiﬁed
to meet constraints.
The goal of this work is to propose an approach
to neural NLG that addresses these issues in a principled way. We target this goal by proposing a
new model that generates with template-like objects induced by a neural HSMM (see Figure 1).
Templates are useful here because they represent
a ﬁxed plan for the generation’s content, and because they make it clear what part of the generation is associated with which record in the knowledge base.
Background: Semi-Markov Models
What does it mean to learn a template? It is natural to think of a template as a sequence of typed
text-segments, perhaps with some segments acting
as the template’s “backbone” , and the remaining segments ﬁlled in from
the knowledge base.
A natural probabilistic model conforming with
this intuition is the hidden semi-markov model
(HSMM) , which models latent segmentations
in an output sequence. Informally, an HSMM is
much like an HMM, except emissions may last
multiple time-steps, and multi-step emissions need
not be independent of each other conditioned on
the state.
We brieﬂy review HSMMs following Murphy
Assume we have a sequence of observed tokens y1 . . . yT and a discrete, latent state
zt ∈{1, . . . , K} for each timestep. We addition-
ally use two per-timestep variables to model multistep segments: a length variable lt ∈{1, . . . , L}
specifying the length of the current segment, and a
deterministic binary variable ft indicating whether
a segment ﬁnishes at time t. We will consider in
particular conditional HSMMs, which condition
on a source x, essentially giving us an HSMM decoder.
An HSMM speciﬁes a joint distribution on the
observations and latent segmentations. Letting θ
denote all the parameters of the model, and using
the variables introduced above, we can write the
corresponding joint-likelihood as follows
p(y, z, l, f | x; θ) =
p(zt+1, lt+1 | zt, lt, x)ft
p(yt−lt+1:t | zt, lt, x)ft,
where we take z0 to be a distinguished startstate, and the deterministic ft variables are used
for excluding non-segment log probabilities. We
further assume p(zt+1, lt+1 | zt, lt, x) factors as
p(zt+1 | zt, x) × p(lt+1 | zt+1).
Thus, the likelihood is given by the product of the probabilities
of each discrete state transition made, the probability of the length of each segment given its discrete state, and the probability of the observations
in each segment, given its state and length.
A Neural HSMM Decoder
We use a novel, neural parameterization of an
HSMM to specify the probabilities in the likelihood above. This full model, sketched out in Figure 3, allows us to incorporate the modeling components, such as LSTMs and attention, that make
neural text generation effective, while maintaining
the HSMM structure.
Parameterization
Since our model must condition on x, let rj ∈Rd
represent a real embedding of record rj ∈x, and
let xa ∈Rd represent a real embedding of the entire knowledge base x, obtained by max-pooling
coordinate-wise over all the rj. It is also useful
to have a representation of just the unique types
of records that appear in x, and so we also deﬁne
xu ∈Rd to be the sum of the embeddings of the
unique types appearing in x, plus a bias vector and
followed by a ReLU nonlinearity.
Figure 3: HSMM factor graph (under a known segmentation) to illustrate parameters. Here we assume z1 is in the
“red” state (out of K possibilities), and transitions to the
“blue” state after emitting three words. The transition model,
shown as T, is a function of the two states and the neural encoded source x. The emission model is a function of a “red”
RNN model (with copy attention over x) that generates words
1, 2 and 3. After transitioning, the next word y4 is generated
by the “blue” RNN, but independently of the previous words.
Transition Distribution
The transition distribution p(zt+1 | zt, x) may be viewed as a K × K matrix of probabilities, where each row sums to 1. We
deﬁne this matrix to be
p(zt+1 | zt, x) ∝AB + C(xu)D(xu),
where A ∈RK×m1, B ∈Rm1×K are state embeddings, and where C : Rd →RK×m2 and D :
Rd →Rm2×K are parameterized non-linear functions of xu. We apply a row-wise softmax to the
resulting matrix to obtain the desired probabilities.
Length Distribution
We simply ﬁx all length
probabilities p(lt+1 | zt+1) to be uniform up to a
maximum length L.1
Emission Distribution
The emission model
models the generation of a text segment conditioned on a latent state and source information,
and so requires a richer parameterization. Inspired
by the models used for neural NLG, we base this
model on an RNN decoder, and write a segment’s
probability as a product over token-level probabilities,
p(yt−lt+1:t | zt = k, lt = l, x) =
p(yt−lt+i | yt−lt+1:t−lt+i−1, zt = k, x)
× p(</seg> | yt−lt+1:t, zt = k, x) × 1{lt = l},
1We experimented with parameterizing the length distribution, but found that it led to inferior performance. Forcing
the length probabilities to be uniform encourages the model
to cluster together functionally similar emissions of different lengths, while parameterizing them can lead to states that
specialize to speciﬁc emission lengths.
where </seg> is an end of segment token. The
RNN decoder uses attention and copy-attention
over the embedded records rj, and is conditioned
on zt = k by concatenating an embedding corresponding to the k’th latent state to the RNN’s input; the RNN is also conditioned on the entire x
by initializing its hidden state with xa.
More concretely, let hk
i−1 ∈Rd be the state of
an RNN conditioned on x and zt = k (as above)
run over the sequence yt−lt+1:t−lt+i−1. We let the
model attend over records rj using hk
i−1 ), producing a context
i−1. We may then obtain scores vi−1 for
each word in the output vocabulary,
vi−1 = W tanh . Deﬁne copy scores,
We then normalize the outputvocabulary and copy scores together, to arrive at
evi−1 = softmax([vi−1, ρ1, . . . , ρJ]),
p(yt−lt+i = w | yt−lt+1:t−lt+i−1, zt = k, x) =
j:rj.m = w
evi−1,V +j.
An Autoregressive Variant
The model as speciﬁed assumes segments are independent conditioned on the associated latent state and x. While
this assumption still allows for reasonable performance, we can tractably allow interdependence
between tokens (but not segments) by having each
next-token distribution depend on all the previously generated tokens, giving us an autoregressive HSMM. For this model, we will in fact use
p(yt−lt+i = w | y1:t−lt+i−1, zt = k, x) in deﬁning
our emission model, which is easily implemented
by using an additional RNN run over all the preceding tokens.
We will report scores for both
non-autoregressive and autoregressive HSMM decoders below.
The model requires ﬁtting a large set of neural network parameters.
Since we assume z, l,
and f are unobserved, we marginalize over these
variables to maximize the log marginal-likelihood
of the observed tokens y given x. The HSMM
marginal-likelihood calculation can be carried out
efﬁciently with a dynamic program analogous to
either the forward- or backward-algorithm familiar from HMMs .
It is actually more convenient to use the
backward-algorithm
formulation
RNNs to parameterize the emission distributions,
and we brieﬂy review the backward recurrences
here, again following Murphy . We have:
βt(j) = p(yt+1:T | zt = j, ft = 1, x)
t (k) p(zt+1 = k | zt = j)
t (k) = p(yt+1:T | zt+1 = k, ft = 1, x)
βt+l(k) p(lt+1 = l | zt+1 = k)
p(yt+1:t+l | zt+1 = k, lt+1 = l)
βT (j) = 1.
probability
p(y | x) = PK
0(k) p(z1 = k),
have used the fact that f0 must be 1, and we
therefore train to maximize the log-marginal
likelihood of the observed y:
ln p(y | x; θ) = ln
0(k) p(z1 = k).
Since the quantities in (1) are obtained from a
dynamic program, which is itself differentiable,
we may simply maximize with respect to the parameters θ by back-propagating through the dynamic program; this is easily accomplished with
automatic differentiation packages, and we use
pytorch in all experiments.
Extracting Templates and Generating
After training, we could simply condition on a new
database and generate with beam search, as is standard with encoder-decoder models. However, the
structured approach we have developed allows us
to generate in a more template-like way, giving us
more interpretable and controllable generations.
[The Golden Palace]55 [is a]59 [coffee shop]12
[providing]3 [Indian]50 [food]1 [in the]17 [£20-
25]26 [price range]16 [.]2 [It is]8 [located in
the]25 [riverside]40 [.]53 [Its customer rating is]19
[high]23 [.]2
Figure 4: A sample Viterbi segmentation of a training text;
subscripted numbers indicate the corresponding latent state.
From this we can extract a template with S = 17 segments;
compare with the template used at the bottom of Figure 1.
First, note that given a database x and reference generation y we can obtain the MAP assignment to the variables z, l, and f with a dynamic
program similar to the Viterbi algorithm familiar
from HMMs. These assignments will give us a
typed segmentation of y, and we show an example
Viterbi segmentation of some training text in Figure 4. Computing MAP segmentations allows us
to associate text-segments (i.e., phrases) with the
discrete labels zt that frequently generate them.
These MAP segmentations can be used in an exploratory way, as a sort of dimensionality reduction of the generations in the corpus. More importantly for us, however, they can also be used to
guide generation.
In particular, since each MAP segmentation implies a sequence of hidden states z, we may run
a template extraction step, where we collect the
most common “templates” (i.e., sequences of hidden states) seen in the training data. Each “template” z(i) consists of a sequence of latent states,
with z(i) = z(i)
1 , . . . z(i)
S representing the S distinct
segments in the i’th extracted template (recall that
we will technically have a zt for each time-step,
and so z(i) is obtained by collapsing adjacent zt’s
with the same value); see Figure 4 for an example
template (with S = 17) that can be extracted from
the E2E corpus. The bottom of Figure 1 shows a
visualization of this extracted template, where discrete states are replaced by the phrases they frequently generate in the training data.
With our templates z(i) in hand, we can then
restrict the model to using (one of) them during
generation. In particular, given a new input x, we
may generate by computing
ˆy(i) = arg max
p(y′, z(i) | x),
which gives us a generation ˆy(i) for each extracted
template z(i). For example, the generation in Figure 1 is obtained by maximizing (2) with x set to
the database in Figure 1 and z(i) set to the template
extracted in Figure 4. In practice, the arg max in
(2) will be intractable to calculate exactly due to
the use of RNNs in deﬁning the emission distribution, and so we approximate it with a constrained
beam search. This beam search looks very similar
to that typically used with RNN decoders, except
the search occurs only over a segment, for a particular latent state k.
Discussion
Returning to the discussion of controllability and
interpretability, we note that with the proposed
model (a) it is possible to explicitly force the generation to use a chosen template z(i), which is itself automatically learned from training data, and
(b) that every segment in the generated ˆy(i) is
typed by its corresponding latent variable. We explore these issues empirically in Section 7.1.
We also note that these properties may be useful for other text applications, and that they offer
an additional perspective on how to approach latent variable modeling for text. Whereas there has
been much recent interest in learning continuous
latent variable representations for text (see Section 2), it has been somewhat unclear what the latent variables to be learned are intended to capture.
On the other hand, the latent, template-like structures we induce here represent a plausible, probabilistic latent variable story, and allow for a more
controllable method of generation.
Finally, we highlight one signiﬁcant possible issue with this model – the assumption that segments are independent of each other given the corresponding latent variable and x. Here we note
that the fact that we are allowed to condition on x
is quite powerful. Indeed, a clever encoder could
capture much of the necessary interdependence
between the segments to be generated (e.g., the
correct determiner for an upcoming noun phrase)
in its encoding, allowing the segments themselves
to be decoded more or less independently, given x.
Data and Methods
Our experiments apply the approach outlined
above to two recent, data-driven NLG tasks.
Experiments use the E2E 
and WikiBio datasets, examples of which are shown in Figures 1 and 2,
respectively.
The former dataset, used for the
2018 E2E-Gen Shared Task, contains approximately 50K total examples, and uses 945 distinct
word types, and the latter dataset contains approximately 500K examples and uses approximately
400K word types. Because our emission model
uses a word-level copy mechanism, any record
with a phrase consisting of n words as its value is
replaced with n positional records having a single
word value, following the preprocessing of Lebret
et al. . For example, “type[coffee shop]”
in Figure 1 becomes “type-1[coffee]” and “type-
For both datasets we compare with published
encoder-decoder models, as well as with direct
template-style baselines.
The E2E task is evaluated in terms of BLEU ,
NIST , ROUGE , CIDEr , and ME-
TEOR .2 The benchmark system for the task is an encoder-decoder
style system followed by a reranker, proposed by
Duˇsek and Jurcıcek . We compare to this
baseline, as well as to a simple but competitive
non-parametric template-like baseline (“SUB” in
tables), which selects a training sentence with
records that maximally overlap (without including
extraneous records) the unseen set of records we
wish to generate from; ties are broken at random.
Then, word-spans in the chosen training sentence
are aligned with records by string-match, and replaced with the corresponding ﬁelds of the new set
of records.3
The WikiBio dataset is evaluated in terms of
BLEU, NIST, and ROUGE, and we compare with
the systems and baselines implemented by Lebret
et al. , which include two neural, encoderdecoder style models, as well as a Kneser-Ney,
templated baseline.
Model and Training Details
We ﬁrst emphasize two additional methodological
details important for obtaining good performance.
Constraining Learning
We were able to learn
more plausible segmentations of y by constraining
the model to respect word spans yt+1:t+l that appear in some record rj ∈x. We accomplish this by
giving zero probability (within the backward re-
2We use the ofﬁcial E2E NLG Challenge scoring scripts at
 
3For categorical records, like “familyFriendly”, which
cannot easily be aligned with a phrase, we simply select only
candidate training sentences with the same categorical value.
currences in Section 5) to any segmentation that
splits up a sequence yt+1:t+l that appears in some
rj, or that includes yt+1:t+l as a subsequence of
another sequence. Thus, we maximize (1) subject
to these hard constraints.
Increasing
While a larger K allows for a more expressive latent model, computing K emission distributions
over the vocabulary can be prohibitively expensive. We therefore tie the emission distribution between multiple states, while allowing them to have
a different transition distributions.
We give additional architectural details of our
model in the Supplemental Material; here we note
that we use an MLP to embed rj ∈Rd, and a 1layer LSTM 
in deﬁning our emission distributions. In order to
reduce the amount of memory used, we restrict our
output vocabulary (and thus the height of the matrix W in Section 5) to only contain words in y
that are not present in x; any word in y present in x
is assumed to be copied. In the case where a word
yt appears in a record rj (and could therefore have
been copied), the input to the LSTM at time t+1 is
computed using information from rj; if there are
multiple rj from which yt could have been copied,
the computed representations are simply averaged.
For all experiments, we set d = 300 and L = 4.
At generation time, we select the 100 most common templates z(i), perform beam search with a
beam of size 5, and select the generation with the
highest overall joint probability.
For our E2E experiments,
our best nonautoregressive model has 55 “base” states, duplicated 5 times, for a total of K = 275 states, and
our best autoregressive model uses K = 60 states,
without any duplication. For our WikiBio experiments, both our best non-autoregressive and autoregressive models uses 45 base states duplicated
3 times, for a total of K = 135 states. In all cases,
K was chosen based on BLEU performance on
held-out validation data. Code implementing our
models is available at 
harvardnlp/neural-template-gen.
Our results on automatic metrics are shown in
Tables 1 and 2.
In general, we ﬁnd that the
templated baselines underperform neural models,
whereas our proposed model is fairly competitive with neural models, and sometimes even out-
CIDEr METEOR
Validation
Table 1: Comparison of the system of Duˇsek and Jurcıcek
 , which forms the baseline for the E2E challenge, a
non-parametric, substitution-based baseline (see text), and
our HSMM models (denoted “NTemp” and “NTemp+AR”
for the non-autoregressive and autoregressive versions, resp.)
on the validation and test portions of the E2E dataset.
“ROUGE” is ROUGE-L. Models are evaluated using the of-
ﬁcial E2E NLG Challenge scoring scripts.
Template KN †
NNLM (ﬁeld) †
NNLM (ﬁeld & word) †
Seq2seq 
Table 2: Top: comparison of the two best neural systems of
Lebret et al. , their templated baseline, and our HSMM
models (denoted “NTemp” and “NTemp+AR” for the nonautoregressive and autoregressive versions, resp.) on the test
portion of the WikiBio dataset. Models marked with a † are
from Lebret et al. , and following their methodology
we use ROUGE-4. Bottom: state-of-the-art seq2seq-style results from Liu et al. .
performs them. On the E2E data, for example,
we see in Table 1 that the SUB baseline, despite
having fairly impressive performance for a nonparametric model, fares the worst.
The neural
HSMM models are largely competitive with the
encoder-decoder system on the validation data, despite offering the beneﬁts of interpretability and
controllability; however, the gap increases on test.
Table 2 evaluates our system’s performance on
the test portion of the WikiBio dataset, comparing with the systems and baselines implemented
by Lebret et al. . Again for this dataset we
see that their templated Kneser-Ney model underperforms on the automatic metrics, and that neural models improve on these results.
HSMMs are competitive with the best model of
Lebret et al. , and even outperform it on
ROUGE. We emphasize, however, that recent, sophisticated approaches to encoder-decoder style
Travellers Rest Beefeater
name[Travellers Rest Beefeater], customerRating[3 out of 5],
area[riverside], near[Raja Indian Cuisine]
1. [Travellers Rest Beefeater]55 [is a]59 [3 star]43
[restaurant]11 [located near]25 [Raja Indian Cuisine]40 [.]53
2. [Near]31 [riverside]29 [,]44 [Travellers Rest Beefeater]55
[serves]3 [3 star]50 [food]1 [.]2
3. [Travellers Rest Beefeater]55 [is a]59 [restaurant]12
[providing]3 [riverside]50 [food]1 [and has a]17
[3 out of 5]26 [customer rating]16 [.]2 [It is]8 [near]25
[Raja Indian Cuisine]40 [.]53
4. [Travellers Rest Beefeater]55 [is a]59 [place to eat]12
[located near]25 [Raja Indian Cuisine]40 [.]53
5. [Travellers Rest Beefeater]55 [is a]59 [3 out of 5]5
[rated]32 [riverside]43 [restaurant]11 [near]25
[Raja Indian Cuisine]40 [.]53
Table 3: Impact of varying the template z(i) for a single x
from the E2E validation data; generations are annotated with
the segmentations of the chosen z(i). Results were obtained
using the NTemp+AR model from Table 1.
database-to-text generation have since surpassed
the results of Lebret et al. and our own,
and we show the recent seq2seq style results of Liu
et al. , who use a somewhat larger model, at
the bottom of Table 2.
Qualitative Evaluation
We now qualitatively demonstrate that our generations are controllable and interpretable.
Controllable Diversity
One of the powerful aspects of the proposed approach to generation is
that we can manipulate the template z(i) while
leaving the database x constant, which allows for
easily controlling aspects of the generation. In Table 3 we show the generations produced by our
model for ﬁve different neural template sequences
z(i), while ﬁxing x. There, the segments in each
generation are annotated with the latent states determined by the corresponding z(i). We see that
these templates can be used to affect the wordordering, as well as which ﬁelds are mentioned in
the generated text. Moreover, because the discrete
states align with particular ﬁelds (see below), it is
generally simple to automatically infer to which
ﬁelds particular latent states correspond, allowing
users to choose which template best meets their requirements. We emphasize that this level of controllability is much harder to obtain for encoderdecoder models, since, at best, a large amount of
sampling would be required to avoid generating
around a particular mode in the conditional distribution, and even then it would be difﬁcult to control the sort of generations obtained.
kenny warren
name: kenny warren, birth date: 1 april 1946, birth name: kenneth warren deutscher, birth place: brooklyn, new york,
occupation: ventriloquist, comedian, author, notable work: book - the revival of ventriloquism in america
1. [kenneth warren deutscher]132 [ ]67 [is an american]82 [author]20 [and]1
[ventriloquist and comedian]69 [.]88
2. [kenneth warren deutscher]132 [ ]67 [is an american]82 [author]20
[best known for his]95 [the revival of ventriloquism]96 [.]88
3. [kenneth warren]16 [“kenny” warren]117 [ ]67 [is an american]127
[ventriloquist, comedian]28 [.]133
4. [kenneth warren]16 [“kenny” warren]117 [ ]67 [is a]104 [new york]98 [author]20 [.]133
5. [kenneth warren deutscher]42 [is an american]82 [ventriloquist, comedian]118 [based in]15 [brooklyn, new york]84 [.]88
Table 4: Impact of varying the template z(i) for a single x from the WikiBio validation data; generations are annotated with
the segmentations of the chosen z(i). Results were obtained using the NTemp model from Table 2.
Interpretable States
Discrete states also provide a method for interpreting the generations produced by the system, since each segment is explicitly typed by the current hidden state of the model.
Table 4 shows the impact of varying the template
z(i) for a single x from the WikiBio dataset. While
there is in general surprisingly little stylistic variation in the WikiBio data itself, there is variation in
the information discussed, and the templates capture this. Moreover, we see that particular discrete
states correspond in a consistent way to particular
pieces of information, allowing us to align states
with particular ﬁeld types.
For instance, birth
names have the same hidden state (132), as do
names (117), nationalities (82), birth dates (101),
and occupations (20).
To demonstrate empirically that the learned
states indeed align with ﬁeld types, we calculate
the average purity of the discrete states learned for
both datasets in Table 5. In particular, for each
discrete state for which the majority of its generated words appear in some rj, the purity of a
state’s record type alignment is calculated as the
percentage of the state’s words that come from
the most frequent record type the state represents.
This calculation was carried out over training examples that belonged to one of the top 100 most
frequent templates. Table 5 indicates that discrete
states learned on the E2E data are quite pure. Discrete states learned on the WikiBio data are less
pure, though still rather impressive given that there
are approximately 1700 record types represented
in the WikiBio data, and we limit the number of
states to 135. Unsurprisingly, adding autoregressiveness to the model decreases purity on both
datasets, since the model may rely on the autoregressive RNN for typing, in addition to the state’s
89.2 (17.4)
85.4 (18.6)
43.2 (19.7)
39.9 (17.9)
Table 5: Empirical analysis of the average purity of discrete states learned on the E2E and WikiBio datasets, for the
NTemp and NTemp+AR models. Average purities are given
as percents, and standard deviations follow in parentheses.
See the text for full description of this calculation.
Conclusion and Future Work
We have developed a neural, template-like generation model based on an HSMM decoder,
which can be learned tractably by backpropagating through a dynamic program. The method allows us to extract template-like latent objects in
a principled way in the form of state sequences,
and then generate with them. This approach scales
to large-scale text datasets and is nearly competitive with encoder-decoder models. More importantly, this approach allows for controlling the
diversity of generation and for producing interpretable states during generation. We view this
work both as the ﬁrst step towards learning discrete latent variable template models for more dif-
ﬁcult generation tasks, as well as a different perspective on learning latent variable text models in
general. Future work will examine encouraging
the model to learn maximally different (or minimal) templates, which our objective does not explicitly encourage, templates of larger textual phenomena, such as paragraphs and documents, and
hierarchical templates.
Acknowledgments
SW gratefully acknowledges the support of a
Siebel Scholars award. AMR gratefully acknowledges the support of NSF CCF-1704834, Intel Research, and Amazon AWS Research grants.