Hindsight Trust Region Policy Optimization
Hanbo Zhang1 , Site Bai1 , Xuguang Lan1∗, David Hsu2 and Nanning Zheng1
1Xi’an Jiaotong University
2National University of Singapore
{zhanghanbo163, best99317}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, , ,
 
Reinforcement Learning (RL) with sparse rewards
is a major challenge. We propose Hindsight Trust
Region Policy Optimization (HTRPO), a new RL
algorithm that extends the highly successful TRPO
algorithm with hindsight to tackle the challenge
of sparse rewards.
Hindsight refers to the algorithm’s ability to learn from information across
goals, including past goals not intended for the current task. We derive the hindsight form of TRPO,
together with QKL, a quadratic approximation to
the KL divergence constraint on the trust region.
QKL reduces variance in KL divergence estimation and improves stability in policy updates. We
show that HTRPO has similar convergence property as TRPO. We also present Hindsight Goal Filtering (HGF), which further improves the learning
performance for suitable tasks. HTRPO has been
evaluated on various sparse-reward tasks, including
Atari games and simulated robot control. Results
show that HTRPO consistently outperforms TRPO,
as well as HPG, a state-of-the-art policy gradient
algorithm for RL with sparse rewards.
Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been widely investigated
to solve problems from complex strategic games [Mnih et
al., 2015] to precise robotic control [Deisenroth et al., 2013].
However, current successful practice of RL in robotics relies heavily on careful and arduous reward shaping[Ng et al.,
1999; Grzes, 2017]. Sparse reward, in which the agent is
rewarded only upon reaching the desired goal, obviates designing a delicate reward mechanism. It also guarantees that
the agent focuses on the intended task itself without any deviation. However, sparse reward diminishes the chance for policy to converge, especially in the initial random exploration
stage, since the agent can hardly get positive feedbacks.
Recently, several works have been devoted to sparsereward RL. [Andrychowicz et al., 2017] proposes Hindsight
Experience Replay(HER), which trains the agent with hindsight goals generated from the achieved states through the his-
∗Corresponding Author
torical interactions. Such hindsight experience substantially
alleviates exploration problem caused by sparse-reward settings. [Rauber et al., 2019] proposes Hindsight Policy Gradient(HPG). It introduces hindsight to policy gradient, resulting
in an advanced algorithm for RL with sparse reward. However, for HPG, there remain several drawbacks hindering its
application in more cases. Firstly, as an extension to “vanilla”
policy gradient, its performance level and sample efﬁciency
remain limited. Secondly, it inherits the intrinsic high variance of PG methods, and the combination with hindsight data
further exacerbates the learning stability.
In this paper, we propose Hindsight Trust Region Policy
Optimization (HTRPO), a hindsight form of TRPO [Schulman et al., 2015b], which is an advanced RL algorithm with
approximately monotonic policy improvements. We prove
that HTRPO theoretically inherits the convergence property
of TRPO, and signiﬁcantly reduces the variance of policy improvement by introducing Quadratic KL divergence Estimation (QKL) approach. Moreover, to select hindsight goals that
better assist the agent to reach the original goals, we design a
Hindsight Goal Filtering mechanism.
We demonstrate that in a wide variety of sparse-reward
tasks including benchmark toy tasks, image-input Atari
games and discrete and continuous robotic control, HTRPO
can consistently outperform TRPO and HPG in the aspect of
performance and sample efﬁciency with commendable learning stability. We also provide a comprehensive comparison
with HER, showing that HTRPO achieves much better performance in 6 out of 7 benchmarks. Besides, we also conduct
ablation studies to show that Quadratic KL divergence Estimation can effectively lower the variance and constrain the
divergence while Hindsight Goal Filtering brings the performance to a higher level especially in more challenging tasks.
Preliminaries
RL Formulation and Notation.
Consider the standard
inﬁnite-horizon reinforcement learning formulation which
can be deﬁned by tuple (S, A, π, ρ0, r, γ). S and A denote
the set of states and actions respectively. π : S →P(A)
is a policy mapping states to a distribution over actions. ρ0
is the distribution of the initial state s0.
Reward function
r : S →R deﬁnes the reward obtained from the environment and γ ∈(0, 1) is a discount factor.
In this paper,
the policy is a differentiable function regarding parameter θ.
 
We follow the standard formalism of state-action value function Q(s, a), state value function V (s) and advantage function A(s, a) in [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
We also adopt
the deﬁnition of γ-discounted state visitation distribution as
ρθ(s) = (1 −γ) P∞
t=0 γtP(st = s) [Ho et al., 2016]. Correspondingly, γ-discounted state-action visitation distribution
[Ho et al., 2016], also known as occupancy measure [Ho and
Ermon, 2016], is deﬁned as ρθ(s, a) = ρθ(s) × πθ(a|s).
Optimization(TRPO).
[Schulman et al., 2015a] is an iterative trust region method
that effectively optimizes policy by maximizing the periteration policy improvement.
The optimization problem
proposed in TRPO can be formalized as follows:
π˜θ(a|s)A˜θ(s, a)
DKL(π˜θ(a|s)||πθ(a|s))
in which ρ˜θ(s) = P∞
t=0 γtP(st = s). θ denotes the parameter of the new policy while ˜θ is that of the old one.
Hindsight Policy Gradient(HPG).
HPG [Rauber et al.,
2019] combines the idea of hindsight [Andrychowicz et
al., 2017] with policy gradient methods.
Though goalconditioned reinforcement learning has been explored for a
long time and actively investigated in recent works [Peters
and Schaal, 2008; Schaul et al., 2015; Veeriah et al., 2018],
HPG ﬁrstly extends the idea of hindsight to goal-conditioned
policy gradient and shows that the policy gradient can be
computed in expectation over all goals. The goal-conditioned
policy gradient is derived as follows:
∇θη(πθ) = E
∇θ log πθ(at|st, g)Aθ(st, at, g)
where τ ∼pθ(τ|g). Then, by applying hindsight formulation, it rewrites goal-conditioned policy gradient with trajectories conditioned on achieved goal g′ using importance sampling to solve sparse-reward problems efﬁciently.
Hindsight Trust Region Policy Optimization
In this section, we ﬁrstly introduce Quadratic KL divergence
Estimation (QKL) method, which efﬁciently reduces the variance of KL estimation in TRPO and results in higher learning stability. With QKL, we show that TRPO maintains the
monotonically-converging property. After that, we derive the
hindsight form of TRPO, called Hindsight Trust Region Policy Optimization algorithm, to tackle the severely off-policy
hindsight data for better learning with sparse rewards. Specifically, the expected return and the KL divergence constraint
are both modiﬁed to adapt to hindsight data with importance
sampling. Beneﬁting from QKL, we can precisely estimate
KL divergence using hindsight data while keeping the variance below a reasonable level. Intuitively, HTRPO utilizes
hindsight data to estimate the objective and the constraint,
and iteratively ﬁnd out the local optimal policy to ensure the
approximately monotonous policy improvements.
TRPO with Quadratic KL Divergence
In TRPO, the KL divergence expectation under ρ˜θ(s) is estimated by averaging values of KL divergence conditioned on
collected states. However, this method is no longer valid if
KL divergence cannot be analytically computed (e.g. Gaussian Mixture Model) or the state distribution changes (e.g. using hindsight data instead of the collected ones). To solve this
problem, we ﬁrstly transform the KL divergence to an expectation under occupancy measure ρ˜θ(s, a) = ρ˜θ(s) × π˜θ(a|s).
It can be estimated using the collected state-action pairs
(s, a), no longer depending on the analytical form of KL divergence. Also, such formulation is convenient for correcting changed distribution over state and action by importance
sampling, which will be discussed in section 3.2. However,
it will increase the estimation variance, causing instability of
training. Therefore, by making use of another f-divergence,
we propose QKL to approximate KL divergence for variance
reduction, and both theoretically and practically, we prove the
effectiveness of such an approximation.
Given two policies π˜θ(a|s) and πθ(a|s),
the KLdivergence over state s can be converted to a logarithmic
DKL(π˜θ(a|s)||πθ(a|s)) =
log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s)
However, simply expanding the KL-divergence into logarithmic form still leaves several problems unhandled. Firstly,
such formulation causes excessively high estimation variance. Secondly, such estimation of KL-divergence is of possible negativity. To overcome these two drawbacks, we propose Quadratic KL Divergence Estimation in Proposition 1
and prove that such approximation will reduce the estimation
variance in Proposition 2 (detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.1 and A.2):
Proposition 1. (Quadratic KL Divergence Estimation). For
policy π˜θ(a|s) and πθ(a|s), and for η = πθ(a|s) −π˜θ(a|s),
log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s)
2(log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s))2
where a ∼π˜θ(a|s).
Proposition 1 demonstrates that when θ and ˜θ is of limited difference, the expectation of log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s)
can be sufﬁciently estimated by the expectation of its square.
In fact, Ea∼π˜
2(log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s))2
is an fdivergence, where f(x) = 1
2x(log x)2, which we call DQKL
in this paper. Noticeably, though f(x) is a convex function
only when x ∈( 1
e, ∞), and it indeed does not correspond to
an f-divergence, in our practice, π˜
e holds, hence
we can deﬁne a convex function on R+: f(x) = 1
2x(log x)2
when x ∈( 1
e, ∞) and −x + 2
e when x ∈(0, 1
e], with an
unused piece deﬁned over (0, 1
Proposition 2. (Variance of Constraint Function). For policy
π˜θ(a|s) and πθ(a|s), let Var denote the variance of a variable. For any action a ∈A and any state s ∈S, when
log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s) ∈[−0.5, 0.5], then
(log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s))2
log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s)
Proposition 2 illustrates that there is a decrease from the
variance of log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s) to the variance of its
square. In fact, the closer it is between ˜θ and θ, the more the
variance decreases. Next, we will show that with the introduction of QKL, TRPO still maintains similar convergence
Proposition 3. (Policy Improvement Guarantee) Given two
policies πθ and π˜θ, Let
s∗= arg max
DT V (π˜θ(a|s), πθ(a|s))
θ(a|s∗),πθ(a|s∗))
θ(a|s∗),πθ(a|s∗)) ≤
ln 2, then
η(πθ) ≥Lπ˜
θ(πθ) −CDmax
QKL(π˜θ(a|s), πθ(a|s))
θ(πθ) = η(π˜θ) + Es∼π˜
θ(s),a∼πθ(a|s)[Aπ˜
and η(πθ) = E [P γtrt] is the expected return, C =
β = maxs,a|Aπ˜
θ(s, a)|, DT V (p, q) = 1
i |pi −qi|.
The proof and detailed analysis are given in Appendix B.
Intuitively, Proposition 3 means that when two policies are
not far from each other, the convergence property of TRPO
also holds for the QKL constraint. As a result, with Proposition 3, we can derive a new but similar monotonicallyconverging algorithm as in TRPO, given in Appendix B.2. By
taking a series of approximation as shown in Appendix B.2,
the following policy optimization problem is derived, called
π˜θ(a|s)A˜θ(s, a)
2(log π˜θ(a|s) −log πθ(a|s))2
It is noteworthy that QKL-TRPO can be applied to policies
which do not correspond to an analytic KL divergence (e.g.
GMM policies). We also provide a simple analysis of QKL-
TRPO compared with the original TRPO in Appendix G.1,
which shows that QKL-TRPO is comparable with TRPO in a
series of MuJoCo benchmarks.
Hindsight Formulation of QKL-TRPO
In this section, we derive the hindsight form of the QKL-
TRPO, called Hindsight Trust Region Policy Optimization
(HTRPO), to efﬁciently tackle severely off-policy hindsight
experience and sparse-reward RL problems.
Starting from eq.1, it can be written in the following variant
γt πθ(at|st)
π˜θ(at|st)A˜θ(st, at)
The derivation process of this variant form is shown explicitly in Appendix C.1 and in [Schulman et al., 2015a]. Given
the expression above, similar to eq.3, we consider the goalconditioned objective function:
L˜θ(θ) = E
γt πθ(at|st, g)
π˜θ(at|st, g)A˜θ(st, at, g)
where τ ∼p˜θ(τ|g). For the record, though it seems that eq.10
makes it possible for off-policy learning, it can be used as the
objective only when policy πθ is close to the old policy π˜θ,
i.e. within the trust region. Using severely off-policy data like
hindsight experience will make the learning process diverge.
Therefore, importance sampling is integrated to correct the
difference of the trajectory distribution caused by changing
the goal. Based on eq.10, the following Proposition gives
out the hindsight objective function conditioned on some goal
g′ with the distribution correction derived from importance
Proposition 4. (Hindsight Expected Return). For the original goal g and hindsight goal g′, the object function of
HTRPO L˜θ(θ) is given by:
L˜θ(θ) = E
π˜θ(ak|sk, g′)
π˜θ(ak|sk, g) γt πθ(at|st, g′)
π˜θ(at|st, g′)A˜θ(st, at, g′)
in which τ ∼pθ(τ|g) and τ = s0, a0, s1, a1, ..., st, at.
Appendix C.2 presents an explicit proof of how the
hindsight-form objective function derives from eq.10. In our
practice, we introduce a baseline Vθ(s) for computing the advantage Aθ. Though Aθ here can be estimated by combining
per-decision return [Precup et al., 2000], due to its high variance, we adopt one-step TD method instead to get Aθ, i.e.,
Aθ(s, a) = r(s, a) + γVθ(s′) −Vθ(s). Intuitively, eq.11 provides a way to compute the expected return in terms of the
advantage with new-goal-conditioned hindsight experiences
which are generated from interactions directed by old goals.
Next, we demonstrate that hindsight can also be introduced
to the constraint function. The proof follows the methodology
similar to that in Proposition 4, and is deducted explicitly in
Appendix C.3.
Proposition 5. (HTRPO Constraint Function). For the original goal g and hindsight goal g′, the constraint between policy π˜θ(a|s) and policy πθ(a|s) is given by:
π˜θ(ak|sk, g′)
π˜θ(ak|sk, g) γtKt
in which ϵ′
1−γ , and Kt
2(log π˜θ(at|st, g′) −
log πθ(at|st, g′))2.
Proposition 5 implies the practicality of using hindsight
data under condition g′ to estimate the KL expectation. From
all illustration above, we give out the ﬁnal form of the optimization problem for HTRPO:
π˜θ(ak|sk, g′)
π˜θ(ak|sk, g) γtRt
Selected Hindsight Goals
Valid Achieved Goals
Max-Min Distance
Figure 1: Procedure of Hindsight Goal Filterring
π˜θ(ak|sk, g′)
π˜θ(ak|sk, g) γtKt
πθ(at|st,g′)
θ(at|st,g′)A˜θ(st, at, g′)
2(log π˜θ(at|st, g′)−log πθ(at|st, g′))2. The solving process
for HTRPO optimization problem is explicitly demonstrated
in Appendix D.
Hindsight Goal Filtering
In hindsight learning, the agent generalizes to reaching the
original goal through learning to reach the hindsight goal ﬁrst.
Therefore, the selection of hindsight goals imposes a direct
impact on the performance. If the hindsight goals are far from
the original ones, the learned policy may not generalize well
to the original goals. For example, in Fetch PickAndPlace,
the initialized random policy barely grasps the target successfully, which results in the hindsight goals majorly distributing
on the table. Given the original goals up in the air, such a discrepancy can cause a lower learning efﬁciency.
In this section, we introduce a heuristic method called
Hindsight Goal Filtering(HGF). Intuitively, HGF is trying to
ﬁlter the most useful goals from the achieved ones instead
of random selection. Speciﬁcally, based on our analysis (eq.
13), the performance improves if we reduce the distribution
discrepancy between original goals g and hindsight goals g′.
Ideally, if the distribution of g′ matches that of g, the agent
will reach g after learning to reach g′. Therefore, we restrict
the selected hindsight goals to distribute in the original goal
space whenever possible to cover the area of original goals.
The main idea is shown in Figure 1 and the algorithm is
summarized in Appendix E.1. The input of HGF includes
2 parts: the achieved goal set Ga and the original goal set
Go. At the beginning, especially for some complex tasks, Ga
can only have small or even no overlap with Go. Under this
situation, we encourage the agent to learn to reach the original goal region by selecting the nearest achieved goals as the
hindsight goals. Once some achieved goals fall in the original goal region, they are considered valid achieved goals, and
a subset of this intersection will be sampled to cover the region as fully as possible. This subset is selected following the
procedure in Figure 1. Note that the distance metric should
be determined by the collected original goal distribution. In
our experiments, we use the density-weighted Euclidean distance. Speciﬁcally, we initialize the hindsight goal set G with
a randomly sampled achieved goal. To make the goal distribute dispersedly, we use Max-Min Distance as the measurement, which indicates the minimal distance between the
new goal and the selected ones. By maximizing the minimal
(a) Bit Flipping
(b) Ms. Pacman
Figure 2: Demonstration of experiment environments
distance, it ensures an overall large distance between the new
goal and the rest. HGF is related to Curriculum-guided HER
(CHER)[Fang et al., 2019] to some extent. However, CHER
is suitable for transition-based RL, and cannot be applied to
episode-based policy gradient algorithms directly.
The complete algorithm of HGF and HTRPO is presented
in Appendix E.
Experiments
Our experiments aims to answer the following questions:
1. How does HTRPO compared to other methods when
performed over diversiﬁed tasks?
2. What are the main contributors to HTRPO?
3. How do key parameters affect the performance?
For 1), we show that HTRPO consistently outperforms
both HPG and TRPO in the aspect of success rate and sample
efﬁciency in a wide variety of tasks, and achieves state-ofthe-art performance in sparse-reward stochastic policy gradient methods. We also provide an in-depth comparison with
HER in this part. For 2), we ablate the main components
of HTRPO. The ablation study shows that QKL effectively
reduces the variance and signiﬁcantly improves the performance in all tasks. HGF plays a crucial role in improved performance for the more challenging tasks (e.g. Fetch PickAnd-
Place). For 3), we vary the scale of KL estimation constraint
and the numbers of hindsight goals and choose the best parameter settings.
Benchmark Settings
Benchmarks
We implement HTRPO on a variety of sparse
reward tasks. Firstly, we test HTRPO in simple benchmarks
established in previous work [Andrychowicz et al., 2017] including 4-to-100-Bit Flipping tasks.
Secondly, We verify
HTRPO’s performance in Atari games like Ms.
[Bellemare et al., 2013] with complex raw image input to
demonstrate its generalization to convolutional neural network policies. Finally, we test HTRPO in simulated robot
control tasks like Reach, Push, Slide and PickAndPlace in
Fetch [Plappert et al., 2018] robot environment. As mentioned in [Plappert et al., 2018], it still remains unexplored
that to what extent the policy gradient methods trained with
hindsight data can solve continuous control tasks.
HTRPO is a natural candidate that can be applied to both discrete and continuous tasks, other than discrete Fetch environments introduced in [Rauber et al., 2019], we also implement
HTRPO in continuous environments including Fetch Reach,
Fetch Push, Fetch Slide, Fetch PickAndPlace.
Figure 3: Success rate for benchmark environments. Top row: performance of discrete environments. Bottom row: performance of
continuous environments. The full lines represent the average evaluation over 10 trails and the shaded regions represent the corresponding
standard deviation.
A glimpse of these environments is demonstrated in Figure
2, and the inclusive introductions are included in Appendix
F.1. Detailed settings of hyperparameters are listed in Appendix F.2. All experiments are conducted on a platform with
NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080Ti.
We compare HTRPO with HPG [Rauber et al.,
2019] and TRPO [Schulman et al., 2015a], which are chosen
as the baseline algorithms. The reward setting used in our paper is purely sparse reward, i.e., when the task has not been
ﬁnished, the agent receives 0 reward in each time step, and
once the task is ﬁnished, the agent will receive a high positive
reward. Besides, TRPO is also implemented with dense rewards and the new KL estimation method proposed in Section
3.1. For a fair comparison, we also combine HPG with Hindsight Goal Filtering in our experiments. To demonstrate the
performance level of HTRPO more comprehensively, we also
compare HTRPO with the well-known HER algorithm. In all
experiments, we directly use the accumulated time steps the
agent takes while interacting with the environments throughout episodes and batches, and do not count the hindsight steps
which are generated using hindsight goals.
Comparative Analysis
How does HTRPO compared to other methods when
performed over diversiﬁed tasks?
We evaluate HTRPO’s performance from success rate and
sample efﬁciency, and test its generality to different tasks including image-based Atari games, and simulated robot control tasks. Results show HTRPO’s consistent effectiveness
and strong generality to different kinds of tasks and policies.
Compare with Baselines
The success rate curves for the
trained policy are demonstrated in Figure 3. We can conclude
that HTRPO consistently outperforms all baselines, including
different versions of TRPO and HPG, in most benchmarks,
including image-based Atari games (Ms. Pac-Man) and a variety of simulated robot control tasks with different control
modes. It demonstrates that HTRPO generalizes well in different kinds of tasks and policies with high-dimensional inputs. Besides, the sample efﬁciency of HTRPO also exceeds
that of HPG, for it reaches a higher average return within less
time in most environments.
DQN [Mnih et al., 2015] for discrete environments and
DDPG [Lillicrap et al., 2015] for continuous environments
based on OpenAI baselines1.
We found that HER cannot
work well with the sparse reward setting of HTRPO, i.e., the
reward is available only when reaching the goal. Thus, we
also follow the reward setting in [Andrychowicz et al., 2017]
to conduct HER experiments for reference (HER−1).
Toy Example: To begin with, we test HTRPO on 4-to-100-
Bit Flipping task [Andrychowicz et al., 2017] as well as HER
(Figure 4). The maximum training steps are 2 · 106. In all Bit
Flipping tasks, HTRPO can converge to nearly 100% success
rate with much fewer time steps while HER is much datainefﬁcient as the number of Bits increases.
Benchmarks:
Table 1 shows the comparison over the
benchmark environments. We can conclude that: 1) HER
can not work quite well with the purely sparse reward setting, and HTRPO outperforms HER in 6 out of 7 benchmarks
signiﬁcantly. 2) For discrete robot control tasks, HTRPO can
learn a good policy while HER−1+DQN cannot work well.
For continuous environments, HER−1 slightly outperforms
HTRPO. In summary, HTRPO can be applied both in discrete
and continuous tasks without any modiﬁcation and achieve
commendable performance compared to HER.
What are the main contributors to HTRPO?
There are mainly 2 components in HTRPO, QKL and HGF,
that impose an effect on the performance. Besides, we will
also investigate the impact of Weighted Importance Sampling
(WIS), which is conducive to variance reduction. To study the
effect of reward settings, we implement HTRPO with dense
1 
Figure 4: Performance of Bit Flipping.
Environment
Ms. Pacman
Fetch Reach D
Fetch Push D
Fetch Slide D
Fetch Reach C
Fetch Push C
Fetch Slide C
Table 1: Success rate comparison between HTRPO and HER (%).
HER−1 means using the original -1-and-0 reward setting instead of
the purely sparse reward that HTRPO used, i.e., only when the agent
achieves the goal can it receive a high reward.
rewards. Selected results are shown in Figure 5 and the full
ablation study is available in Appendix G.2. We can conclude
that: 1) QKL plays a crucial role for the high performance
of HTRPO by signiﬁcantly reducing the estimation variance
of KL divergence; 2) HGF can enhance the performance of
HTRPO to a higher level; 3) WIS is important since it can
reduce the variance of importance sampling signiﬁcantly; 4)
Dense-reward setting harms the performance, which has also
been veriﬁed in [Plappert et al., 2018].
How do key parameters affect the performance?
We take Continuous Fetch Push as an example to study the
impact of different KL estimation constraint scales and different numbers of hindsight goals.
Different KL Estimation Constraint Scales: KL estimation constraint, i.e. max KL step speciﬁes the trust region, the
range within which the agent searches for the next-step optimal policy. In the sense of controlling the scale to which the
agent updates the policy per step, this parameter presents similar functionality as learning step size. If set too low, say 5e-6
shown in Figure 6, it would inevitably slow down the converging speed. If set too high, the potentially large divergence
between the new and old policy may violate the premise for
some core parts of HTRPO theory derivation including Theorem 3.3 and HTRPO solving process.
Different Number of Hindsight Goals: From the results
in Figure 7, it is straightforward that more hindsight goals
lead to faster converging speed. This phenomenon accords
with the mechanism of how hindsight methodology deals
with sparse reward scenarios, i.e. it augments the sample pool
with substantial hindsight data rather than leaving it with few
valid original trajectories. It’s intuitive that the more hindsight data there are, the higher sample efﬁciency HTRPO
Figure 5: Ablation Experiments.
Figure 6: Max KL steps.
Figure 7: Goal numbers.
achieves. However, limited by the hardware resources, we
need to trade off the sampled goal number.
Conclusion
We proposed Hindsight Trust Region Policy Optimization(HTRPO), a new RL algorithm that extends the highly
successful TRPO algorithm with hindsight to tackle the challenge of sparse rewards.
We show that with the help of
the proposed Quadratic KL divergence Estimation (QKL),
HTRPO signiﬁcantly reduces the variance of KL estimation
and improves the performance and learning stability. Moreover, we design a Hindsight Goal Filtering mechanism to
narrow the discrepancy between hindsight and original goal
space, leading to better performance. Results on diversiﬁed
benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of HTRPO.
Since HTRPO is a natural candidate for both discrete
and continuous tasks and the QKL constraint gets rid of
the demand for analytical form, it is promising to optimize policies with non-Gaussian (e.g.
GMM) or mixed
(discrete+continuous) action space. It also provides the possibility to tackle high-dimensional real-world problems and
train robot control policies without arduous reward shaping.
Besides, HGF can be integrated into hindsight-goal exploration methods naturally [Ren et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020],
which should lead to a higher performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NSFC under grant
No.91748208, No.62088102, No.61973246, Shaanxi Project
under grant No.2018ZDCXLGY0607, and the program of the
Ministry of Education. D. Hsu is supported by the National
Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore Program .