© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  1
We present a combined report on the results of three editions
of the Cell Tracking Challenge, an ongoing initiative aimed at
promoting the development and objective evaluation of cell
segmentation and tracking algorithms. With 21 participating
algorithms and a data repository consisting of 13 data sets
from various microscopy modalities, the challenge displays
today’s state-of-the-art methodology in the field. We
analyzed the challenge results using performance measures
for segmentation and tracking that rank all participating
methods. We also analyzed the performance of all of the
algorithms in terms of biological measures and practical
usability. Although some methods scored high in all technical
aspects, none obtained fully correct solutions. We found that
methods that either take prior information into account using
learning strategies or analyze cells in a global spatiotemporal
video context performed better than other methods under the
segmentation and tracking scenarios included in the challenge.
Cell migration and proliferation are two important processes in
normal tissue development and disease1, and optical microscopy
remains the most appropriate imaging modality2 for visualizing
these processes. Imaging techniques, such as phase contrast (PhC)
or differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy, make cells
visible without the need of exogenous markers. Fluorescence micro­
scopy, on the other hand, relies on fluorescent reporters to specifi­
cally label cell components such as nuclei, cytoplasm or membranes.
These labeled structures are then imaged in two or three dimen­
sions by various imaging modalities, including widefield, confocal,
multiphoton or light-sheet fluorescence microscopy.
To gain biological insights from time-lapse microscopy record­
ings of cell behavior, it is often necessary to identify individual
cells and follow them over time. The bioimage-processing com­
munity has, since its inception, worked on extracting such quan­
titative information from microscopy images of cultured cells3,4.
Recently, the advent of new imaging technologies has challenged
this community with multi-dimensional, large image data sets
following the development of tissues, organs or entire organisms.
However, the tasks remain the same: accurately delineating (that
is, segmenting) cell boundaries and tracking cell movements over
time, providing information about their velocities and trajecto­
ries, and detecting cell-lineage changes as a result of cell divi­
sion or cell death (Fig. 1). The level of difficulty of automatically
An objective comparison of cell-tracking algorithms
Vladimír Ulman1,24,25   , Martin Maška1,25, Klas E G Magnusson2, Olaf Ronneberger3,24, Carsten Haubold4,
Nathalie Harder5,24   , Pavel Matula1, Petr Matula1, David Svoboda1   , Miroslav Radojevic6, Ihor Smal6,
Karl Rohr5, Joakim Jaldén2, Helen M Blau7, Oleh Dzyubachyk8, Boudewijn Lelieveldt8,9, Pengdong Xiao10,24   ,
Yuexiang Li11,24, Siu-Yeung Cho12, Alexandre C Dufour13   , Jean-Christophe Olivo-Marin13   ,
Constantino C Reyes-Aldasoro14, Jose A Solis-Lemus14, Robert Bensch3   , Thomas Brox3, Johannes Stegmaier15,
Ralf Mikut15   , Steffen Wolf4, Fred A Hamprecht4, Tiago Esteves16,17   , Pedro Quelhas16, Ömer Demirel18,
Lars Malmström18   , Florian Jug19, Pavel Tomancak19   , Erik Meijering6, Arrate Muñoz-Barrutia20,21   ,
Michal Kozubek1 & Carlos Ortiz-de-Solorzano22,23
1Centre for Biomedical Image Analysis, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. 2ACCESS Linnaeus Centre, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
3Computer Science Department and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies University of Freiburg, Frieburg, Germany. 4Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image
Processing, IWR, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 5Biomedical Computer Vision Group, Department of Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics,
BIOQUANT, IPMB, University of Heidelberg and DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. 6Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Departments of Medical Informatics and
Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 7Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, and Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. 8Division of Image
Processing, Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands. 9Intelligent Systems Department, Delft University of Technology, Delft,
the Netherlands. 10Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*Star, Singapore. 11Department of Engineering, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. 12Faculty of
Engineering, University of Nottingham, Ningbo, China. 13BioImage Analysis Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. 14Research Centre in Biomedical Engineering, School
of Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering, City University of London, London, UK. 15Group for Automated Image and Data Analysis, Institute for Applied
Computer Science, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany. 16i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal. 17Facultade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. 18S3IT, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 19Max Planck Institute of Molecular
Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany. 20Bioengineering and Aerospace Engineering Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Getafe, Spain. 21Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañon, Madrid, Spain. 22CIBERONC, IDISNA and Program of Solid Tumors and Biomarkers, Center for Applied Medical Research,
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. 23Bioengineering Department, TECNUN School of Engineering, University of Navarra, San Sebastián, Spain. 24Present address:
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany (V.U.); DeepMind, London, UK (O.R.); Definiens AG, Munich, Germany (N.H.);
National Heart Research Institute Singapore (NHRIS), National Heart Centre Singapore (NHCS), Singapore (P.X.); and Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer
Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China (Y.L.). 25These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed
to C.O.-d.-S. ( ).
Received 3 June; accepted 23 September; published online 30 OCTOBER 2017; doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
segmenting and tracking cells depends on the quality of the
recorded video sequences (Fig. 2 and Online Methods).
The image-processing community has addressed the abovementioned tasks using increasingly sophisticated segmentation
and tracking algorithms5–7. We briefly summarize the most com­
monly used methods for segmentation and tracking (Fig. 3).
For cell segmentation, creating a ‘taxonomy of methods’ is not a
straightforward process, as state-of-the-art methods usually com­
bine different strategies to achieve improved results. We classify
existing algorithms by three criteria. First, the principle on which
cells are detected, for example, by finding uniform areas, bounda­
ries or at very low resolution by simply finding bright spots and
maxima8. Second, the image features that are computed to achieve
the cell segmentation. These can be simple pixel or voxel intensi­
ties, their local averages, or more complex local image descrip­
tors of shapes or textures. Third, we distinguish the segmentation
method itself that implements the principle using the features. The
methods range from simple methods like thresholding9,10, hyster­
esis thresholding11, edge detection12 and shape matching13,14 to
more sophisticated approaches like region growing15–17, machine
learning18,19 and energy minimization20–26.
Cell-tracking methods can be broadly categorized into two
groups. Tracking by contour evolution methods21,22,24,25 start by
segmenting the cells in the first frame of a video and then evolve
their contours in consecutive frames, thereby solving the segmen­
tation and tracking tasks simultaneously, one step at a time, under
the essential assumption of unambiguous, spatiotemporal overlap
between the corresponding cell regions. Tracking by detection
methods14,19,26–29, in contrast, start by segmenting the cells in
all frames of a video and later, using mostly probabilistic frame­
works, establish temporal associations between the segmented
cells. This can be done by either using a two-frame or multiframe
sliding window, or even for all frames at once.
The diversity of imaging modalities, cell-tracking tasks and
available algorithms makes it difficult for biologists to decide
which algorithm to use under certain conditions. Moreover, the
developers of image-processing algorithms need to objectively
evaluate new cell segmentation and tracking solutions by compar­
ing their performance on standardized data sets. We addressed
these problems by organizing three Cell Tracking Challenges (CTC
I–III) between 2013 and 2015. For these challenges, we created a
diverse repository of annotated microscopy videos and defined
quantitative evaluation measures to allow a fair comparison of the
competing algorithms30. The participating algorithms were exam­
ined under the challenge conditions. Here we present an in-depth
analysis of the CTC results, provide useful guidelines for users to
identify appropriate algorithms for their own data sets and point
developers to open challenges that we believe are insufficiently
addressed by the algorithms tested. It is important to note that the
CTC is an open-source initiative that remains open online, and
most of the competing methods are publicly available through the
challenge website ( 
Data sets and ground truth
The data set repository (Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 1 and
Supplementary Videos 1–13) consists of 52 annotated videos from
13 classes, occupying 92 GB of raw image data. Of the 13 data sets,
11 consist of contrast enhancing (PhC, DIC) or fluorescence (wide­
field, confocal, light sheet) microscopy recordings of live cells and
organisms in two (2D) or three dimensions (3D). The other two data
sets are synthetic, generated using a cell simulator that produces
Figure 1 | Concept of cell segmentation and tracking. (a) Top, artificial sequence that simulates six consecutive frames of a time-lapse video. The gray
circles represent cells moving on a flat surface. Middle, the goal of a segmentation algorithm is to accurately determine the regions of each individual
cell in every frame, constructing a set of binary segmentation masks that correspond to the cells and locate them on a flat background. Bottom, a
tracking algorithm finds correspondences between the masks, i.e., the cells, in consecutive frames. If properly designed, a tracking algorithm is able
to detect a moving cell (e.g., C1 or C3) while it is in the field of view, determining when the cell enters and leaves the field of view. From the location
of the cells in consecutive frames, it is possible to determine the trajectory of each cell and its velocity. A tracking algorithm should also be able to
detect lineage changes as a result of, for instance, a cell division event (for example, cell C2 divides into two daughter cells, C21 and C22) or apoptosis.
(b) Graph-based representation of the cell tracks found by a tracking algorithm in the sequence shown at the top of a. Such an acyclic-oriented graph
contains, for each cell, the time when the cell enters and leaves the field of view, along with its division or apoptotic events. In a real case scenario,
these graphs show the complete genealogy of the cells displayed in the frame of the video, for the entire length of the video. Please note that the
orientation of the graph edges follows the temporal sequence starting at t = 0 and moving toward t = 5.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  
realistic 2D and 3D renderings of chromatin-stained live cells31.
Supplementary Note 1 and supporting Supplementary Figures
1–11 provide a detailed description of the data sets. Supplementary
Note 2 and supporting Supplementary Figure 12 describe the sim­
ulator used to create the synthetic data sets, applying the parameter
configuration provided in Supplementary Data 1. Table 1 provides a
quantitative characterization of the quality of each data set, based
on the measures described in the Online Methods. In all of the
tables, figures and videos, we use a naming convention for data sets
that identifies their microscopy modality (fluorescence (Fluo), DIC,
t = 1 no sync
t = 1 sync
t = 1 slow
t = 1 fast
Temporal res
Noise free
With noise
Clustering
Irregular shape
Signal decay
Spatial res
Heterogeneity
Affect segmentation
Affect tracking
Figure 2 | Concept of the main factors that determine the quality of cell images and videos. (a–f). SNR and CR measure the relationship between the
signal captured from the cells and the unwanted noise or signal captured at the same time. Decreasing SNR is shown using a cell with 250 intensity
units (iu) and no background (0 iu) in three scenarios of increasing s.d. (in iu) of background Gaussian noise: 0 (a), 50 (b) and 200 (c). The effect of
decreased CR is displayed using a simulated cell in high background (200 iu) with increasing noise s.d.: 0 (d), 50 (e) and 200 (f). The effect is shown
for three increasing noise levels: 0 noise (a versus d), 50 noise s.d. (b versus e) and 200 noise s.d. (c versus f). (g,h) Intra-cellular signal heterogeneity
that can lead to cell over-segmentation when the same cell yields several detections is simulated by a cell with nonuniform distribution of the labeling
marker or nonlabel retaining structures (g). Signal texture can also be linked to the process of image formation, in this case shown using a simulated
cell image imaged by PhC microscopy (h). (i) Signal heterogeneity between cells, shown by simulated cells with different average intensities can be
a result of, for instance, different levels of protein transfection, non-uniform label uptake, or cell cycle stage or chromatin condensation, when using
chromatin-labeling techniques. (j–l) Spatial resolution that can compromise the accurate detection of cell boundaries is displayed using a cell captured
with increasing pixel size, i.e., with decreasing spatial resolution: full resolution (j), half resolution (k) and one fourth of the original full resolution
(l). (m,n) Irregular shape that can cause over/under-segmentation, especially when the segmentation methods assume simpler, non-touching objects,
is displayed using a simulated cell with highly irregular shape under two background noise s.d. situations: 0 (m) and 100 (n).This is especially a
problem in high-noise situations (n). (o) High density of cells, which is also a frequent cause of incorrect segmentation, is shown by a cluster of
simulated cells. (p–r) Fluorescence temporal decay that can bring the SNR or CR below detection levels, thereby complicating both segmentation and
tracking, is simulated by a cell in a time series showing increasing fluorescence decay as a result of bleaching or quenching of the fluorochrome, and
same noise conditions (s.d. of 50 iu): original cell at the beginning of the experiment (p), cell with 100 iu decay (q) and cell with 200 iu decay (r).
(s–u) Cell overlap between consecutive frames is important for correctly tracking the cells, as many algorithms rely on this overlap. Here it is shown
using three simulated cells at the beginning of a video (t = 0) (s) and two possible alternative scenarios for the following time point (t = 1): t = 1 in
a scenario of high temporal resolution and/or low cell speed, allowing relatively simple identification of the correspondence between the cells (t);
t = 1 in a scenario of low temporal resolution and/or high cell speed, complicating the identification of the correspondence between the cells (u).
(v–x) Number and synchronization of mitotic events also complicates cell tracking, as tracking a mitotic cell requires correctly assigning the mother
to its daughter cells in consecutive frames. This is simulated by cells at the beginning of the video (t = 0) (v) and two possible alternative scenarios for
the following time point (t = 1): t = 1 in a scenario where only one of the cell divides asynchronously allowing a simple lineage assignment of mother
and daughter cells (w); t = 1 in a scenario of multiple, synchronized division events rendering a complicated lineage assignment of mothers
and daughters (x).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
4  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
PhC), the staining (nuclear (N), cellular (C)), the dimensionality
(2D, 3D), the resolution (low (L), high (H)), and the cell type or
model organism used.
Each data set consists of two training and two competition vid­
eos. The training videos, along with their reference annotations,
were provided at the time of registration for the CTC, allowing the
participants to carry out performance-driven optimization of their
algorithms. The competition videos, excluding the reference anno­
tations that were kept secret, were provided at a later time, which
allowed the participants to visually fine tune their algorithms on
the competition videos before submitting their results.
Three independent human experts created a segmentation
solution and a tracking solution (annotation) for each nonsyn­
thetic video30. The final segmentation (SEG-GTs) and tracking
(TRA-GTs) ground truths were created by combining the three
annotations, following a majority-voting scheme30. SEG-GTs for
the data sets of Caenorhabditis elegans (Fluo-N3DH-CE) and the
Drosophila melanogaster (Fluo-N3DL-DRO) embryos were gen­
erated as described above, but in the case of Fluo-N3DL-DRO,
only cells of the early nervous system were annotated and used
as ground truth. TRA-GTs of both embryonic data sets were not
created following the description above. Instead, they were cre­
ated using published protocols32,33 by the groups that provided
the data sets. For the synthetic videos, SEG-GTs and TRA-GTs
were inherently created by the cell simulator used31.
Participants, algorithms and handling of submissions
17 teams from 11 countries participated in the three CTC edi­
tions, all providing complete tracking results for at least one of
the data sets. Two teams submitted more than one algorithm,
leading to a total of 21 competing algorithms. Tables 2 and 3 list
the algorithms and classify their segmentation and tracking strat­
egies. Supplementary Table 2 lists affiliations of the participating
teams, and Supplementary Table 3 contains links to the execut­
able versions of most of the submitted algorithms. Their expanded
description is presented in the Supplementary Note 3, and the
parameter configurations used by each algorithm are listed in
the Supplementary Data 2. All submissions were received by the
CTC organizers as labeled segmentation masks and structured
text files containing the cell-lineage graphs. The CTC organizers
verified the submitted results by reproducing them on a single
computer, using the executable version of each algorithm pro­
vided by the participants.
Quantitative performance criteria
To quantify the performance of all submitted algorithms, we
developed three categories of measures that quantified the seg­
mentation and tracking accuracy from the computer science
point of view, the biological relevance of the obtained tracking
results, and the practical usability of the methods (see Online
Methods). It is important to note that only the first set of meas­
ures was evaluated in the challenge, and the methods were there­
fore only fine tuned in this respect. The other two sets were used
to analyze aspects that are relevant from the user point of view.
Supplementary Table 3 contains a link to the evaluation software
used in the challenge.
The first set of measures examined the segmentation and track­
ing accuracy of the methods from the developer’s point of view.
The segmentation accuracy measure (SEG) evaluates the average
amount of overlap between the reference segmentation ground
truth (SEG-GT) and the segmentation masks computed by an
evaluated algorithm. The tracking accuracy measure (TRA) is
a normalized weighted distance between the tracking solution
submitted by the participant and the reference tracking ground
truth (TRA-GT), with weights chosen to reflect the effort it takes
a human curator to carry out the edits manually. Both SEG and
TRA take values in the interval , with higher values cor­
responding to better performance. For ranking the algorithms,
the overall performance (OP) is computed by averaging SEG
and TRA values for each pair of competition videos, and then
averaging these averages (i.e., OP = 0.5 . (SEGavg + TRAavg)). In
summary, SEG and TRA evaluate results in terms of similarity
to the ground truth and are particularly relevant for compar­
ing algorithms with one another. Method developers use such
measures to show the superiority of new methods over current
state-of-the-art methods.
Biologists, however, have specific questions when using track­
ing algorithms and are therefore usually more interested in spe­
cific aspects of the final segmentation and tracking analysis. For
this reason, we evaluated four additional aspects of biological
relevance. Complete tracks (CT) measures the fraction of ground
truth cell tracks that a given method is able to reconstruct in their
entirety, from the frame they appear in to the frame they disap­
pear from. CT is especially relevant when a perfect reconstruction
of the cell lineages is required. Track fractions (TF) averages, for
all detected tracks, the fraction of the longest continuously match­
ing algorithm-generated tracklet with respect to the reference
track. Intuitively, this can be interpreted as the fraction of an aver­
age cell’s trajectory that an algorithm reconstructs correctly once
the cell has been detected. Branching correctness (BC) measures
how efficient a method is at detecting division events. Finally, the
cell cycle accuracy (CCA) measures how accurate an algorithm
is at correctly reconstructing the length of cell cycles (that is,
the time between two consecutive divisions). Both BC and CCA
are informative about the ability of the algorithm to detect cell
population growth. All of the biologically inspired measures take
Uniformity
Local statistics
Thresholding
Region growing
Machine learning
Energy minimization
Shape matching
Edge detection
Maxima detection
Methodology
Segmentation
Contour evolution
Association
Overlap-based label propagation
Graph-based optimization:
Distance-based nearest-neighbor linking
Probability
Shortest path
Multiple hypothesis
Methodology
Figure 3 | Taxonomy of cell segmentation and tracking methods.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  5
values in the interval , with higher values corresponding to
better performance.
The third set of measurable quantities expresses the practical
usability of the submitted algorithms. The first indication of an
algorithm’s usability is the number of tunable parameters (NP)
a user is required to manually set, excluding parameters visible
only to developers. In general, a lower number of tunable param­
eters indicates a more usable algorithm. A very different, but
important, attribute of an algorithm is its generalizability (GP).
This measure quantifies how stable an algorithm is when being
applied with the same parameter configuration to new videos
acquired under otherwise unchanged imaging conditions. GP
values are computed by comparing the results for a particular
training and competition video obtained using the same param­
eter configuration. This measure takes values in the interval
 , with higher values corresponding to better generalizability.
The last value we report for each algorithm is its execution time
(TIM), in seconds.
Analysis of the performance of submitted algorithms
All of the measures described have been computed for every data
set and competing algorithm. We first evaluated the SEG and
TRA measures (Figs. 5 and 6 and Supplementary Data 3). To
determine the significance of these values, we calculated SEG and
TRA values with respect to the ground truth for the three manual
annotations, as they are the best available proxies for evaluating
the variability among human annotators. Thus, algorithms with
SEG or TRA scores in the range of the average manual scores
(SEGa and TRAa), ±1 s.d., can be considered to perform at the
level of human annotators, and algorithms with scores above or
below that range can be said to perform better or worse, respec­
tively, than the human annotators.
Figure 4 | Sample images of the challenge data sets. (a) DIC-C2DH-HeLa. (b) Fluo-C2DL-MSC. (c) Fluo-C3DH-H157. (d) Fluo-C3DL-MDA231. (e) Fluo-
N2DH-GOWT1. (f) Fluo-N2DL-HeLa. (g) Fluo-N3DH-CE. (h) Fluo-N3DH-CHO. (i) Fluo-N3DL-DRO. (j) PhC-C2DH-U373. (k) PhC-C2DL-PSC. (l) Fluo-N2DH-
SIM+ and Fluo-N3DH-SIM+.
Table 1 | Properties of the competition data sets used in the three editions of the Cell Tracking Challenge
The displayed values correspond to the image/video quality parameters mathematically described in the Online Methods. SNR, signal-to-noise ratio; CR, contrast ratio; Heti, internal signal
heterogeneity of the cells; Hetb, heterogeneity of the signal between cells; Res, resolution, measured as the size of the cells in number of pixels (2D) or voxels (3D); Sha, regularity of the cell
shape, normalized between 0 (completely irregular) and 1 (perfectly regular); Den, cell density measured as minimum pixel (2D) or voxel (3D) distance between cells; Cha, change of the aver­
age intensity of the cells with time; Ove, level of overlap of the cells in consecutive frames, normalized between 0 (no overlap) and 1 (complete overlap); Mit/Syn, number and synchronization
of division events; Ent/Leav, cells entering or leaving the field of view; Apo, presence of apoptotic cells; Deb, presence of moving debris. Color code: for each category and data set, the average
was computed excluding outlying values (*). The background color of the cell indicates whether the highlighted value is in the categories’ average ±1/2 s.d. (yellow) or the value is outside
of that range (green or red). A red background indicates a poor value in a given category, and a green background indicates a high value for a given category. In Sha, the 2D and 3D data sets
were treated separately because different shape descriptor was used for 2D and for 3D cases.
Syn Ent/Leav Apo
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
Fluo-C3DH-H157
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa
Fluo-N3DH-CE
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
PhC-C2DH-U373
PhC-C2DL-PSC
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
6  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
We first examine the results trying to pinpoint the features that
underlie the good and not so good performance of the compet­
ing methods (Fig. 5). We observed that some algorithms reached
very good values (OP > 0.9) for data sets Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1,
PhC-C2DH-U373, Fluo-N2DL-HeLa, Fluo-C3DH-H157 and
Fluo-N3DH-CHO. In all but one of these data sets (Fluo-C3DH-
H157), one or more algorithms reached human-quality results.
Notably, all but one of these results were obtained on fluorescence
data with high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) or contrast ratio (CR)
values. Some also showed high spatial (Fluo-C3DH-H157, Fluo-
N3DH-CHO) and/or temporal (Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1, Fluo-
N2DL-HeLa, Fluo-N3DH-CHO) resolution and displayed rather
low cell densities (Fluo-C3DH-H157, Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1,
PhC-C2DH-U373, Fluo-N3DH-CHO).
A second group of data sets was solvable with OP values
between 0.75 and 0.9 (DIC-C2DH-HeLa, PhC-C2DL-PSC, Fluo-
C3DL-MDA231, Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ and Fluo-N3DH-SIM+). For
these data sets, the SEG and TRA values are near, but below, the
performance of the human annotators, meaning that after auto­
matic tracking some additional curation work is required to reach
the level of the human-level solutions. The difficulty for DIC-
C2DH-HeLa and PhC-C2DL-PSC appeared to be the low SNR
and CR values and high cell density, and for DIC-C2DH-HeLa
also the rather complex image texture of the cells (Supplementary
Figs. 1 and 11). For Fluo-C3DL-MDA231, the low SNR and CR
values were paired with low spatial and temporal resolution and
substantial photobleaching (Supplementary Fig. 4). The two syn­
thetic data sets (Fluo-N2DH-SIM+, Fluo-N3DH-SIM+) showed
average SNR, low CR, average cell density and average-to-high
heterogeneity in and between cells.
Three data sets (Fluo-C2DL-MSC, Fluo-N3DH-CE and Fluo-
N3DL-DRO) turned out to be the hardest to segment and track
fully automatically (OP < 0.75). For these data sets, a substantial
amount of manual work would be needed to curate the computed
results to reach human-level annotations. Fluo-C2DL-MSC suf­
fered mostly from low SNR and CR values, low temporal resolution
Table 2 | Segmentation strategies used by the competing methods
Preprocessing
Methodology
Postprocessing
Noise suppression
Intensity normalization
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering
Noise suppression
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering
Noise suppression
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Cluster separation
Intensity normalization
Illumination correction
Homogeneity Boundary
Energy minimization
Size filtering Hole filling
Intensity normalization
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Texture descriptor
Machine learning
Noise suppression
Intensity clipping
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Hole filling Cluster separation
Homogeneity
Texture descriptor
Machine learning
Size filtering
IMCB-SG (1)
Noise suppression
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Cluster separation
IMCB-SG (2)
Image resampling Noise
suppression Illumination
correction
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Cluster separation
Noise suppression
Homogeneity
Local descriptor
Thresholding
KTH-SE (1)
Intensity normalization
Noise suppression
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Hole filling Cluster
separation
KTH-SE (2)
Intensity normalization
Noise suppression
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Hole filling Cluster
separation
KTH-SE (3)
Intensity normalization
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Local descriptor
Thresholding
Boundary refinement
KTH-SE (4)
Intensity normalization
Noise suppression
Thresholding
Size filtering Region merging
Noise suppression
Homogeneity
Energy minimization
Cluster separation
Noise suppression
Homogeneity
Energy minimization
Cluster separation
Intensity normalization
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Intensity normalization
Noise suppression
Homogeneity Boundary
Energy minimization
Image subsampling Noise
suppression
Homogeneity Peak
Thresholding
Boundary refinement
Noise suppression
Homogeneity
Thresholding
Size filtering Hole filling
Boundary refinement
Intensity normalization
Noise suppression
Illumination correction
Homogeneity
Region growing
Size filtering Hole filling
Principle, feature and methodology used in the segmentation phase of the competing algorithms (following the taxonomy shown in Fig. 3) along with the preprocessing and postprocessing
strategies employed.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  7
and substantial photobleaching. This data set was also difficult
to segment correctly as a result of its prominent cell protrusions
(Supplementary Fig. 2). For Fluo-N3DH-CE and Fluo-N3DL-
DRO, the two whole-embryo data sets, the algorithms mostly
struggled to segment and track the very noisy cell nuclei in 3D.
In addition, these data sets showed very low spatial resolution,
relatively low temporal resolution and increasingly dense frames
toward the end of the videos, which strongly complicated tracking
of the segmented cells (Supplementary Figs. 7 and 9).
Next, we examined the results from the viewpoint of the algo­
rithms, asking which ones showed the best overall performance
(Fig. 6). The algorithms KTH-SE, FR-Ro-GE and HD-Hau-GE
ranked first for one or more data sets. Looking more globally at
the number of top-three occurrences, KTH-SE, FR-Ro-GE and
HD-Har-GE outperformed the others. Their common denomina­
tor was reliance on the tracking by detection paradigm. In par­
ticular, KTH-SE algorithms performed extraordinarily well, and
they were ranked among the top-three algorithms for all data sets.
These methods rely on a simple thresholding for segmentation,
the results of which are highly enriched by the use of global infor­
mation in the tracking process. In some data sets, however, the
tracking by contour evolution methods (LEID-NL, MU-CZ and
PAST-FR) reached the level of the tracking by detection methods.
This can be attributed to their high segmentation performance
on data sets with high temporal and spatial resolution (Fluo-
N3DH-CHO, Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1, Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ and
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+). These results highlight how these methods
rely on substantial cell-to-cell overlaps between successive frames
to work properly. Finally, it is interesting to note the exceptional
performance of the machine-learning methods (FR-Ro-GE, HD-
Hau-GE) on contrast enhancement microscopy (PhC and DIC)
data sets. Indeed, these methods obtained performance values on
DIC-C2DH-HeLa, PhC-C2DH-U373 and PhC-C2DL-PSC that
did not match their predicted level of complexity. This can be
explained by the fact that the internal texture of the cells in these
data sets is not detrimental for the segmentation. On the contrary,
it seems to improve the learning capacity of the algorithms.
Notably, the evolution of the average of the top-three OP
values during the three CTC editions showed progress toward
the objective of reaching the level of the human expert annota­
tors (Supplementary Fig. 13). Across all data sets, the average
top-three OP values rose by 0.03 ± 0.03 (CTC II versus CTC I)
and 0.05 ± 0.07 (CTC III versus CTC I).
We studied the robustness of the OP-based rankings (see Online
Methods and Supplementary Fig. 14) and found that the rank­
ings were indeed robust for up to 45% of possible weight changes.
Furthermore, we analyzed the correlation (i.e., interdependence)
of SEG and TRA scores using the Kendall’s τ correlation coef­
ficient (Supplementary Table 4) and found moderate global
correlation (0.55) with only a few cases of very high (DIC-C2DH-
HeLa and Fluo-N3DH-CE) or high (PhC-C2DL-PSC and Fluo-
C2DL-MSC) correlation.
Given that segmentation and tracking are meant to answer bio­
logical questions in the hands of practicing biologists, we next
Table 3 | Tracking strategies used by the competing methods
Methodology
Temporal support
Postprocessing
Division detection
Association
Graph-based multiple hypothesis tracking
Distance-based track
refinement
Association
Motion prediction-based label propagation
Cell-collision-based track
refinement
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
Association
Maximum-overlap-based label propagation
Association
Maximum-overlap-based label propagation
Association
Constrained distance-based nearest neighbor
Location- and lengthbased track refinement
Association
Probability-graph-based global optimization
IMCB-SG (1)
Association
Overlap-based label propagation
IMCB-SG (2)
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
KTH-SEM (1)
Association
Graph-based shortest path global optimization
Adjacency- and overlapbased track refinement
KTH-SEM (2)
Association
Graph-based shortest-path global optimization
with detection preprocessing
Adjacency based track
refinement
KTH-SEM (3)
Association
Graph-based shortest-path global optimization
Adjacency based track
refinement
KTH-SEM (4)
Association
Graph-based shortest-path global optimization
Adjacency based track
refinement
Contour evolution with motion compensation
Contour evolution with bleaching compensation
Location-based track
refinement
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
Contour evolution
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
Location- and lengthbased track refinement
Association
Overlap-based label propagation
Association
Distance-based nearest neighbor linking
Principle and methodology used in the tracking phase of all the competing algorithms (following the taxonomy shown in Fig. 3) along with postprocessing strategies employed, the temporal
support given, and the scheme followed for the division detection.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
8  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
analyze the biologically inspired and usability measures. Figure 7
shows the top-three biological scores: CT, TF, BC and CCA, and
the average values obtained by the annotators (CTa, TFa, BCa and
CCAa). When looking at CT across data sets, we observed very low
values overall, but especially so for DIC-C2DH-HeLa, Fluo-C2DL-
MSC, PhC-C2DL-PSC and the two embryonic developmental data
sets (Fluo-N3DH-CE and Fluo-N3DL-DRO). The low CT values
are especially relevant for the embryonic data sets, as tracking
completeness is critical for a correct genealogical reconstruction
of embryo development. The TF values were at a higher level,
meaning that the methods are reasonably competent at measur­
ing cell speeds and trajectories, but some work is still required to
bring them to the level of the human annotators. Finally, Fluo-
N2DL-HeLa, Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ and Fluo-N3DH-SIM+ showed
high BC and CCA values, which indicates that the methods are
able to correctly detect cell divisions and cell-population growth;
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
Fluo-C3DH-H157
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa
Fluo-N3DH-CE
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
PhC-C2DH-U373
PhC-C2DL-PSC
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
OP, SEGa, SEG, TRAa and TRA
Figure 5 | Top-three technical performance values (SEG, TRA and OP) obtained by the competing algorithms. Both the SEG and TRA sections start with
SEGa and TRAa, respectively, which are the average plus s.d. values of the measures obtained by three manual annotations used to create the ground
truths (SEG-GTs and TRA-GTs), which were considered as if they were also regular submissions. The color code below correlates with the values in the interval for the SEG, TRA and OP scores. NA, not applicable because only one tracking annotation exists (Fluo-N3DH-CE and Fluo-N3DL-DRO) or because
no manual annotation was necessary as a result of the existence of an absolute ground truth (simulated data sets Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ and Fluo-N3DH-SIM+).
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
Fluo-C3DH-H157
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
Fluo-N2DH-HeLa
Fluo-N3DH-CE
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
PhC-C2DH-U373
PhC-C2DL-PSC
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
KTH-SE (1–4)
IMCB-SG (1–2)
Figure 6 | Top-three performing methods of the three challenge editions. For each data set, the table shows the OP and its corresponding average SEG
and TRA scores computed over the two competition videos. Note that the methods submitted by the same participant are displayed in the same color,
with super-indices denoting the particular method of the respective participant.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  9
whereas PhC-C2DL-PSC, Fluo-N3DH-CE and, presumably, Fluo-
N3DL-DRO would benefit from improved management of divi­
sion events as revealed by their low BC and CCA values.
When analyzing the performance of the individual algorithms
in terms of CT and TF (Fig. 8 and Supplementary Data 4),
we saw similar, but not completely matching, pictures com­
pared with the ranking compiled using SEG and TRA (Fig. 6).
This is because TF and CT consider only tracking correctness,
regardless of the accuracy of the segmentation, and have much
stricter requirements on correctly reconstructed tracks. This means
that solutions with a high TRA score and low TF and CT scores still
contain errors that need to be fixed to enable sound biological con­
clusions. The KTH-SE algorithms remained the top-ranked ones
in most data sets, which highlights the importance of the inclusion
of global information in the linking process, as it yields longer,
correctly reconstructed tracklets. However, similar to the abovediscussed SEG and TRA scores, the tracking by contour evolution
method LEID-NL managed to break the dominance of tracking by
detection approaches (it is top ranked twice for TF and four times
for CT). This highlights the fact that tracking by contour evolution
methods can be superior at following cells once a track has been
initiated if the temporal resolution of the image data permits. As a
final comment, methods that inherently (KTH-SE, HD-Hau-GE,
IMCB-SG) or specifically (HD-Har-GE, LEID-NL) detect cell divi­
sion events showed higher BC and CCA values than those that do not
use specific cell division detection routines. Especially relevant is the
excellent behavior of HD-Har-GE, which was ranked first three
out of five possible times in the CCA category, and can there­
fore safely be distinguished as the best method when it comes
to detecting complete cell cycles and therefore measuring cell popu­
lation growth.
Finally, given that competing solutions need to be deployed
by biologists who normally have little computer science experi­
ence, we analyzed the usability, speed and general applicability
of all top-ranked algorithms. We found that the superior per­
formance of the KTH-SE algorithms came, unfortunately, with
the disadvantage of an elevated number of parameters compared
with most other methods (in particular with the close contender
FR-Ro-GE; Table 4 and Supplementary Data 5). Conversely, the
KTH-SE algorithms were faster than most other methods, includ­
ing FR-Ro-GE (for which, however, a much faster implementation
using graphics cards exists). Finally, we found that the KTH-SE
methods generalized very well to similar data (high GP values).
This indicates that, given a well-chosen parameter configuration,
this method is likely to obtain good results also when applied on
previously unseen image data of the same kind.
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
Fluo-C3DH-H157
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa
Fluo-N3DH-CE
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
PhC-C2DH-U373
PhC-C2DL-PSC
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
CTa, CT, TFa, TF, BC(i)a, BC(i), CCAa and CCA
Figure 7 | Top-three biological performance values (CT, TF, BC(i) and CCA) measures obtained by the competing algorithms. All four CT, TF, BC(i) and CCA
sections start with CTa, TFa, BC(i)a and CCAa, respectively, which are the average plus s.d. values of the measures obtained by three manual annotations
used to create the ground truths (SEG-GTs and TRA-GTs), which were considered as if they were also regular submissions. If not available, the values are
labeled NA. The color code below correlates with the values in the interval. The BC(i) measure was not calculated for the data sets that do not
feature any division event (NA) or a minimum number of 50 division events in each video (UC). The tolerance parameters i used for each data set were:
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa (i = 1, corresponding to a 30-min tolerance window), Fluo-N3DH-CE (i = 1, 1 min), PhC-C2DL-PSC (i = 2, 20 min), Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ (i = 3,
87 min) and Fluo-N3DH-SIM+ (i = 3, 87 min). The CCA measure was not calculated for the data sets where no evidence of entire cell cycles was found (NA).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
10  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
DISCUSSION
Here we present the results of three editions of the CTC, a
benchmarking effort aimed at improving cell tracking in multi­
dimensional microscopy. The prerequisite for our study was the
compilation of a large corpus of exemplar video sequences of bio­
logical samples imaged with a variety of microscopy modalities and
displaying a broad range of image qualities known to be challeng­
ing for automated segmentation and tracking of cells. Our work
makes a number of important contributions. First, the compila­
tion of expert-driven annotations of cell regions and trajectories
in these videos. We also include artificially generated image data at
an intermediate level of complexity, for which an absolute ground
truth inherently exists. Together, this represents a unique and rich
resource of annotated, real and simulated image data that distin­
guishes our challenge from similar events that relied exclusively on
simulated data34. Second, we developed a set of measures that quan­
titatively evaluate the performance of submitted solutions against
the ground truth data in terms of accuracy, biological relevance of
the results and usability for biologists. Third, over the course of
three challenges, we assembled a diverse collection of competing
solutions that represent all of the main algorithmic approaches to
cell segmentation and tracking problems in biology. Fourth, we
analyzed the accumulated results and provide useful guidelines for
both users and developers of tracking software.
From the comparison of the competing algorithms, we found
that in most practical scenarios tracking by detection methods
outperformed tracking by contour evolution methods. A notable
exception to this can be observed in data sets with high temporal
resolutions that have substantial interframe cell overlaps. Indeed,
in these situations tracking by contour evolution methods seem
to be able to track cells for longer stretches of the videos than
the tracking by detection methods. Paradoxically, this means that
even if the results of tracking by contour evolution methods are
less similar to the ground truth solution, their biologically rele­
vant performance might be sometimes higher. Another important
result of this study is that the algorithms that make use of modern
machine-learning approaches performed best in most segmen­
tation scenarios. For example, the methods that use machinelearning strategies to classify pixels as being either part of a cell
or the background tended to produce better segmentation results
than other methods. Furthermore, tracking by detection methods
that consider larger, possibly global, spatiotemporal contexts to
reason about track linking tended to outperform algorithms that
only look at the nearest neighbors in space and time. The conclu­
sion that algorithms that use prior and contextual information
perform better than those that do not use it was also reached in
the aforementioned Particle Tracking Challenge34. We found this
conclusion to also be true in real data sets of moving cells with
nonlinear lineages (i.e., with division events).
From the user perspective, complete and perfect unsupervised
tracking remains a distant dream. When a certain level of remain­
ing errors or manual postprocessing is acceptable, the top-scoring
algorithms offer good performance. However, as a result of a large
number of tunable parameters, practical deployment of the soft­
ware on new data may prove to be cumbersome. Potentially, long
runtimes of complex algorithmic solutions can be offset by running
them on graphics hardware whenever such implementation is fea­
sible and/or available. The good news is that once parameters have
been optimized manually or using automatic supervised or unsu­
pervised algorithms and the software runs on decent hardware, the
best methods will perform well on all similar microscopy record­
ings. Finally, we acknowledge that, as a result of the complexity of
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
Fluo-C3DH-H157
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa
Fluo-N3DH-CE
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
PhC-C2DH-U373
PhC-C2DL-PSC
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
KTH-SE (1–4)
IMCB-SG (1–2)
Figure 8 | Top-three performing methods of the three challenge editions in terms of the CT, TF, BC(i) and CCA scores. Note that the methods submitted
by the same participant are displayed in the same color, with super-indices denoting the particular method of the respective participant. The BC(i)
measure was not calculated for the data sets that do not feature any division event (NA) or at least a minimum number of 50 division events in each
video (UC). The data set Fluo-N2DL-HeLa, Fluo-N3DH-CE, PhC-C2DL-PSC, Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ and Fluo-N3DH-DIM+ was evaluated with i = 1 (corresponding
to a 30-min tolerance window), i = 1 (1 min), i = 2 (20 min), i = 3 (87 min) and i = 3 (87 min), respectively. The CCA measure was not calculated for the
data sets where no evidence of entire cell cycles was found (NA).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  11
relevant factors (biological, imaging and algorithmic) that affect
the results of segmentation and tracking, there is no simple way
to point out the right algorithm for a given data set. This is sup­
ported by the fact that none of the presented problems were solved
completely when judged from a biologist’s viewpoint.
For algorithm developers, the results of the challenge indicate
that their job is far from being complete. Despite the very good
results the submitted algorithms achieved on many data sets,
additional development is crucially required for scenarios with
low SNR or CR or for tracking cells with more complex shapes or
textures. Large 3D data sets, such as those of developing embryos,
present additional challenges. Not only do such videos show very
high cell densities in later frames, the size of the image data itself
causes very long runtimes. Tracking by detection approaches fail
on these data sets because they crucially depend on high-quality
segmentation results, something difficult to achieve in these chal­
lenging data sets. Tracking by contour evolution approaches often
fails because of their low temporal resolution.
In most circumstances, tracking is contingent on segmenta­
tion, and the submitted algorithms mix and match different
segmentation and tracking strategies. By equally weighting both
segmentation and tracking accuracy when calculating the overall
performance of the methods, we assign equal importance to both
tasks; although, as we found, the resulting ranking is robust against
changes in those weights. Furthermore, the overall correlation of
both measures is moderate, with only a few exceptions in data sets
in which the performance of a tracking solution seems to be heavily
influenced by the performance of the segmentation approach.
Although the challenge was broadly taken on by the commu­
nity, and many algorithms competed, it is important to stress that
the voluntary nature of participation necessarily resulted in sub­
stantial omissions. In particular, this affected the submissions
attempting to meaningfully solve the 3D tracking problems in
embryos that are the most challenging data sets and for which
efficient methods are published and available32,33.
The CTC, which remains open for online submissions, is a power­
ful resource for algorithm developers and users alike. Along with the
data sets, we offer an open-source Fiji plugin35 with the evaluation
suite, which is capable of computing the technical and biologically
oriented measures, as well as the data set quality parameters; and we
provide executable versions of most of the participants’ algorithms.
Furthermore, we encourage participants to make their submitted
algorithms available to biologists via easy to install and intuitive
graphical user interfaces. In the future, new data sets of existing
and new microscopy modalities will be incorporated to the data set
repository. It will be particularly important to collect and annotate
complex tissue, organ and whole-embryo image data. Finally, we
intend to add new synthetic data sets that closely mimic the variety
of cell types and microscopy scenarios. These synthetic image data
will model different cell labeling, cell shapes and cell behaviors and
migration patterns in 2D and 3D. Given that artificially generated
data sets implicitly bear absolute ground truth, they can be tuned
to challenge algorithms to improve specific aspects of the problem
(for example, how to deal with increasing noise or signal heteroge­
neity levels) or provide training data for segmentation and tracking
approaches based on promising machine-learning methods.
Methods, including statements of data availability and any associ­
ated accession codes and references, are available in the online
version of the paper.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the
online version of the paper.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the work of A. Urbiola, C. Ederra, T. España, S. Venkatesan,
D.M.W. Balak, P. Karas, T. Bolcková, M. Štreitová, M. Charousová and
L. Zátopková, who manually annotated the data sets to create the ground truths
used to evaluate the performance of the algorithms. We also would like to thank
F. Prósper (CIMA-University of Navarra), E. Bártová (Institute of Biophysics,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic), J. Essers (Erasmus University
Medical Center), the Mitocheck consortium, A. Rouzaut (CIMA-University of
Navarra), R. Kamm (Massachussets Institute of Technology), the Waterston
Lab (The George Washington University), P. Keller (Howard Hughes Medical
Institute), S. Kumar (University of California at Berkeley), G. van Cappellen
(Erasmus University Medical Center) and T. Becker (Fraunhofer Institution
for Marine Biology), who provided the data sets used in the three challenge
editions. Finally, we thank R. Stoklasa for technical support. The participants
would like to acknowledge the contributions of M. Schiegg, D. Stöckel, J. Crowe,
M. Temerinac-Ott and P. Fischer. This work was funded by Spanish Ministry of
Economy MINECO grants DPI2012-38090-C03-02 (C.O.-d.-S.) and DPI2015-
64221-C2-2 (C.O.-d.-S.), TEC2013-48552-C2-1-R (A.M.B.), TEC2015-73064-EXP
(A.M.B), and TEC2016-78052-R (A.M.B.); Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO) grants 612.001.018 (M.R. and E.M.) and 639.021.128 (I.S.);
Dutch Technology Foundation (STW) grant 10443 (I.S. and E.M.); Czech Science
Foundation (GACR) grant P302/12/G157 (M.K. and Pavel Matula); the Czech
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports grant LTC17016 in the frame of EU COST
NEUBIAS project (M.M., Pavel Matula, Petr Matula, D.S. and M.K.); Helmholtz
Association (J.S. and R.M.) and DFG grant MI 1315/4-1 (J.S. and R.M.); the
Excellence Initiative of the German Federal and State Governments EXC 294
(O.R., T.B. and R.B.); the Swiss Commission for Technology and Innovation, CTI
project 16997 (Ö.D. and L.M.); the BMBF, projects ENGINE (NGFN+), RNA-Code
(e:Bio) and de.NBI, as well as the DFG, SFB 1129 and RTG 1653 (N.H. and K.R.);
Table 4 | Usability evaluation of the top-three ranked algorithms
based on the overall performance measure
1st ranked
2nd ranked
3rd ranked
DIC-C2DH-HeLa
FR-Ro-GE 0.828
KTH-SEM (4) 0.629
IMCB-SG (1) 0.523
Fluo-C2DL-MSC
KTH-SEM (1) 0.676
FR-Ro-GE 0.636
NOTT-UK 0.546
Fluo-C3DH-H157
KTH-SEM (1) 0.938
HD-Har-GE 0.885
CUNI-CZ 0.870
Fluo-C3DL-MDA231
KTH-SEM (1) 0.757
LEID-NL 0.745
IMCB-SG (2) 0.659
Fluo-N2DH-GOWT1
KTH-SEM (1) 0.951
LEID-NL 0.902
CUNI-CZ 0.902
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa
KTH-SEM (1) 0.942
FR-Ro-GE 0.940
HD-Har-GE 0.901
Fluo-N3DH-CE
KTH-SEM (1) 0.688
HD-Har-GE 0.601
KIT-GE 0.507
Fluo-N3DH-CHO
KTH-SEM (1) 0.926
MU-CZ 0.912
HD-Har-GE 0.906
Fluo-N3DL-DRO
KTH-SEM (2) 0.609
UP-PT 0.285
CUL-UK 0.220
PhC-C2DH-U373
FR-Ro-GE 0.951
FR-Be-GE 0.896
KTH-SEM (3) 0.886
PhC-C2DL-PSC
HD-Hau-GE 0.804
KTH-SEM (1) 0.772
UP-PT 0.735
Fluo-N2DH-SIM+
FR-Ro-GE 0.878
KTH-SEM (1) 0.874
PAST-FR 0.859
Fluo-N3DH-SIM+
KTH-SEM (1) 0.848
LEID-NL 0.798
IMCB-SG (2) 0.714
NP, number of parameters; GP, generalizability measure, normalized between 0 (no generaliz­
ability) and 1 (complete generalizability); TIM, execution time in seconds. Color code:
for each data set and parameter, red background indicates the worst value of the three
methods, yellow indicates the intermediate value and green indicates the best value out
of the three listed.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
12  |  ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION  |  nature methods
the HGS MathComp Graduate School, the SFB 1129 for integrative analysis of
pathogen replication and spread, the RTG 1653 for probabilistic graphical models,
and the CellNetworks Excellence Cluster/EcTop (C.H., S.W. and F.H.); the Baxter
Foundation and US National Institutes of Health grant AG020961 (H.M.B.) and
the Swedish Research Council VR Grant 2015-04026 (K.M. and J.J.); and the
BMBF, project de.NBI, grant 031L0102 (V.U. and F.J.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
V.U. actively participated in the organization and management of the CTC
challenges by handling submissions, producing synthetic data sets, evaluating
the submitted results and globally analyzing the participant’s contributions, and
creating annotations for data set evaluation. V.U. contributed to the writing
of the manuscript and produced the tables and plot results, as well as the Fiji
plugin with the evaluation suite. M.M. actively participated in the organization
and management of the CTC challenges by handling and evaluating submissions,
providing evaluation and annotation software, supervising annotations, and
creating consensual ground truths for the evaluation of the submitted results.
M.M. contributed to the writing of the manuscript and was a challenge participant.
K.E.G.M., O.R. and C.H. were top ranked challenge participants and contributed
to the writing of the manuscript. N.H. was a top ranked challenge participant.
Pavel Matula actively participated in the organization of the CTC challenges
by leading the development of a suitable tracking measure and assessing the
behavior of various measures on challenge data sets. Petr Matula, M.R. and I.S.
actively participated in the organization of the CTC challenges by preparing data
and supervising data annotation. D.S. actively participated in the organization of
the CTC challenges by leading the development of synthetic data generator and
creation of suitable collection of synthetic time-lapse sequences with absolute
ground truth. K.R., J.J., H.M.B., O.D., B.L., P.X., Y.L., S.-Y.C., A.C.D., J.-.C.O.-M.,
C.C.R.-A., J.A.S.-L., R.B., T.B., J.S., R.M., S.W., F.A.H., T.E., P.Q., Ö.D. and L.M.
were challenge participants. F.J. contributed to the revision of the manuscript and
supported V.U. with the related data processing. P.T., E.M., A.M.-B. and M.K. were
challenge organizers and contributed to the revision of the manuscript. C.O.-d.-S.
was a challenge organizer, coordinated the work of the committee that organized
the challenges and wrote the manuscript with input from all of the authors.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at 
com/reprints/index.html. Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
1. Franz, C.M., Jones, G.E. & Ridley, A.J. Cell migration in development and
disease. Dev. Cell 2, 153–158 .
2. Bullen, A. Microscopic imaging techniques for drug discovery. Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 7, 54–67 .
3. Walter, R.J. & Berns, M.W. Digital image processing and analysis. in Video
Microscopy (ed. Inoué, S.) 327–392 .
4. Schneider, C.A., Rasband, W.S. & Eliceiri, K.W. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25
years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 .
5. Meijering, E. Cell segmentation: 50 years down the road. IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 29, 140–145 .
6. Dufour, A.C. et al. Signal processing challenges in quantitative 3-D cell
morphology: more than meets the eye. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 32,
30–40 .
7. Zimmer, C. et al. On the digital trail of mobile cells. IEEE Signal Process.
Mag. 23, 54–62 .
8. Wuttisarnwattana, P., Gargesha, M., van’t Hof, W., Cooke, K.R. & Wilson,
D.L. Automatic stem cell detection in microscopic whole mouse cryoimaging. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 35, 819–829 .
9. Lerner, B., Clocksin, W.F., Dhanjal, S., Hultén, M.A. & Bishop, C.M.
Automatic signal classification in fluorescence in situ hybridization
images. Cytometry 43, 87–93 .
10. Chen, X., Zhou, X. & Wong, S.T.C. Automated segmentation, classification,
and tracking of cancer cell nuclei in time-lapse microscopy. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 53, 762–766 .
11. Henry, K.M. et al. PhagoSight: an open-source MATLAB package for the
analysis of fluorescent neutrophil and macrophage migration in a zebrafish
model. PLoS One 8, e72636 .
12. Wählby, C., Sintorn, I.M., Erlandsson, F., Borgefors, G. & Bengtsson, E.
Combining intensity, edge and shape information for 2D and 3D
segmentation of cell nuclei in tissue sections. J. Microsc. 215,
67–76 .
13. Cicconet, M., Geiger, D. & Gunsalus, K. Wavelet-based circular houghtransform and its application in embryo development analysis. in Proc. of
the International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and Applications
669–674 .
14. Türetken, E., Wang, X., Becker, C.J., Haubold, C. & Fua, P. Network flow
integer programming to track elliptical cells in time-lapse sequences. IEEE
Trans. Med. Imaging 36, 942–951 .
15. Malpica, N. et al. Applying watershed algorithms to the segmentation of
clustered nuclei. Cytometry 28, 289–297 .
16. Ortiz de Solórzano, C. et al. Segmentation of confocal microscope
images of cell nuclei in thick tissue sections. J. Microsc 193, 212–226
17. Cliffe, A. et al. Quantitative 3D analysis of complex single border cell
behaviors in coordinated collective cell migration. Nat. Commun. 8, 14905
18. Ronneberger, O., Fisher, P. & Brox, T. U-net: convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation. in Proc. MICCAI 2015 LNCS 9351,
234–241 .
19. Schiegg, M. et al. Graphical model for joint segmentation and tracking of
multiple dividing cells. Bioinformatics 31, 948–956 .
20. Zimmer, C., Labruyère, E., Meas-Yedid, V., Guillén, N. & Olivo-Marin, J.-C.
Segmentation and tracking of migrating cells in videomicroscopy with
parametric active contours: a tool for cell-based drug testing. IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging 21, 1212–1221 .
21. Dufour, A., Thibeaux, R., Labruyère, E., Guillén, N. & Olivo-Marin, J.C.
3-D active meshes: fast discrete deformable models for cell tracking in
3-D time-lapse microscopy. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 20, 1925–1937
22. Maška, M. et al. Segmentation and shape tracking of whole fluorescent
cells based on the Chan-Vese model. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 32,
995–1006 .
23. De Solorzano, C.O., Malladi, R., Lelièvre, S.A. & Lockett, S.J. Segmentation
of nuclei and cells using membrane related protein markers. J. Microsc.
201, 404–415 .
24. Dzyubachyk, O., van Cappellen, W.A., Essers, J., Niessen, W.J. & Meijering,
E. Advanced level-set-based cell tracking in time-lapse fluorescence
microscopy. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 29, 852–867 .
25. Dufour, A. et al. Segmenting and tracking fluorescent cells in dynamic 3-D
microscopy with coupled active surfaces. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 14,
1396–1410 .
26. Bensch, R. & Ronneberger, O. Cell segmentation and tracking in phase
contrast images using graph cut with asymmetric boundary costs. In Proc.
2015 IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imaging (ISBI) 1120–1123 .
27. Harder, N. et al. Automatic analysis of dividing cells in live cell movies to
detect mitotic delays and correlate phenotypes in time. Genome Res. 19,
2113–2124 .
28. Bise, R., Yin, Z. & Kanade, T. Reliable cell tracking by global data
association. in Proc. 2011 IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imaging (ISBI)
1004–1010 .
29. Magnusson, K.E.G., Jaldén, J., Gilbert, P.M. & Blau, H.M. Global linking of
cell tracks using the Viterbi algorithm. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 34,
911–929 .
30. Maška, M. et al. A benchmark for comparison of cell tracking algorithms.
Bioinformatics 30, 1609–1617 .
31. Svoboda, D. & Ulman, V. MitoGen: A framework for generating 3D
synthetic time-lapse sequences of cell populations in fluorescence
microscopy. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 36, 310–321 .
32. Murray, J.I. et al. Automated analysis of embryonic gene expression with
cellular resolution in C. elegans. Nat. Methods 5, 703–709 .
33. Amat, F. et al. Fast, accurate reconstruction of cell lineages from
large-scale fluorescence microscopy data. Nat. Methods 11, 951–958
34. Chenouard, N. et al. Objective comparison of particle tracking methods.
Nat. Methods 11, 281–289 .
35. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image
analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 .
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473
ONLINE METHODS
Data set quality parameters. To assess the quantitative video
parameters (see Table 1), we had to calculate those param­
eters, ideally, on a complete ground truth of the competition
data sets, meaning having appropriate cell masks and tracking
information for all the cells in the videos. The ground truth
used to evaluate the performance of the algorithms (SEG-GT
and TRA-GT) was obtained manually from three annotators.
TRA-GT indeed contains the manually annotated tracks of all
the cells in the videos. However, due to the monumental task that
it would have required, SEG-GT includes a subset of complete
segmentation masks per video, which constitutes a representa­
tive amount for the evaluation of segmentation performance. To
extend the manual ground truth to cover as many as possible of
the cells in the videos, we first combined the manual tracking
ground truth (TRA-GT) with the segmentation masks provided
by the participants. For any marker in TRA-GT, we automatically
merged the top-performing participants’ segmentation masks
that overlap the majority of this tracking marker. The number of
masks used was determined manually for each video. On aver­
age, a majority of the total number of available masks were used.
The process led occasionally to colliding situations, i.e., when
obtained segmentation masks for two different tracking markers
were overlapping. If the overlap was less than 10% of the mask
area/volume, the intersecting pixels/voxels were removed from
both colliding masks in an expectation that 10% loss will not
significantly influence the measured quantities. Otherwise, both
entire masks were discarded. In this way, a rich consensus-based
segmentation with reliable linking was obtained for all real chal­
lenge videos. The synthetic data sets did not require this process,
since they are accompanied with the absolute segmentation and
tracking ground truth, inherently generated during the simula­
tion process.
Next, a mask for the background region of each video was
established as the complement to the union of all objects’ con­
sensus segmentation masks taken over all frames of the given
video. This results in a constant -stationary over the video- back­
ground mask that fits to all images of that video. A background
mask for synthetic data sets was established also like this. For
Fluo-N3DH-CE and Fluo-N3DL-DRO data sets, however, the
background masks had to be established on per-frame basis,
encompassing interior region of the embryos as well as the sur­
rounding medium.
From the consensus segmentation and tracking ground truth,
we calculated quantitative parameters as follows. Let FGi,t and
BGt represent the sets of image elements that form i-th cell and
(single) background mask, respectively, in t-th image of the video.
Furthermore, let avg(S) and s.d.(S) denote average and s.d. of
intensities found at image elements in the set S, and let dist(a,
b) be a chamfer distance36 between image elements a and b in
their coordinate units (pixels/voxels in 2D/3D). The reported
values of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), contrast ratio (CR),
internal signal heterogeneity of the cells (Heti), resolution (Res),
regularity of the cell shape (Sha), cell density (Den), and level
of cell overlap in consecutive frames (Ove) were established as
averages of SNRi,t, CRi,t, HETii,t, Resi,t, Shai,t, Deni,t,and Ovei,t
values, respectively, calculated for every object in every image in
both competition videos
where |S| is the size of the set S and I(t) is the set of indices of all
cells or nuclei segmented in the t-th image. The heterogeneity of the
signal between cells (Hetb) is calculated as the s.d. of HETbi,t values
for every object in every image in both competition videos. Shai,t
is the circularity37 for 2D objects, which is given as the normalized
ratio of perimeter of a circle having the same area as the object to
the actual area of the object, and sphericity37 for 3D objects, which
is given as the normalized ratio of the surface area of a sphere hav­
ing the same volume as the object to the actual surface area of the
object. Note that in the latter case the actual (anisotropic) voxel size
was taken into account. The Deni,t was evaluated only up to the
distance of 50 image elements away from i-th object. The distance
tells how many (background) pixels/voxels there are between two
nearby objects. Clearly, higher number expects separating nearby
objects easier. To calculate Cha, the absolute difference between the
average object intensity at the end and the beginning of a video was
divided by the number of its frames minus one and averaged over
both videos in a data set. The number of division events (Mit) is
computed as average of Mitt taken over images from both videos,
where Mitt is the number of objects whose tracks end in the t-th
image because of subsequent division events (which are marked
in the tracking ground truth TRA-GT). The remaining qualitative
parameters, synchronization of division events (Syn), cells enter­
ing or leaving the field of view (Ent/Leav), apoptotic cells (Apo),
and the presence of moving debris (Deb), were set after manual
inspection of the data sets.
Performance criteria (technical measures). Segmentation
Accuracy. We quantify the amount of overlap between the refer­
ence annotations and the computed segmentation results using
the Jaccard similarity index, defined as
where R is the reference segmentation of a cell in SEG-GT and S
is its corresponding cell segmentation. The Jaccard index always
falls in the interval, where 1 means total overlap and 0
means no overlap. The final SEG value for a particular video is
calculated as the mean Jaccard index over all reference cells in
the video.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature methods
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473
Tracking accuracy. To evaluate the ability of an algorithm to
track cells in time, the tracking results are first represented as
acyclic oriented graphs, as trees that capture the genealogy of the
cells during the duration of the video. We then assess how difficult
it is to transform a computed tracking graph into the correspond­
ing reference graph, TRA-GT, using a normalized version of the
Acyclic Oriented Graph Matching (AOGM) measure38
where AOGM0 is the AOGM value required for creating the ref­
erence graph from scratch (i.e., it is the AOGM value for empty
tracking results). The minimum operator in the numerator pre­
vents from having a final negative value when it is cheaper to
create the reference graph from scratch than to transform the
computed graph into the reference graph. TRA always falls in
the interval, with higher values corresponding to better
tracking performance.
Overall performance. For each algorithm and data set, SEG and
TRA are first averaged over the two competition videos. Then,
the averaged values, SEGavg and TRAavg, are averaged again (i.e.,
OP = 0.5 · (SEGavg + TRAavg)), and the result is used to compile
the final ranking.
Performance criteria (biologically inspired measures).
Complete tracks. CT39 examines how good a method is at recon­
structing complete reference tracks (i.e., the tracks in TRA-GT).
A reference track is considered completely reconstructed if and
only if each of its track points has an assigned track point in the
corresponding computed track, and both tracks have the same
temporal support. The final CT value for a particular video is
computed as the F1 score of completely reconstructed reference
tracks, defined as:
where Trc is number of completely reconstructed reference tracks,
Tgt is number of all reference tracks, and Tc is the number of all
computed tracks.
Track fractions. TF targets the longest, correctly reconstructed,
continuous fraction of a detected reference track. The final TF
value for a particular video is computed by averaging these frac­
tions over all detected reference tracks.
Branching correctness. BC(i)28,29 examines how good a method
is at reconstructing mother-daughter relationships. Division
events often happen during several frames, thus complicating
matching of the provided result and the ground truth. Therefore,
for two division events to be considered matching29,30 (i.e., one
provided by the method and one in the ground truth), they are
allowed to be separated by no more than i frames. More spe­
cifically, we allowed the reconstruction of division events using a
tolerance window of (2.i + 1) frames. The tolerance value i used
for each data set was fixed by analyzing how the performance
of the participating methods depends on i. Namely, the value
i was selected as the minimum value that was large enough to
ensure that the BC(i) values of all competitive methods remain
constant. The actual i values used for individual data sets were:
Fluo-N2DL-HeLa (i = 1, corresponding to a 30-min tolerance
window), Fluo-N3DH-CE (i = 1, 1 min), PhC-C2DL-PSC (i =
2, 20 min), Fluo-N2DH-SIM+ (i = 3, 87 min), and Fluo-N3DH-
SIM+ (i = 3, 87 min). The final BC(i) value for a particular video
is computed as the F1 score of correctly reconstructed division
events in the corresponding reference graph.
Cell cycle accuracy. CCA reflects the ability of an algorithm to
discover true distribution of cell cycle lengths in a video, consider­
ing only those tracks that are both initiated and terminated by a
branching event. Each such track witnesses the development of a
cell from its birth until its next division, and its length, therefore,
corresponds to the cell cycle length of that cell. The CCA measure
is defined as:
where CDFr and CDFgt are cumulative distribution functions of
cell cycle length occurrence probabilities in the reference annota­
tion and the computed result, respectively, adopting a common
non-parametric approach to discovering dissimilarities between
two sample distributions40.
It is important to note that CT, TF, BC(i) and CCA always fall
into the interval, with higher values corresponding to bet­
ter performance.
Performance criteria (usability measures). Number of required
tunable paramters. NP corresponds to the number of parameters
that need to be provided, and possibly tuned, to obtain the evalu­
ated results. Although there are methodologies that allow for auto­
matic tuning of the parameters, having to do so adds a level of
complexity to the task that might prevent a very efficient algorithm
from being used by a user non-proficient in those methods.
Generalizability. GP examines how stable the algorithm is
when being applied to similar image data using the set of param­
eters provided. Being evaluated for all 21 algorithms, we ran the
algorithms on the training videos using the same parameters
provided for the competition videos and evaluated how much
the results for the training videos differ from those for the
competition videos in terms of the technical measures:
where SEGavg
GP and TRAavg
GP are average absolute differences in the
SEG and TRA scores, respectively, between the results obtained
for the competition and training videos. Note that GP always
falls into the interval, with higher values corresponding to
higher generalizability.
Execution time. For each data set, we accumulated the time (in
seconds) that was required to analyze each competition video.
Ranking robustness. For each dataset, we ranked all methods
based on their SEG and TRA scores using the formula 0.5 · (a ·
SEG + b · TRA), a, b ∈ {0, 0.001, 0.002, …, 1}, and calculated
the number of changes between each such ranking and the one
compiled using OP (i.e., when a equals to b). Supplementary
Figure 14 plots the number of changes for every combination of
weights. As can be seen, 45% of the area causes no more than two changes in the rankings
across all data sets.
Code availability. All the code used to produce the results reported
in this article, namely a Fiji plugin that implements the entire eval­
uation suite (used to produce the numbers listed in Tables 1 and
4, Figs. 5–8, and Supplementary Figs. 13 and 14), is freely avail­
able through the link to the CTC website given in Supplementary
Table 3, along with the links to the executable versions of indi­
vidual algorithms of those participants who agreed to share their
tools. The parameters used by the participants to produce their
submitted results are listed in Supplementary Data 2.
Data availability statement. All the data sets used in the challenge
(referred to in Fig. 4, Supplementary Figs. 1–11, Supplementary
Videos 1–13, and described in Table 1 and Supplementary Table
1 and Supplementary Note 1), along with the annotations of the
training data sets, are available through the challenge website:
 Access to the data
sets is granted after free registration for the challenge.
The set of parameters used for the generation of the syn­
thetic data sets (referred to in Fig. 4, Supplementary Fig. 12,
Supplementary Videos 12 and 13, and described in Table 1 and
Supplementary Table 1) is given in Supplementary Data 1.
The entire set of evaluation measures obtained and used to
compare the algorithms (used to produce Figs. 5–8, Table 4,
Supplementary Figs. 13 and 14, and Supplementary Table 4) is
provided with this article as Supplementary Data 3 (SEG, TRA
and OP), 4 (CT, TF, BC and CCA), and 5 (NP, GP and TIM).
A Life Sciences Reporting Summary is provided.
36. Klette, R. & Zamperoni, P. Handbook of Image Processing Operators .
37. Lin, C.L. & Miller, J.D. 3D characterization and analysis of particle shape
using X-ray microtomography (XMT). Powder Technol. 154, 61–69 .
38. Matula, P. et al. Cell tracking accuracy measurement based on comparison
of acyclic oriented graphs. PLoS One 10, e0144959 .
39. Li, K. et al. Cell population tracking and lineage construction with
spatiotemporal context. Med. Image Anal. 12, 546–566 .
40. Brown, M.R. et al. Flow-based cytometric analysis of cell cycle via
simulated cell populations. PLOS Comput. Biol. 6, e1000741 .
nature research | life sciences reporting summary
Corresponding author(s): Carlos Ortiz de Solórzano
Initial submission
Revised version
Final submission
Life Sciences Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form is intended for publication with all accepted life
science papers and provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting. Every life science submission will use this form; some list
items might not apply to an individual manuscript, but all fields must be completed for clarity.
For further information on the points included in this form, see Reporting Life Sciences Research. For further information on Nature Research
policies, including our data availability policy, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
` Experimental design
1. Sample size
Describe how sample size was determined.
Our manuscript does not report on experimental work. We evaluate and rank the
performance of software -cell tracking algorithms on videos- based on a set of
performace measures. Therefore, no descriptive statistics have been used and
accordingly all the following questions have been answered (N/A).
Regarding the sample size, as explained in the Results section, "Datasets and
ground truth" subsection (page 6), we used 52 annotated videos, 4 videos of 13
types, covering a wide range of microscopy and experimental conditions. From
each type, two videos were used for training the algorithms and two videos were
used to evaluate the performance of the algorithms. The number of videos per
dataset (4) was considered appropriate taking into account the labor intense
annotation required, the amount of work given to the participants, and the
availability of good quality videos of each type.
2. Data exclusions
Describe any data exclusions.
3. Replication
Describe whether the experimental findings were
reliably reproduced.
4. Randomization
Describe how samples/organisms/participants were
allocated into experimental groups.
5. Blinding
Describe whether the investigators were blinded to
group allocation during data collection and/or analysis.
Note: all studies involving animals and/or human research participants must disclose whether blinding and randomization were used.
Nature Methods: doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473
nature research | life sciences reporting summary
6. Statistical parameters
For all figures and tables that use statistical methods, confirm that the following items are present in relevant figure legends (or in the
Methods section if additional space is needed).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement (animals, litters, cultures, etc.)
A description of how samples were collected, noting whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same
sample was measured repeatedly
A statement indicating how many times each experiment was replicated
The statistical test(s) used and whether they are one- or two-sided (note: only common tests should be described solely by name; more
complex techniques should be described in the Methods section)
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as an adjustment for multiple comparisons
The test results (e.g. P values) given as exact values whenever possible and with confidence intervals noted
A clear description of statistics including central tendency (e.g. median, mean) and variation (e.g. standard deviation, interquartile range)
Clearly defined error bars
See the web collection on statistics for biologists for further resources and guidance.
` Software
Policy information about availability of computer code
7. Software
Describe the software used to analyze the data in this
We have developed code to analyze the performance of the algorithms, and
quantify the properties of the videos, to help with the interpretation of the results.
A beta version of a Fiji plugin that contains the software in provided as a link in
Supplementary Table 3, along with links to the executable versions of the
participant's algorithms.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the paper but not yet described in the published literature, software must be made
available to editors and reviewers upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). Nature Methods guidance for
providing algorithms and software for publication provides further information on this topic.
` Materials and reagents
Policy information about availability of materials
8. Materials availability
Indicate whether there are restrictions on availability of
unique materials or if these materials are only available
for distribution by a for-profit company.
9. Antibodies
Describe the antibodies used and how they were validated
for use in the system under study (i.e. assay and species).
10. Eukaryotic cell lines
a. State the source of each eukaryotic cell line used.
b. Describe the method of cell line authentication used.
c. Report whether the cell lines were tested for
mycoplasma contamination.
d. If any of the cell lines used are listed in the database
of commonly misidentified cell lines maintained by
ICLAC, provide a scientific rationale for their use.
Nature Methods: doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473
nature research | life sciences reporting summary
` Animals and human research participants
Policy information about studies involving animals; when reporting animal research, follow the ARRIVE guidelines
11. Description of research animals
Provide details on animals and/or animal-derived
materials used in the study.
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
12. Description of human research participants
Describe the covariate-relevant population
characteristics of the human research participants.
Nature Methods: doi:10.1038/nmeth.4473