LVIS: A Dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation
Agrim Gupta
Piotr Doll´ar
Ross Girshick
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Progress on object detection is enabled by datasets that
focus the research community’s attention on open challenges. This process led us from simple images to complex
scenes and from bounding boxes to segmentation masks. In
this work, we introduce LVIS (pronounced ‘el-vis’): a new
dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation. We
plan to collect ∼2 million high-quality instance segmentation masks for over 1000 entry-level object categories in
164k images. Due to the Zipﬁan distribution of categories
in natural images, LVIS naturally has a long tail of categories with few training samples. Given that state-of-the-art
deep learning methods for object detection perform poorly
in the low-sample regime, we believe that our dataset poses
an important and exciting new scientiﬁc challenge. LVIS is
available at 
1. Introduction
A central goal of computer vision is to endow algorithms
with the ability to intelligently describe images.
detection is a canonical image description task; it is intuitively appealing, useful in applications, and straightforward to benchmark in existing settings. The accuracy of
object detectors has improved dramatically and new capabilities, such as predicting segmentation masks and 3D representations, have been developed. There are now exciting
opportunities to push these methods towards new goals.
Today, rigorous evaluation of general purpose object detectors is mostly performed in the few category regime (e.g.
80) or when there are a large number of training examples
per category (e.g. 100 to 1000+). Thus, there is an opportunity to enable research in the natural setting where there are
a large number of categories and per-category data is sometimes scarce. The long tail of rare categories is inescapable;
annotating more images simply uncovers previously unseen,
rare categories (see Fig. 9 and ). Efﬁciently
learning from few examples is a signiﬁcant open problem in
machine learning and computer vision, making this opportunity one of the most exciting from a scientiﬁc and practical perspective. But to open this area to empirical study, a
suitable, high-quality dataset and benchmark is required.
Figure 1. Example annotations. We present LVIS, a new dataset
for benchmarking Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation in the
1000+ category regime with a challenging long tail of rare objects.
We aim to enable this new research direction by designing and collecting LVIS (pronounced ‘el-vis’)—a benchmark dataset for research on Large Vocabulary Instance
Segmentation.
We are collecting instance segmentation
masks for more than 1000 entry-level object categories (see
Fig. 1). When completed, we plan for our dataset to contain
164k images and ∼2 million high-quality instance masks.1
Our annotation pipeline starts from a set of images that were
collected without prior knowledge of the categories that will
be labeled in them. We engage annotators in an iterative
object spotting process that uncovers the long tail of categories that naturally appears in the images and avoids using
machine learning algorithms to automate data labeling.
We designed a crowdsourced annotation pipeline that enables the collection of our large-scale dataset while also
yielding high-quality segmentation masks. Quality is important for future research because relatively coarse masks,
such as those in the COCO dataset , limit the ability
to differentiate algorithm-predicted mask quality beyond a
certain, coarse point. When compared to expert annotators,
our segmentation masks have higher overlap and boundary
1We plan to annotate the 164k images in COCO 2017 (we have permission to label test2017); ∼2M is a projection after labeling 85k images.
 
consistency than both COCO and ADE20K .
To build our dataset, we adopt an evaluation-ﬁrst design
principle. This principle states that we should ﬁrst determine exactly how to perform quantitative evaluation and
only then design and build a dataset collection pipeline to
gather the data entailed by the evaluation. We select our
benchmark task to be COCO-style instance segmentation
and we use the same COCO-style average precision (AP)
metric that averages over categories and different mask intersection over union (IoU) thresholds . Task and metric
continuity with COCO reduces barriers to entry.
Buried within this seemingly innocuous task choice are
immediate technical challenges: How do we fairly evaluate
detectors when one object can reasonably be labeled with
multiple categories (see Fig. 2)? How do we make the annotation workload feasible when labeling 164k images with
segmented objects from over 1000 categories?
The essential design choice resolving these challenges
is to build a federated dataset: a single dataset that is
formed by the union of a large number of smaller constituent datasets, each of which looks exactly like a traditional object detection dataset for a single category. Each
small dataset provides the essential guarantee of exhaustive annotations for a single category—all instances of that
category are annotated. Multiple constituent datasets may
overlap and thus a single object within an image can be labeled with multiple categories. Furthermore, since the exhaustive annotation guarantee only holds within each small
dataset, we do not require the entire federated dataset to be
exhaustively annotated with all categories, which dramatically reduces the annotation workload. Crucially, at test
time the membership of each image with respect to the constituent datasets is not known by the algorithm and thus it
must make predictions as if all categories will be evaluated.
The evaluation oracle evaluates each category fairly on its
constituent dataset.
In the remainder of this paper, we summarize how our
dataset and benchmark relate to prior work, provide details
on the evaluation protocol, describe how we collected data,
and then discuss results of the analysis of this data.
Dataset Timeline. We report detailed analysis on the 5000
image val subset that we have annotated twice. We have
now annotated an additional 77k images (split between
train, val, and test), representing ∼50% of the ﬁnal
dataset; we refer to this as LVIS v0.5 (see §A for details).
The ﬁrst LVIS Challenge, based on v0.5, will be held at the
COCO Workshop at ICCV 2019.
1.1. Related Datasets
Datasets shape the technical problems researchers study
and consequently the path of scientiﬁc discovery . We
owe much of our current success in image recognition
to pioneering datasets such as MNIST , BSDS ,
Figure 2. Category relationships from left to right: non-disjoint
category pairs may be in partially overlapping, parent-child, or
equivalent (synonym) relationships, implying that a single object
may have multiple valid labels. The fair evaluation of an object
detector must take the issue of multiple valid labels into account.
Caltech 101 , PASCAL VOC , ImageNet , and
COCO . These datasets enabled the development of algorithms that detect edges, perform large-scale image classiﬁcation, and localize objects by bounding boxes and segmentation masks. They were also used in the discovery of
important ideas, such as Convolutional Networks ,
Residual Networks , and Batch Normalization .
LVIS is inspired by these and other related datasets, including those focused on street scenes (Cityscapes and
Mapillary ) and pedestrians (Caltech Pedestrians ).
We review the most closely related datasets below.
COCO is the most popular instance segmentation
benchmark for common objects. It contains 80 categories
that are pairwise distinct. There are a total of 118k training images, 5k validation images, and 41k test images. All
80 categories are exhaustively annotated in all images (ignoring annotation errors), leading to approximately 1.2 million instance segmentation masks. To establish continuity
with COCO, we adopt the same instance segmentation task
and AP metric, and we are also annotating all images from
the COCO 2017 dataset. All 80 COCO categories can be
mapped into our dataset. In addition to representing an order of magnitude more categories than COCO, our annotation pipeline leads to higher-quality segmentation masks
that more closely follow object boundaries (see §4).
ADE20K is an ambitious effort to annotate almost every pixel in 25k images with object instance, ‘stuff’, and
part segmentations.
The dataset includes approximately
3000 named objects, stuff regions, and parts.
ADE20K was annotated by a single expert annotator, which
increases consistency but also limits dataset size. Due to the
relatively small number of annotated images, most of the
categories do not have enough data to allow for both training and evaluation. Consequently, the instance segmentation benchmark associated with ADE20K evaluates algorithms on the 100 most frequent categories. In contrast, our
goal is to enable benchmarking of large vocabulary instance
segmentation methods.
iNaturalist contains nearly 900k images annotated
with bounding boxes for 5000 plant and animal species.
Similar to our goals, iNaturalist emphasizes the importance
Shoulder bag (3)
Motor Scooter (4)
Hairbrush (3)
Peanut (29)
Printer (2)
Pineapple (12)
Banana (80)
Pool Table (1)
Beer Bottle (3)
Umbrella (24)
Hand Towel (2)
Teacup (12)
Donut (195)
Figure 3. Example LVIS annotations (one category per image for clarity). See 
of benchmarking classiﬁcation and detection in the few example regime. Unlike our effort, iNaturalist does not include segmentation masks and is focussed on a different
image and ﬁne-grained category distribution; our category
distribution emphasizes entry-level categories.
Open Images v4 is a large dataset of 1.9M images.
The detection portion of the dataset includes 15M bounding
boxes labeled with 600 object categories. The associated
benchmark evaluates the 500 most frequent categories, all
of which have over 100 training samples (>70% of them
have over 1000 training samples). Thus, unlike our benchmark, low-shot learning is not integral to Open Images.
Also different from our dataset is the use of machine learning algorithms to select which images will be annotated by
using classiﬁers for the target categories. Our data collection process, in contrast, involves no machine learning algorithms and instead discovers the objects that appear within a
given set of images. Starting with release v4, Open Images
has used a federated dataset design for object detection.
2. Dataset Design
We followed an evaluation-ﬁrst design principle: prior
to any data collection, we precisely deﬁned what task would
be performed and how it would be evaluated. This principle
is important because there are technical challenges that arise
when evaluating detectors on a large vocabulary dataset that
do not occur when there are few categories. These must be
resolved ﬁrst, because they have profound implications for
the structure of the dataset, as we discuss next.
2.1. Task and Evaluation Overview
Task and Metric. Our dataset benchmark is the instance
segmentation task: given a ﬁxed, known set of categories,
design an algorithm that when presented with a previously
unseen image will output a segmentation mask for each instance of each category that appears in the image along with
the category label and a conﬁdence score. Given the output
of an algorithm over a set of images, we compute mask average precision (AP) using the deﬁnition and implementation from the COCO dataset (for more detail see §2.3).
Evaluation Challenges. Datasets like PASCAL VOC and
COCO use manually selected categories that are pairwise
disjoint: when annotating a car, there’s never any question
if the object is instead a potted plant or a sofa. When increasing the number of categories, it is inevitable that other
types of pairwise relationships will occur: (1) partially overlapping visual concepts; (2) parent-child relationships; and
(3) perfect synonyms. See Fig. 2 for examples.
If these relations are not properly addressed, then the
evaluation protocol will be unfair. For example, most toys
are not deer and most deer are not toys, but a toy deer is
both—if a detector outputs deer and the object is only labeled toy, the detection will be marked as wrong. Likewise,
if a car is only labeled vehicle, and the algorithm outputs
car, it will be incorrectly judged to be wrong. Or, if an object is only labeled backpack and the algorithm outputs the
synonym rucksack, it will be incorrectly penalized. Providing a fair benchmark is important for accurately reﬂecting
algorithm performance.
These problems occur when the ground-truth annotations are missing one or more true labels for an object. If
an algorithm happens to predict one of these correct, but
missing labels, it will be unfairly penalized. Now, if all
objects are exhaustively and correctly labeled with all categories, then the problem is trivially solved. But correctly
and exhaustively labeling 164k images each with 1000 categories is undesirable: it forces a binary judgement deciding
if each category applies to each object; there will be many
cases of genuine ambiguity and inter-annotator disagreement. Moreover, the annotation workload will be very large.
Given these drawbacks, we describe our solution next.
2.2. Federated Datasets
Our key observation is that the desired evaluation protocol does not require us to exhaustively annotate all images
with all categories. What is required instead is that for each
category c there must exist two disjoint subsets of the entire
dataset D for which the following guarantees hold:
Positive set: there exists a subset of images Pc ⊆D
such that all instances of c in Pc are segmented. In other
words, Pc is exhaustively annotated for category c.
Negative set: there exists a subset of images Nc ⊆D
such that no instance of c appears in any of these images.
Given these two subsets for a category c, Pc ∪Nc can be
used to perform standard COCO-style AP evaluation for c.
The evaluation oracle only judges the algorithm on a category c over the subset of images in which c has been exhaustively annotated; if a detector reports a detection of category
c on an image i /∈Pc ∪Nc, the detection is not evaluated.
By collecting the per-category sets into a single dataset,
D = ∪c(Pc ∪Nc), we arrive at the concept of a federated dataset. A federated dataset is a dataset that is formed
by the union of smaller constituent datasets, each of which
looks exactly like a traditional object detection dataset for a
single category. By not annotating all images with all categories, freedom is created to design an annotation process
that avoids ambiguous cases and collects annotations only
if there is sufﬁcient inter-annotator agreement. At the same
time, the workload can be dramatically reduced.
Finally, we note that positive set and negative set membership on the test split is not disclosed and therefore algorithms have no side information about what categories will
be evaluated in each image. An algorithm thus must make
its best prediction for all categories in each test image.
Reduced Workload. Federated dataset design allows us to
make |Pc ∪Nc| ≪|D|, ∀c. This choice dramatically reduces the workload and allows us to undersample the most
frequent categories in order to avoid wasting annotation resources on them (e.g. person accounts for 30% of COCO).
Of our estimated ∼2 million instances, likely no single category will account for more than ∼3% of the total instances.
2.3. Evaluation Details
The challenge evaluation server will only return the overall AP, not per-category AP’s. We do this because: (1) it
avoids leaking which categories are present in the test
set;2 (2) given that tail categories are rare, there will be few
examples for evaluation in some cases, which makes percategory AP unstable; (3) by averaging over a large number
of categories, the overall category-averaged AP has lower
variance, making it a robust metric for ranking algorithms.
Non-Exhaustive Annotations. We also collect an imagelevel boolean label, ec
i, indicating if image i ∈Pc is exhaustively annotated for category c. In most cases (91%),
this ﬂag is true, indicating that the annotations are indeed
exhaustive. In the remaining cases, there is at least one instance in the image that is not annotated. Missing annotations often occur in ‘crowds’ where there are a large number
of instances and delineating them is difﬁcult. During evaluation, we do not count false positives for category c on
images i that have ec
i set to false. We do measure recall on
these images: the detector is expected to predict accurate
segmentation masks for the labeled instances. Our strategy
differs from other datasets that use a small maximum number of instances per image, per category (10-15) together
with ‘crowd regions’ (COCO) or use a special ‘group of c’
label to represent 5 or more instances (Open Images v4).
Our annotation pipeline (§3) attempts to collect segmentations for all instances in an image, regardless of count, and
then checks if the labeling is in fact exhaustive. See Fig. 3.
Hierarchy. During evaluation, we treat all categories the
same; we do nothing special in the case of hierarchical relationships. To perform best, for each detected object o, the
detector should output the most speciﬁc correct category as
well as all more general categories, e.g., a canoe should be
labeled both canoe and boat. The detected object o in image
i will be evaluated with respect to all labeled positive categories {c | i ∈Pc}, which may be any subset of categories
between the most speciﬁc and the most general.
Synonyms. A federated dataset that separates synonyms
into different categories is valid, but is unnecessarily fragmented (see Fig. 2, right). We avoid splitting synonyms
into separate categories with WordNet . Speciﬁcally, in
LVIS each category c is a WordNet synset—a word sense
speciﬁed by a set of synonyms and a deﬁnition.
2It’s possible that the categories present in the val and test sets may
be a strict subset of those in the train set; we use the standard COCO
2017 val and test splits and cannot guarantee that all categories present
in the train images are also present in val and test.
!"#$%&'(&)*+%,"&-./""01$2&
/1%&01-"#1,%&.%3&,#"%$/34
!"#$%&5(&678#9-"0:%&01-"#1,%&
;#3<01$&/=&%#,8&,#"%$/34
!"#$%&>&?&@&A*#,<&#1B&=/3"8C(
!%$;%1"#"0/1&#1B&:%30=0,#"0/1
!"#$%&D(&678#9-"0:%
#11/"#"0/1&:%30=0,#"0/1
Not exhaustive:
!"#$%&E(&F%$#"0:%&G#*%G-
Figure 4. Our annotation pipeline comprises six stages. Stage 1: Object Spotting elicits annotators to mark a single instance of many
different categories per image. This stage is iterative and causes annotators to discover a long tail of categories. Stage 2: Exhaustive
Instance Marking extends the stage 1 annotations to cover all instances of each spotted category. Here we show additional instances of
book. Stages 3 and 4: Instance Segmentation and Veriﬁcation are repeated back and forth until ∼99% of all segmentations pass a quality
check. Stage 5: Exhaustive Annotations Veriﬁcation checks that all instances are in fact segmented and ﬂags categories that are missing
one or more instances. Stage 6: Negative Labels are assigned by verifying that a subset of categories do not appear in the image.
3. Dataset Construction
In this section we provide an overview of the annotation
pipeline that we use to collect LVIS.
3.1. Annotation Pipeline
Fig. 4 illustrates our annotation pipeline by showing the
output of each stage, which we describe below. For now,
assume that we have a ﬁxed category vocabulary V. We
will describe how the vocabulary was collected in §3.2.
Object Spotting, Stage 1. The goals of the object spotting
stage are to: (1) generate the positive set, Pc, for each category c ∈V and (2) elicit vocabulary recall such that many
different object categories are included in the dataset.
Object spotting is an iterative process in which each image is visited a variable number of times. On the ﬁrst visit,
an annotator is asked to mark one object with a point and to
name it with a category c ∈V using an autocomplete text
input. On each subsequent visit, all previously spotted objects are displayed and an annotator is asked to mark an object of a previously unmarked category or to skip the image
if no more categories in V can be spotted. When an image
has been skipped 3 times, it will no longer be visited. The
autocomplete is performed against the set of all synonyms,
presented with their deﬁnitions; we internally map the selected word to its synset/category to resolve synonyms.
Obvious and salient objects are spotted early in this iterative process. As an image is visited more, less obvious objects are spotted, including incidental, non-salient ones. We
run the spotting stage twice, and for each image we retain
categories that were spotted in both runs. Thus two people
must independently agree on a name in order for it to be
included in the dataset; this increases naming consistency.
To summarize the output of stage 1: for each category in
the vocabulary, we have a (possibly empty) set of images in
which one object of that category is marked per image. This
deﬁnes an initial positive set, Pc, for each category c.
Exhaustive Instance Marking, Stage 2. The goals this
stage are to: (1) verify stage 1 annotations and (2) take each
image i ∈Pc and mark all instances of c in i with a point.
In this stage, (i, c) pairs from stage 1 are each sent to 5
annotators. They are asked to perform two steps. First, they
are shown the deﬁnition of category c and asked to verify if
it describes the spotted object. Second, if it matches, then
the annotators are asked to mark all other instances of the
same category. If it does not match, there is no second step.
To prevent frequent categories from dominating the dataset
and to reduce the overall workload, we subsample frequent
categories such that no positive set exceeds more than 1%
of the images in the dataset.
To ensure annotation quality, we embed a ‘gold set’
within the pool of work. These are cases for which we know
the correct ground-truth. We use the gold set to automatically evaluate the work quality of each annotator so that we
can direct work towards more reliable annotators. We use 5
annotators per (i, c) pair to help ensure instance-level recall.
To summarize, from stage 2 we have exhaustive instance
spotting for each image i ∈Pc for each category c ∈V.
Instance Segmentation, Stage 3. The goals of the instance
segmentation stage are to: (1) verify the category for each
marked object from stage 2 and (2) upgrade each marked
object from a point annotation to a full segmentation mask.
To do this, each pair (i, o) of image i and marked object
instance o is presented to one annotator who is asked to verify that the category label for o is correct and if it is correct,
to draw a detailed segmentation mask for it (e.g. see Fig. 3).
We use a training task to establish our quality standards.
Annotator quality is assessed with a gold set and by tracking their average vertex count per polygon. We use these
metrics to assign work to reliable annotators.
In sum, from stage 3 we have for each image and spotted
instance pair one segmentation mask (if it is not rejected).
Segment Veriﬁcation, Stage 4. The goal of the segment
veriﬁcation stage is to verify the quality of the segmentation masks from stage 3. We show each segmentation to
up to 5 annotators and ask them to rate its quality using
a rubric. If two or more annotators reject the mask, then
we requeue the instance for stage 3 segmentation. Thus we
only accept a segmentation if 4 annotators agree it is highquality. Unreliable workers from stage 3 are not invited to
judge segmentations in stage 4; we also use rejections rates
from this stage to monitor annotator reliability. We iterate
between stages 3 & 4 a total of four times, each time only
re-annotating rejected instances.
To summarize the output of stage 4 (after iterating back
and forth with stage 3): we have a high-quality segmentation mask for >99% of all marked objects.
Full Recall Veriﬁcation, Stage 5. The full recall veriﬁcation stage ﬁnalizes the positive sets. The goal is to ﬁnd images i ∈Pc where c is not exhaustively annotated. We do
this by asking annotators if there are any unsegmented instances of category c in i. We ask up to 5 annotators and
require at least 4 to agree that annotation is exhaustive. As
soon as two believe it is not, we mark the exhaustive annotation ﬂag ec
i as false. We use a gold set to maintain quality.
To summarize the output of stage 5: we have a boolean
i for each image i ∈Pc indicating if category c is exhaustively annotated in image i. This ﬁnalizes the positive
sets along with their instance segmentation annotations.
Negative Sets, Stage 6. The ﬁnal stage of the pipeline is to
collect a negative set Nc for each category c in the vocabulary. We do this by randomly sampling images i ∈D \ Pc,
where D is all images in the dataset. For each sampled image i, we ask up to 5 annotators if category c appears in
image i. If any one annotator reports that it does, we reject
the image. Otherwise i is added to Nc. We sample until the
negative set Nc reaches a target size of 1% of the images in
the dataset. We use a gold set to maintain quality.
To summarize, from stage 6 we have a negative image
set Nc for each category c ∈V such that the category does
not appear in any of the images in Nc.
3.2. Vocabulary Construction
We construct the vocabulary V with an iterative process
that starts from a large super-vocabulary and uses the object
spotting process (stage 1) to winnow it down. We start from
8.8k synsets that were selected from WordNet by removing some obvious cases (e.g. proper nouns) and then ﬁnding the intersection with highly concrete common nouns .
This yields a high-recall set of concrete, and thus likely visual, entry-level synsets. We then apply object spotting to
10k COCO images with autocomplete against this supervocabulary. This yields a reduced vocabulary with which
we repeat the process once more. Finally, we perform minor manual editing. The resulting vocabulary contains 1723
synsets—the upper bound on the number of categories that
can appear in LVIS.
Figure 5. Distribution of object centers in normalized image coordinates for four datasets. ADE20K exhibits the greatest spatial
diversity, with LVIS achieving greater complexity than COCO and
the Open Images v4 training set.3
4. Dataset Analysis
For analysis, we have annotated 5000 images (the COCO
val2017 split) twice using the proposed pipeline. We begin by discussing general dataset statistics next before proceeding to an analysis of annotation consistency in §4.2 and
an analysis of the evaluation protocol in §4.3.
4.1. Dataset Statistics
Category Statistics. There are 977 categories present in
the 5000 LVIS images.
The category growth rate (see
Fig. 9) indicates that the ﬁnal dataset will have well over
1000 categories. On average, each image is annotated with
11.2 instances from 3.4 categories. The largest instancesper-image count is a remarkable 294. Fig. 6a shows the full
categories-per-image distribution. LVIS’s distribution has
more spread than COCO’s indicating that many images are
labeled with more categories. The low-shot nature of our
dataset can be seen in Fig. 6b, which plots the total number
of instances for each category (in the 5000 images). The
median value is 9, and while this number will be larger for
the full image set, this statistic highlights the challenging
long-tailed nature of our data.
Spatial Statistics. Our object spotting process (stage 1) encourages the inclusion of objects distributed throughout the
image plane, not just the most salient foreground objects.
The effect can be seen in Fig. 5 which shows object-center
density plots. All datasets have some degree of center bias,
with ADE20K and LVIS having the most diverse spatial
distribution.
COCO and Open Images v4 (training set3)
have similar object-center distributions with a marginally
lower degree of spatial diversity.
Scale Statistics. Objects in LVIS are also more likely to
be small. Fig. 6c shows the relative size distribution of object masks: compared with COCO, LVIS objects tend to
smaller and there are fewer large objects (e.g., objects that
occupy most of an image are ∼10× less frequent). ADE20K
has the fewest large objects overall and more medium ones.
3The CVPR 2019 version of this paper shows the distribution of the
Open Images v4 validation set, which has more center bias. The peakiness is also exaggerated due to an intensity scaling artifact. For more details, see 
web/factsfigures.html.
Number of categories per image
Percent of images
Open Images v4
(a) Distribution of category count per image.
LVIS has a heavier tail than COCO and Open Images training set. ADE20K is the most uniform.
Sorted category index
Number of instances
(b) The number of instances per category (on 5k
images) reveals the long tail with few examples.
Orange dots: categories in common with COCO.
Relative segmentation mask size
Percent of instances
(c) Relative segmentation mask size (square root
of mask-area-divided-by-image-area) compared
between LVIS, COCO, and ADE20K.
Figure 6. Dataset statistics. Best viewed digitally.
Percent of instances
Mask quality (IoU)
(a) LVIS segmentation quality measured by mask
IoU between matched instances from two runs of
our annotation pipeline. Masks from the runs are
consistent with a dataset average IoU of 0.85.
Percent of image-category pairs (i,c)
Recognition quality (F1)
(b) LVIS recognition quality measured by F1
score given matched instances across two runs of
our annotation pipeline. Category labeling is consistent with a dataset average F1 score of 0.87.
Mask IoU : 0.91
Boundary quality: 0.82
Mask IoU : 0.94
Boundary quality: 0.99
(c) Illustration of mask IoU vs. boundary quality
to provide intuition for interpreting Fig. 7a (left)
and Tab. 1a (dataset annotations vs. expert annotators, below).
Figure 7. Annotation consistency using 5000 doubly annotated images from LVIS. Best viewed digitally.
boundary quality
comparison
dataset vs. experts
0.83 – 0.87
0.88 – 0.91
0.77 – 0.82
0.79 – 0.88
expert1 vs. expert2
0.91 – 0.95
0.96 – 0.98
0.92 – 0.96
0.97 – 0.99
dataset vs. experts
0.84 – 0.88
0.90 – 0.93
0.83 – 0.87
0.84 – 0.92
expert1 vs. expert2
0.90 – 0.94
0.95 – 0.97
0.90 – 0.95
0.99 – 1.00
dataset vs. experts
0.90 – 0.92
0.94 – 0.96
0.87 – 0.91
0.93 – 0.98
expert1 vs. expert2
0.93 – 0.96
0.96 – 0.98
0.91 – 0.96
0.97 – 1.00
(a) For each metric (mask IoU, boundary quality) and each statistic (mean, median), we show
a bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence interval. LVIS has the highest quality across all measures.
annotation
boundary complexity
5.59 – 6.04
5.13 – 5.51
6.94 – 7.84
5.86 – 6.80
6.00 – 6.84
4.79 – 5.31
6.34 – 7.43
4.83 – 5.53
6.35 – 7.07
5.44 – 6.00
7.13 – 8.48
5.91 – 6.82
(b) Comparison of annotation complexity. Boundary
complexity is perimeter divided by square root area .
Table 1. Annotation quality and complexity relative to experts.
4.2. Annotation Consistency
Annotation Pipeline Repeatability. A repeatable annotation pipeline implies that the process generating the groundtruth data is not overly random and therefore may be
learned. To understand repeatability, we annotated the 5000
images twice: after completing object spotting (stage 1),
we have initial positive sets Pc for each category c; we
then execute stages 2 through 5 (exhaustive instance marking through full recall veriﬁcation) twice in order to yield
doubly annotated positive sets. To compare them, we compute a matching between them for each image and category
pair. We ﬁnd a matching that maximizes the total mask intersection over union (IoU) summed over the matched pairs
and then discard any matches with IoU < 0.5. Given these
matches we compute the dataset average mask IoU (0.85)
and the dataset average F1 score (0.87). Intuitively, these
quantities describe ‘segmentation quality’ and ‘recognition
quality’ . The cumulative distributions of these metrics
(Fig. 7a and 7b) show that even though matches are established based on a low IoU threshold (0.5), matched masks
tend to have much higher IoU. The results show that roughly
50% of matched instances have IoU greater than 90% and
roughly 75% of the image-category pairs have a perfect F1
score. Taken together, these metrics are a strong indication
that our pipeline has a large degree of repeatability.
Comparison with Expert Annotators. To measure segmentation quality, we randomly selected 100 instances with
mask area greater than 322 pixels from LVIS, COCO,
and ADE20K. We presented these instances (indicated by
bounding box and category) to two independent expert annotators and asked them to segment each object using professional image editing tools. We compare dataset annotations to expert annotations using mask IoU and boundary
quality (boundary F ) in Tab. 1a. The results (bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals) show that our masks are
high-quality, surpassing COCO and ADE20K on both measures (see Fig. 7c for intuition). At the same time, the objects in LVIS have more complex boundaries (Tab. 1b).
max |Nc| (with max |Pc| = inf)
(a) Given ﬁxed detections, we show how AP
varies with |Nc|, the number of negative images
per category used in evaluation.
max |Pc| (with max |Nc| = 50)
(b) With the same detections from Fig. 8a and
|Nc| = 50, we show how AP varies as we vary
|Pc|, the positive set size.
Training set size in images
(c) Low-shot detection is an open problem:
training Mask R-CNN on 1k images decreases
COCO val2017 mask AP from 36% to 10%.
Figure 8. Analysis of AP as a function of different data sizes. Best viewed digitally.
Mask R-CNN
test anno.
ResNet-50-FPN
model id: 35859007
ResNet-101-FPN
model id: 35861858
ResNeXt-101-64x4d-FPN
model id: 37129812
Table 2. COCO-trained Mask R-CNN evaluated on LVIS annotations. Both annotations yield similar AP values.
4.3. Evaluation Protocol
COCO Detectors on LVIS. To validate our annotations
and federated dataset design we downloaded three Mask R-
CNN models from the Detectron Model Zoo and
evaluated them on LVIS annotations for the categories in
COCO. Tab. 2 shows that both box AP and mask AP are
close between our annotations and the original ones from
COCO for all models, which span a wide AP range. This result validates our annotations and evaluation protocol: even
though LVIS uses a federated dataset design with sparse annotations, the quantitative outcome closely reproduces the
‘gold standard’ results from dense COCO annotations.
Federated Dataset Simulations. For insight into how AP
changes with positive and negative sets sizes |Pc| and |Nc|,
we randomly sample smaller evaluation sets (20 times) from
COCO val2017 and recompute AP. In Fig. 8a we use all
positive instances for evaluation, but vary |Nc| between 50
and 5k. AP decreases somewhat (∼2% absolute) as we increase the number of negative images as the ratio of negative to positive examples grows with ﬁxed |Pc| and increasing |Nc|. Next, in Fig. 8b we set |Nc| = 50 and vary
|Pc|. We observe that even with a small positive set size of
80, AP is similar to the baseline with low variance. With
smaller positive sets (down to 5) variance increases, but the
AP gap from 1st to 3rd quartile remains below 2% absolute.
A curious upward bias in AP appears, which we investigate
in §C.2. These simulations together with COCO detectors
tested on LVIS (Tab. 2) indicate that including smaller evaluation sets for each category is viable for evaluation.
Low-Shot Detection. To validate the claim that low-shot
detection is a challenging open problem, we trained Mask
R-CNN on random subsets of COCO train2017 rang-
Number of annotated images
Number of categories
Number of annotated images
Percent of categories
with 1-10 images (rare)
with 11-100 (common)
with > 100 (frequent)
Figure 9. (Left) As more images are annotated, new categories
are discovered. (Right) Consequently, the percentage of low-shot
categories (blue curve) remains large, decreasing slowly.
ing from 1k to 118k images. For each subset, we optimized
the learning rate schedule and weight decay by grid search.
Results on val2017 are shown in Fig. 8c. At 1k images,
mask AP drops from 36.4% (full dataset) to 9.8% (1k subset). In the 1k subset, 89% of the categories have more than
20 training instances, while the low-shot literature typically
considers ≪20 examples per category .
Low-Shot Category Statistics. Fig. 9 (left) shows category
growth as a function of image count (up to 977 categories
in 5k images). Extrapolating the trajectory, our ﬁnal dataset
will include over 1k categories (upper bounded by the vocabulary size, 1723). Since the number of categories increases during data collection, the low-shot nature of LVIS
is somewhat independent of the dataset scale, see Fig. 9
(right) where we bin categories based on how many images
they appear in: rare (1-10 images), common (11-100), and
frequent (>100). These bins, as measured w.r.t. the training
set, will be used to present disaggregated AP metrics.
5. Conclusion
We introduced LVIS, a new dataset designed to enable,
for the ﬁrst time, the rigorous study of instance segmentation algorithms that can recognize a large vocabulary of object categories (>1000) and must do so using methods that
can cope with the open problem of low-shot learning. While
LVIS emphasizes learning from few examples, the dataset
is not small: it will span 164k images and label ∼2 million
object instances. Each object instance is segmented with a
high-quality mask that surpasses the annotation quality of
related datasets. We plan to establish LVIS as a benchmark
challenge that we hope will lead to exciting new object detection, segmentation, and low-shot learning algorithms.
Number of annotated images
Number of categories
LVIS val (unpruned)
LVIS val v0.5
LVIS train v0.5
Number of annotated images
Percent of categories
with 1-10 images (rare)
with 11-100 (common)
with > 100 (frequent)
Figure 10. Category growth (left) and frequency statistics (right)
for LVIS v0.5. Best viewed digitally. Compare with Fig. 9.
A. LVIS Release v0.5
LVIS release v0.5 marks the halfway point in data collection. For this release, we have annotated an additional
77k images (57k train, 20k test) beyond the 5k val
images that we analyzed in the previous sections, for a total
of 82k annotated images. Release v0.5 is publicly available
at and will be used
in the ﬁrst LVIS Challenge to be held in conjunction with
the COCO Workshop at ICCV 2019.
Collection Details. We collected the v0.5 data in two 38.5k
image batches using the process described in the main text.
Each batch contained a proportional mix of train and
test images. After collection was completed for the ﬁrst
batch, we manually checked all 1415 categories that were
represented in the data collection and cast an include vs.
exclude vote for each category based on its visual consistency. This process led to the removal of ∼18% of categories and ∼10% of labeled instances. After collecting the
second batch, we repeated this process for 83 categories that
were newly introduced. After we ﬁnish the full data collection for v1 , we will conduct another
similar quality control pass on a subset of the categories.
LVIS val v0.5 is the same as the set used for analysis in
the main text, except that we removed any categories that:
(1) were determined to be visually inconsistent in the quality control pass or (2) had zero instances in the training set.
In this section, we refer to the annotations used for analysis
in the main text as ‘LVIS val (unpruned)’.
Dataset Statistics. After our quality control pass, the ﬁnal
category count for release v0.5 is 1230. The number of categories in the val set decreased from 977 to 830, due to
quality control, and it now has 51k segmented object instances. The train v0.5 set has 694k segmented instances.
We next repeat some of the key analysis plots, this time
showing the ﬁnal val and train v0.5 sets compared to
the original (unpruned) val set from the main text. The
train and test sets are collected using an identical process (the train and test images were originally sampled
from the same image distribution and are mixed together in
each annotation batch) and therefore the training data is statistically identical to that of the test data.
Fig. 10 (left) illustrates the category growth rate on
train and val before and after pruning.
Figure 11. Distribution of object centers in normalized image coordinates for LVIS val, LVIS val v0.5 (i.e. after quality control),
and LVIS train v0.5. The distributions are nearly identical.
only modest growth while collecting the second half of the
dataset, perhaps expanding by ∼100 additional categories.
Next, we extend Fig. 9 (right) from 5k images to 57k images using the train v0.5 data, as shown in Fig. 10 (right).
Due to the slowing category growth, the percent of rare categories (those appearing in 1-10 training images) is decreasing, but remains a sizeable portion of the dataset. Roughly
75% of categories appear in 100 training images or less,
highlighting the challenging low-shot nature of the dataset.
Finally, we look at the spatial distribution of object centers in Fig. 11. This visualization veriﬁes that quality control did not lead to a meaningful bias in this statistic. The
train and val sets exhibit visually similar distributions.
Based on this analysis and our qualitative judgement
when performing per-category quality control, we conclude
that our data collection process scales well beyond the initial 5k set analyzed in the main text.
B. LVIS v0.5 Baselines
To help researchers calibrate their results for the upcoming LVIS Challenge at ICCV 2019,4 we introduce simple
baselines. In §B.1, we test the performance of Mask R-
CNN out-of-the-box, and show the importance of adjusting two inference-time hyper-parameters. Next in §B.2
we provide an improved (yet standard) baseline that resamples the training data in order to increase the frequency of
rare categories. Finally in §B.3 we train larger models.
B.1. Mask R-CNN Out-of-the-Box
We ﬁrst apply Mask R-CNN out-of-the-box on LVIS.
Unless speciﬁed we use Mask R-CNN with a ResNet-50
backbone (pre-trained on ImageNet) with FPN . Training is performed using Detectron2, which is implemented
in PyTorch and will be open-sourced later this year. Our
training formula is unmodiﬁed from COCO training.5
4 
5We use SGD with 0.9 momentum and 16 images per minibatch; the training schedule is 60k/20k/10k updates at learning rates of
0.02/0.002/0.0002 respectively (this 90k update schedule is equivalent to
∼25 epochs over train v0.5); we use a linear learning rate warmup 
over 1000 updates starting from a learning rate of 0.001; weight decay
0.0001 is applied; horizontal ﬂipping is the only train-time data augmentation unless otherwise stated; training and inference images are resized to a
shorter image edge of 800 pixels; no test-time augmentation is used.
score thr det/img
(a) Mask R-CNN baselines (ResNet-50-FPN backbone). Top rows: adjusting two inference-time hyper-parameters, the minimum score threshold and the number of detections per image, leads to a gain of 6.1 AP over
the baseline using standard COCO hyper-parameters (row 1). The last
two rows show the mean and standard deviation from ﬁve training runs.
(b) Mask R-CNN with repeat factor sampling (with best settings from
Table 3a). The frequency threshold t controls the degree of resampling of
rare categories (t=0 gives no resampling). Setting t>0 substantially improves APr and t=0.001 gives best overall results. The last row presents
class aware sampling (CAS), an alternate oversampling method .
enhancement
Table 3b best
+ scale jitter
+ ResNet-101
+ ResNeXt-101-32×8d
(c) Mask R-CNN enhancements. We apply scale jitter data augmentation and upgrade the backbone to larger models . This improves all
AP metrics although APr does not improve with the largest backbone.
Table 3. LVIS release v0.5 baselines. Metrics: AP is mask AP;
subscripts ‘r’, ‘c’, and ‘f’ refer to rare, common, and frequent category subsets (deﬁned in §4.3). Where applicable we repeat each
experiment 5 times and report mean and standard deviation.
The results are low and in particular APr (mask AP for
rare categories) is 0.8%—near zero. In Table 3a we demonstrate that adjusting two inference-time hyper-parameters
on LVIS improves results. First, we increase the number of
detections per images as LVIS allows up to 300 (vs. 100 for
COCO). Second, due to class imbalance the max conﬁdence
scores reported for rare and common classes is typically low
(compared to COCO), hence reducing the minimum score
threshold from the default of 0.05 to 0.0 (i.e., no threshold) substantially improves APc. The combination of these
changes increases APr a modest amount, up to an average
of 3.2% Table 3a (bottom row).
We additionally observe that on LVIS, mask AP is typically slightly higher than box AP (denoted by APbb). This
trend is the opposite for COCO, where AP is typically 3 to
4% (absolute) lower than APbb. We hypothesize that the
AP/APbb trend on LVIS is due to high quality segmentation
masks. We have found supporting evidence by programmatically degrading LVIS mask quality and observing a drop in
AP with almost no change in APbb (results not shown).
B.2. Mask R-CNN with Data Resampling
Resampling training data is a common strategy for training models on class imbalanced datasets .
We apply a method that was used to train large-scale hashtag prediction models in (inspired by ).
method, which we refer to as repeat factor sampling, increases the rate at which tail categories are observed by
oversampling the images that contain them.
The method is implemented as follows. For each category c, let fc be the fraction of training images that contain at least one instance of c. Deﬁne the category-level
repeat factor as rc = max(1,
t/fc), where t is a hyperparameter. Since each image may contain multiple categories, we deﬁne an image-level repeat factor. Speciﬁcally,
for each image i, we set ri = maxc∈i rc, where {c ∈i}
are the categories labeled in i. In each epoch, the SGD data
sampler creates a random permutation of images in which
each image is repeated according to its repeat factor ri.
The one hyper-parameter of this method, t, is a threshold that intuitively controls the point at which oversampling
kicks in. For categories with fc ≤t, there is no oversampling. For categories with fc > t, the degree of oversampling follows a square-root inverse frequency heuristic: if
we decrease the frequency of a category by a factor γ < 1,
then its repeat factor will be multiplied by
heuristic has worked well in other settings, e.g. .
The results of repeat factor sampling for varying t are
shown in Table 3b. Comparing with the baseline (equivalent to t = 0), there is a large improvement in APr from
3.2% to 13.4% at t = 0.001. This threshold oversamples
categories appearing in less than 0.1% of images (829 of
the 1230 categories). There is a slight penalty in lower APf
(−0.6%), but overall AP improves (+2.2%).
We also present results using class aware sampling
(CAS), a popular method on imbalanced classiﬁcation
datasets (e.g., ).
In CAS, the data sampler ﬁrst selects a category and then an image containing that category. Consistent with repeat factor sampling and SGD bestpractices , we iterate over random permutations of categories and within each category random permutations of
their images. CAS improves APr over the baseline as expected (from 3.2% to 8.5%), however both APc and APf
decrease leading to a worse overall result.
B.3. Mask R-CNN Standard Enhancements
Finally we consider two standard enhancements in addition to using repeat factor sampling with t = 0.001: we apply scale jitter at training time (sampling image scale from
{640, 672, 704, 736, 768, 800}) and upgrade to larger models. Both enhancement yield improvements as reported in
Table 3c with a ﬁnal validation AP of 27.1%.
Subset size (images)
Percent of categories
train v0.5
Figure 12. The distribution of rare, common, and frequent categories (deﬁned w.r.t. train v0.5) within random image subsets
of a given size changes as a function of that size. The shaded
region (imperceptible without zoom) illustrates one standard deviation around the mean over 10 draws of subsets for each size.
C. LVIS val to test Results Transfer
In this section we analyze how AP on LVIS v0.5 val
transfers to the test set. First, in §C.1 we show how the
category distribution varies between the smaller val and
larger test sets. Next, in §C.2 we demonstrate the surprising result that even with a ﬁxed category set smaller evaluation sets can have a bias towards higher AP. The impact
is larger for rare categories, hence while it has a minimal
effect on COCO, on LVIS it results in AP measured on the
larger test set to be lower than on the smaller val set.
C.1. Category Frequency Distributions
An evaluation set with a large proportion of categories
that appear infrequently in the training set (i.e. categories
with few training examples) will tend to be more difﬁcult as
learning from few examples is challenging. An important
question, then, is what is the frequency distribution (w.r.t.
the training set) of categories in a given evaluation set?
To investigate this question, we look at category frequency distributions in random image subsets of various
sizes. For visualization, we quantize category frequency
as described in §4.3 into ‘rare’, ‘common’, and ‘frequent’
groups based on how many images each category appears
in the training set. In Fig. 12, for each subset size, we plot
the mean rare/common/frequent category distribution over
random subsets of that size.
From this analysis, we can predict that the val set
(5k images) should contain ∼15% rare categories, while
the test set (20k images) should have ∼29% rare categories. Their actual values are 15.1% and 28.2%, validating our prediction. In general, larger evaluation sets contain a higher proportion of rare categories. Using the APr/c/f
achieved by R-101-FPN Mask R-CNN as an example, this
distribution shift could result in a decrease in overall AP of
∼2% when moving from val to test. While optimizing
for the LVIS Challenge, one may want to take this distribution shift into account; on the test set rare categories will
play a more important role than on the val set.
C.2. AP as a Function of Evaluation Set Size
Suppose we have a small evaluation set (e.g., val, 5k
images) and a large evaluation set (e.g., test, 20k images)
that are both random samples from the same population.
One might expect that while the categories present in the
sets are different, the per-category AP for a given category
computed on evaluation sets of different sizes should be unbiased estimates of the true AP and only the variance of the
estimate should change. Surprisingly, in general this intuition is not true and the estimate can be biased for smaller
evaluation set sizes. We ﬁrst observed this bias in Fig. 8b,
in which we see that AP increases on average as the number
of positive images per category (|Pc|) decreases. We now
analyze this bias further in both simulated6 and real data.
Consider a simple binary classiﬁcation setting with n
test examples in total. Each example is positive for category c with probability fc. We will compute AP as a function of the evaluation set size n and for various values of
fc. We consider two simulated classiﬁers, each of which is
deﬁned by class-conditional probability distributions over
scores: p1(s) = p(s|y = 1) and p0(s) = p(s|y = 0), where
s is the classiﬁer score and y indicates the true label.
In the ﬁrst simulation the classiﬁer scores are drawn from
p1(s) = N(1, 1) and p0(s) = N(−1, 1), i.e., the scores are
Gaussian-distributed around +1 and −1, respectively. In
the second simulation, we draw classiﬁer scores from p1(s)
and p0(s) obtained from a real classiﬁer (the distributions,
not shown, are highly non-Gaussian). Results for both simulations are shown in Fig. 13a. Each curve shows the AP
for a classiﬁer as the evaluation set size (x-axis) varies. Different curves correspond to different category frequencies
(0.001 to 0.1).
Given a ﬁxed classiﬁer, we observe that
the curves are ordered top-to-bottom by higher-to-lower fc.
This ordering shows that for a ﬁxed classiﬁer, AP tends to
be lower for rarer categories, which is an intuitive and wellknown trend (see §3.2). More surprising is the ﬁnding that within a curve, AP is consistently higher when the
evaluation subset size is smaller. This pattern exists at all
frequency levels in both simulations.
Now moving from the simulated classiﬁcation problem
to real object detection data, we show APbb@75 of a trained
detector for three categories evaluated on random COCO
val2017 subsets of various sizes in Fig. 13b. The toaster
category is one of the two rarer categories in COCO while
cats and and dining table appear more frequently. In each
case we observe similar trends as in the earlier simulations.
Most categories in COCO are well-sampled like the cat
and dining table categories and their AP has already converged on the 5k val2017 set. Therefore overall AP does
not vary much on COCO when comparing val2017 to
test2017 results.
6The simulation code will be available on the LVIS website.
Evaluation set size (n examples)
Simulated Gaussian scores
Evaluation set size (n examples)
Simulated empirical scores
(a) AP of simulated classiﬁers as a function of the evaluation set size and the fraction of positive
examples fc (the number below each data point indicates the number of positives at that point, the
shaded region indicates the standard error when averaged over 300 trials). The left plot shows the
behavior of a random Gaussian classiﬁer; the right shows a classiﬁer that mimics the empirical
score distribution of a trained classiﬁer. While smaller fc leads to decreased AP, we also observe
a consistent decrease in AP as the evaluation set size increases (until convergence).
COCO val2017 subset size (images)
74 111 185
200300 500
Trained detector
cat, fc =0.037
toaster, fc =0.002
dining table, fc =0.100
(b) APbb@75 of a detector on three COCO categories when evaluated on random subsets of different sizes. Toasters are rare (fc = 0.002) while
cats and dining tables appear more frequently. As
in simulation, the AP can decreases with larger test
set size, especially for rare categories.
Figure 13. AP bias as the size of the evaluation set is varied.
subset size
20k (full)
(a) Fixed Mask R-CNN model (Table 3b best + scale jitter) evaluated on
different size subsets of test v0.5 (average over 30 random subsets).
AP on the 5k subset is similar to AP on val v0.5. As we increase subset
size we observe a systematic decrease in all AP metrics consistent with
the simulated and observed bias described in the main text.
ResNet-101
ResNeXt-101-32×8d
(b) We compare how AP transfers for three different models (Table 3c)
from val v0.5 to test v0.5. All AP metrics decrease but the ranking
of the models remains consistent across val and test.
Table 4. Results on LVIS test v0.5 for different size subsets of test and for three different baseline models.
LVIS, unlike COCO, is not artiﬁcially balanced and
therefore it contains a large number of rare categories.
Therefore we expect to see a change in AP when moving
from the small val v0.5 set to the larger test v0.5 set.
We see exactly the predicted effects in Table 4a where we
report the results of a ﬁxed Mask R-CNN model on various sized subsets of the test set from 5k to 20k images.
The results on the 5k subset size are in line with results on
the 5k image val set. As the number of evaluation images
increases, we observe that AP systematically decreases.
Despite the bias between val and test (or more generally evaluation sets of different sizes), we expect the ranking
of different models on the val set and test to remain constant under typical conditions as it is not obvious how one
would exploit the bias. In Table 4b we compare three models with distinctly different AP on the val set to each other
on the test test. Indeed for at least these three models the
ranking on val transfers exactly to the ranking on test.
C.3. Comparing Models
Finally, to gain a sense for the statistical differences
between the three models in Table 4b, we applied three
standard hypothesis tests (paired t-test, random permutation test, and percentile bootstrap) to the mean of the percategory AP differences between pairs of models. As an
example, for the ResNet-101 and ResNeXt-101 based models (test AP of 20.0 vs. 20.5, respectively) the paired ttest and random permutation test return p = 0.0490 and
p = 0.0486, respectively. The percentile bootstrapped produced a 95% conﬁdence interval of [0.002, 1.015], which
excludes 0 (barely). These tests agree with each other (i.e.,
they reject, at a 5% level, the null hypothesis that the mean
difference in per-category AP values is zero) and provide
some intuition for the statistical signiﬁcance that might arise
from a 0.5% absolute difference in AP on test.
C.4. Summary
In existing class-balanced detection datasets, researchers
have grown accustomed to AP transferring nearly perfectly
between small validation sets (e.g., 5k images) and larger
test sets (20k images). In this section we demonstrated that
when a dataset has a larger class imbalance there are at least
two factors that cause AP estimated on smaller evaluation
sets to be biased compared to larger evaluation sets. Empirically, this bias leads to higher AP on val v0.5 than on
test v0.5. While a small validation set was unavoidable
for LVIS v0.5, based on this analysis we may extend the
validation set to include more images in release v1.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Ilija Radosavovic,
Amanpreet Singh, Alexander Kirillov, Judy Hoffman, and Tsung-
Yi Lin for their help during creation of LVIS. We thank the COCO
Committee for granting us permission to annotate the COCO test
set and Amanpreet Singh for help in creating the LVIS website.