Future Frame Prediction for Anomaly Detection – A New Baseline
Wen Liu∗, Weixin Luo∗, Dongze Lian, Shenghua Gao†
ShanghaiTech University
{liuwen, luowx, liandz, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Anomaly detection in videos refers to the identiﬁcation of
events that do not conform to expected behavior. However,
almost all existing methods tackle the problem by minimizing the reconstruction errors of training data, which cannot guarantee a larger reconstruction error for an abnormal event. In this paper, we propose to tackle the anomaly
detection problem within a video prediction framework. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that leverages the difference between a predicted future frame and
its ground truth to detect an abnormal event. To predict a
future frame with higher quality for normal events, other
than the commonly used appearance (spatial) constraints
on intensity and gradient, we also introduce a motion (temporal) constraint in video prediction by enforcing the optical ﬂow between predicted frames and ground truth frames
to be consistent, and this is the ﬁrst work that introduces
a temporal constraint into the video prediction task. Such
spatial and motion constraints facilitate the future frame
prediction for normal events, and consequently facilitate
to identify those abnormal events that do not conform the
expectation. Extensive experiments on both a toy dataset
and some publicly available datasets validate the effectiveness of our method in terms of robustness to the uncertainty in normal events and the sensitivity to abnormal
All codes are released in 
com/StevenLiuWen/ano_pred_cvpr2018.
1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in videos refers to the identiﬁcation
of events that do not conform to expected behavior . It
is an important task because of its applications in video
surveillance. However, it is extremely challenging because
abnormal events are unbounded in real applications, and it
is almost infeasible to gather all kinds of abnormal events
and tackle the problem with a classiﬁcation method.
∗The authors contribute equally and are listed in alphabetical order.
†Corresponding author.
• , •!, … , •"
Ground truth
Prediction
Figure 1. Some predicted frames and their ground truth in normal and abnormal events. Here the region is walking zone. When
pedestrians are walking in the area, the frames can be well predicted. While for some abnormal events (a bicycle intrudes/ two
men are ﬁghting), the predictions are blurred and with color distortion. Best viewed in color.
Lots of efforts have been made for anomaly detection . Of all these work, the idea of feature
reconstruction for normal training data is a commonly used
strategy. Further, based on the features used, all existing
methods can be roughly categorized into two categories: i)
hand-crafted features based methods . They represent each video with some hand-crafted features including
appearance and motion ones. Then a dictionary is learnt to
reconstruct normal events with small reconstruction errors.
It is expected that the features corresponding to abnormal
events would have larger reconstruction errors. But since
the dictionary is not trained with abnormal events and it is
usually overcomplete, we cannot guarantee the expectation.
ii) deep learning based methods . They usually
learn a deep neural network with an Auto-Encoder way and
they enforce it to reconstruct normal events with small reconstruction errors. But the capacity of deep neural network
is high, and larger reconstruction errors for abnormal events
do not necessarily happen. Thus, we can see that almost all
training data reconstruction based methods cannot guaran-
 
Intensity Loss and
Gradient Loss
Discriminator
••, • ,…, ••
Real or Fake
Figure 2. The pipeline of our video frame prediction network. Here we adopt U-Net as generator to predict next frame. To generate
high quality image, we adopt the constraints in terms of appearance (intensity loss and gradient loss) and motion (optical ﬂow loss).
Here Flownet is a pretrained network used to calculate optical ﬂow. We also leverage the adversarial training to discriminate whether the
prediction is real or fake.
tee the ﬁnding of abnormal events.
It is interesting that even though anomaly is deﬁned as
those events do not conform the expectation, most existing
work in computer vision solve the problem within a framework of reconstructing training data . We presume it is probable that the video frame prediction is far
from satisfactory at that time. Recently, as the emergence
of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) , the performance of video prediction has been greatly advanced .
In this paper, rather than reconstructing training data for
anomaly detection, we propose to identify abnormal events
by comparing them with their expectation, and introduce
a future video frame prediction based anomaly detection
method. Speciﬁcally, given a video clip, we predict the future frame based on its historical observation. We ﬁrst train
a predictor that can well predict the future frame for normal training data. In the testing phase, if a frame agrees
with its prediction, it potentially corresponds to a normal
event. Otherwise, it potentially corresponds to an abnormal
event. Thus a good predictor is a key to our task. We implement our predictor with an U-Net network architecture given its good performance at image-to-image translation . First, we impose a constraint on the appearance by enforcing the intensity and gradient maps of the
predicted frame to be close to its ground truth; Then, motion is another important feature for video characterization,
and a good prediction should be consistent with real object
motion. Thus we propose to introduce a motion constraint
by enforcing the optical ﬂow between predicted frames to
be close to their ground truth. Further, we also add a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) module into our
framework in light of its success for video generation 
and image generation .
We summarize our contributions as follows:
propose a future frame prediction based framework for
anomaly detection. Our solution agrees with the concept of
anomaly detection that normal events are predictable while
abnormal ones are unpredictable. Thus our solution is more
suitable for anomaly detection. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst work that leverages video prediction for
anomaly detection; ii) For the video frame prediction framework, other than enforcing predicted frames to be close to
their ground truth in spatial space, we also enforce the optical ﬂow between predicted frames to be close to their optical
ﬂow ground truth. Such a temporal constraint is shown to
be crucial for video frame prediction, and it is also the ﬁrst
work that leverages a motion constraint for anomaly detection; iii) Experiments on toy dataset validate the robustness
to the uncertainty for normal events, which validates the robustness of our method. Further, extensive experiments on
real datasets show that our method outperforms all existing
2. Related Work
2.1. Hand-crafted Features Based Anomaly Detection
Hand-crafted features based anomaly detection is mainly
comprised of three modules: i) extracting features; In this
module, the features are either hand-crafted or learnt on
training set; ii) learning a model to characterize the distribution of normal scenarios or encode regular patterns; iii)
identifying the isolated clusters or outliers as anomalies.
For feature extraction module, early work usually utilizes
low-level trajectory features, a sequence of image coordinates, to represent the regular patterns . However,
these methods are not robust in complex or crowded scenes
with multiple occlusions and shadows, because trajectory
features are based on object tracking and it is very easy to
fail in these cases. Taking consideration of the shortcom-
ings of trajectory features, low-level spatial-temporal features, such as histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) ,
histogram of oriented ﬂows (HOF) are widely used.
Based on spatial-temporal features, Zhang et al. exploit a Markov random ﬁled (MRF) for modeling the normal patterns. Adam et al. characterize the regularly local histograms of optical ﬂow by an exponential distribution. Kim and Grauman model the local optical ﬂow
pattern with a mixture of probabilistic PCA (MPPCA). Mahadevan et al. ﬁt a Gaussian mixture model to mixture
of dynamic textures (MDT). Besides these statistic models,
sparse coding or dictionary learning is also a popular approach to encode the normal patterns . The fundamental underlying assumption of these methods is that
any regular pattern can be linearly represented as a linear
combination of basis of a dictionary which encodes normal
patterns on training set. Therefore, a pattern is considered as
an anomaly if its reconstruction error is high and vice verse.
However, optimizing the sparse coefﬁcients is usually timeconsuming in sparse reconstruction based methods. In order
to accelerate both in training and testing phase, Lu et al 
propose to discard the sparse constraint and learn multiple
dictionaries to encode normal scale-invariant patches.
2.2. Deep Learning Based Anomaly Detection.
Deep learning approaches have demonstrated their successes in many computer vision tasks as well as
anomaly detection . In the work , Xu et al. design a multi-layer auto-encoder for feature learning, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of deep learning features. In
another work , a 3D convolutional auto-encoder (Conv-
AE) is proposed by Hasan to model regular frames. Further, motivated by the observation that Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) has strong capability to learn spatial
features, while Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)and its
long short term memory (LSTM) variant have been widely
used for sequential data modeling. Thus, by taking both
advantages of CNN and RNN, leverage a Convolutional LSTMs Auto-Encoder (ConvLSTM-AE) to model
normal appearance and motion patterns at the same time,
which further boosts the performance of the Conv-AE based
solution. In , Luo et al. propose a temporally coherent
sparse coding based method which can map to a stacked
RNN framework. Besides, Ryota et al. combine detection and recounting of abnormal events. However, all
these anomaly detections are based on the reconstruction of
regular training data, even though all these methods assume
that abnormal events would correspond to larger reconstruction errors, due to the good capacity and generalization of
deep neural network, this assumption does not necessarily
hold. Therefore, reconstruction errors of normal and abnormal events will be similar, resulting in less discrimination.
2.3. Video Frame Prediction
Recently, prediction learning is attracting more and more
researchers’ attention in light of its potential applications in
unsupervised feature learning for video representation .
In , Shi et al. propose to modify original LSTM with
ConvLSTM and use it for precipitation forecasting. In ,
a multi-scale network with adversarial training is proposed
to generate more natural future frames in videos. In ,
a predictive neural network is designed and each layer in
the network also functions as making local predictions and
only forwarding deviations. All aforementioned work focuses on how to directly predict future frames. Different
from these work, recently, people propose to predict transformations needed for generating future frames and ,
which further boosts the performance of video prediction.
3. Future Frame Prediction Based Anomaly
Detection Method
Since anomaly detection is the identiﬁcation of events
that do not conform the expectation, it is more natural
to predict future video frames based on previous video
frames, and compare the prediction with its ground truth
for anomaly detection. Thus we propose to leverage video
prediction for anomaly detection. To generate a high quality video frame, most existing work only considers appearance constraints by imposing intensity loss ,
gradient loss , or adversarial training loss . However, only appearance constraints cannot guarantee to characterize the motion information well. Besides spatial information, temporal information is also an important feature of videos. So we propose to add an optical ﬂow constraint into the objective function to guarantee the motion
consistency for normal events in training set, which further
boosts the performance for anomaly detection, as shown in
the experiment section (section 4.5 and 4.6). It is worth
noting abnormal events can be justiﬁed by either appearance (A giant monster appears in a shopping mall) or motion (A pickpocket walks away from an unlucky guy), and
our future frame prediction solution leverages both the appearance and motion loss for normal events, therefore these
abnormal events can be easily identiﬁed by comparing the
prediction and ground truth. Thus the appearance and motion losses based video prediction are more consistent with
anomaly detection.
Mathematically, given a video with consecutive t frames
I1, I2, . . . , It, we sequentially stack all these frames and use
them to predict a future frame It+1. We denote our prediction as ˆIt+1. To make ˆIt+1 close to It+1, we minimize their
distance regarding intensity as well as gradient. To preserve the temporal coherence between neighboring frames,
we enforce the optical ﬂow between It+1 and It and that
between ˆIt+1 and It to be close. Finally, the difference
Max pooling
Convolution
Deconvolution
Concatenate
32x32 64x64
Figure 3. The network architecture of our main prediction network
(U-Net). The resolutions of input and output are the same.
between a future frame’s prediction and itself determines
whether it is normal or abnormal. The network architecture
of our framework is shown in Fig. 2. Next, we will introduce all the components of our framework in details.
3.1. Future Frame Prediction
The network commonly used for frame generation or
image generation in existing work usually contains two modules: i) an encoder which extracts features by
gradually reducing the spatial resolution; and ii) a decoder
which gradually recovers the frame by increasing the spatial resolution. However, such a solution confronts with the
gradient vanishing problem and information imbalance in
each layer. To avoid this, U-Net is proposed by adding
a shortcut between a high level layer and a low level layer
with the same resolution. Such a manner suppresses gradient vanishing and results in information symmetry. We
slightly modify U-Net for future frame prediction in our
implementation. Speciﬁcally, for each two convolution layers, we keep output resolution unchanged. Consequently, it
does not need the crop and resize operations anymore when
adding shortcuts. The details of this network are illustrated
in Figure 3. The kernel sizes of all convolution and deconvolution are set to 3 × 3 and that of max pooling layers are
set to 2 × 2.
3.2. The Constraints on Intensity and Gradient
To make the prediction close to its ground truth, following the work , intensity and gradient difference are used.
The intensity penalty guarantees the similarity of all pixels
in RGB space, and the gradient penalty can sharpen the generated images. Speciﬁcally, we minimize the ℓ2 distance between a predicted frame ˆI and its ground true I in intensity
space as follows:
Lint(ˆI, I) = ∥ˆI −I∥2
Further, we deﬁne the gradient loss by following previous
work as follows:
Lgd(ˆI, I) =
|ˆIi,j −ˆIi−1,j| −|Ii,j −Ii−1,j|
|ˆIi,j −ˆIi,j−1| −|Ii,j −Ii,j−1|
where i, j denote the spatial index of a video frame.
3.3. The Constraint on Motion
Previous work only considers the difference between intensity and gradient for future frame generation,
and it can not guarantee to predict a frame with the correct
motion. This is because even a small change occurs in terms
of the pixel intensity of all pixels in a predicted frame, even
though it corresponds to a small prediction error in terms
of gradient and intensity, it may result in totally different
optical ﬂow, which is a good estimator of motion . So
it is desirable to guarantee the correctness of motion prediction. Especially for anomaly detection, the coherence of
motion is an important factor for the evaluation of normal
events. Therefore, we introduce a temporal loss deﬁned as
the difference between optical ﬂow of prediction frames and
ground truth. However, the calculation of optical ﬂow is not
easy. Recently, a CNN based approach has been proposed
for optical ﬂow estimation . Thus we use the Flownet
 for optical ﬂow estimation. We denote f as the Flownet,
then the loss in terms of optical ﬂow can be expressed as
Lop = ∥f(ˆIt+1, It) −f(It+1, It)∥1
In our implementation, f is pre-trained on a synthesized
dataset , and all the parameters in f are ﬁxed.
3.4. Adversarial Training
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) have demonstrated its usefulness for image and video generation
 . By following , we also leverage a variant of
GAN (Least Square GAN ) module for generating a
more realistic frame. Usually GAN contains a discriminative network D and a generator network G. G learns to
generate frames that are hard to be classiﬁed by D, while
D aims to discriminate the frames generated by G. Ideally,
when G is well trained, D cannot predict better than chance.
In practice, adversarial training is implemented with an alternative update manner.
Moreover, we treat the U-Net
based prediction network as G. As for D, we follow 
and utilize a patch discriminator which means each output
scalar of D corresponds a patch of an input image. Totally,
the training schedule is illustrated as follows:
Training D. The goal of training D is to classify It+1
into class 1 and G(I1, I2, ..., It) = ˆIt+1 into class 0, where 0
and 1 represent fake and genuine labels, respectively. When
training D, we ﬁx the weights of G, and a Mean Square
Error (MSE) loss function is imposed:
adv(ˆI, I) =
2LMSE(D(I)i,j, 1)
2LMSE(D(ˆI)i,j, 0)
where i, j denotes the spatial patches indexes and LMSE is
a MSE function, which is deﬁned as follows:
LMSE( ˆY , Y ) = ( ˆY −Y )2
where Y takes values in {0,1} and ˆY ∈ 
Training G. The goal of training G is to generate frames
where D classify them into class 1. When training G, the
weights of D are ﬁxed. Again, a MSE function is imposed
as follows:
2LMSE(D(ˆI)i,j, 1)
3.5. Objective Function
We combine all these constraints regarding appearance,
motion, and adversarial training, into our objective function,
and arrive at the following objective function:
LG =λintLint(ˆIt+1, It+1)
+ λgdLgd(ˆIt+1, It+1)
adv(ˆIt+1)
When we train D, we use the following loss function:
adv(ˆIt+1, It+1)
To train the network, the intensity of pixels in all frames
are normalized to [-1, 1] and the size of each frame is resized to 256 × 256.
We set t = 4 and use a random
clip of 5 sequential frames which is the same with .
Adam based Stochastic Gradient Descent method is
used for parameter optimization. The mini-batch size is 4.
For gray scale datasets, the learning rate of generator and
discriminator are set to 0.0001 and 0.00001, respectively.
While for color scale datasets, the learning rate of generator and discriminator start from 0.0002 and 0.00002, respectively. For different datasets, the coefﬁcient factors of
λint, λgd, λop and λadv are slightly different. An easy way
is to set λint, λgd, λop and λadv as 1.0, 1.0, 2.0 and 0.05,
respectively.
3.6. Anomaly Detection on Testing Data
We assume that normal events can be well predicted.
Therefore, we can use the difference between predicted
frame ˆI and its ground truth I for anomaly prediction. MSE
is one popular way to measure the quality of predicted images by computing a Euclidean distance between the prediction and its ground truth of all pixels in RGB color space.
However, Mathieu shows that Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) is a better way for image quality assessment,
shown as following:
PSNR(I, ˆI) = 10 log10
i=0(Ii −ˆIi)2
High PSNR of the t-th frame indicates that it is more likely
to be normal. After calculating each frame’s PSNR of each
testing video, following the work , we normalize PSNR
of all frames in each testing video to the range and
calculate the regular score for each frame by using the following equation:
PSNR(It, ˆIt) −mint PSNR(It, ˆIt)
maxt PSNR(It, ˆIt) −mint PSNR(It, ˆIt)
Therefore, we can predict whether a frame is normal or abnormal based its score S(t). One can set a threshold to distinguish regular or irregular frames.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our proposed method as
well as the functionalities of different components on three
publicly available anomaly detection datasets, including
the CUHK Avenue dataset , the UCSD Pedestrian
dataset and the ShanghaiTech dataset . We further
use a toy dataset to validate the robustness of our method,
i.e., even if there exists some uncertainties in normal events,
our method can still correctly classify normal and abnormal
4.1. Datasets
Here we brieﬂy introduce the datasets used in our experiments. Some samples are shown in Fig. 4.
• CUHK Avenue dataset contains 16 training videos and
21 testing ones with a total of 47 abnormal events, including throwing objects, loitering and running. The
size of people may change because of the camera position and angle.
• The UCSD dataset contains two parts: The UCSD
Pedestrian 1 (Ped1) dataset and the UCSD Pedestrian 2
(Ped2) dataset. The UCSD Pedestrian 1 (Ped1) dataset
includes 34 training videos and 36 testing ones with
Table 1. AUC of different methods on the Avenue, Ped1, Ped2 and ShanghaiTech datasets.
CUHK Avenue
ShanghaiTech
MPPCA 
MPPC+SFA 
Conv-AE 
Del et al. 
ConvLSTM-AE 
Unmasking 
Hinami et al. 
Stacked RNN 
Our proposed method
CUHK Avenue
ShanghaiTech
Figure 4. Some samples including normal and abnormal frames in
the UCSD, CUHK Avenue and ShanghaiTech datasets are illustrated. Red boxes denote anomalies in abnormal frames.
40 irregular events. All of these abnormal cases are
about vehicles such as bicycles and cars. The UCSD
Pedestrian 2 (Ped2) dataset contains 16 training videos
and 12 testing videos with 12 abnormal events. The
deﬁnition of anomaly for Ped2 is the same with Ped1.
Usually different methods are evaluated on these two
parts separately.
• The ShanghaiTech dataset is a very challenging
anomaly detection dataset.
It contains 330 training
videos and 107 testing ones with 130 abnormal events.
Totally, it consists of 13 scenes and various anomaly
types. Following the setting used in , we train the
model on all scenes.
4.2. Evaluation Metric
In the literature of anomaly detection , a popular evaluation metric is to calculate the Receiver Operation
Characteristic (ROC) by gradually changing the threshold
of regular scores. Then the Area Under Curve (AUC) is cumulated to a scalar for performance evaluation. A higher
value indicates better anomaly detection performance. In
this paper, following the work , we leverage frame-level
AUC for performance evaluation.
4.3. Comparison with Existing Methods
In this section, we compare our method with different
hand-craft features based method and latest deep learning based methods .
AUC of different methods is listed in Table 1. We can see
that our method outperforms all existing methods (around
(3–5)% on all datasets), which demonstrates the effectiveness of our method.
4.4. The Design of Prediction Network
In our anomaly detection framework, the future frame
prediction network is an important module.
To evaluate
how different prediction networks affect the performance
of anomaly detection, we compare our U-Net prediction
network with Beyond Mean Square Error (Beyond-MSE)
 which achieves state-of-the-art performance for video
generation. Beyond-MSE leverages a multi-scale prediction
network to gradually generate video frames with larger spatial resolution. Because of its multi-scale strategy, it is much
slower than U-Net. To be consistent with Beyond-MSE, we
adapt our network architecture by removing the motion constraint and only use the intensity loss, the gradient loss and
adversarial training in our U-Net based solution.
Quantitative comparison for anomaly detection. We
ﬁrst compute the gap between average score of normal
frames and that of abnormal frames, denoted as ∆s. We
compare the result of U-Net with that of Beyond-MSE on
the Ped1 and Ped2 datasets, respectively. Larger ∆s means
the network can be more capable to distinguish normal and
abnormal patterns. Then, we also compare the U-Net based
solution and Beyond-MSE with the AUC metric on the Ped1
and Ped2 datasets, respectively. We demonstrate the results
in Table 2. We can see that our method both achieves a
larger ∆s and higher AUC than Beyond-MSE, which show
that our network is more suitable for anomaly detection than
Beyond-MSE. Therefore, we adapt U-Net architecture as
our prediction network. As we aforementioned, the results
listed here do not contain motion constraint, which would
further boost the AUC.
Table 2. The gap (∆s) and AUC of different prediction networks
in the Ped1 and Ped2 datasets.
Beyond-MSE
Figure 5. The evaluation of different components in our future
frame prediction network in the Avenue dataset. Each column in
the histogram corresponds to a method with different loss functions. We calculate the average scores of normal and abnormal
events in the testing set. The gap is calculated by subtracting the
abnormal score from the normal one.
CUHK Avenue
Our method
Figure 6. We ﬁrstly compute the average score for normal frames
and that for abnormal frames in the testing set of the Ped1, Ped2
and Avenue datasets. Then, we calculate the difference of these
two scores(∆s) to measure the ability of our method and Conv-AE
to discriminate normal and abnormal frames. A larger gap(∆s)
corresponds to small false alarm rate and higher detection rate.
The results show that our method consistently outperforms Conv-
AE in term of the score gap between normal and abnormal events.
Table 3. AUC for anomaly detection of networks with/wo the motion constraint in Ped1 and Ped2.
without motion constraint
with motion constraint
4.5. Impact of Constraint on Motion.
To evaluate the importance of motion constraint for
video frame generation as well as anomaly detection, we
conduct the experiment by removing the constraint from the
objective in the training. Then we compare such a baseline
with our method.
Evaluation of motion constraint with optical ﬂow
We show the optical ﬂow maps generated
with/without motion constraint in Fig. 7, we can see that
the optical ﬂow generated with motion constraint is more
consistent with ground truth, which shows that such motion
constraint term helps our prediction network to capture motion information more precisely. We also compare the MSE
between optical ﬂow maps generated with/without motion
constraint and the ground truth, which is 7.51 and 8.26, respectively. This further shows the effectiveness of motion
constraint.
Quantitatively evaluation of motion with anomaly detection. The result in Table 3 shows that the model trained
with motion constraint consistently achieves higher AUC
than that without the constraint on Ped1 and Ped2 dataset.
This also proves that it is necessary to explicitly impose
the motion consistency constraint into the objective for
anomaly detection.
4.6. Impact of Different Losses for Anomaly Detection.
We also analyze the impact of different loss functions
for anomaly detection by ablating different terms gradually. We combine different losses to conduct experiments
on the Avenue dataset. To evaluate how different losses affect the performance of anomaly detection, we also utilize
the score gap(∆s) mentioned above. The larger gap represents the more discriminations between normal and abnormal frames. The results in Figure 5 show more constraints
usually achieve a higher gap as well as AUC value, and our
method achieves the highest value under all settings.
4.7. Comparison of Prediction Network and Auto-
Encoder Networks for Anomaly Detection
We also compare the video prediction network based and
Auto-Encoder network based anomaly detection. Here for
Auto-Encoder network based anomaly detection, we use
the Conv-AE which is the latest work and achieves
state-of-the-art performance for anomaly detection.
Because of the capacity of deep neural network, Auto-Encoder
Optical flow
with motion constraint
Predicted image
with motion constraint
Optical flow
ground truth
Optical flow
without motion constraint
Predicted image
without motion constraint
Figure 7. The visualization of optical ﬂow and the predicted images on the Ped1 dataset. The red boxes represent the difference of optical
ﬂow predicted by the model with/without motion constraint. We can see that the optical ﬂow predicted by the model with motion constraint
is closer to ground truth. Best viewed in color.
Vehicle Intrude
prediction
ground truth
Uncertainty in A Normal Event & Vehicle Intruding
Jump fight
prediction
ground truth
Figure 8. The visualization of predicted testing frames in our toy pedestrian dataset. There are two abnormal cases including vehicle
intruding(left column) and humans ﬁghting(right column). The orange circles correspond to normal events with uncertainty in prediction
while the red ones correspond to abnormal events. It is noticeable that the predicted truck is blurred, because no vehicles appear in the
training set. Further, in the ﬁghting case, two persons cannot be predicted well because ﬁghting motion never appear in the training phase.
based methods may well reconstruct normal and abnormal
frames in the testing phase. To evaluate the performance of
prediction network and Auto-Encoder one, we also utilize
the aforementioned gap(∆s) between normal and abnormal
scores. The result in Fig. 6 shows that our solution always
achieves higher gaps than Conv-AE, which validates the effectiveness of video prediction for anomaly detection.
4.8. Evaluation with A Toy Dataset
We also design a toy pedestrian dataset for performance
evaluation. In the training set, only a pedestrian walks on
the road and he/she can choose different directions when
he/she comes to a crossroad. In the testing set, there are
some abnormal cases such as vehicles intruding, humans
ﬁghting, etc.. We have uploaded our toy dataset in the supplementary material. Totally, the training data contains 210
frames and testing data contains 1242 frames.
It is interesting that the motion direction is sometimes
also uncertain for normal events, for example, a pedestrian
stands at the crossroad. Even though we cannot predict the
motion well, we only cannot predict the next frame at a moment which leads a slightly instant drop in terms of PSNR.
After observing the pedestrian for a while when the pedestrian has made his or her choice, it becomes predictable and
PSNR would go up, shown in Fig. 8. Therefore the uncertainty of normal events does not affect our solution too
much. However, for the real abnormal events, for example, a truck breaks into the scene and hits the pedestrian, it
would leads to a continuous lower PSNR, which facilitates
the anomaly prediction. Totally, the AUC is 98.9%.
4.9. Running Time
Our framework is implemented with NVIDIA GeForce
TITAN GPUs and Tensorﬂow .
The average running
time is about 25 fps, which contains both the video frame
generation and anomaly prediction. We also report the running time of other methods such as 20 fps in , 150 fps
 and 0.5 fps in .
5. Conclusion
Since normal events are predictable while abnormal
events do not conform to the expectation, therefore we propose a future frame prediction network for anomaly detection. Speciﬁcally, we use a U-Net as our basic prediction
network. To generate a more realistic future frame, other
than adversarial training and constraints in appearance, we
also impose a loss in temporal space to ensure the optical
ﬂow of predicted frames to be consistent with ground truth.
In this way, we can guarantee to generate the normal events
in terms of both appearance and motion, and the events
with larger difference between prediction and ground truth
would be classiﬁed as anomalies. Extensive experiments on
three datasets show our method outperforms existing methods by a large margin, which proves the effectiveness of our
method for anomaly detection.