Machine learning framework for early MRI-based Alzheimer’s
conversion prediction in MCI subjects
Elaheh Moradia, Antonietta Pepeb, Christian Gaserc, Heikki Huttunena, Jussi Tohkaa,*, and
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative1
aDepartment of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, P.O. Box 553, 33101,
Tampere, Finland bAix Marseille Université, CNRS, ENSAM, Université de Toulon, LSIS UMR
7296,13397, Marseille, France cDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Jena, Jahnstr 3, D-07743,
Jena, Germany
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage between age-related cognitive decline and
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). For the effective treatment of AD, it would be important to identify
MCI patients at high risk for conversion to AD. In this study, we present a novel magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)-based method for predicting the MCI-to-AD conversion from one to
three years before the clinical diagnosis. First, we developed a novel MRI biomarker of MCI-to-
AD conversion using semi-supervised learning and then integrated it with age and cognitive
measures about the subjects using a supervised learning algorithm resulting in what we call the
aggregate biomarker. The novel characteristics of the methods for learning the biomarkers are as
follows: 1) We used a semi-supervised learning method (low density separation) for the
construction of MRI biomarker as opposed to more typical supervised methods; 2) We performed
a feature selection on MRI data from AD subjects and normal controls without using data from
MCI subjects via regularized logistic regression; 3) We removed the aging effects from the MRI
data before the classifier training to prevent possible confounding between AD and age related
atrophies; and 4) We constructed the aggregate biomarker by first learning a separate MRI
biomarker and then combining it with age and cognitive measures about the MCI subjects at the
baseline by applying a random forest classifier. We experimentally demonstrated the added value
of these novel characteristics in predicting the MCI-to-AD conversion on data obtained from the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. With the ADNI data, the MRI
biomarker achieved a 10-fold cross-validated area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC) of 0.7661 in discriminating progressive MCI patients (pMCI) from stable MCI patients
(sMCI). Our aggregate biomarker based on MRI data together with baseline cognitive
measurements and age achieved a 10-fold cross-validated AUC score of 0.9020 in discriminating
pMCI from sMCI. The results presented in this study demonstrate the potential of the suggested
approach for early AD diagnosis and an important role of MRI in the MCI-to-AD conversion
*Corresponding author. (J. Tohka).
1Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (http://
adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided
data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at http://
adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
 
Neuroimage. 2015 January 01; 104: 398–412. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.10.002.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
prediction. However, it is evident based on our results that combining MRI data with cognitive test
results improved the accuracy of the MCI-to-AD conversion prediction.
Low density separation; Mild cognitive impairment; Feature selection; Support vector machine;
Magnetic resonance imaging; Classification; Semi-supervised learning; Alzheimer’s disease;
ADNI; Early diagnosis
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a common form of dementia, occurs most frequently in aged
population. More than 30 million people worldwide suffer from AD and, due to the
increasing life expectancy, this number is expected to triple by 2050 . Because of the dramatic increase in the prevalence of AD, the identification of
effective biomarkers for the early diagnosis and treatment of AD in individuals at high risk
to develop the disease is crucial. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage
between age-related cognitive decline and AD, and the earliest clinically detectable stage of
progression towards dementia or AD . According to previous studies
 , a significant proportion of MCI patients, approximately 10% to 15%
from referral sources such as memory clinics and AD centers, will develop into AD
annually. AD is characterized by the formation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and
extracellular β-amyloid plaques as well as extensive synaptic loss and neuronal death
(atrophy) within the brain . The progression of the neuropathology in
AD can be observed many years before clinical symptoms of the disease become apparent
 . AD pathology has been therefore hypothesized to be detectable
using neuroimaging techniques . Among different neuroimaging
modalities, MRI has attracted a significant interest in AD related studies because of its
completely non-invasive nature, high availability, high spatial resolution and good contrast
between different soft tissues. Over the past few years, numerous MRI biomarkers have been
proposed in classifying AD patients in different disease stages . Despite of many
efforts, identifying efficient AD-specific biomarkers for the early diagnosis and prediction of
disease progression is still challenging and requires more research.
In the current study, we present a novel MRI-based technique for the early detection of AD
conversion in MCI patients by using advanced machine learning algorithms and combining
MRI data with standard neuropsychological test results. In more detail, we aim to predict
whether an MCI patient will convert to AD over a 3 year period (this is referred as
progressive MCI or pMCI) or not (this is referred as stable MCI or sMCI) using only data at
the baseline. The data used in this work is obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (www.loni.usc.edu/ADNI) and it includes MRI
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
scans and neuropsychological test results from normal controls (NC), AD, and MCI subjects
with a matched age range. Recently, several computational neuroimaging studies have
focused on predicting the conversion to AD in MCI patients by utilizing various types of
ADNI data such as MRI , positron emission tomography (PET) , cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers , and
demographic and cognitive information (see Tables 1 and 7). Our method is a multi-step
procedure combining several ideas into a coherent framework for AD conversion prediction:
Semi-supervised learning, using data from AD and NC subjects to help the
sMCI/pMCI classification
Novel random forest based data integration scheme
Removal of age related confound.
In the experimental sections we will demonstrate that all these provide a significant
contribution towards the accuracy of the combined prediction model. Our method differs in
the following aspects from earlier studies.
Most of the earlier studies were based on supervised learning methods, where only labeled
data samples are used for learning the model. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) approaches
are able to use unlabeled data in conjunction with labeled data in a learning procedure for
improving the classification performance. The great interest in SSL techniques over the past
few years is related to the wide spread of application domains
where providing labeled data is hard and expensive compared to providing unlabeled data.
The problem studied in this work, predicting the AD-conversion in MCI subjects, is a good
example of this scenario since MCI subjects have to be followed for several years after the
data acquisition to obtain a sufficiently reliable disease label (pMCI or sMCI). Few recent
studies (listed in Table 1) have investigated the use of different semi-supervised approaches
for diagnosis of AD in different stages of the disease. In Zhang and Shen , MCI
subjects’ data were used as unlabeled data to improve the classification performance in
discriminating AD versus NC subjects. They achieved a significant improvement, the AUC
score increased from 0.946 to 0.985, which is high for discriminating AD vs. NC subjects.
Ye et al. , Filipovych and Davatzikos , and Batmanghelich et al. used
AD and NC subjects as labeled data and MCI subjects as unlabeled data and predicted
disease-labels for the MCI subjects. In all these studies, the improvement in the predictive
performance of the model was significant over supervised learning. The best classification
performance in discriminating sMCI versus pMCI using only MRI data was achieved by Ye
et al. with the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) equal to
0.73 for prediction of conversion within 0–18 month period. We hypothesize that the
classification performance of semi-supervised learning approaches could be improved if
MCI subjects who have been followed up for long enough would be used as labeled data. In
this work, we develop a semi-supervised classifier for AD conversion prediction in MCI
patients based on low density separation (LDS) and by using MRI
data of MCI subjects. Our results demonstrate applicability of the proposed semi-supervised
method in MRI based AD conversion prediction in MCI patients by achieving a significant
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
improvement compared to a state of the art supervised method and the learning of the LDS classifier. First, we remove
age-related effects from MRI data before training the classifier to prevent the confounding
between AD and age-related effects to brain anatomy. Previously, a similar technique has
been used for the classification between AD and NC subjects, but this study has not
considered AD-conversion prediction in MCI subjects . In addition, the
impact of age was studied recently for detecting AD as well as for
predicting AD in MCI patients . Second, we perform feature selection
on MRI data independently of the classification procedure using the auxiliary data from AD
and NC subjects. Feature selection is an essential part of the combined procedure since the
number of features (29,852) available after the image preprocessing significantly exceeds the
number of subjects. We assume that AD vs. NC classification is a simplified version of the
pMCI vs. sMCI and the same features that are most useful for the simple problem are useful
for the complex one. This idea is implemented by applying regularized logistic regression
(RLR) on MRI data of AD and NC subjects for finding the image
voxels that are best discriminated between AD and NC subjects. Next, we use these selected
voxels for predicting conversion to AD within MCI patients. Most of existing studies
incorporating feature selection rely only on a dataset of MCI subjects by using it for feature
selection and classification task. In particular, previous studies have considered feature selection based on RLR for MCI-to-AD
conversion prediction, but the feature selection was performed with the data from MCI
subjects not utilizing data from AD and NC subjects. Auxiliary data from AD and NC
subjects to aid the classification of MCI subjects have been considered by Cheng et al.
 in a domain transfer learning method. Briefly, the method utilizes cross-domain
kernel build from target data (MCI subjects) and auxiliary data (AD and NC) subjects to
learn a linear support vector machine classifier. As Cheng et al. reduced the number of
features to 93 by partitioning each MRI into 93 regions of interest and did not consider
feature selection, the approach to use the auxiliary data is different from our approach.
We integrate MRI data with age and cognitive measurements, also acquired at the baseline,
for improving the predictive performance of MCI-to-AD conversion. As opposed to several
other studies combining MRI with other types of data , we purposely avoid
using CSF or PET based biomarkers, the former because it requires lumbar puncture, which
is invasive and potentially painful for the patient, and the latter because of its limited
availability compared to MRI, as well as its cost and radiation exposure . Previously, the combination of MRI derived information and cognitive measurements
has been considered by Ye et al. who trained an RLR classifier with standard
cognitive measurements and volumes of certain regions of interest as features and Casanova
et al. who combined outputs of two classifiers, one trained based on MRI and the
other trained based on cognitive measurements, based on a sum-rule for the classifier
combination. In order to use more efficiently MRI and basic (age and cognitive) measures,
we develop what we call an aggregate biomarker by utilizing two different classifiers, i.e.
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
LDS and random forest (RF), in different stages of the process. We first derive a single real
valued biomarker based on MRI data using LDS (our biomarker) and thereafter use this as a
feature for the aggregate classifier (RF). We will highlight the importance of using a
transductive classifier (e.g., LDS) instead of an inductive one (e.g., a standard SVM) during
the first stage of the learning process and provide evidence of the effectiveness of the
aggregate biomarker for the AD conversion prediction in MCI patients based on MRI, age
and cognitive measures at the baseline.
Materials and methods
Data used in this work is obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database ( The ADNI was launched in 2003 by the
National Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private pharmaceutical
companies and non-profit organizations, as a $60 million, 5-year public–private partnership.
The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, PET, other biological
markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the
progression of MCI and early AD. Determination of sensitive and specific markers of very
early AD progression is intended to aid researchers and clinicians to develop new treatments
and monitor their effectiveness, as well as lessen the time and cost of clinical trials.
The principal investigator of this initiative is Michael W. Weiner, MD, VA Medical Center
and University of California — San Francisco. ADNI is the result of efforts of many coinvestigators from a broad range of academic institutions and private corporations, and
subjects have been recruited from over 50 sites across the U.S. and Canada. The initial goal
of ADNI was to recruit 800 subjects but ADNI has been followed by ADNI-GO and
To date these three protocols have recruited over 1500 adults, ages 55 to 90, to participate in
the research, consisting of cognitively normal older individuals, people with early or late
MCI, and people with early AD. The follow-up duration of each group is specified in the
protocols for ADNI-1, ADNI-2 and ADNI-GO. Subjects originally recruited for ADNI-1
and ADNI-GO had the option to be followed in ADNI-2. For up-to-date information, see
www.adni-info.org.
Data used in this work include all subjects for whom baseline MRI data (T1-weighted MP-
RAGE sequence at 1.5 T, typically 256 × 256 × 170 voxels with the voxel size of
approximately 1 mm × 1 mm × 1.2 mm), at least moderately confident diagnoses (i.e.
confidence > 2), hippocampus volumes (i.e. volumes of left and right hippocampi, calculated
by FreeSurfer Version 4.3), and test scores in certain cognitive scales (i.e. ADAS:
Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale, range 0–85; CDR-SB: Clinical Dementia Rating
‘sum of boxes’, range 0–18; MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination, range 0–30) were
available.
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
For the diagnostic classification at baseline, 825 subjects were grouped as (i) AD
(Alzheimer’s disease), if diagnosis was Alzheimer’s disease at baseline (n = 200); (ii) NC
(normal cognitive), if diagnosis was normal at baseline (n = 231); (iii) sMCI (stable MCI), if
diagnosis was MCI at all available time points (0–96 months), but at least for 36 months (n =
100); (iv) pMCI (progressive MCI), if diagnosis was MCI at baseline but conversion to AD
was reported after baseline within 1, 2 or 3 years, and without reversion to MCI or NC at
any available follow-up (0–96 months) (n = 164); (v) uMCI (unknown MCI), if diagnosis
was MCI at baseline but the subjects were missing a diagnosis at 36 months from the
baseline or the diagnosis was not stable at all available time points (n = 100). From 164
pMCI subjects, 68 subjects were converted to AD within the first 12 months, 69 subjects
were converted to AD between 12 and 24 months of follow-up and the remaining 27
subjects were converted to AD between 24 and 36 month follow-up. Details of the
characteristics of the ADNI sample used in this work are presented in Table 2. The subject
IDs together with the group information is provided in the supplement (Tables S2 – S5, see
also for MATLAB files). The
conversion data was downloaded on April 2014.
Image preprocessing
As described in Gaser et al. , preprocessing of the T1-weighted images was performed
using the SPM8 package ( and the VBM8 toolbox (http://
dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de), running under MATLAB. All T1-weighted images were corrected
for bias-field inhomogeneities, then spatially normalized and segmented into gray matter
(GM), white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within the same generative model
 . The segmentation procedure was further extended by
accounting for partial volume effects , by applying adaptive maximum a
posteriori estimations , and by using an hidden Markov random field
model as described previously . This procedure resulted
in maps of tissue fractions of WM and GM. Only the GM images were used in this work.
Following the pipeline proposed by Franke et al. , the GM images were processed
with affine registration and smoothed with 8-mm full-width-at-half-maximum smoothing
kernels. After smoothing, images were resampled to 4 mm isotropic spatial resolution. This
procedure generated, for each subject, 29,852 aligned and smoothed GM density values that
were used as MRI features.
MRI biomarker
As a preprocessing operation, we removed the effects of normal aging from the MRI data.
The rationale for this is related to the fact that the effects of normal aging on the brain are
likely to be similar (equally directed) with the effects of AD, which can lead to an overlap
between the brain atrophies caused by age and AD. This, in turn, would bring a possible
confounding effect on the estimation of disease-specific differences . We estimated the age-related effects on the GM densities of NC
subjects by using a linear regression model that is similar to a method applied in earlier
studies . Once estimated, the age-related effects
were removed from the MRI data of each subject before training the classifiers. For more
details, see the algorithmic description in Appendix B.
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The overall structure of the proposed classification method is illustrated in Fig. 1. The
method consists of two fundamental stages: a feature selection stage, that uses a regularized
logistic regression (RLR) algorithm to select a good subset of MRI voxels for AD
conversion prediction; and a classification stage that applies a semi-supervised low density
separation (LDS) method to produce the final prediction. The LDS relies on a transductive
support vector machine classifier, whose hyperparameters are also learned from the data.
Note that, for each test subject, instead of the discrete class, an LDS returns the value of the
continuous discriminant function d ∈ ℝ that we call MRI biomarker. If d < 0 then the
subject is predicted as sMCI and otherwise pMCI; more details are presented in Appendix
More specifically, the first stage of the classification framework selects the most informative
voxels (features) among all MRI voxels (features) while discarding non-informative ones.
The feature selection uses the regularized logistic regression framework that produces a path of feature subsets with different cardinalities (called
regularization path), and has been used widely in previous works for the multi-voxel pattern analyses of functional neuroimaging
data as well as for AD related studies using structural MRI data . As the RLR procedure is a
supervised learning method, the input has to be fully labeled data. To this aim, we applied
RLR on MRI data of AD and NC subjects for determining a subset of features (voxels) with
the highest accuracy in discriminating the two classes. The selected voxels (and only them)
were then used for predicting conversion to AD in MCI patients. Note that this way we
avoided using data about MCI subjects for feature selection and therefore we can use all the
MCI data for learning the classifier. The cardinality of the selected subset along the
regularization path was determined using 10-fold cross validation, which estimated the most
discriminative subset among the candidates found by the RLR. The details of the RLR
approach are described in Appendix B.
The second stage trains the final semi-supervised LDS classifier. At this stage, also the
unlabeled uMCI samples were fed to the classifier, after the extraction of the most
discriminative features. Since the LDS approach is based on the transductive SVM classifier,
also the hyperparameters of the transductive SVM have to be selected. The choice of the
SVM parameters was done using a nested cross validation approach, where each of the cross
validation splits of the feature selection stage was further split into second level of 10 cross
validation folds. In this way we were able to estimate the performance of the complete
framework and simulate the final training process with all data after the hyperparameters
have been selected.
The LDS approach for semi-supervised learning integrates unlabeled data into the training procedure. The algorithm assumes that the
classes (e.g., pMCI and sMCI subjects) form high density clusters in the feature space, and
that there are low density areas between the classes. This way the labeled samples determine
the rough shape of the decision rule, while the unlabeled samples fine-tune the decision rule
to improve the performance. A typical gain due to integrating unlabeled data varies from a
few percent to manifold decrease in prediction error. The LDS is a two step algorithm,
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
which first derives a graph-distance kernel for enhancing the cluster separability and then it
applies transductive support vector machine (TSVM) for classifier learning. SSL methods
previously applied to MCI-to-AD conversion prediction have included TSVM and Laplacian SVM . Based on experimental results
by Chapelle and Zien , LDS can be seen as an improved version of TSVM and related
to Laplacian SVM. Moreover, we have provided evidence that the LDS overperforms the
semi-supervised discriminant analysis in MCI-to-AD conversion prediction
in our recent conference paper . Finally, we note that as the majority of
the semi-supervised classifiers including TSVMs, LDS applies transductive learning,
practically meaning that the MRI data (but not the labels) of the test subjects can be used for
learning the classifier. We point out that this is perfectly valid and does not lead to doubledipping as the test labels are not used for learning the classifier. For a clear explanation of
the differences between transductive and inductive machine learning algorithms, we refer to
Gammerman et al. and relation between semi-supervised and transductive learning is
discussed in detail by Chapelle et al. .
In order to examine the applicability of the semi-supervised method, i.e., LDS, we applied it
on the MRI data with and without feature selection and compared its performance with the
performance of its supervised counterpart, the support vector machine (SVM). SVM is a
maximum margin classifier that is widely used in supervised classification problems. In
SVM, only labeled samples are used for determining decision boundary between different
Aggregate biomarker
In order to improve AD conversion prediction in MCI patients, we developed a method for
the integration of the baseline MRI data with age and cognitive measurements acquired at
baseline. The measurements we considered were Rey’s Auditory Verbal Learning Test
(RAVLT), Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale—cognitive subtest (ADAS-cog), Mini
Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Rating—Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB),
and Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ). These standard cognitive measurements,
which are widely used in assessing cognitive and functional performance of dementia
patients, are explained in the ADNI General Procedures Manual.2 The rationale was to
include the cognitive assessments that are inexpensive to acquire and available for the MCI
subjects in this study. We only considered the composite scores of the measurements that
often include several subtests. We did not consider CSF or PET measurements for the
reasons outlined in the Introduction section. Since the effects of normal aging on the MRI
data were removed, age was again used as a predictor, because it is a risk factor for AD.
The way that MRI data is combined with the cognitive measurements is crucial to achieve a
good estimation accuracy of the MCI-to-AD conversion prediction. The simplest way would
be to combine the MRI data (only selected voxels) and cognitive measurements as a long
feature vector which is as the input of the classifier. We will refer to this as data
concatenation. However, this is not the best way, because of the different natures of MRI
2 
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
data (close to continuous) and cognitive measurements (mainly discrete) . Therefore, we propose a simple classifier ensemble for constructing the aggregate
biomarker. In effect, we used the MRI biomarker, derived using LDS classifier, as a feature/
predictor for the aggregate biomarker. The MRI feature was combined with age and
cognitive measurements and used as input features for the random forest (RF) classifier. An
RF consists of a collection of decision trees all trained with different subsets of the original
data. Averaging of the outputs of individual trees renders RFs tolerant to overlearning, which
is the reason for their popularity in classification and regression tasks especially in the area
of bioinformatics. Note that an RF is an ensemble learning method that outputs vote counts
for different classes so the aggregate biomarker value approximates the probability of
converting to AD. Random forests are often used for ranking the importance of input
variables by randomly permuting the values of each variable at a time, and estimating the
decrease in accuracy on out of bag samples . The
overview of the aggregate biomarker and its evaluation is shown in Fig. 2. Previous
applications of RFs in the context of AD classification include Llano et al. who
applied RFs to generate a new weighting of ADAS subscores.
Performance evaluation
For the evaluation of classifier performance and estimation of the regularization parameters,
we used two nested cross-validation loops (10-fold for each loop) . First, an external 10-fold cross-validation was
implemented in which labeled samples were randomly divided into 10 subsets with the same
proportion of each class label (stratified cross-validation). At each step, a single subset was
left for testing and remaining subsets were used for training. Again the train set was divided
into 10 subsets that were used for the selection of classifier parameters listed below. The
optimal parameters were selected according to the maximum average accuracy across the
10-fold of the inner loop. The performance of the classifier was then evaluated based on
AUC (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve), accuracy (ACC, the number of
correctly classified samples divided by the total number of samples), sensitivity (SEN, the
number of correctly classified pMCI subjects divided by the total number of pMCI subjects)
and specificity (SPE, the number of correctly classified sMCI subjects divided by the total
number of sMCI subjects) using the test subset of the outer loop. The pooling strategy was
used for computing AUCs . The reported results in the Results section are
averages over 100 nested 10-fold CV runs in order to minimize the effect of the random
variation. To compare the mean AUCs of two learning algorithms, we computed a p-value
for the 100 AUC scores with a permutation test.
To perform the survival analysis and estimate the hazard rate for AD conversion in MCI
subjects, Cox proportional hazard model was employed . The predictor was the real valued output of the classifier (i.e., the value of the
discriminant function in the case of LDS and estimated probability of conversion in the case
of RF; see the MRI biomarker and Aggregate biomarker sections) and the conversion time to
AD in MCI subjects was taken as the time-to-event variable. The duration of follow-up was
truncated at 3 years for sMCI subjects and uMCI subjects were not included in the analysis.
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The Cox models implemented by MATLAB’s coxphfit-function were adjusted for age and
gender. The Cox-regression was performed in the cross-validation framework similarly as
described above for AUC.
Implementation
The implementation of elastic-net RLR for feature selection was done by using the
GLMNET library ( The support vector
machine (SVM) with a Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel was used as supervised method
for a comparison with LDS. The RBF kernel was used with the SVM as this widely used
kernel clearly outperformed the linear kernel in a preliminary testing and linear kernels can
be seen as a special case of the RBF kernels . The implementation of
SVM was done using LIBSVM ( 
running under MATLAB. The implementation of LDS was done by using a publicly
available MATLAB implementation ( The SVM has two
parameters, C (soft margin parameter, see Appendix A) and γ (parameter for RBF kernel
function). For tuning these parameters, a grid search was used, i.e., parameter values were
varied among the candidate set {10−4, 10−3, 10−2, 10−1, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104} and each
combination was evaluated using cross-validation as outlined above. LDS has more
parameters to tune. Since tuning many parameters with grid search is impractical, we
considered only the most critical parameters, i.e., C (soft margin parameter) and ρ
(softening parameter for graph distance computation) in grid search. For tuning parameter C,
its value was varied among the candidate set {10−2, 10−1, 100, 101, 102} and for parameter ρ
among the candidate set {1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12}. For the other parameters, default values were
used except that the 10-nearest neighbor graphs were used for the kernel construction
(instead of fully connected graph) and the parameter δ in was set
to be 1. The MRI features were normalized to have unit variance before the classification.
The implementation of RF was the MATLAB port of the R-code of Liaw and Wiener 
available at All parameters were set to their
default values. The CPU time for training a single classifier (including parameter selection
and performance evaluation using cross-validation) was in the order of tens of minutes on an
Intel Core 2 Duo processor, 3.00 GHz, 4 GB RAM. The image processing of the Image
preprocessing section required on average 8 min per single image (3.4 GHz Intel Core i7, 8
MRI biomarker
In this section, we consider the experimental results obtained using the biomarker based on
solely MRI data as described in the MRI biomarker section. The feature selection reduced
the number of voxels in MRI data from 29,852 to 309 voxels. Fig. 3 shows the locations of
the selected 309 voxels overlaid on the standard template. Supplementary Table S1 provides
the ranking of the brain regions of the loci of the selected voxels according to the Automatic
Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas. It can be observed that the selected voxels were spread all
over the brain (including the hippocampus, the temporal and frontal lobes, the cerebellar
areas, as well as the amygdala, insula, and parahippocampus). These locations have been
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
previously reported in studies concerning the brain atrophy in AD . The
neuropathology of AD is typically related to changes (e.g. atrophy that reflects the loss and
shrinkage of neurons) in the entorhinal cortex, that progress then to the hippocampus, the
temporal, frontal and parietal areas, before ultimately diffusing to the whole cerebral cortex
 . These brain structures, especially the
hippocampus, frontal and temporal areas have been found to be effective in discriminating
between AD patients and NC . Also, patterns of neuropathology in cerebellar areas have been reported in previous
studies .
We applied LDS on the MRI data with and without feature selection and compared its
performance with the performance of its supervised counterpart, the standard SVM. We also
evaluated the impact of removing age-related effects from the MRI data for the purpose of
early diagnosis of AD. Because the age was used as a parameter for removing age-related
effects, the biomarker was based on MRI and age information. However, the age was not
used as a feature in the learning process. Table 3 shows the results of the MRI biomarker.
First, second and third rows show the performance measures obtained using a SVM without
feature selection, with feature selection, and after removing age-related effects, respectively.
The fourth, fifth and sixth rows in Table 3 show the performance measures obtained by the
LDS. The classification accuracy of both methods without feature selection was only about
chance level. After the feature selection, the classification performance based on AUC and
ACC obtained by both methods improved. The improvement (in AUC) was statistically
significant for both LDS (p < 0.0001) and SVM (p < 0.0001). As a result, the elastic-net
RLR was able to select the relevant voxels corresponding to AD in the high dimensional
MRI data. In addition, feature selection was done independently of the classification
procedure. Using NC and AD datasets for feature selection was a strategy that allowed a
larger sample size for the training and validating the MCI classifier.
In order to evaluate the performance of the elastic-net RLR for feature selection within MRI
data, we compared the classification performance of MRI biomarker based on different
feature selection algorithms. For this purpose we used univariate t-test and graph-net
 feature selection methods. The AUC of MRI biomarker with the
univariate t-test based feature selection (1000 features) was 0.71 and with graph-net based
feature selection (354 features) was 0.74. The elastic-net RLR based feature selection led to
a significantly improved performance in MRI biomarker as compared to the t-test and graphnet based feature selection methods (p < 0.0001). We experimented with the feature
selection directly on MCI subjects’ data for reducing dimensionality of MRI data. More
specifically, the feature selection (elastic-net RLR) was performed in the outer loop of two
nested cross-validation loops by first performing the feature selection using all features in
MRI data (29,852 voxels) and then using these selected features for parameter selection and
learning the model. The performance of MRI biomarker with the feature selection using
MCI subjects decreased significantly compared to the feature selection using an independent
validation set of AD and NC subjects (from 0.7661 to 0.6833, p < 0.0001). When the feature
selection was done combining AD and pMCI subjects into one class, and NC and sMCI
subjects into other, the performance did not significantly differ from the suggested approach
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(AUCs of 0.7661 vs. 0.7692). As this approach necessitates an additional CV loop, the
suggested feature selection method remained preferable.
We investigated how much unlabeled data improved the classification accuracy. For this, we
trained the LDS classifier also without data from uMCI subjects. Note that the LDS is a
transductive learning method that uses the test MRI data (but not labels) as unlabeled data.
As explained in the MRI biomarker section, because the label information of the test data
was not used in the learning process, this does not lead to ‘double-dipping’ or ‘training on
the testing data’ problems, and more specifically, to upward biased classifier performance
estimates . Fig. 4 shows the box plots for
AUC, ACC, SEN and SPE of LDS and SVM methods based on MRI data (with feature
selection and age-related effects removed). In the case of LDS, the results are shown with
and without utilizing uMCI data as unlabeled data in the learning process. As it can be seen
from the results, adding uMCI data samples improved classification performance slightly,
but the improvement was not statistically significant (p = 0.3072). However, it increased the
stability of the classifier by decreasing the variance in AUCs between different crossvalidation runs. The LDS method works based on the cluster assumption and utilizes
unlabeled data for finding different clusters and placing the decision boundary in low density
regions of the feature space. When the cluster assumption does not hold, unlabeled data
points do not carry significant information and cannot improve the results . Also, the number of unlabeled data might be too small for significant
performance improvement. Here, the number of unlabeled data was only 130 which is few
compared to number of labeled data (264 subjects). However, LDS either with or without
uMCI data samples, clearly outperformed the corresponding supervised method (SVM,
AUC 0.7430 vs. 0.7661, p < 0.0001). Even though adding uMCI samples did not
significantly improve the predictive performance of the MCI-to-AD conversion, the use of
LDS method in a transductive manner led to a higher predictive performance compared to
SVM method.
Aggregate biomarker
In this section, we present the experimental results for the aggregate biomarker of the
Aggregate biomarker section based on MRI, age, and cognitive measures, all acquired at the
baseline. Table 4 shows the correlation between cognitive measurements used in aggregate
biomarker to the ground-truth label.
In order to demonstrate the advantage of the selected data-aggregation method and the utility
of combining age and cognitive measurements with MRI data, we also applied LDS and RF
on data formed by concatenating cognitive measurements, age and MRI data (309 selected
voxels with age-related effects removed) as a long vector. Further, we applied RF on the age
and cognitive measurements to predict AD in MCI patients in the absence of MRI data and
combined SVM with RF (abbreviated as SVM + RF) in the same way as LDS is combined
to RF in the aggregate biomarker. The box plots for the performance measures of aggregate
biomarker (LDS + RF), SVM + RF as well as RF and LDS applied on the concatenated data
and the RF without MRI are shown in Fig. 5.
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The aggregate biomarker achieved mean AUC of 0.9020, which was significantly better than
the AUC of LDS with aggregated data (0.7990, p < 0.0001) and the AUC of RF with only
cognitive measures (0.8819, p < 0.001). With LDS, there was a significant improvement
when integrating cognitive measurements and MRI data (mean AUC increased from 0.7661
to 0.7990, p < 0.0001). However, in the case of RF adding cognitive measurements with
MRI data decreased its performance significantly when comparing to RF with only cognitive
measurements (mean AUC decreased from 0.8819 to 0.8313, p < 0.0001). These results
seem to suggest that RF had difficulties in aggregating MRI data with cognitive measures
and supports our decision to use two different learning algorithms when designing the
aggregate biomarker. Also, the performance of SVM + RF was clearly worse than the
performance LDS + RF (p < 0.001) and even RF with only cognitive measures (p < 0.001).
We hypothesize that this is because SVM overlearned and failed to provide a useful input to
random forest while the images in the test set regularize LDS in a useful way. Fig. 6 shows
the ROC curves of one computation time (of the median AUC within 100 cross-validation
runs) of MRI biomarker (LDS with only MRI data), RF with only age and cognitive
measures, LDS and RF methods trained on the concatenated data from MRI, age and
cognitive measurements, and of the aggregate biomarker with MRI, age and cognitive
measurements. The ROC curve of the aggregate biomarker dominates the other ROC curves
nearly everywhere. We also calculated the stratified AUC for different pMCI subgroups, i.e.,
pMCI subjects that are converted to AD in different time points (1, 2 or 3 years), for both
MRI and aggregate biomarkers. Results are shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 7 shows, as expected, that
the prediction was more accurate the closer the conversion subject was. Additionally, we
evaluated the classification performance of the MRI and aggregate biomarkers against a
random classifier, where a biomarker value for each subject was drawn randomly from a
standard normal distribution. The mean AUC of the random classifier was 0.5016, which
was significantly lower than the AUC of the MRI biomarker (AUC = 0.7661, p < 0.0001) as
well as the AUC of aggregate biomarker (AUC = 0.9020, p < 0.0001).
Random forests can (without too much extra computational burden) produce of an estimate
of feature importance via out-of-bag error estimate . Fig. 9 shows the importance of each feature of the aggregate biomarker calculated by
the RF classifier. The MRI feature was the combined feature generated by LDS classifier as
described in the MRI biomarker section. According to Fig. 9, the MRI biomarker and
RAVLT were the most important features followed by ADAS-cog total, FAQ, ADAS-cog
total Mod, age, CDR-SB, and MMSE. We computed AUCs for each feature, considered oneby-one, using 10-fold CV. AUCs for MRI, RAVLT, ADAS-cog scores and FAQ were high
while age, CDR-SB and MMSE were less significant.
The survival curve for the aggregate biomarker is shown in Fig. 8. According to Fig. 8
subjects in the first quartile have the lowest risk for conversion to AD and subjects in the last
quartile have the highest risk. Table 5 shows the hazard ratios for the continuous predictor
and for different quartiles compared to the first quartile. These are shown for the aggregate
biomarker, the MRI biomarker and the RF trained with age and cognitive measures. High
biomarker values were associated with the elevated risk for Alzheimer’s conversion (p <
0.001 for all three biomarkers). The aggregate biomarker showed over 10 times higher risk
of conversion to AD for the subjects in the last quartile as compared to the subjects in the
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
first quartile while for the MRI biomarker and the RF with age and cognitive measures
(without MRI) this risk was 3.5 and 5.83 times higher, respectively.
Comparisons to other methods
Cuingnet et al. tested ten different methods for classification of pMCI and sMCI
subjects. Only four of these methods, listed in Table 6 using the naming of Cuingnet et al.
 , performed better than the random classifier for the task. However, none of them
obtained significantly better results than the random classifier, according to McNemar test.
In order to compare the performance of our biomarkers with the work presented by Cuingnet
et al. we performed the experiments using training and testing set used on their
manuscript. The Supplementary Tables S7 and S8 explain the differences between ours and
Cuingnet’s labeling of the subjects. With aggregate biomarker, one subject was excluded
from the training set and two subjects from the testing set in sMCI groups due to missing
cognitive measurements. The results are reported in Table 6. The McNemar’s chi square
tests with significance level 0.05 were performed to compare the performance of each
method with random classifier, as it was done in Cuingnet et al. . We also list the
results of Wolz et al. with the dataset used in Cuingnet et al. in Table 6.
According to McNemar tests, both MRI and aggregate biomarkers performed significantly
better than random classifier for this data. Also, with this dataset, the aggregate biomarker
provided better AUC than the MRI biomarker. Interestingly, the margin of difference
between the AUCs of the two biomarkers was smaller than with our labeling. This is
probably caused by the difference in the labeling of subjects detailed in Supplementary
Tables S7 and S8.
Discussion
For the early identification of MCI subjects who are in risk of converting to AD, we
developed a new method by applying advanced machine learning algorithms for combining
MRI data with standard cognitive test results. First, we presented a new biomarker utilizing
only MRI data that was based on a semi-supervised learning approach termed low density
separation (LDS). The use of LDS in place of more typical supervised learning approaches
based on support vector machines was shown to provide advantages as demonstrated by
significantly increased cross-validated AUC scores. Second, we presented a new method for
combining MRI-biomarker with age and cognitive measurements. This method combines the
score provided by the MRI-biomarker and applies it as a feature for the learning algorithm
(RF in this case). This aggregate biomarker provided a cross-validated AUC score of 0.9020
averaged across 100 different cross-validation runs. Since the cross-validation was properly
nested, i.e., the testing data was not used for feature nor parameter selection, this AUC can
be seen as promising for the early prediction of AD conversion.
The main novelties of the MRI-biomarker were 1) feature selection using only the data from
AD and NC subjects without using any data from MCI subjects, thus reserving all the data
about MCI subjects for learning the classifier, and 2) removing age-related effects from MRI
data by using only data from healthy controls. The feature selection in this way can be seen
as a mid-way between whole-brain, voxel-based MCI-to-AD conversion prediction
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
approaches and approaches that use the volumes of pre-defined
regions of interest (ROIs) as MRI features. For the feature selection,
we applied elastic-net RLR by selecting all the features that had a non-zero coefficient value
along the regularization path up to a point which may be considered to provide minimal
applicable amount of regularization. This allowed us to detect all the voxels which may be
thought to provide relevant information for the classification task with concrete evidence
that they indeed are useful for the discrimination. The regularized logistic regression was
chosen as a model selection method because it has been widely used in multi-voxel pattern
analyses of functional neuroimaging data as well as MRI based AD classification
approaches and shown to outperform many other feature selection methods . According to the results presented here (see Table 3), elastic-net RLR was able to
select relevant voxels corresponding to AD in the high dimensional MRI data. We note that
the number of selected voxels is not sufficient to fully capture the AD atrophy. The elastic
net succeeded in this task better than the tested competing methods and provides a voxel set
that, although being sparse, was well distributed all over the brain. If our aim would be to
capture the full extent of atrophy in AD, a more specialized feature selection method would
probably be more adequate .
As normal aging and AD have similar effects on certain brain regions , we estimated the effects of normal aging on the MRI based on the data
of healthy controls in a voxel-wise manner and then removed it from MRI data of MCI
subjects before training the classifier. Our results indicated that removing age-related effects
from MRI could improve significantly the prediction of AD, especially young pMCI
subjects as well as old sMCI subjects were classified more accurately after the age removal.
We hypothesize that this is because the AD related atrophy in young pMCI was mixed to the
normal age related atrophy. Moreover, due to misidentifying age-related atrophy as AD
related atrophy in old sMCI subjects, these subjects could be misdiagnosed as pMCI.
We constructed the aggregate biomarker by a specific ensemble learning method. We first
derived the MRI biomarker by using LDS and then added the output of the LDS classifier as
a feature together with the age and cognitive measures for RF, which acts as a classifier
combiner. This aggregate biomarker was shown to outperform data concatenation with either
LDS or RF as a learning algorithm. Moreover, the data concatenation scheme with RF
outperformed the MRI biomarker and the data concatenation scheme with LDS. In addition
to demonstrating the utility of combining cognitive measurements with MRI, these results
suggest that different classifiers were adequate for the different stages of the biomarker
design method. LDS performed well with close-to-continuous data (such as MRI) but failed
when a part of the data was discrete. Instead, RF was more immune to the data type because
it is able to handle discrete data and for continuous data type it applies an efficient
discretization algorithm before the learning step. The difficulty of LDS to adapt to discrete
features is not surprising because LDS in our implementation applied the Euclidean distance
in constructing the graph-based kernel (see Appendix A) that is sub-optimal for discrete
features. Recently, Wang et al. , Hinrichs et al. and Zhang et al. 
considered multiple kernel learning algorithms for combining MRI, PET and CSF
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
biomarkers for AD vs. NC and NC vs. MCI classification and showed that the combination
of multiple data sources improves the classification performance. All data in these works is
close-to-continuous and all the data sources have multiple features. Instead, in our case, only
MRI has multiple features and cognitive measurements provide a single feature as we rely
on the composite cognitive scores with standard weightings. Interestingly, Zhang et al.
 compared the performance of their multiple kernel learning to a simple classifier
ensemble (majority vote between three SVMs trained with data from three different
modalities, MRI, PET, and CSF), and obtained nearly as good classification accuracy with
the classifier ensemble (75.6% for NC vs. MCI) as with the multiple kernel learning (76.4%
for NC vs. MCI).
Compared to several previous studies (listed in Table 7) using ADNI database, our aggregate
biomarker seems promising with an AUC of 0.9020, ACC of 0.8172, SEN of 0.8665 and
SPE of 0.7364, on 164 pMCI and 100 sMCI subjects. To the best of our knowledge, the
study by Ye et al. reported a highest achieved performance (AUC of 0.8587) to date
for predicting AD in MCI patients in a relatively large data samples (319 labeled MCI
subjects).
The comparison of different methods for MCI-to-AD conversion prediction is hampered by
the fact that the nearly all works use a different classification of the subjects into stable and
progressive MCI. For example, Wolz et al. used a simple criterion for labeling where
a subject who had not converted to AD before July 2011 was labeled as stable MCI. This
labeling provides a label for every MCI subject, but, on the other hand, leads to very
heterogeneous stable MCI group that contains subjects with progressive MCI and is not sensible in our semi-supervised learning setup. Our pMCI group is almost
the same as in Eskildsen et al. (156 subjects of 164 are common), but using more
recent conversion information, we found that 41 subjects labeled as stable MCI by Eskildsen
et al. had converted to AD or the diagnosis had changed from MCI to NC and we
labeled them as uMCI. Finally, the 3-year cut-off period used here is somewhat arbitrary and
was decided based on the length of follow-up for the original ADNI-1 project while ADpathologies might be detectable in MRI even earlier than 3 years before clinical diagnosis
 and setting a fixed cut-off period is difficult due to nondichotomous nature of the problem, partly caused by the fact that the pMCI group is
composed of subjects who convert to AD in different time spans from the baseline. Partial
remedies for the problem include the use of more homogeneous groups for the classifier
evaluation as we have done in Fig. 7 ) and the use of
statistical methods from the survival analysis to evaluate AD-prediction biomarkers as we
have done in Fig. 8 and Table 5. Survival analysis has been used to evaluate MCI-to-AD
conversion prediction previously in McEvoy et al. , Gaser et al. , and Da et al.
 . Specifically, McEvoy et al. and Da et al. build an MRI-based MCI-to-
AD conversion prediction biomarkers based on data from AD and NC subjects and compare
the biomarker magnitudes in MCI subjects to their time to conversion to AD using either
Kaplan–Meier curves and/or Cox hazard models. As Da et al. noted the results of
survival analyses cannot be directly compared to the results of dichotomous classification
into pMCI and sMCI groups, but are a complementary approach. As in previous studies
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 , we showed that the elevated
biomarker values are associated with the higher risk of converting to AD.
An important characteristic of the present study was the use of a semi-supervised
classification method for the AD conversion prediction in MCI subjects. The semisupervised method (LDS) was shown to outperform its counterpart supervised method
(SVM) in the design of MRI biomarker. We also found that adding data about uMCI subjects
as unlabeled data in the LDS learning procedure improved the classification performance
slightly but not enough to reach the statistical significance. This is probably due to a
relatively small number of uMCI subjects. Previously, Filipovych and Davatzikos 
have found that even a small number of unlabeled data improved the performance of TSVM
in AD versus NC classification when the number of labeled data was very small (10 or 20
samples). However, AD vs. NC classification is an easier problem than sMCI vs. pMCI
classification , especially if the number of labeled training data is
small . Generally, unlabeled data improves the
classification performance when the assumed model is correct and
the amount of improvement depends strongly on the number of labeled data and the problem
complexity . In our recent conference paper we
provided evidence that even a small number of unlabeled data aids the MRI-based AD
conversion prediction, but the size of improvement decreases when the number of labeled
data increases.
In summary, we developed an approach to predict conversion to AD within MCI patients by
combining machine learning approaches including feature selection for selecting most
relevant voxels corresponding to AD within MRI data, regression for determining normal
aging effects within the brain and supervised and semi-supervised classification methods for
discriminating between pMCI vs. sMCI subjects. Our aggregate biomarker achieved a very
high predictive performance, with a cross-validated AUC of 0.9020. Our experimental
results demonstrated also the important role of MRI in MCI-to-AD conversion prediction.
However, the integration of MRI data with age and cognitive measurements improved
significantly the AD conversion prediction in MCI patients.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
(National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number
W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Alzheimer’s Association;
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen Idec Inc.; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Eisai
Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company
Genentech, Inc.; GE Healthcare; Innogenetics, N.V.; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research &
Development, LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.; Medpace, Inc.; Merck &
Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.;
Piramal Imaging; Servier; Synarc Inc.; and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. The Canadian Institutes of Health
Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by
the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Disease
Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for
Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California. This research was also supported by the Academy of
Finland under grants 130275 and 263785.
Appendix A
A.1. Low density separation (LDS) 
The LDS algorithm is implemented in two steps:
Training a graph-distance derived kernel.
Training TSVM by gradient descent with the graph-distance derived kernel.
A.2. Standard support vector machines and transductive support vector
Denote a training data point by xn and associated class label by yn ∈ {−1, 1}. The task is to
learn a linear classifier (possibly in a high-dimensional kernel space) described by the
weight vector w perpendicular to hyperplane separating the two classes and the bias b so that
the sign of the discriminant function d(x) = wTx + b determines the class label for data point
x. The standard SVM aims at maximizing the margin around decision boundary by solving
the following optimization problem
s . t . yn w · xn −b + ξn ≥1,
n = 1, …, N
where N is the number of labeled data points. This is the soft-margin SVM allowing some
degree of misclassification (in the training set) to prevent overfitting by introducing positive
slack variables ξn, n = 1,…, N which measure the degree of misclassification of data xn. The
idea with adding the slack variable is to maximize the margin while finding a tradeoff
between a large margin and a small error penalty. Here, C is the penalty parameter that
controls the tradeoff between a large margin and a small error penalty.
In the transductive SVM, the idea is to maximize the margin around decision boundary by
using labeled data while simultaneously driving the hyperplane as far away as possible from
unlabeled points. Therefore, the optimization problem in TSVM becomes
s . t . yn w · xn −b + ξn ≥1, n = 1, …N
w · n −b + ξn ≥1, n = N + 1, …, M
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
where N is the number of labeled data samples and M is the number of unlabeled data
samples, assuming that samples 1,…, N are labeled and N + 1,…, M are unlabeled. This can
be rewritten as minimizing
L yn w · xn −b
L w · xn −b
where the function L(t) = max(0, 1 − t) is the classical Hinge Loss. The implementation of
TSVM was introduced first by Joachims , which assigned a Hinge Loss function L(t)
on the labeled samples and Symmetric Hinge Loss function L(|t|) on the unlabeled samples.
However, because the cost function defined in Eq. (3) is not differentiable, it is replaced by
L2 yn w · xn −b
L∗w · xn −b .
Here the function L* = exp(−3t2) is the Symmetric Sigmoid function, a smooth version of
the Hinge Loss function. In LDS, Eq. (4) is minimized by performing the standard conjugate
gradient descent on the primal formulation for optimization.
A.3. Graph based similarities
Graph-based methods for semi-supervised learning use a graph representation G = (V, E) of
the data. The graph consists of a node for each labeled and unlabeled sample V = {xi: i = 1,
…, N + M} and edges placed between nodes E = {(i, j)}, which model the similarities of the
samples. The node set V is divided into labeled points Vl of size N and unlabeled points Vu
of size M.
Here, the graph is constructed by using pairwise similarities between samples by squeezing
the distances in high density regions. The cluster assumption states that points are probably
in the same class if they are connected by a path through high density regions. As the idea
here is to construct a graph which captures the true distribution of the observations, edges
must be weighted based on some distance measure such as the Euclidean distance denoted
here by d(i,j) := ║xi - xj║ However, in many problems the Euclidean distance cannot
capture the true distribution in clustering . Therefore, a nonlinear weight is
assigned to each edge eij = exp(ρd(i, j)) − 1 where ρ is the stretching factor to be selected by
cross-validation. After creating the 10-nearest neighbors graph with weights eij, the
distances between two points are calculated as a distance along shortest paths between the
points based on Euclidean distance from all labeled and unlabeled data points. The distance
matrix Dρ according to the density distance measure is calculated from all labeled points to
all data (labeled and unlabeled points) according to
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
ep k p k + 1
where ρ is the stretching factor and Pi,j is the set of all paths (p) connecting xi and xj. As
described in Chapelle and Zien , p ∈ Vl is a path of length l := |p| on G = (V, E), in
case (p(k), p(k + 1)) ∈ E for 1 ≤ k < |p|, which connects the nodes p1 and p|p|. The kernel
defined by Dρ is not necessarily positive-definite, and, therefore, before applying SVM, we
perform the eigenanalysis of Dρ and retain only eigenvectors corresponding to the highest
(and positive) eigenvalues. In more detail, let λ1, λ2, …, λN be the decreasing eigenvalues
of HNDρH(N + M), where Hp is the p × p centering matrix and let the U = (uik) be the matrix
of the corresponding eigenvectors. Then, kernelized representation of x is
x∗= φ x :xk
∗= uik λk for k = 1, …p,
where p is selected as described in Chapelle and Zien .
Appendix B
Denote the data from the pre-processed MRI of subject i (i = 1, …, N) by xi = [xi1, …,
xiM]T, where M is the number of brain voxels, let li ∈ {AD, MCI, NC } be the diagnosis of
the subject i, and ai the age of the subject i.
B.1. Age removal
Denote the vector of intensity values of the NC (MCI) subjects at the voxel j by xj
and the vector of ages of the NC (MCI) subjects by a aNC (aMCI).
Estimate the effect of age to data at each voxel separately by a fitting a linear
NC = αjaNC + αj0. Solve this model in the least squares sense resulting in
estimates α j, α j0.
Apply the model from the Step 1 to remove the age effects of each voxel
separately from MCI data: xj
MCIar = xj
MCI −α jaMCI + α j0.
B.2. Feature selection
The goal of this feature selection is to select all the features (voxels) among M that are
useful in linear separation of the AD class from the NC class. The feature selection consists
of the following steps:
Train a sparse logistic regression classifier using elastic-net penalty, i.e., a
combination of l1 and l2 norms of the coefficient vector β, separating the class
Moradi et al.
Neuroimage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
AD from the class NC for various λt, t = 1, …, 100 using the full data (all MRI
voxels), by maximizing the elastic-net penalized log-likelihood
logLC β0 + βxi + ∑
log 1 −LC β0 + βxi
−λt α β 1 + 1 −α
where yi = 1 if li = AD and yi = 0 if li = NC and LC(z) = 1/(1 + exp(z)) is the
logistic function and we set α = 0.5. Note that the algorithm used here estimates
the classifiers along the whole regularization path λt, t = 1, …, 100 at once.
To select the best among λt, run 100 10-fold CV runs to yield λCV
i in each run
that minimize the CV error and select the smallest of these as λ*.
Select all the features that have a non-zero coefficient value βj(λ) (in the trained
logistic regression model) for any λ ≥ λ* the along the regularization path up to
λ*. This ensures that we select all the features (voxels) that can be considered to
be useful for linearly separating the AD and NC classes.
Appendix C. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at 
j.neuroimage.2014.10.002.