How Users Perceive and Appraise Personalized
Recommendations
Nicolas Jones1, Pearl Pu1, and Li Chen2
1 Human Computer Interaction Group, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(nicolas.jones, pearl.pu)@epfl.ch
2 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
 
Abstract. Traditional websites have long relied on users revealing their preferences explicitly through direct manipulation interfaces. However recent recommender systems have gone as far as using implicit feedback indicators to understand users’ interests. More than a decade after the emergence of recommender
systems, the question whether users prefer them compared to stating their preferences explicitly, largely remains a subject of study. Even though some studies
were found on users’ acceptance and perceptions of this technology, these were
general marketing-oriented surveys. In this paper we report an in-depth user study
comparing Amazon’s implicit book recommender with a baseline model of explicit search and browse. We address not only the question “do people accept
recommender systems” but also how or under what circumstances they do and
more importantly, what can still be improved.
Introduction and Related Work
Twenty years ago, the classical buying-scheme was that when a user entered a shop,
a knowledgeable seller would be available to advise and inform him/her on products.
With the emergence of the Internet, online shops started to appear, proposing interfaces
where the users had a high level of control, and where actions triggered predictable
results. Classical interface have allowed people to express their preferences by browsing along a set of well deﬁned categories. For Books these might be poems, romance
or thriller. In addition search tools rapidly appeared allowing users to more quickly
navigate to their target items. Later on, recommender systems (RS) were introduced,
often relying on explicitly expressed ratings of items. More recently, there has been a
lot of research on indirect ways for users to reveal their preferences (e.g. through their
purchase history), paving the way to behavioral recommenders. This difference from
search & browse to today’s behavioral recommenders follows very well a more general
and long standing debate, central to the UM community, about automation and direct
manipulation which was voiced in : to what extent should users give up control of
their interaction with interfaces in favor of depending on intelligent “agents” that learn
the likes and dislikes of a user?
In this paper we compare traditional user-controlled interfaces with more recent personalized systems using recommendations. A lot of research has been done on ways for
users to reveal their preferences, and experiments such as suggest that when users
implicitly give feedback, the performance of the RS can be close to the more traditional
ones using explicit feedback. But the work is highly incremental and there are no studies directly comparing both extremes. For these reasons, we decided to evaluate how
recommendations based on implicit preference feedback compare with results provided
to users who explicitly reveal their preferences in a traditional user controlled way. We
chose to conduct this study on Amazon.com 3 and set up a comparative between-group
user-study where users were instructed to search for ﬁve books. One group of users
tested Amazon without the beneﬁt of the RS, by searching and browsing. This represented the baseline measure for the experiment. Two other groups tested Amazon’s recommendations which were based on their past purchase history. One group had a small
purchase history whereas the second group had a larger proﬁle. The experiment was
conducted online and users’ opinions were collected through a post-study assessment
questionnaire, evaluating multiple dimensions from satisfaction to intention to return.
Background and Related Work
In content-based recommenders, users specify their needs explicitly in terms of content
or features . Similarly, in user involved RS, ratings are used to determine like-minded
users through collaborative ﬁltering. More recently, unit or compound critiquing techniques, rather than single valued ratings, were proposed to improve accuracy . Such
direct feedback is the most common interest indicator, offering a fairly precise way to
measure users’ preferences, but suffers from several drawbacks . These include the
fact that a user must stop to enter explicit ratings, which alters browsing and reading
patterns. Users may not be very motivated to provide ratings unless this effort is perceived to be beneﬁcial , or because the user might not yet know his preferences as he
just started to use the system, and often changes them in different contexts .
In behavior based RS, a user’s purchase history or his reading time on a page can be
used to infer interests and preferences. In Nichols’ seminal paper on implicit rating and
ﬁltering , he identiﬁes several types of data that can implicitly capture a user’s interest, including past purchases, repeated uses, and decisive actions (printing, marking,
examining). Since then, several of these indicators have been used like in where
Shapira et al. showed that mouse movements normalized by reading time were a good
preference indicator, or as in where the time spent on a page is shown as a potentially good indicator. Unfortunately, research work measuring the progress of RS, with
few exceptions, has concentrated on improving the accuracy of algorithms, the most
common metric being the mean average error (MAE) . The earliest paper evaluating
six RS in depth, with real users is where the central concern was to compare the
performance and acceptance of such systems against human recommenders (friends).
A recent marketing survey reported that consumers strongly preferred sites that
provide personalized product recommendations, with 45% claiming that they are more
likely to shop at sites with personalized recommendations than at sites without them.
Our work is the ﬁrst signiﬁcant in-depth user study that reports on the users’ perceptions of today’s behavioral recommender systems compared to classical search &
browse patterns.
3 We chose Amazon because it has a well-established RS; we have no afﬁliation with Amazon.
Hypotheses
We established three simple hypotheses. First, we expected that, when a user just starts
using a website, a user-controlled solution would be more effective at supporting his information needs than an indirect one. If a user has a small purchase history, for example,
there is perhaps not enough information to infer his preferences, most certainly resulting
in an inadequate recommendation. We thus propose hypothesis H1. Second, we considered how recommendation quality might evolve. When a user controls a search, he may
only cover a speciﬁc subset of all his preferences, whereas information gathered over
time gives a much broader view of these preferences. We highlight this with hypothesis
H2 where we ﬁx an arbitrary cut-off level of twenty books. Finally, since an indirect
proﬁle should cover multiple aspects of a user’s real proﬁle, we hypothesized H3.
H1 for users with a small proﬁle size, search & browse should provide higher recommendation accuracy than indirect feedback.
H2 there exists a proﬁle size as of which indirect feedback should propose a better
accuracy than the baseline explicit elicitation.
H3 non-expert users are likely, overall, to signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from recommendations
based on indirect feedback.
Real-User Evaluation
The experiment was limited to the domain of books. We designed a between-group
experiment of three user groups, with 20 users in each: the baseline search & browse
group, and two recommendation-receiving groups with small and big purchase proﬁles
respectively. All users were told to ﬁnd ﬁve books to purchase, similar to what they
would do on the real website.
Evaluation Setup & Procedure
We implemented a user study with a wizard-like online web application containing all
the instructions, interfaces and questionnaires so that subjects could remotely participate in the in-depth evaluation. The general procedure consists of the following steps.
Step 1. Based on how many books a participant bought in the past on Amazon (pro-
ﬁle size), he is oriented to the adequate experiment (baseline or recommendations).
Step 2. Basic background information is collected (gender, age, etc.)
Step 3. After reading a brief scenario, the user is given detailed instructions: The
tester of the search & browse interface is instructed to go to Amazon.com, make sure he
is not logged in, and then to browse through the available categories of literature, until
he ﬁnds a book which he likes. The tester of the implicit RS system is asked to head to
Amazon.com and log in to his account. He is then asked to go the “my recommendations” section and to navigate through the book section of the recommendations until
he ﬁnds a book that he likes.
Step 4. The user starts the experiment. He is asked to select ﬁve books; for each one,
he must ﬁll in a template-questionnaire allowing him to rate the book on the spot.
Step 5. To conclude the study, the user is asked to complete a nine questions assessment questionnaire to evaluate the system he has just tested.
Measured Variables
All questions in this study are statements to which a user can indicate his level of agreement on a ﬁve-point Likert scale, ranging from −2 (strongly disagree) to +2 (strongly
agree); 0 is neutral. Not having access to Amazon’s interaction logs, we recorded users’
opinion about the recommendation quality through a template, immediately after selecting each book (novelty, appreciation, intention to buy). Then, once ﬁve books had been
selected, an overall appreciation was recorded through a set of nine questions, measuring experience (satisfaction, effort, trust, conﬁdence, novelty, diversity) and decision
(acceptance of a recommended book, future usage, sharing with friends). Because of
the setup of the experiment, each question was adapted into two variants such as to differentiate between the baseline and recommendation experiments, but tested identical
dimensions.
Participants
The user study was carried out over a period of three weeks and an incentive was proposed. The study was taken by off-campus users (half of the participants), students (7%)
and academic researchers in Switzerland. The study collected 60 users, resulting in a
sample size of twenty participants per group. There were 17 female and 43 male, with
66% being aged between 25 and 30; 18% were younger, and 15% older. The group of
baseline users showed slightly less familiarity with Amazon as 25% more users disagreed that they “read a lot of books”, and 30% of them had never surfed on Amazon
before. We accepted this potential bias as such users have a fresh view of Amazon, less
inﬂuenced by the evolution of the site.
Evaluation Results
Results are reported in Figure 1. An Anova analysis showed that ﬁve questions conveyed
statistically signiﬁcant different averages across all three groups of users. The question
S2 shows an increase in results from baseline elicitation to recommendation users with
a large proﬁle, who found that the system required less effort (with an average of 1).
The recommendation users with a small proﬁle scored 0.6 on average. The difference
between all three groups is signiﬁcant (p = 0.02). S5, the question on trust, shows the
same general tendency, albeit a smaller increase between the ﬁrst two groups (significant, p = 0.05). S3, the conﬁdence about making the best choice, presents a baseline average around 0.5 and one of -0.5 for the recommendation small group, with the
recommendation big being amid (signiﬁcant, p = 0.02). Diversity S4 shows a very similar pattern, but with an increased score from the baseline users, around 1 (signiﬁcant,
p < 0.01). One of the template questions also shows a signiﬁcant difference: T3, the
intention to buy where the recommendation small is much lower than both other groups
(p = 0.04).
For S1, satisfaction, the 0.5 difference between the ﬁrst two groups is signiﬁcant
(p = 0.02). T2, on perceived accuracy, gives much higher averages around 1.0, with a
signiﬁcant difference (t-test, p = 0.02) between the two recommendation groups. Finally, the special question for recommendation users about them having “already used”
strongly disagree
strongly agree
Baseline vs. Small & Big Recommendation Proﬁles
S1 S2* S3* S4* S5* S6 S7 S8 S9
satisfaction
future usage
past usage
Recs.(small proﬁle)
Recs (big proﬁle)
* signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level
S10* T1 T2 T3*
Fig. 1. Detailed Graph of Users’ Preferences
this recommendation feature showed S10 the expected trend with a score close to 0
for the recommendation small group, and above 1 for the recommendation big group
(signiﬁcant, p < 0.01). These results reveal that although a recommender interface provides users with an overall satisfaction and perceived beneﬁts like a lower effort required, most users have to wait until their proﬁle reaches a certain size to enjoy the full
Discussion and Conclusions
Through our hypotheses H1 and H2, we predicted that at ﬁrst a controlled search would
be more accurate but that this would rapidly change, seeing the accuracy of recommendations increase with the proﬁle size. The direct assessments of perceived accuracy, S6
and T2, are not strongly conclusive. This twist-and-turn between hypotheses and results
is surprising. However, we would like to point out that if “accuracy” does not reveal itself as imagined, other dimensions do demonstrate some parallels with the predictions.
Elements like conﬁdence and diversity, show us that search & browse methods are more
efﬁcient at the beginning, but that larger recommendation proﬁles actually start to catch
up. Nevertheless, and this brings us to H3, there are not many measures where an implicit large proﬁle strongly beats an explicit one (only trust S5 and low effort S2).
The results point out that the two types of interface mechanisms being compared
can provide quite similar overall satisfaction for the users. The difference in the amount
of effort required to operate in both systems is highly noticed by users, and clearly in
favor of the RS (which required lower effort). On the other hand, users clearly found
the baseline as proposing a much more diverse set of books, which is problematic for
the recommender engine. It is also disappointing to see such low scores for the novelty
(T1) from the recommender. Measures of conﬁdence show that users are more conﬁdent about their choices in the search & browse scheme. However, people are trusting
the system’s implicitly generated recommendations, as soon as their proﬁle reaches a
certain size, which is encouraging. This was further reﬂected in users’ comments. When
compared to books that friends might have proposed, neither methods were perceived
as being very accurate; nevertheless users’ opinions were positive as in all groups they
thought they would like the ﬁve selected books. Contrary to purchase intentions, decision variables about future usage of the system or introduction to a friend, were not
very high on average, but all three showed good correlations with satisfaction.
A decade has passed since the recommender technology was invented . Today’s
systems based on this technology are in the mainstream practice of e-commerce and
social websites. Even though some surveys demonstrate that acceptance and perception
of this technology are showing good sings, we should not take them for granted. Our
paper demonstrates that investigating users issues pays off, and that several traditional
problems remain unsolved. It gives a clear idea how to improve the current technology
and points out design guidelines. Additionally, the challenge of motivating initial users
until they build a large proﬁle (hence user loyalty) remains.