THE INFLUENCE OF IMPROVEMENT IN ONE
MENTAL FUNCTION UPON THE
EFFICIENCY OF OTHER
FUNCTIONS. (I.)
BY DR. E. L. THORNDIKE,
Teachers College, New York,
AND DR. R. S. WOODWORTH,
New York University Medical School.
This is the first of a number of articles reporting an inductive study of the facts suggested by the title.
It will comprise
a general statement of the results and of the methods of obtaining them, and a detailed account of one type of experiment.
The word function is used without any rigor to refer to the
mental basis of such things as spelling, multiplication, delicacy
in discrimination of size, force of movement, marking a's on a
printed page, observing the word boy in a printed page, quickness, morality, verbal memory, chess playing, reasoning, etc.
Function is used for all sorts of qualities in all sorts of performances from the narrowest to the widest, e. g., from attention to
the word ' fire' pronounced in a certain tone, to attention to all
sorts of things.
By the word improvement we shall mean
those changes in the workings of functions which psychologists
would commonly call by that name.
Its use will be clear in
each case and the psychological problem will never be different
even if the changes studied be not such as everyone would call
improvements.
For all purposes ' change ' maybe used instead
of ' improvement' in the title.
By efficiency we shall mean the
status of a function which we use when comparing individuals
or the same individual at different times, the status on which
we would grade people in that function.
By other function we
mean any function differing in any respect whatever from the
We shall at times use the word function-group to mean
B. L. THORNDIKE
WOODWORTH.
those cases where most psychologists would say that the same
operation occurred with different data.
The function attention,
for instance, is really a vast group of functions.
Our chief method was to test the efficiency of some function or functions, then to give training in some other function or
functions until a certain amount of improvement was reached,
and then to test the first function or set of functions.
no other factors were allowed to affect the tests, the difference
between the test before and the test after training measures the
influence of the improvement in the trained functions on the
functions tested.
It is possible to test the general question in a much neater
and more convenient way by using, instead of measures of a
function before and after training with another, measures of the
correlation between the two functions.
If improvement in one
function increases the efficiency of another and there has been
improvement in one, the other should be correlated with it; the
individuals who have high rank in the one should have a higher
rank in the other than the general average.
Such a result
might also be brought about by a correlation of the inborn capacities for those functions.
Finding correlation between two
functions thus need not mean that improvement in one has
brought increased efficiency in the other.
But the absence of
correlation does mean the opposite.
In an unpublished paper
Mr. Clark Wissler, of Columbia Universitv, demonstrates the
absence of any considerable correlation between the functions
measured by the tests given to students there.
Miss Naomi
Norsworthy, of Teachers College, has shown (the data were presented in part at the Baltimore meeting; the research is not yet
in print) that there is no correlation between accuracy in noticing
misspelled words and accuracy in multiplication, nor between
the speeds ; that there is little or no correlation between accuracy
and speed in marking on a printed page misspelled words,
words containing r and e, the word boy, and in marking semicircles on a page of different geometrical figures.
Perhaps the most striking method of showing the influence
or lack of influence of one function on another is that of testing
the same function-group, using cases where there are very
IMPROVEMENT
slightly different data. If, for instance, we test a person's ability
to estimate a series of magnitudes differing each from the next
very slightly, and find that he estimates one very much more
accurately than its neighbors on either side, we can be sure that
what he has acquired from his previous experience or from the
experience of the test is not improvement in the function-group
of estimating magnitudes but a lot of particular improvements
in estimating particular magnitudes, improvements which may
be to a large extent independent of each other.
The experiments, finally, were all on the influence of the
training on efficiency, on ability as measured by a single test,
not on the ability to improve.
It might be that improvement in
one function might fail to give in another improved ability, but
succeed in giving ability to improve faster than would have occurred had the training been lacking.
The evidence given by our experiments makes the following
conclusions seem probable:
It is misleading to speak of sense discrimination, attention,
memory, observation, accuracy, quickness, etc., as multitudinous separate individual functions are referred to by any one of
these words.
These functions may have little in common.
There is no reason to suppose that any general change occurs
corresponding to the words ' improvement of the attention,' or ' of
the power of observation,' or ' of accuracy.'
It is even misleading to speak of these functions as exercised
within narrow fields as units. For example, ' attention to
words ' or ' accurate discrimination of lengths ' or ' observation
of animals' or ' quickness of visual perception ' are mythological,
not real entities.
The words do not mean any existing fact
with anything like the necessary precision for either theoretical
or practical purposes, for, to take a sample case, attention to
the meaning of words does not imply equal attention to their
spelling, nor attention to their spelling equal attention to their
length, nor attention to certain letters in them equal attention to
other letters.
The mind is, on the contrary, on its dynamic side a machine
for making particular reactions to particular situations.
works in great detail, adapting itself to the special data of which
E. L. THORNDIKE
WOODWORTH.
it has had experience.
The word attention, for example, can
properly mean only the sum total of a lot of particular tendencies to attend to particular sorts of data, and ability to attend
can properly mean only the sum total of all the particular abilities and inabilities, each of which may have an efficiency
largely irrespective of the efficiencies of the rest.
Improvement in any single mental function need not improve the ability in functions commonly called by the same
It may injure it.
Improvement in any single mental function rarely brings
about equal improvement in any other function, no matter how
similar, for the working of every mental function-group is conditioned by the nature of the data in each particular case.
The very slight amount of variation in the nature of the
data necessary to affect the efficiency of a function-group
makes it fair to infer that no change in the data, however slight,
is without effect on the function.
The loss in the efficiency of
a function trained with certain data, as we pass to data more and
more unlike the first, makes it fair to infer that there is always a
point where the loss is complete, a point beyond which the
influence of the training has not extended.
The rapidity of
this loss, that is, its amount in the case of data very similar to
the data on which the function was trained, makes it fair to infer
that this point is nearer than has been supposed.
The general consideration of the cases of retention or of loss
of practice effect seems to make it likely that spread of practice
occurs only where identical elements are concerned in the influencing and influenced function.
The particular samples of the influence of training in one
function on the efficiency of other functions chosen for investigation were as follows:
1. The influence of certain special training in the estimation
of magnitudes on the ability to estimate magnitudes of the same
general sort, *". e., lengths or areas or weights, differing in
amount, in accessory qualities (such as shape, color, form) or
in both. The general method was here to test the subject's accuracy of estimating certain magnitudes, e. g.% lengths of lines.
He would, that is, guess the length of each.
Then he would
IMPROVEMENT
practice estimating lengths within certain limits until he attained
a high degree of proficiency.
Then he would once more estimate the lengths of the preliminary test series.
Similarly with
weights, areas, etc. This is apparently the sort of thing that
happens in the case of a tea-taster, tobacco-buyer, wheat-taster
or carpenter, who attains high proficiency in judging magnitudes or, as we ambiguously say, in delicacy of discriminating
certain sense data.
It is thus like'common cases of sense training in actual life.
2. The influence of training in observing words containing
certain combinations of letters (e. g., s and e) or some other
characteristic on the general ability to observe words.
general method here was to test the subject's speed and accuracy in picking out and marking certain letters, words containing certain letters, words of a certain length, geometric figures,
misspelled words, etc.
He then practiced picking out and
marking words of some one special sort until he attained a high
degree of proficiency.
He was then re-tested.
The training
here corresponds to a fair degree with the training one has in
learning to spell, to notice forms and endings in studying foreign
languages, or in fact in learning to attend to any small details.
3. The influence of special training in memorizing on the
general ability to memorize.
Careful tests of one individual
and a group test of students confirmed Professor James' result
(see Principles of Psychology, Vol. I., pp. 666-668).
tests will not be described in detail.
These samples were chosen because of their character as
representative mental functions, because of their adaptability to
quantitative interpretations and partly because of their convenience.
Such work can be done at odd times without any bulky
or delicate apparatus.
This rendered it possible to secure subjects.
In all the experiments to be described we tested the influence of improvement in a function on other /unctions closely
allied to it.
We did not in sense-training measure the influence
of training one sense on others, nor in the case of training of
the attention the influence of training in noticing words on, say,
the ability to do mental arithmetic or to listen to a metaphysical
discourse.
For common observation seemed to give a negative
-E L. THORNDIKB AND
R. S. WOODWORTH.
answer to this question, and some considerable preliminary experimentation by one of us supported such a negative.
Wissler's and Miss Norsworthy's studies are apparently conclusive, and we therefore restricted ourselves to the more profitable inquiry.
A SAMPLE EXPERIMENT.
There was a series of about 125 pieces of paper cut in various shapes.
(Area test series.)
Of these 13 were rectangles of
almost the same shape and of sizes from 20 to 90 sq. cm. (series
1), 27 others were triangles, circles, irregular figures, etc., within
the same limits of size (series 2). A subject was given the
whole series of areas and asked to write down the area in sq.
cm. of each one.
In front of him was a card on which three
squares, 1, 25 and 100 sq. cm. in area, respectively, were drawn.
He was allowed to look at them as much as he pleased but not to
superpose the pieces of paper on them.
No other means of telling the areas were present.
After being thus tested the subject
was given a series of paper rectangles,1 from 10 to 100 sq. cm.
in area and of the same shape as those of series 1. These were
shuffled and the subject guessed the area of one, then looked to
see what it really was and recorded his error.
This was continued and the pieces of paper were kept shuffled so that he
could judge their area only from their intrinsic qualities.
a certain amount of improvement had been made he was retested with the ' area test series' in the same manner as before.
'The judgments of area were made with the following apparatus : a series
of parallelograms ranging from 10 to 140 and from 190 to 280 sq. cm., varying
each from the next by 1 sq. cm. Their proportions were almost the same (no
oue of them could possibly be distinguished by its shape). For example, the
dimensions of those from 137 to 145 sq. cm. were
IMPROVEMENT IN MENTAL FUNCTION.
The function trained was that of estimating areas from 10 to
100 sq. cm. with the aid of the correction of wrong tendencies
supplied by ascertaining the real area after each judgment.
We will call this 'function a.' A certain improvement was
What changes in the efficiency of closely allied functions are brought about by this improvement?
Does the improvement in this function cause equal improvement (1) in the
function of estimating areas of similar size but different shape
without the correction factor? or (2) in the function of estimating
identical areas without the correction factor? (3) In any case
how much improvement was there? (4) Is there as much improvement in the function of estimating dissimilar shapes as
similar? The last is the most important question.
We get the answer to 1 and part of 3 by comparing in various ways the average errors of the test areas of dissimilar shape
in the before and after tests.
These are given in Table I. The
average errors for the last trial of the areas in the training series
similar in size to the test series are <jiven in the same table.
Test series
Av. error before
Av error after
Training series
Av error at end of
1 5 approx.
The function of estimating series 2 (same sizes, different
shapes) failed evidently to reach an efficiency equal to that of the
function trained. Did it improve proportionately as much?
This is a hard question to answer exactly, since the efficiency
of ' function a' increases with great rapidity during the first
score or so of trials, so that the average error of even the first
twenty estimates made is below that of the first ten, and that
again is below that of the first five. Its efficiency at the start
depends thus on what you take to be the start. The fact is that
the first estimate of the training series is not an exercise of
• function a' at all and that the correction influence increases
B. L. THORNDIKE AND R. S. WOODWORTH.
up to a certain point which we cannot exactly locate. The
fairest method would seem to be to measure the improvement
in ' function a' from this point and compare with that improvement the improvement in the other function or functions in question. This point is probably earlier in the series than would be
supposed. If found, it would probably make the improvement
in ' function a' greater than that given in our percentages.
The proportion of average error in the after test to that in
the before test is greater in the case of the test series than in the
case of the first and last estimations of the areas of the same
size in the training series, save in the case of Be. The proportions are given in the following table :
Proportion
of error after to error before training
Test series i
Training series
.77 approx.
.83 approx
Question 2 is answered by a comparison of the average
errors, before and after the training, of Series I. (identical areas)
given without the correction factor.
The efficiency reached in
estimating without the correction factor (see column 2 of Table
III.) is evidently below that reached in 'function a.' Theresuits there in the case of the same areas are given in column 3.
TABLE III.
trainingof | training of
series i ; series i
trainingof
trainingof
Proportion of error after to error
before training
of training
IMPROVEMENT
The function of estimating an area while in the frame of mind
due to being engaged in estimating a limited series of areas and
seeing the extent of one's error each time, is evidently independent to a large extent of the function of judging them after the
fashion of the tests.
If we ask whether the function of judging without correction
improved proportionately as much as ' function a,' we have our
previous difficulty about rinding a starting point for a.
Comparing as before the first 100 estimates with the last 100 we get
the proportions in the case of the areas identical with those in
These are given in column 7.
The proportions in
the case of the test areas (series 1 ; same shape) are given in
A comparison of columns 6 and 7 thus gives more
or less of an answer to the question, and column 6 gives the
answer to the further one : "How much improvement was there ?"
We can answer question 4 definitely. Column 5 repeats the
statement of the improvement in the case of the test areas of different shape, and by comparing column 6 with it we see that in
every case save that of Be. there was more improvement when
the areas were similar in shape to those of the training series.
This was of course the most important fact to be gotten at.
To sum up the results of this experiment, it has been shown
that the improvement in the estimation of rectangles of a certain
shape is not equalled in the case of similar estimations of areas
of different shapes.
The function of estimating areas is really
a function-group, varying according to the data (shape, size,
It has also been shown that even after mental standards
of certain limited areas have been acquired, the function of
estimating with these standards constantly kept alive by noticing the real area after each judgment is a function largely
independent of the function of estimating them with the standards fully acquired by one to two thousand trials, but not constantly renewed by so noticing" the real areas.
Just what happened in the training was the partial formation of a number of
associations.
These associations were between sense impressions of particular sorts in a particular environment coming to
a person in a particular mental attitude or frame of mind, and a
number of ideas or impulses.
E. L. THORNDJKE AND It. S.
WOODWORTH.
What was there in this to influence other functions, other
processes than these particular ones?
There was first of all the
acquisition of certain improvements in mental standards of areas.
These are of some influence in judgments of different shapes.
We think, " This triangle or circle or trapezoid is about as big as
such and such a rectangle, and such a rectangle would be 49 sq.
cm." The influence is here by means of an idea that may form
an identical element in both functions.
Again, we may form a
particular habit of making a discount for a tendency to a constant error discovered in the training series.
We may say, " I
tend to judge with a minus error," and the habit of thinking of
this may be beneficial in all cases.
The habit of bearing this
judgment in mind or of unconsciously making an addition to
our first impulse is thus an identical element of both functions.
This was the case with Be.
That there was no influence due
to a mysterious transfer of practice, to an unanalyzable property
of mental functions, is evidenced by the total lack of improvement in the functions tested in the case of some individuals.
On pushing our conception of the separateness of different
functions to its extreme, we were led to ask if the function of
estimating one magnitude might not be independent even of the
functions of estimating magnitudes differing only slightly from
the first. It might be that even the judgment of areas of 40-50
sq. cm. was not a single function, but a group of similar functions, and that ability might be gained in estimating one of these
areas without spreading to the others.
The only limits that
must necessarily be set to this subdivision would be those of the
mere sensing of small differences.
If, on the contrary, judgments of nearly equal magnitudes
are acts of a single function, ability gained in one should appear
in the others also. The results of training should diffuse readily
throughout the space covered by the function in question, and
the accuracy found in judgments of different magnitudes within
this space should be nearly constant.
The differences found
should simply be such as would be expected from chance.
The question can be put to test by comparing the actual difference between the average errors made, in judging each of
IMPROVEMENT IN MENTAL FUNCTION.
neighboring magnitudes, with the probable difference as computed from the probability curve. If the actual difference
greatly exceeds the probable difference, it is probably significant of some real difference in the subject's ability to judge the
two magnitudes. He has somehow mastered one better than
the other. No matter how this has come about. If it is a fact,
then clearly ability in the one has not been transferred to the
Our experiments afford us a large mass of material for testing this question. In the 'training series,' we have a considerable number (10 to 40) of judgments of each of a lot of magnitudes differing from each other by slight amounts. We have
computed the accuracy of the judgment of each magnitude (as
measured by the error of mean square), and then compared the
accuracy for each with that for the adjacent magnitudes. We
find many instances in which the difference between the errors
for adjacent magnitudes is largely in excess of the probable
difference.
And the number of such instances greatly exceeds
what can be expected from chance.1
These great differences between the errors of adjacent magnitudes are strikingly seen in the curves on page 259. The
ordinates of these curves represent the mean square error of
judgments of areas of 10 to 100 square centimeters, and for 3
individuals.
The dots above and below each point of the curve
give the 'limits of error' of that value, as determined by the
formula, —=, in which a is the error of mean square, and «
the number of cases.
These limits are such that the odds are
about 2 to 1, more exactly 683 to 317, that the true value lies
inside them.
The dots thus furnish a measure of the reliability
of the curve at every point.
1 The smaller error at certain magnitudes is not the result of a preference
of the subject to guess that number. Of course, if the subject were prone to
guess ' 64 square centimeters' oftener than 63 or 65, he would be more apt to
guess 64 right, and the error for 64 would be diminished. We therefore made
a few tables of the frequency with which each number was guessed. But we
found that the magnitudes that were best judged were not more often guessed
than their neighbors.
E. L. THORNDIKE
AND R. S. WOOD WORTH.
These curves are all irregular, with sudden risings and fallings that greatly obscure their general course. Psychologists
are familiar of old with irregularities of this kind, and are wont
to regard them as effects of chance, and so to smooth out the
curve. But as we find more irregularity than can reasonably
be attributed to chance, we conclude that our curves at least
should not be smoothed out, and that the sudden jumps, or
some of them, signify real differences in the person's ability.1
If, for example, we examine Fig. 1, we notice a number of
sudden jumps, or points at which the errors in judging adjacent
magnitudes differed considerably from each other.
significant of these jumps are at 10-11, 36-37, 41-42, 65-66,
66-67, 83-84, and 98-99 sq. cm. The question is whether such
a jump as that at 41-42 indicates greater ability to judge 42 sq.
cm., or whether the observed difference is simply due to chance
and the relatively few cases (here 10 for each area). A vague
appeal to chance should not be allowed, in view of the possibility of calculating the odds in favor of each side of the question. This can be done by a fairly simple method. We can
consider two adjacent areas as practically equal, so far as concerns Weber's law or any similar law. The average errors
found for the two would thus be practically two determinations
of the same quantity, and should differ only as two determinations of the same quantity may probably differ.
We wish then to compare the actual difference between the
errors for 41 and 42 sq. cm. with the probable difference. The
error—we use throughout the ' error of mean square,' and the
measure of reliability based on it—this error is here 6.2 and 3.1
sq. cm. respectively. The actual difference is 3.1 sq. cm. To
find the probable difference, we first find the ' limits of error'
or reliability of each determination, as described above, and
then find the square root of the sums of the squares of these
1 The fact that judgments of nearly equal magnitudes may show very unequal errors throws doubt on all curves drawn from the judgment of only a few
'normals.' If slightly different normals had been chosen, the errors might
have been considerably different, and the course of the curve changed. If, for
example, three normals be chosen from the 91 in our curves, and those three
used as the basis of a curve, the curve will vary widely with the choice of the
three normals.
10 n a IJ n
B. L. THORNDIKE
WOODWORTH.
'limits of error.'
The 'limits' are here i.o and 0.7, and the
probable difference 1.2 sq. cm. The actual difference is 2.6
times the probable.
In this whole series we find 6 other
instances in which the actual difference is over 2 times the
From the probability integral we find that, in the
long run, 46 actual differences to the thousand would exceed
twice the probable.
The question is, therefore, what is the
probability of finding as many as 7 such differences in a series
of 90? This is a form of the familiar problem in probabilities :
to find the chances that an event whose probability is j> shall
occur at least r times out of a possible n.
The solution depends on an application of the binomial theorem, and may be
evaluated by means of logarithms. In the present case, the
value found is .1209 or about yi.
Instead of vaguely saying that the large jumps seen in the
curves may be due to chance, we are now able to state that the
odds are 7 to 1 against this view, and 7 to 1 in favor of the
view that the large jumps, or some of them, are significant of
inequality in the person's power to estimate nearly equal areas.
These odds are of course not very heavy from the standpoint of
scientific criticism.
But they are fortified by finding, as we do,
the same general balance of probability in all of the series
In one other series, the number of large differences
is small, and the probability is as large as .2938 that they are
due to mere chance.
In three other series, this probability is
very small, measuring .0025, .0025, .0028, or about
Finally, in the series corresponding to Fig. 3, there are a
large number of actual differences which far exceed the probable.
(The errors are small, and consequently the probable
differences are small.)
There are 31 that exceed twice the
probable difference, and of these 9 exceed 3.5 times the probable difference.
The probability of finding even these 9 is so
small that six-place logarithms cannot determine it exactly, but
it is less than .000001.
In four cases, then, out of six examined, it is altogether inadmissible to attribute the differences to chance, while in the
other two the odds are against doing so. The probability that
the differences in all the series are due to chance is of course
IMPROVEMENT
multiply small.
The differences are therefore not chance, but
significant; the ability to judge one magnitude is sometimes
demonstrably better than the ability to judge the next magnitude ;
one function is better developed than its neighbor.
The functions of judging nearly equal magnitudes are, sometimes at
least, largely separate and independent.
A high degree of
ability in one sometimes coexists with a low degree of ability in
the others.