Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Prefrontal Projections to the Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
form a Unique Circuit for Attentional Mechanisms
Basilis Zikopoulos1 and Helen Barbas1,2,3,4
1Department of Health Sciences and 2Program in Neuroscience, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, 3New England Primate Research Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and 4Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118
The inhibitory thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) intercepts and modulates all corticothalamic and thalamocortical communications.
PreviousstudiesshowedthatprojectionsfromsensoryandmotorcorticesoriginateinlayerVIandterminateassmallboutonsincentral
andcaudalTRN.HereweshowthatprefrontalprojectionstoTRNinrhesusmonkeyshaveadifferenttopographicorganizationandmode
of termination. Prefrontal cortices projected mainly to the anterior TRN, at sites connected with the mediodorsal, ventral anterior, and
anterior medial thalamic nuclei. However, projections from areas 46, 13, and 9 terminated widely in TRN and colocalized caudally with
projections from temporal auditory, visual, and polymodal association cortices. Population analysis and serial EM reconstruction
revealed two distinct classes of corticoreticular terminals synapsing with GABA/parvalbumin-positive dendritic shafts of TRN neurons.
Most labeled boutons from prefrontal axons were small, but a second class of large boutons was also prominent. This is in contrast to the
homogeneous small TRN terminations from sensory cortices noted previously and in the present study, which are thought to arise
exclusively from layer VI. The two bouton types were often observed on the same axon, suggesting that both prefrontal layers V and VI
could project to TRN. The dual mode of termination suggests a more complex role of prefrontal input in the functional regulation of TRN
and gating of thalamic output back to the cortex. The targeting of sensory tiers of TRN by specific prefrontal areas may underlie
attentional regulation for the selection of relevant sensory signals and suppression of distractors.
Key words: laminar origin of projections; presynaptic specificity; macaque brain; dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; inhibitory control; 3D
reconstruction
Introduction
The thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) is composed entirely of
inhibitory neurons, unlike other thalamic nuclei, and surrounds
the thalamus along its entire anteroposterior extent. Corticothalamic and thalamocortical axons must, therefore, pass through its
mesh of inhibitory neurons (supplemental Fig. 1, Movie 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material) . The TRN receives unidirectional projections from the cortex and has bidirectional connections with all thalamic nuclei and
is thus in a strategic position to modulate the flow of information
between thalamus and cortex.
The TRN has a crude topographic map of the cortex and
thalamus, so that cortices and their associated thalamic nuclei
project to the same parts of TRN. This topography broadly divides TRN into motor and sensory sectors . The topography, however, is blurred, hence
TRN connection zones of nearby cortical or thalamic sites overlap, allowing indirect modulation of TRN inhibition.
The activity of TRN changes dramatically during the sleep–
wake cycle, shifting from spindle oscillations during slow-wave
sleep that inhibit thalamocortical activity, to single-spike activity
during wakefulness. These properties implicate TRN in attention, highlighted by TRN inhibition of thalamocortical neurons
during cortically generated absence seizures accompanied by loss
of consciousness . Because of its unique placement and physiology,
it has been suggested that TRN is the attentional searchlight of the
brain and a key component of a larger network
including the prefrontal cortex and thalamus, with an important
role in cognition.
Despite these indications, there is no information on prefrontal corticoreticular projections in primates, the interaction of
prefrontal areas, and their associated thalamic nuclei, or the pattern of prefrontal projections in TRN compared with other cortices. Sensory and motor cortices are thought to issue projections
to TRN exclusively from layer VI, which terminate as small boutons .
Layer V does not appear to contribute to the corticoreticular
projection but innervates other thalamic nuclei through large
boutons . Corticothalamic projections from layer V are thought to be driving afferents
Received Dec. 22, 2005; revised April 21, 2006; accepted May 29, 2006.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants from National Institute of Mental Health and
NationalInstituteofNeurologicalDisordersandStroke.WethankDr.AlanPetersforEMconsultation,Dr.JohnFiala
for assistance in adapting the free 3D reconstruction software he developed, Dr. Ron Killiany for MRI and surgical
assistance, Dr. Claus Hilgetag for helpful suggestions about the statistical analyses, Maria Medalla, Ola Alade, and
MarciaFeinbergfortechnicalassistance,Dr.P.Sehgalforveterinarycare,andLindaFernstenforsurgicalassistance.
Correspondence should be addressed to Helen Barbas, Boston University, 635 Commonwealth Avenue, Room
431, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5511-05.2006
Copyright © 2006 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/06/267348-14$15.00/0
7348 • The Journal of Neuroscience, July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
of an intrathalamic corticocortical communication system,
whereas layer VI projections are regarded as modulators of thalamic relay activity .
The prefrontal system is an excellent model to investigate the
relationship of high-order association areas with TRN because it
issues substantial projections from layer V to other thalamic nuclei . We examined the organization of
projections from several prefrontal areas and their thalamic nuclei in TRN and compared them with projections to TRN from
sensory and polymodal association cortices. Our results show, for
the first time in a primate, the topography and mode of prefrontal
corticoreticular terminations and establish that they differ from
TRN projections originating in sensory cortices. Our findings
provide the anatomic basis for the gating of sensory-related corticothalamic communications by the prefrontal cortex and TRN
in mechanisms underlying selection or enhancement of relevant
Materials and Methods
Animal and tissue preparation
Experiments were conducted on 12 adult rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) in accordance with National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals . The
experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at Boston University School of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, and New England Primate Research Center. Procedures were
designed to minimize animal suffering and reduce their number.
Magnetic resonance imaging. Before injection of neural tracers, we obtained three-dimensional (3D) scans of each brain using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in animals anesthetized with propofol (loading
continuous
mg  kg 1  min 1). The interaural line was rendered visible in the scan
by filling the hollow ear bars of the stereotaxic apparatus with betadine
salve. We then calculated the stereotaxic coordinates for each injection in
three dimensions using the interaural line as reference.
Surgical procedures. One week after the MRI, the monkeys were anesthetized with ketamine hydrochloride (10–15 mg/kg, i.m.) followed by
gas anesthetic (isoflurane), until a surgical level of anesthesia was accomplished. Surgery was performed under aseptic conditions while heart
rate, muscle tone, respiration, and pupillary dilatation were closely monitored. The monkeys were placed in a stereotaxic apparatus, and a small
region of the cortex was exposed.
Injection of neural tracers. In an effort to minimize animal numbers,
injections of distinct neural tracers were made in the right and left hemisphere, as indicated in Table 1 (for map of injection sites, see Fig. 1A–F).
We injected tracers in prefrontal areas 9, 10, 46, 13, and 32, as well as
temporal areas TE1, Ts1, Ts2, and 36, and the anteromedial (AM), ventral anterior (VA), and mediodorsal (MD) thalamic nuclei, which are
connected with prefrontal cortices. Using a microsyringe (Hamilton, 5
l) mounted on a microdrive, we injected the bidirectional tracers biotinylated dextran amine (BDA) (10% solution, 6–10 l, 10 kDa; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), fluoro-emerald (FE) (dextran fluorescein, 10% solution, 3–5 l, 10 kDa, and in some cases a mixture of 3 and 10 kDa;
Invitrogen), fluoro-ruby (FR) (dextran tetramethylrhodamine, 10% solution, 3–4 l, 10 kDa, and in some cases a mixture of 3 and 10 kDa;
Invitrogen), and Lucifer yellow (LY) (dextran, Lucifer yellow, anionic,
lysine fixable, 10% solution, 3–4 l, 10 kDa; Invitrogen). All of these
tracers are excellent anterograde tracers that label the entire extent of
axonal terminals and boutons. They also act as retrograde tracers (especially in the 3 kDa molecular weight), but the extent of the labeling is
restricted to the cell bodies and proximal dendrites of projection neurons
and the tracer does not enter axon collaterals . In some cases, we injected the
retrograde tracer fast blue (FB) in the thalamus (MD and VA; 1% solution, volume of 0.3 l, 379.84 Da; Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Trans-synaptic
transport of any of these tracers has not been observed. In each case, the
tracer was injected in two penetrations and, for the cortical injections, at
a depth of 1.2–1.6 mm below the pial surface. After injection, the needle
was left in place for 10–15 min to allow the dye to penetrate at the
injection site and prevent upward diffusion of the dye during retraction
of the needle.
Perfusion and tissue processing. After a survival period of 18 d, the
animals were anesthetized with a lethal dose of sodium pentobarbital
(50 mg/kg, to effect) and transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde or, for electron microscopy, 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.2%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB), pH 7.4. The brains were
removed from the skull, photographed, and cryoprotected in graded
solutions of sucrose (10–30%) in 0.01 M PBS. Brains were then frozen in
75°C isopentane (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) and cut on a freezing microtome in the coronal plane at 40 or 50 m to produce 10 series.
In cases with injection of fluorescent tracers, one series was mounted on
glass slides, coverslipped, and used to map labeled neurons and
terminals.
Histochemical and immunohistochemical procedures
Bright-field or fluorescent microscopy. In cases with BDA injections, freefloating sections were rinsed in 0.01 M PBS and incubated for 1 h in an
avidin–biotin HRP complex [AB kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA); diluted 1:100 in 0.01 M PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100]. The sections
were then washed and processed for immunoperoxidase reaction using
diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Zymed, San Francisco, CA). Sections were
then mounted, dried, and coverslipped with Permount or Entellan
(Merck, Whitehouse, NJ).
In some cases with FE, FR, and LY injections in the prefrontal cortex,
we used polyclonal antibodies (anti-fluorescein/Oregon Green, antitetramethylrhodamine, and anti-LY, 1:800; Invitrogen) to convert the
fluorescent tracers and visualize them by the peroxidase-catalyzed polymerization of DAB. To avoid cross-reaction with the BDA, we used nonbiotinylated polyclonal anti-rabbit secondary antibody followed by tertiary anti-rabbit solution (PAP method, 1:200; Sternberger Monoclonals,
Lutherville, MD).
To identify TRN inhibitory neurons, we used antibodies against the
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA or the calcium binding protein parvalbumin (PV). The tissue was rinsed in 0.01 M PBS, pH 7.4, followed by
Table 1. Injection sites and neural tracers used in 12 cases analyzed
Injection site
Brain hemisphere
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361 • 7349
10% normal goat serum, 5% bovine serum albumin, and 0.1% Triton
X-100 in 0.01 M PBS blocking solution for 1 h and incubated for 1–2 d in
primary antibody for GABA [1:1000, mouse monoclonal (Sigma) or
1:1000, rabbit polyclonal . The sections were rinsed
in PBS, incubated for 1 h with a goat anti-rabbit (for GABA polyclonal)
or anti-mouse (for GABA and PV monoclonals) IgG conjugated with the
fluorescent probes Alexa Fluor 488 (green) or 568 (red; 1:100; Invitrogen) and thoroughly rinsed with PBS. In some cases for PV labeling, a
biotinylated secondary antibody and an avidin–biotin–peroxidase kit
was used to label PV-positive (PV ) structures with DAB. For the quantification of TRN neurons, cells were labeled with an antibody against the
DNA-binding, neuron-specific nuclear protein NeuN (1:200, mouse
monoclonal; Chemicon). To exclude any nonspecific immunoreactivity,
controlexperimentswereperformed,withsectionsadjacenttothoseusedin
the experiments described above. These included omission of the primary
antibodies and incubation with all secondary or tertiary antisera used. All
control experiments resulted in no immunocytochemical labeling.
Electron microscopy. Sections treated for bright-field BDA, FE, FR, or
LY were processed for electron microscopy. We used the protocols described above, but Triton X-100 concentration in all solutions was reduced to 0.025%. To determine the relationship of labeled boutons from
prefrontal areas with inhibitory TRN neurons, we double labeled sections using antibodies against GABA or PV and preembedding immunohistochemistry and visualized label with gold-conjugated anti-mouse or
anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:50; gold particle diameter, 1 nm;
Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). To prevent diffusion of the gold
particles, tissue was postfixed in a microwave with 2% glutaraldehyde
 . Labeling was intensified with the
use of the Amersham Biosciences silver enhancement kit (IntenSE). Tissue sections were mounted on slides and quickly viewed under the light
microscope, and images were captured with a CCD camera. Small blocks
of sections with anterograde and GABA or PV label were cut under a
dissecting microscope, postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide with 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide in PB, washed in buffer (PB) and water, and dehydrated in an ascending series of alcohols. While in 70% alcohol, they were
stained with 1% uranyl acetate for 30 min. Subsequently, they were
cleared in propylene oxide and embedded in araldite at 60°C. Serial ultrathin sections (50 nm) were cut with a diamond knife (Diatome, Fort
Washington, PA) using an ultramicrotome (Ultracut; Leica, Wein, Austria) and collected on single slot grids, to view with a transmission electron microscope (100CX; Jeol, Peabody, MA).
Stereological analysis
The architecture of thalamic nuclei, the cortex, and other brain areas
was determined in Nissl and AChE-stained sections. The nomenclature of the thalamus is according to the map of Jones , as
modified from the map of Olszewski , and for the prefrontal
cortex is according to the map of Barbas and Pandya , modified
from the map of Walker .
Bouton population analysis. We analyzed anterograde labeling in the
TRN at high magnification (1000) using unbiased stereological methods . Progressive mean analysis
was used to determine the systematic, random sampling fraction, which
was 1⁄100 of the total volume of the region studied and resulted in measuring the morphological characteristics of 4000 labeled bouton profiles in each case. In three cases with tracer injections in temporal cortices
(case BA, area TE; case BC, area Ts2; and case AT, area 36), we sampled
terminations in TRN exhaustively to map the distribution of labeled
boutons and measure their size. The morphological characteristics measured were the minor and major diameter, perimeter, and surface area.
Neuron and bouton density estimation. We estimated the numbers of
NeuN  neurons, PV  neurons, and anterogradely labeled boutons in
TRN using the unbiased stereological method of the optical fractionator
 with the aid of a commercial
system (StereoInvestigator; MicroBrightField, Williston, VT). Large and
small boutons were measured separately and systematically distinguished based on the results of the bouton population analyses presented
earlier. Specifically, in agreement with previous studies , small boutons had a maximum major diameter of 1.4 m, and, therefore, all bigger terminals
were considered as large. We used progressive mean analysis and a pilot
study to determine the sampling fraction, which was 1⁄160 of the total
volume of TRN and was achieved by setting the disector counting frame
at 100  100 m and the grid size at 400  400 m. The total number of
neurons or boutons counted in the systematic random samples was multiplied with the denominator of the sampling fraction to provide an
estimate of the total number of labeled neurons or boutons. The volume
of TRN was estimated by multiplying the number of measured disectors
with the same denominator and was used to assess the density of labeled
boutons in each case by dividing the total number of boutons by the
corresponding TRN volume. We normalized data by expressing the density of neurons or large and small boutons as a percentage of the total
density of all neurons or boutons in each case.
3D reconstruction and imaging
Light microscopy. In some cases, the labeled axonal pathways were followed all the way from the injection sites in the prefrontal cortex to their
termination sites in TRN, at low magnification (40) in serial sections. The
section surface, the cytoarchitectonic borders of various nuclei, and labeled
pathways, were outlined with the aid of a commercial computerized microscope system and motorized stage (Neurolucida; MicroBrightField).
Sections ipsilateral to the injection sites containing areas of interest
(TRN, MD, VA, caudate, and amygdala) were viewed under bright-field
or fluorescence illumination, and their surface as well as architectonic
borders were outlined using the Neurolucida software. The procedure
involves setting a reference point for every brain hemisphere analyzed,
and, as a result, the outlines are automatically registered and aligned to
the actual corresponding sections, retaining information about the 3D
coordinates of every mark or trace. These sections and outlines were used
for stereological analyses of the anterograde labeling presented earlier.
Retrogradely labeled neurons in the TRN directed to MD, VA, and AM
were mapped and their stereotaxic coordinates were marked.
To compare the topography and distribution of anterograde and retrograde labeling across cases and exhibit their overlap in TRN, we reconstructed in three dimensions the entire nucleus using the free, open
source software Reconstruct . With the aid of Neurolucida,
we outlined the surface and the borders of TRN of all Nissl-stained coronal sections spanning the rostrocaudal extent of the nucleus from a representative case and used them as reference. We then imported these
reference outlines along with outlines containing 3D information about
the topography of labeling in Reconstruct, aligned them, and generated
3D models. As a result, all markers and traces were stereotaxically registered and superimposed on the 3D models. This method made it possible
to compare the relative distribution of different cortical axonal terminations in TRN and labeled neurons in TRN projecting to MD, VA, or AM
to assess possible overlaps.
To exhibit the distribution of large and small terminals in TRN originating in different prefrontal areas, we imported Neurolucida outlines of
sections and labeling in Reconstruct, in which we color coded the bouton
markers (large boutons, blue; small boutons, red) and generated 3D
Images presented or used for analyses were captured at high resolution
with a CCD camera mounted on an Olympus Optical (Thornwood, NY)
BX51 microscope connected to a personal computer using commercial
imaging systems [MetaMorph version 4.1 (Universal Imaging Corporation) or Neurolucida]. Image stacks of several focal planes were acquired
in each area of interest, resulting in pictures with high depth of field of 40to 50-m-thick sections focused throughout their z-axis extent. Stacked
images from adjacent serial sections were superimposed to highlight the
differential distribution or overlap of retrogradely labeled neurons and
anterogradely labeled boutons. Photomicrographs were prepared with
Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA), and overall brightness
and contrast were adjusted without retouching.
Stereological measurements of the numbers of labeled fibers that contained exclusively small or large boutons or a mixed population were
conducted on high-resolution stacks of images captured as described
above. These stacks were imported in NIH ImageJ, reconstructed in 3D,
7350 • J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
and rotated, in 1° increments in the x-, y-, or z-axis, using the 3D project
plugin (supplemental Movie 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). This allowed us to distinguish whether various boutons
were part of the same or different labeled axons.
Electron microscopy. We viewed labeled boutons emanating from prefrontal axons synapsing on TRN neurons and neighboring unlabeled
boutons at high magnification (10,000) and photographed them
throughout their whole extent (between 10 and 80 serial ultrathin sections). Film negatives were scanned at high resolution (Minolta Dimage
Scan Multi II; Konica Minolta, Mahwah, NJ) and imported as a series in
Reconstruct, in which they were aligned. Boutons, postsynaptic densities,
and postsynaptic structures (e.g., dendrites) were traced. Section thickness was calibrated through measurements of the diameter of mitochondria . Structures were reconstructed in three
dimensions, and their volumes, surface areas, and diameters were calculated. We used classic criteria for identifying synapses and profiles as described previously .
Statistical analysis
Data were evaluated with Statistica (StatSoft, Tulsa, OK), through scatter
and frequency distribution plots and K-means cluster analysis with parameters set to maximize initial between-cluster distances.  2 and Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests were used to examine the bouton size distributions. We used ANOVA to test for differences among bouton
populations and densities, and p values 0.01 were taken as statistically
significant. Post hoc analyses using Bonferroni’s/Dunn’s (all means) was
performed to identify possible differences between groups.
TRN features
The TRN covers the dorsal and lateral parts of the thalamus as an
open umbrella with the handle positioned on the midline (supplemental Figs. 1, 2, Movie 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material). It has a similar shape across animals,
appearing round rostrally, becomes progressively thinner along
the mediolateral dimension and elongates along the dorsoventral
axis, and tapers to a narrow spur at its most caudal extent. The
TRN in the rhesus monkey was remarkably similar across cases,
containing 28  2 sections (mean  SE), with a mean volume of
44  3.7 mm 3. On each side, the TRN consisted of 1 million
neurons (1,077,091  108,509) and a mean density of 15,093 
73 neurons/mm 3. All neurons in TRN were GABAergic and most
were PV  (70  13%; mean density  SE, 10,588  1,862
neurons/mm 3) (supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.
org as supplemental material). The small variability in TRN size
and shape facilitated a reliable comparison of projections from
cortical areas across cases through 3D reconstruction.
To facilitate the description of projections and overlaps in
TRN, the nucleus was divided rostrocaudally into four quarters.
The rostral quarter extended from the rostral pole of TRN to the
anterior extent of the VA and the anterior thalamic nuclei. The
rostral pole was bordered laterally by the internal capsule and
medially by the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. The central
quarters of TRN, namely the rostrocentral and caudocentral,
were crescent shaped and surrounded the central VA, MD, lateral
posterior, ventral nuclei, and the anterior part of the pulvinar.
The caudal quarter of TRN surrounded the rest of the pulvinar
and included the perigeniculate area.
Topography of prefrontal terminations in the thalamic
reticular nucleus
The injection sites of anterograde tracers in prefrontal cortices
are shown on the lateral (Fig. 1A), medial (Fig. 1B), and basal
(Fig. 1C) surfaces of the brain. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the injection sites showed that injections encompassed all
cortical layers, and the needle tracts were restricted to the cortical
mantle. We mapped the distribution of labeled terminals from
cortical axons in TRN in one series of sections (1⁄10 of the total
nucleus) and estimated stereologically the axonal bouton density.
In all cases, labeled axons from prefrontal cortices entered
TRN rostrally from the adjacent internal capsule and some axons
passed through TRN without sending terminations (Fig. 2A). A
majority of prefrontal corticoreticular terminals were found in
primarily overlapping sites of the anterior and dorsal TRN. On
average, 83% of labeled boutons were distributed in the rostral
quarter of TRN. The central quarters of TRN included, respectively, 6 and 9%, and the caudal quarter of the nucleus had a few
labeled boutons only after injections in area 9 (2%).
Axons from area 32 terminated predominantly in the first
quarter of the nucleus (98%), concentrated mainly in the rostral pole, with only 2% in the second quarter of TRN. Although
anterograde labeling was prominent in the dorsal part of TRN, a
few terminals were scattered along its ventral and central regions
(Fig. 2B). A similar distribution of anterograde label was observed after injections in area 10 in the frontal pole. Labeled terminals were found only in the first quarter of TRN and almost
exclusively in its dorsal part (Fig. 2B).
In contrast to the above areas, axons from the dorsomedial
part of area 9 terminated in patches throughout the nucleus (Fig.
2B). Labeled boutons were found predominantly in the dorsal
part of TRN, most within the first quarter (86%), but some
were seen also in the central and caudal quarters of the nucleus
(14%). Axonal terminations from dorsal area 46 occupied
larger zones of the first three quarters of TRN (69, 14, and 17%,
respectively) and extended throughout the dorsoventral axis of
the nucleus. Among prefrontal areas studied, dorsal area 46 issued the most robust projections to central-caudal regions of
TRN (second and third quarters of the nucleus) (Fig. 2B). The
same pattern, but with sparser label, was seen in the axonal terminations of orbital area 13, which were found in the first three
quarters of TRN (66, 9, and 25%, respectively) and spread over
dorsal and ventral sites of the nucleus (Fig. 2B).
Projections from areas 46, 13, and 9 colocalized with cortical
auditory, visual, and polymodal terminations in TRN
We then investigated whether these posterior terminations of
prefrontal axons overlapped with projections from temporal auditory (Ts1, Ts2), visual (TE1), and polymodal (36) association
areas in four cases (case BC, area Ts2; case AT, area 36; case BA,
area TE1; and case AV, areas Ts1/TE1) (Table 1; Fig. 1A,C). The
comparison was made from different experiments after alignment and registration of all sections containing TRN. Labeled
terminals were superimposed on a reference map, and threedimensional reconstruction revealed a significant extent of colocalization (Fig. 3). Anterogradely labeled terminals in the TRN
from Ts1 and Ts2 were found mainly in its caudal regions, consistent with the location of the auditory sectors of TRN in other
species. Axonal terminations from areas 36 and TE1 were found
rostral to the auditory sector, in the visual sector of TRN, situated
in the central-caudal parts of the nucleus. These projections were
more prominent in the ventral parts of the nucleus, which included the perigeniculate region. Interestingly, among prefrontal
areas studied only terminations from dorsal area 46 overlapped
with projections from all of the injected temporal cortices in the
caudocentral and ventral segments of TRN, in the sensory sectors
of the nucleus (Fig. 3). Projections from orbital area 13 and temporal areas 36 and Ts2 overlapped extensively in dorsal and ventral parts of the sensory TRN sectors. In contrast, there was only
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361 • 7351
limited overlap in the terminations from area 9 with those from
areas 36 and Ts2, restricted to the dorsal regions of TRN (Fig. 3B).
Prefrontal terminations colocalized with TRN connections
with MD, VA, and AM thalamic nuclei
We then investigated whether axonal terminations from prefrontal cortices were localized in sites of TRN that are connected with
thalamic nuclei associated with prefrontal cortices. We focused
on MD, VA, and AM, three thalamic nuclei that receive the majority of prefrontal cortical input . After
injection of retrograde tracers in each of these thalamic nuclei
(Fig. 1B,D–F), labeled projection neurons in TRN were most
prevalent in the anterior and dorsal half of the nucleus, but some
were also found in its ventral sector. Both VA and AM received
projections from rostral TRN, especially its medial segment,
whereas projection neurons directed to MD originated from a
wider region, encompassing the first three quarters of TRN.
Reconstruction of TRN in three dimensions and overlay of
terminals from prefrontal cortices and retrogradely labeled neurons that projected to AM, VA, and MD revealed that prefrontal
axons terminated primarily in TRN sectors that are reciprocally
connected with AM (Fig. 4A), VA (Fig. 4B), and MD (Fig. 4C). It
is evident that there is a linkage throughout nearly the entire
rostrocaudal extent of TRN with nuclei associated with the prefrontal cortex . When these reconstructions included the anterograde terminals from auditory
and visual association cortices TE1 and Ts1, a partial overlap with
projections from dorsal area 46 was seen in the third quarter of
TRN, in which some reticular projection neurons to MD were
also found (Fig. 5).
Dual-termination mode of prefrontal axons in TRN
Corticothalamic terminals were both of the en passant and terminal type and were polymorphic. At least two classes of labeled
presynaptic profiles could be distinguished (Fig. 6A) (supplemental Movie 2, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental
Composite of cortical and thalamic injection sites. Cortical injection sites shown on the lateral (A), medial (B), and basal (C) surfaces of the brain of the rhesus monkey. D–F,
Representativecoronalsectionsthroughthethalamus(photomicrographsontherightcolumnandcorrespondingoutlinesontheleftcolumn).Brown,BDA;red,fluoro-ruby;green,fluoro-emerald;
yellow,Luciferyellow;blue,fastblue.Casenamesappearinblack.OutlinesandnamesofareasandnucleiinA–Careinblue.AD,Nucleusanteriordorsalis;AV,nucleusanteriorventralis;Cl,nucleus
centralis lateralis; CM, nucleus centrum medianum; LD, nucleus lateralis dorsalis; MDmc, nucleus medialis dorsalis, pars magnocellularis; MDpc, nucleus medialis dorsalis, pars parvicellularis; TRN,
thalamic reticular nucleus; VAmc, nucleus ventralis anterior, pars magnocellularis; VPL, nucleus ventralis posterior lateralis.
7352 • J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
material). Most corticoreticular boutons were small (diameter
1.4 m) and spherical in shape, but a significant number of
large (1.4 m  diameter  4.5 m), round, ovoid, or irregularly
shaped boutons were also present. Stereological sampling and
measurement of the major diameter, perimeter, and crosssectional surface area of at least 4000 labeled profiles per case
enabled us to construct a bouton population profile in TRN. Scatter and frequency
distribution plots showed that the population of boutons was continuous, covering
a wide range of sizes (0.1 m  diameter  4.5 m) (Fig. 6B). However, cluster
analysis indicated that there were at least
two distinct bouton populations ( p 
0.00001), one corresponding to the small
terminals (mean diameter  variance,
0.82  0.05 m), and the other corresponding to large boutons (mean diameter  variance, 1.69  0.19 m). Moreover,
comparison
prefrontal
projections revealed that all labeled bouton populations found in TRN were similar, regardless of origin in prefrontal
To quantitatively map the distribution
and density of large and small terminals in
TRN emanating from prefrontal cortices,
we estimated their numbers using stereological procedures. Large boutons were on
average 9% of the population (mean density, 1176 boutons/mm 3), and small boutons made up the other 91% (mean density, 15,015 boutons/mm 3). With the
exception of cases with tracer injections in
dorsal area 46, the vast majority of large
boutons were found in the rostrodorsal regions of TRN, occupying more focal sites
than the small terminals, often overlapping with them (Fig. 7A). Large boutons
observed in central and posterior sectors
of TRN emanated exclusively from axons
of dorsal area 46. In addition to the more
widespread distribution of large boutons
from dorsal area 46, quantitative analysis
revealed that they comprised 14% of all
labeled terminals in TRN compared with
10% from all other prefrontal areas (Fig.
7B). Moreover, in central and posterior
sectors of TRN, large and small boutons
from dorsal area 46 rarely occupied overlapping sites (Fig. 7A).
Additional stereological analysis, 3D
reconstruction, and rotation of 50-mthick sections (as described in Materials
and Methods) revealed that the majority
of labeled axons formed only small boutons (62% of all labeled axons with terminals in TRN), whereas only 9% of the
axons gave rise exclusively to large boutons (Fig. 7C–E) (supplemental Movie 2,
available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). In a few occasions, large
boutons branching out from the latter axons formed aggregated clusters, resembling bunches of grapes, as
described for sensory cortical projections in several other thalamic nuclei but not TRN . Some axons with large en passant boutons
formed round arbors at the termination sites, similar to those
described for corticopulvinar projections . The
Prefrontal axonal terminations in the reticular nucleus. A, Corticothalamic pathway from area 32 to TRN (arrows in
left column), labeled with BDA, entering through the internal capsule (IC), shown at low magnification (top) and high magnification(bottom).Themiddleandrightcolumnsshowmatchedsectionsatlow(top)andhigh(bottom)magnificationstainedwith
Nissl (middle) or immunostained for PV (right) to show the borders of TRN. B, Two-dimensional quantitative projection patterns
in10representativecoronalsectionscoveringthewholerostrocaudalextentofTRN,shownin3Dreconstructionsontheleft.Each
set of outlines corresponds to axonal boutons (red dots) from one prefrontal area. Each dot represents 10 boutons.
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361 • 7353
rest of the axonal branches (29%) gave rise to a mixture of small
and large boutons. Interestingly, although large boutons made up
9% of the prefrontal labeled terminals in TRN, they were observed on 38% of the labeled axonal branches.
Prefrontal and temporal cortical terminations in the reticular nucleus reconstructed in three dimensions. A, Projections to TRN from dorsal area 46 (red) and TE1/Ts1
(green).Overlappingterminalscanbeseenatthebottom3Dmodelinyellow.B,Projectionsto
TRN from areas 36 (left column) and Ts2 (right column) and their respective overlaps with
projectionsfromprefrontalareas9,13,and46.Theoverlapsofarea9withthetemporalcortices
studiedareminor,whereastheoverlapsofareas13and46withthesametemporalcorticesare
more extensive.
Colocalization of prefrontal axonal terminations with TRN projection neurons directed to anterior and medial thalamic nuclei. A, Terminals from area 10 (green) overlap with
labeledneuronsinTRNprojectingtoAM(red).B,Terminalsfromarea32(red)overlapwithlabeled neurons in TRN projecting to VA (green). C, Terminals from area 46 (green) overlap with
labeled neurons in TRN projecting to VA (red and violet) and MD (blue and violet). Cells that
appear violet are double labeled, projecting to MD and VA. Scale bars, 50 m.
7354 • J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
Features of prefrontal corticoreticular synapses
Ultrastructural analysis of serial ultrathin sections at the EM level
and subsequent 3D reconstruction suggested the presence of at
least two classes of labeled presynaptic profiles in TRN, both
forming asymmetric (presumed excitatory) synapses with goldlabeled PV  or GABA  dendritic shafts (Figs. 8, 9). The first class
consisted of small boutons with round synaptic vesicles and one
or no mitochondria (mean volume  SE, 0.16  0.02 m 3; mean
area  SE, 2.07  0.33 m 2). The second class consisted of large
boutons also with round synaptic vesicles but with two or more
mitochondria (mean volume  SE, 0.41  0.02 m 3; mean
area  SE, 3.53  0.17 m 2). Interestingly, large boutons formed
larger synapses (as measured by the areas of the postsynaptic
densities) than the small boutons, but the overall ratio of the
synapse to bouton area was the same (0.05  0.01). Comparison
of the volumes of labeled boutons with unlabeled presynaptic
terminals synapsing on the same or neighboring PV  or GABA 
dendrites showed no significant difference between the two
populations.
Some studies in other brain regions and systems have indicated that large boutons synapse primarily on the proximal dendrites and cell bodies, whereas small boutons synapse on distal
dendrites . In the prefrontal pathway to TRN, however, both large and
small boutons synapsed on similar dendrites with an average diameter of 1.42  1.07 m, a size that covers both proximal and
distal dendrites.
WidespreadprefrontalterminationsinTRNoverlapwithprojectionsfromsensory
association cortices. A, 3D reconstruction of projections to TRN from areas 46 (red), TE1/Ts1
(green),andprojectionneuronstoMD(blue).Overlappingterminalscanbeseenatthebottom
3Dmodelinmagenta(fordorsalarea46andMD),yellow(fordorsalarea46andTE1/Ts1),cyan
(for MD and TE1/Ts1), and black (for dorsal 46, MD, and TE1/Ts1). B, Terminals from areas 46
(green) and TE1/Ts1 (red) overlap with labeled neurons in TRN projecting to MD (blue). Scale
bar, 50 m.
Axonal terminals in TRN were structurally similar regardless of prefrontal cortical
origin.Boutonpopulationanalysisinarea32isrepresentativeofprefrontalprojections.A,Large
(blackarrowheads)andsmall(blackarrows)boutonsinTRNemanatingfromaxonsoriginating
inarea32.Scalebar,50m.B,BoutonfrequencydistributioninTRNfromaxonsoriginatingin
area 32. The population is continuous, best fitted by the lognormal distribution.
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361 • 7355
Similarity of prefrontal terminations in
TRN with those in other thalamic
nuclei, striatum, and amygdala
To infer the laminar origin of prefrontal
corticoreticular terminations, we compared them with a series of other anterogradely labeled bouton populations (at
least 4000 per case) in other thalamic nuclei, the caudate, and amygdala, whose
laminar origin has been described in detail. This indirect method was necessary
because tracer injections exclusively in
layers V or VI are difficult to make. Moreover, even if an injection is confined to
layer VI, the needle will transect axons
from the overlying layer V, which will then
be labeled by the tracer. Conversely, an injection limited to cortical layer V will likely
transect and label the dendritic tree of the
underlying neurons in layer VI. Single-cell
injections in lightly fixed brain slices could
alternative
method, but it is very difficult to obtain
slices that would include intact axons all
the way from the prefrontal cortex to the
thalamus of the rhesus monkey brain.
Three-dimensional reconstruction of corticothalamic pathways highlights the intricate
complexities of such a long pathway and
couldindicatethefeasibilityofthisapproach
onacase-by-casebasisdependingonthesite
of injection.
Terminals of projections from prefrontal cortex to MD and VA, which originate in layers VI and V, as well as the caudate nucleus and the amygdala (which
receive projections mainly from layer V)
were comparable in size and shape with
the bouton population found in TRN
from prefrontal cortical projections (Figs.
10A–E, 11A). All bouton populations were continuous, covering
a wide range of sizes (0.1 m  diameter  6 m) (Fig. 11A).
Cluster analysis indicated that they could include at least two
distinct bouton populations, corresponding to a large population
of small terminals, and a small population of large boutons ( p 
0.00001) (Fig. 11B).
Differences in size of axonal terminations in TRN from
prefrontal and sensory cortices
Previous studies indicated that projections from auditory and
other sensory cortices to TRN originate only from layer VI
 and terminate exclusively as
small boutons. We therefore compared terminations from the
temporal auditory (Ts1 and Ts2), visual (TE1), and polymodal
(36) association areas in TRN with the prefrontal. The bouton
population from the temporal cortices was continuous but differed significantly from all other populations examined, covering
a small range of sizes (0.1 m  diameter  1.4 m) (Figs. 10F,
11) and corresponding to the group of small boutons from prefrontal cortices. These results suggest that prefrontal and sensory
corticoreticular projections are structurally different and could
have different laminar origins.
Methodological controls
The presence of small and large boutons from prefrontal cortices
differed from terminations originating in sensory and motor cortices, which are small. To rule out the possibility that the large
boutons seen in TRN belonged to collateral axons from retrogradely labeled neurons in other thalamic nuclei that project to
prefrontal cortex and TRN, we used mainly the 10 kDa form of
BDA, FE, or FR, which is optimal for anterograde but not retrograde labeling . Comparison of the labeled bouton population in these cases and in
cases in which a mixture of 3 and 10 kDa FE or FR were used
revealed no differences. This finding is consistent with evidence
that retrograde labeling over long distances and long survival
times is present mainly in the cell body and dendrites and does
not enter collateral axons . Moreover, axons from temporal sensory association cortices terminated exclusively as small boutons in TRN, even when
some retrogradely labeled neurons were present in the thalamus.
Discussion
We present novel evidence on the unique nature of prefrontal
cortical projections to TRN (Fig. 12). First, axons from some
prefrontal areas terminated broadly in TRN and caudally overlapped with projections from sensory association cortices and
LargeandsmallboutonpopulationsinTRN.A,3Dreconstructionofthetopographicaldistributionoflarge(blue)and
small (red) boutons in TRN from prefrontal axons. B, Normalized density (percentage) of large and small boutons in TRN from
prefrontal axons. C–E, BDA-labeled fibers from prefrontal cortices containing only large (blue arrowheads), only small (red
arrowheads), or both kinds of boutons in TRN. Scale bars, 25 m.
7356 • J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
TRN connections with MD. Second, unlike sensory and motor
cortices, prefrontal axons exhibited a dual mode of termination
in TRN, as elaborated below.
Topography of cortical projections in TRN: the
prefrontal sector
In rats, cats, rabbits, and primates, cortical and thalamic afferents
in TRN are topographically organized . Along the rostrocaudal axis, centroposterior loci in TRN are respectively linked with the somatosensory,
visual, and auditory cortices and their associated thalamic nuclei.
In contrast to the detailed information on the central and
caudal TRN sectors, little is known about its anterior part, which
includes a motor sector, connected with motor cortex and ventrolateral thalamic nuclei, and the rostral pole, associated with
the limbic cortex and anterior, midline, and intralaminar thalamic nuclei . We now provide evidence that the
anterior quarter of TRN constitutes the prefrontal sector, overlapping with the motor and limbic sectors. In agreement with
previous studies ,
there was considerable overlap in the terminal fields of distinct
prefrontal areas. Moreover, the prefrontal TRN sector projects to
MD, VA, and AM, three thalamic nuclei connected with prefrontal cortices .
The most focal projections originated in prefrontal areas 10
and 32 and terminated in the rostral pole of TRN. Interestingly,
such focal projection is uncharacteristic for area 32, which has
otherwise widespread cortical and subcortical connections . In contrast, terminations from areas 46, 13, and 9 were
Ultrastructure of large and small boutons in TRN. A, B, EM photomicrographs
showing large labeled boutons synapsing on PV  dendrites (black dots). C, EM photomicrograph showing a small labeled bouton synapsing on a PV  dendrite. D, Small bouton synapsing on a PV  dendrite. E, Large bouton synapsing on a GABA  dendrite (black dots). F–H,
Small boutons synapsing on GABA  dendrites. Asterisks indicate postsynaptic densities. DendriteslabeledforPVorGABAcontaingoldparticles(blackdots).Scalebars:A–C,E–H,1m;D,
Labeled large and small boutons from prefrontal axons in TRN. 3D reconstruction
of the boutons shown in Figure 7, A and C, (blue) synapsing (red) on PV  dendrites (gray).
Unlabeledboutons(yellow)areincludedforcomparison.Thelargeboutonatthetopisatleast
three times bigger than the small bouton (bottom right).
PrefrontalprojectionstosubcorticalstructuresaresimilarbutdifferfromtemporalsensoryprojectionstoTRN.Bright-fieldphotomicrographsshowingBDA-labeledprefrontal
(A–E)ortemporal(F)axonsandboutonsterminatinginvarioussubcorticalareas.A–E,Terminations from area 32 in MD (A), VA (B), caudate nucleus (C), amygdala (D), and TRN (E). F,
Terminations in TRN from anterior temporal sensory association areas TE1/Ts1. Note the similarity of all prefrontal terminations, consisting of large boutons (black arrowheads) and small
boutons (silhouette arrows) with comparable diameters and surface areas. Terminals from
anterior temporal sensory cortices consist solely of small boutons. Scale bar, 25 m.
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361 • 7357
widespread in TRN, extending to its posterior (sensory) sectors.
These projections overlapped with terminations from temporal
auditory, visual, and polymodal association cortices within the
second and third TRN quarters. Areas 46 and 13 exhibited the
most extensive overlaps with temporal cortices, followed by area
9. None of the sensory association or polymodal areas studied
had such widespread projections, consistent with their topography in other species.
Presynaptic diversity of prefrontal corticoreticular pathways
There was also a unique mode of prefrontal terminations in TRN,
consisting mostly of small but also a significant proportion of
large boutons. In contrast, projections from sensory and motor
cortices terminate exclusively as small boutons in TRN and are
thought to originate in layer VI , which is
also the predominant pattern of cortical innervation of other
thalamic nuclei. Our results confirm and extend these findings by
showing that axonal boutons from auditory, visual, and polymodal association cortices were also small. Some corticothalamic
neurons are located in layer V, and these are thought to be the
source of large boutons in several thalamic nuclei, although not
TRN. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found both small and
large boutons in prefrontal projections to MD and VA, which
originate from layers VI and V . However, we also found
similar populations of small and large prefrontal terminations in
the amygdala and caudate, which receive the vast majority of their
cortical projections from layer V . Moreover, small and
Figure 11.
Bouton population analysis of prefrontal and temporal terminations in TRN and
subcorticalstructures.A,Meanmajordiameterofboutonsfromaxonsoriginatinginprefrontal
corticesorTE/Ts1andterminatinginTRN,VA,MD,caudate,andamygdala.Rangeofdiameters
of boutons is also indicated (solid bars). B, Cluster analysis of the diameter of boutons terminating in TRN, VA, MD, caudate, and amygdala emanating from prefrontal cortices or TE1/Ts1.
The latter are clearly small.
Figure 12.
Schematic diagram summarizing the differences of corticothalamic projections
issued by prefrontal and sensory/motor cortices. Sensory and motor cortices issue the majority
of their thalamic projections from layer VI, which terminate in the thalamus as small boutons
(red lines and small red dots) and send collateral branches to TRN. Layer V neurons issue some
projections to high-order thalamic nuclei mainly through large boutons, but they do not send
collaterals to TRN (blue lines and large blue dots). The prefrontal cortex issues substantial
corticothalamic projections from layer V, which terminate as large and small boutons in highorder association nuclei of the thalamus. However, it seems that both layers V and VI of the
prefrontalcortexsendcollateralstoTRN,andtheirterminationsaredimorphic(dottedredand
bluelines).AxoncollateralsfromsomeprefrontalareasextendtocentralandcaudallociofTRN,
in sectors that receive projections from motor and sensory cortices. Question marks on large
boutons originating from layer VI neurons highlight the current notion that these neurons
terminate exclusively as small boutons, suggesting that the issuance of large terminals is less
7358 • J. Neurosci., July 12, 2006 • 26(28):7348–7361
Zikopoulos and Barbas • Prefrontal–Reticular Circuits in Executive Control
large terminals were frequently found along the same axonal
branches, suggesting that layer V and/or layer VI corticothalamic
neurons can produce both endings. The above findings suggest
that the most probable source of large boutons in TRN is layer V,
although their origin in layer VI cannot be excluded.
Corticothalamic pathways from layer VI are considered “feedback modulators” of thalamic relay, whereas those from layer V
are thought to be “drivers,” similar to the ascending sensory afferents to first-order thalamic nuclei . Layer V projections reach high-order thalamic nuclei and
are thought to have a role in corticocortical communication, relaying preprocessed information from one area to another cortical area. In this context, prefrontal cortices, unlike other cortices,
issue some “driver-like” projections to TRN. Large boutons are
more likely to undergo multivesicular release and could be more efficient in
activating TRN, suggested by the linear correlation between
number of vesicles and bouton size . Large boutons may be present in highly active networks, consistent with
their increased mitochondrial content, which is activity dependent . Reticular neurons are additionally coupled by electrical synapses , suggesting that even a small number of large
boutons could initiate widespread activation in TRN and override
input from small terminals arising in other cortices. Neighboring
reticular neurons also communicate synaptically and thus can inhibit adjacent TRN regions . As a result,
subsets of thalamic neurons could be inhibited and others disinhibited, facilitating discrimination of incoming information.
Small and large boutons from prefrontal cortices may affect
differentially the excitability of TRN neurons in the sleep–wake
cycle. Glutamatergic cortical afferents, in general, provide the
predominance of synaptic inputs in TRN 
and likely have a critical role in controlling the firing patterns of
thalamocortical relay neurons . Physiological studies and computational models
of reconstructed reticular neurons have shown that the numbers
of glutamate receptor subunits are significantly higher in corticoreticular synapses than in other corticothalamic synapses.
Moreover, high densities of the low-threshold Ca 2 current in
reticular dendrites endow them with exquisite sensitivity to cortical EPSPs when their dendrites are hyperpolarized . As a
result, corticothalamic EPSPs reinforce or evoke bursts in reticular neurons and have a net inhibitory effect on thalamic relay
cells, as seen during the early stages of sleep . Conversely, when the dendrites of TRN neurons are depolarized, their activity switches from burst to tonic mode and
the cortical influence on relay cells is mostly excitatory, resulting
in the desynchronization of thalamocortical oscillations and
transition to the alert state. Interestingly, area 46, which had the
most widespread projections, was the only area studied that had
large terminations in the caudal (sensory) sectors of TRN.
The noradrenergic and cholinergic systems, which have been
implicated in the sleep–wake cycle, arousal, and attentional
mechanisms , heavily innervate TRN , and their input could be modulated by the
widespread prefrontal projections. These neurotransmitter systems and dopamine also innervate robustly thalamic nuclei connected with prefrontal cortices. A delicate balance of norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and dopamine is essential for prefrontal
cortical function , and its disruption is implicated in
several diseases, including attention deficit disorder and
schizophrenia.
Implications of widespread prefrontal projections to TRN on
thalamocortical communication
Prefrontal projections to TRN can regulate the activity of thalamic relay neurons in MD, VA, and AM. In addition, through
their widespread projections to TRN, the prefrontal cortices
could influence relay cells in other high-order or first-order thalamic nuclei situated beneath the central and posterior TRN sectors. The prefrontal cortex could thus exert indirect control on
other cortices or subcortical structures. The unique prefrontal–
TRN interactions combined with the pacemaker attributes of
TRN in the sleep–wake cycle are consistent with the hypothesis
that TRN acts as the attentional searchlight of the brain . In the rat visual system, for example, a focus of attention is
transmitted from the visual cortex to the thalamus, generating a
core of excitation surrounded by inhibition initiated by the disynaptic cortico-reticulo-geniculate pathway .
Approximately half of TRN synapses on anterior and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei in monkeys are with GABAergic neurons,
suggesting disinhibition of thalamic relay neurons projecting to
prefrontal cortices .
Consistent with this circuit, lesions of TRN increase the incidence
of inhibition of thalamocortical projection neurons by local
GABAergic neurons . Area 46 processes detailed
sensory information, has a key role in working memory
 , and is connected with premotor cortices for action
 . Conversely, area
13 has robust connections with limbic structures and is associated
with emotional processing . The interface of prefrontal–sensory association pathways in TRN could have a role in
selecting relevant and motivationally significant signals and suppressing distractors. The widespread prefrontoreticular projections may thus contribute to the supervisory and modulatory
effects that specific prefrontal areas exert over other cortices.