The Difference Between Emergency Remote
Teaching and Online Learning
 
Authors: Charles Hodges, Stephanie Moore, Barb Lockee, Torrey Trust and Aaron Bond
Published: Friday, March 27, 2020
Well-planned online learning experiences are meaningfully different from courses
offered online in response to a crisis or disaster. Colleges and universities working to
maintain instruction during the COVID-19 pandemic should understand those
differences when evaluating this emergency remote teaching.
Credit: frankie's / Shutterstock.com © 2020
Due to the threat of COVID-19, colleges and universities are facing decisions about how
to continue teaching and learning while keeping their faculty, staff, and students safe
from a public health emergency that is moving fast and not well understood. Many
institutions have opted to cancel all face-to-face classes, including labs and other
learning experiences, and have mandated that faculty move their courses online to help
prevent the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19. The list of institutions of higher
education making this decision has been growing each day. Institutions of all sizes and
types—state colleges and universities, Ivy League institutions, community colleges, and
others—are moving their classes online.1 Bryan Alexander has curated the status of
hundreds of institutions.2
Moving instruction online can enable the flexibility of teaching and learning anywhere,
anytime, but the speed with which this move to online instruction is expected to happen
is unprecedented and staggering. Although campus support personnel and teams are
usually available to help faculty members learn about and implement online learning,
these teams typically support a small pool of faculty interested in teaching online. In the
present situation, these individuals and teams will not be able to offer the same level of
support to all faculty in such a narrow preparation window. Faculty might feel like
instructional MacGyvers, having to improvise quick solutions in less-than-ideal
circumstances. No matter how clever a solution might be—and some very clever
solutions are emerging—many instructors will understandably find this process
stressful.
The temptation to compare online learning to face-to-face instruction in these
circumstances will be great. In fact, an article in the Chronicle of Higher Education has
already called for a "grand experiment" doing exactly that.3 This is a highly problematic
suggestion, however. First and foremost, the politics of any such debate must be
acknowledged. "Online learning" will become a politicized term that can take on any
number of meanings depending on the argument someone wants to advance. In talking
about lessons learned when institutions moved classes online during a shutdown in
South Africa, Laura Czerniewicz starts with this very lesson and what happened around
the construct of "blended learning" at the time.4 The idea of blended learning was drawn
into political agendas without paying sufficient attention to the fact that institutions would
make different decisions and invest differently, resulting in widely varying solutions and
results from one institution to another. With some of that hindsight as wisdom, we seek
to advance some careful distinctions that we hope can inform the evaluations and
reflections that will surely result from this mass move by colleges and universities.
Online learning carries a stigma of being lower quality than face-to-face learning,
despite research showing otherwise. These hurried moves online by so many
institutions at once could seal the perception of online learning as a weak option, when
in truth nobody making the transition to online teaching under these circumstances will
truly be designing to take full advantage of the affordances and possibilities of the online
Researchers in educational technology, specifically in the subdiscipline of online and
distance learning, have carefully defined terms over the years to distinguish between
the highly variable design solutions that have been developed and implemented:
distance learning, distributed learning, blended learning, online learning, mobile
learning, and others. Yet an understanding of the important differences has mostly not
diffused beyond the insular world of educational technology and instructional design
researchers and professionals. Here, we want to offer an important discussion around
the terminology and formally propose a specific term for the type of instruction being
delivered in these pressing circumstances: emergency remote teaching.
Many active members of the academic community, including some of us, have been
hotly debating the terminology in social media, and "emergency remote teaching" has
emerged as a common alternative term used by online education researchers and
professional practitioners to draw a clear contrast with what many of us know as highquality online education. Some readers may take issue with the use of the term
"teaching" over choices such as "learning" or "instruction." Rather than debating all of
the details of those concepts, we selected "teaching" because of its simple definitions—
"the act, practice, or profession of a teacher"5 and "the concerted sharing of knowledge
and experience,"6—along with the fact that the first tasks undertaken during emergency
changes in delivery mode are those of a teacher/instructor/professor.
Effective Online Education
Online education, including online teaching and learning, has been studied for decades.
Numerous research studies, theories, models, standards, and evaluation criteria focus
on quality online learning, online teaching, and online course design. What we know
from research is that effective online learning results from careful instructional design
and planning, using a systematic model for design and development.7 The design
process and the careful consideration of different design decisions have an impact on
the quality of the instruction. And it is this careful design process that will be absent in
most cases in these emergency shifts.
One of the most comprehensive summaries of research on online learning comes from
the book Learning Online: What Research Tells Us about Whether, When and
How.8 The authors identify nine dimensions, each of which has numerous options,
highlighting the complexity of the design and decision-making process. The nine
dimensions are modality, pacing, student-instructor ratio, pedagogy, instructor role
online, student role online, online communication synchrony, role of online
assessments, and source of feedback (see "Online learning design options").
Online learning design options (moderating variables)
Fully online
Blended (over 50% online)
Blended (25–50% online)
Web-enabled F2F
Self-paced (open entry, open exit)
Class-paced
Class-paced with some self-paced
Student-Instructor Ratio
36–99 to 1
100–999 to 1
> 1,000 to 1
Expository
Exploratory
Collaborative
Role of Online Assessments
Determine if student is ready for new content
Tell system how to support the student (adaptive instruction)
Provide student or teacher with information about learning state
Input to grade
Identify students at risk of failure
Instructor Role Online
Active instruction online
Small presence online
Student Role Online
Listen or read
Complete problems or answer questions
Explore simulation and resources
Collaborate with peers
Online Communication Synchrony
Asynchronous only
Synchronous only
Some blend of both
Source of Feedback
Source: Content adapted from Barbara Means, Marianne Bakia, and Robert Murphy, Learning
Online: What Research Tells Us about Whether, When and How .
Within each of these dimensions, there are options. Complicating matters, not all of the
options are equally effective. For example, decisions around class size will greatly
constrain what strategies you can use. Practice and feedback, for example, are well
established in the literature, but it's harder to implement this as class size grows,
eventually reaching a point where it's just not possible for an instructor to provide quality
feedback. In the case of synchrony, what you choose will really depend on your
learners' characteristics and what best meets their needs (adult learners require more
flexibility, so asynchronous is usually best, perhaps with optional synchronous sessions,
whereas younger learners benefit from the structure of required synchronous sessions).
Research on types of interaction—which includes student–content, student–student,
and student–learner—is one of the more robust bodies of research in online learning. In
short, it shows that the presence of each of these types of interaction, when
meaningfully integrated, increases the learning outcomes.9 Thus, careful planning for
online learning includes not just identifying the content to cover but also carefully
tending to how you're going to support different types of interactions that are important
to the learning process. This approach recognizes learning as both a social and a
cognitive process, not merely a matter of information transmission.
Those who have built online programs over the years will attest that effective online
learning aims to be a learning community and supports learners not just instructionally
but with co-curricular engagement and other social supports. Consider how much
infrastructure exists around face-to-face education that supports student success:
library resources, housing, career services, health services, and so on. Face-to-face
education isn't successful because lecturing is good. Lectures are one instructional
aspect of an overall ecosystem specifically designed to support learners with formal,
informal, and social resources. Ultimately, effective online education requires an
investment in an ecosystem of learner supports, which take time to identify and build.
Relative to other options, simple online content delivery can be quick and inexpensive,
but confusing that with robust online education is akin to confusing lectures with the
totality of residential education.
Typical planning, preparation, and development time for a fully online university course
is six to nine months before the course is delivered. Faculty are usually more
comfortable teaching online by the second or third iteration of their online courses. It will
be impossible for every faculty member to suddenly become an expert in online
teaching and learning in this current situation, in which lead times range from a single
day to a few weeks. While there are resources to which faculty can turn for assistance,
the scale of change currently being required on many campuses will stress the systems
that provide those resources and most likely will surpass their capacities. Let's face it:
many of the online learning experiences that instructors will be able to offer their
students will not be fully featured or necessarily well planned, and there's a high
probability for suboptimal implementation. We need to recognize that everyone will be
doing the best they can, trying to take just the essentials with them as they make a mad
dash during the emergency. Thus, the distinction is important between the normal,
everyday type of effective online instruction and that which we are doing in a hurry with
bare minimum resources and scant time: emergency remote teaching.
Emergency Remote Teaching
In contrast to experiences that are planned from the beginning and designed to be
online, emergency remote teaching (ERT) is a temporary shift of instructional delivery to
an alternate delivery mode due to crisis circumstances. It involves the use of fully
remote teaching solutions for instruction or education that would otherwise be delivered
face-to-face or as blended or hybrid courses and that will return to that format once the
crisis or emergency has abated. The primary objective in these circumstances is not to
re-create a robust educational ecosystem but rather to provide temporary access to
instruction and instructional supports in a manner that is quick to set up and is reliably
available during an emergency or crisis. When we understand ERT in this manner, we
can start to divorce it from "online learning." There are many examples of other
countries responding to school and university closures in a time of crisis by
implementing models such as mobile learning, radio, blended learning, or other
solutions that are contextually more feasible. For example, in a study on education's
role in fragility and emergency situations, the Inter-Agency Network for Education in
Emergencies examined four case studies.10 One of those cases was Afghanistan, where
education was disrupted by conflict and violence and schools themselves were targets,
sometimes because girls were trying to access education. In order to take children off
the streets and keep them safe, radio education and DVDs were used to maintain and
expand educational access and also were aimed at promoting education for girls.
What becomes apparent as we examine examples of educational planning in crises is
that these situations require creative problem solving. We have to be able to think
outside standard boxes to generate various possible solutions that help meet the new
needs for our learners and communities. In some cases, it might even help us generate
some new solutions to intractable problems, such as the dangers girls faced trying to
access education in Afghanistan. Thus, it may be tempting to think about ERT as a
bare-bones approach to standard instruction. In reality, it is a way of thinking about
delivery modes, methods, and media, specifically as they map to rapidly changing
needs and limitations in resources, such as faculty support and training.11
In the present situation, the campus support teams that are usually available to help
faculty members learn about and implement online learning will not be able to offer the
same level of support to all faculty who need it. Faculty support teams play a critical role
in the learning experiences of students by helping faculty members develop face-to-face
or online learning experiences. Current support models might include full-course design
support, professional development opportunities, content development, learning
management system training and support, and multimedia creation in partnership with
faculty experts. Faculty who seek support typically have varying levels of digital fluency
and are often accustomed to one-on-one support when experimenting with online tools.
The shift to ERT requires that faculty take more control of the course design,
development, and implementation process. With the expectation of rapid development
of online teaching and learning events and the large number of faculty in need of
support, faculty development and support teams must find ways to meet the institutional
need to provide instructional continuity while helping faculty develop skills to work and
teach in an online environment. As such, institutions must rethink the way instructional
support units do their work, at least during a crisis.
The rapid approach necessary for ERT may diminish the quality of the courses
delivered. A full-course development project can take months when done properly. The
need to "just get it online" is in direct contradiction to the time and effort normally
dedicated to developing a quality course. Online courses created in this way should not
be mistaken for long-term solutions but accepted as a temporary solution to an
immediate problem. Especially concerning is the degree to which the accessibility of
learning materials might not be addressed during ERT. This is but one reason that
universal design for learning (UDL) should be part of all discussions around teaching
and learning. UDL principles focus on the design of learning environments that are
flexible, inclusive, and student-centered to ensure that all students can access and learn
from the course materials, activities, and assignments.12
Evaluating Emergency Remote Teaching
Institutions will certainly want to conduct evaluations of their ERT efforts, but what
should they evaluate? First, let's consider what not to evaluate. A common
misconception is that comparing a face-to-face course with an online version of the
course constitutes a useful evaluation. This type of assessment, known as a media
comparison study, provides no real value, for at least three reasons:
First, any medium is simply a way to deliver information, and one medium is not
inherently better or worse than any other medium. Second, we need to better
understand different media and the way people learn with different media to design
effective studies. And, third, there are too many confounding variables in even the best
media comparison study for the results to be valid and meaningful.13
Researchers who conduct media comparison studies are looking at "the whole unique
medium and [giving] little thought to each one's attributes and characteristics, to learner
needs, or to psychological learning theories."14
Other approaches to evaluation can be useful in this move to ERT. The success of
distance and online learning experiences can be measured in a variety of ways,
depending on how "success" is defined from a given stakeholder's perspective. From
the faculty point of view, student learning outcomes would be of primary interest. Did
learners achieve the intended knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes that were the focus of
the instructional experience? Attitudinal outcomes are also possibly of interest, for
students and for faculty. For students, issues such as interest, motivation, and
engagement are directly connected to learner success and so would be possible
evaluation foci. For faculty, attitudes toward online instruction and all that it entails can
affect the perception of success.
Programmatic outcomes such as course and program completion rates, market reach,
faculty time investments, impacts on promotion and tenure processes—all of these are
relevant issues related to the offering of distance courses and programs. Finally,
implementation resources and strategies are possible areas of evaluation inquiry, such
as the reliability of selected technological delivery systems, the provision of and access
to learner support systems, support for faculty professional development for online
teaching pedagogies and tools, policy and governance issues related to distance
program development, and quality assurance. All of these factors can influence the
effectiveness of distance and online learning experiences and can serve to inform
learning experience design and program development and implementation.15 These
recommended areas of evaluation are for well-planned distance or online learning
efforts and may not be appropriate in the case of ERT. Evaluating ERT will require
broader questions, especially during initial implementations.
Next, let us recommend where you should focus your evaluation related to ERT efforts.
The language of the CIPP model will be used for structure.16 CIPP is an acronym
representing context, inputs, process, and products (see table 1).
Table 1. CIPP evaluation terms
Context Evaluations
Input Evaluations
Process Evaluations
Product Evaluations
"Assess needs,
problems, assets, and
opportunities, as well
as relevant contextual
conditions and
"Assess a program's strategy,
action plan, staffing
arrangements, and budget for
feasibility and potential costeffectiveness to meet targeted
needs and achieve goals."
"Monitor, document,
assess, and report on
the implementation
of plans."
"Identify and assess
intended and
unintended, short
term and long
Source: Daniel L. Stufflebeam and Guili Zhang, The CIPP Evaluation Model: How to Evaluate for
Improvement and Accountability .
In the case of ERT, institutions might want to consider evaluation questions such as the
following:
Given the need to shift to remote instruction, what internal and external
resources were necessary in supporting this transition? What aspects of the
context (institutional, social, governmental) affected the feasibility and
effectiveness of the transition? (context)
How did the university interactions with students, families, personnel, and local
and government stakeholders impact perceived responsiveness to the shift to
ERT? (context)
Was the technology infrastructure sufficient to handle the needs of ERT? (input)
Did the campus support staff have sufficient capacity to handle the needs of
ERT? (input)
Was our ongoing faculty professional development sufficient to enable ERT?
How can we enhance opportunities for immediate and flexible learning demands
related to alternative approaches to instruction and learning? (input)
Where did faculty, students, support personnel, and administrators struggle the
most with ERT? How can we adapt our processes to respond to such operational
challenges in the future? (process)
What were the programmatic outcomes of the ERT initiative (i.e., course
completion rates, aggregated grade analyses, etc.)? How can challenges related
to these outcomes be addressed in support of the students and faculty impacted
by these issues? (product)
How can feedback from learners, faculty, and campus support teams inform ERT
needs in the future? (product)
Evaluation of ERT should be more focused on the context, input, and process elements
than product (learning). Note that we are not advocating for no evaluation of whether or
not learning occurred, or to what extent it occurred, but simply stressing that the
urgency of ERT and all that will take to make it happen in a short time frame will be the
most critical elements to evaluate during this crisis. This is being recognized by some as
a few institutions are beginning to announce changing to pass/fail options rather letter
grades during ERT.17
Also, given the continued evidence of problems surrounding student evaluations of
instruction under typical higher education experiences, we recommend that the
standard, end-of-semester teaching evaluations definitely not be counted against faculty
members engaged in ERT.18 If an institution's policy mandates that those evaluations be
administered, consider amending the policy, or make sure that the results are clearly
qualified with the circumstances of the term or semester.
Final Thoughts
Everyone involved in this abrupt migration to online learning must realize that these
crises and disasters also create disruptions to student, staff, and faculty lives, outside
their association with the university. So all of this work must be done with the
understanding that the move to ERT will likely not be the priority of all those involved.
Instructors and administrators are urged to consider that students might not be able to
attend to courses immediately. As a result, asynchronous activities might be more
reasonable than synchronous ones. Flexibility with deadlines for assignments within
courses, course policies, and institutional policies should be considered. For a highlevel example, the US Department of Education has relaxed some requirements and
policies in the face of COVID-19.19
Hopefully the COVID-19 threat will soon be a memory. When it is, we should not simply
return to our teaching and learning practices prior to the virus, forgetting about ERT.
There likely will be future public health and safety concerns, and in recent years,
campuses have been closed due to natural disasters such as wildfires, hurricanes, and
the polar vortex.20 Thus, the possible need for ERT must become part of a faculty
member's skill set, as well as professional development programming for any personnel
involved in the instructional mission of colleges and universities.
The threat of COVID-19 has presented some unique challenges for institutions of higher
education. All parties involved—students, faculty, and staff—are being asked to do
extraordinary things regarding course delivery and learning that have not been seen on
this scale in the lifetimes of anyone currently involved. Although this situation is
stressful, when it is over, institutions will emerge with an opportunity to evaluate how
well they were able to implement ERT to maintain continuity of instruction. It is important
to avoid the temptation to equate ERT with online learning during those evaluations.
With careful planning, officials at every campus can evaluate their efforts, allowing those
involved to highlight strengths and identify weaknesses to be better prepared for future
needs to implement ERT.
1. See, for example: "Information for Ohio State University Students, Faculty
and Staff," The Ohio State University, Wexner Medical Center; "President
Eisgruber Updates University on Next Steps Regarding COVID-19 to Ensure
Health and Well-Being of the Entire Community," Princeton University;
and Everett Community College. ↩
2. "Coronavirus and Higher Education Resources," Bryan Alexander blog,
March 17, 2020. ↩
3. Jonathan Zimmerman, "Coronavirus and the Great Online-Learning
Experiment," Chronicle of Higher Education, March 10, 2020. ↩
4. Laura Czerniewicz, "What We Learnt from ‘Going Online' during University
Shutdowns in South Africa," PhilOnEdTech, March 15, 2020. ↩
5. "Teaching," Merriam-Webster. ↩
6. Daniela Peixoto Olo, Leonida Correia, and Maria da Conceição Rego, "The Main
Challenges of Higher Education Institutions in the 21st Century: A Focus
on Entrepreneurship," in Examining the Role of Entrepreneurial Universities in
Regional Development, eds. Ana Dias Daniel, Aurora A.C. Teixeira, and Miguel
Torres Preto : 1–23. ↩
7. Robert M. Branch and Tonia A. Dousay, "Survey of Instructional Design
Models," Association for Educational Communications and Technology (AECT),
8. Barbara Means, Marianne Bakia, and Robert Murphy, Learning Online: What
Research Tells Us about Whether, When and How : 1,243–89. ↩
10. Lynn Davies and Denise Bentrovato, "Understanding Education's Role in
Fragility; Synthesis of Four Situational Analyses of Education and Fragility:
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Liberia," International
Institute for Educational Planning . ↩
11. For an explanation of method, media, and mode in online learning, see J.
Thomas Head, Barbara B. Lockee, and Kevin M. Oliver, "Method, Media, and
Mode: Clarifying the Discussion of Distance Education
Effectiveness," Quarterly Review of Distance Education 3, no. 3 : 261–
12. See "UDL On Campus," ↩
13. Daniel W. Surry and David Ensminger, "What's Wrong with Media
Comparison Studies?" Educational Technology 41, no. 4 : 60–
15. Mike Moore, Barbara Lockee, and John Burton, "Measuring Success:
Evaluation Strategies for Distance Education," EDUCAUSE Quarterly 25, no.
1 : 20–26. ↩
16. Daniel L. Stufflebeam and Guili Zhang, The CIPP Evaluation Model: How to
Evaluate for Improvement and Accountability . ↩
17. For a discussion of institutions moving to pass/fail in response to COVID-19, see
Allison Stanger, "Make All Courses Pass/Fail Now," Chronicle of Higher
Education, March 19, 2020. ↩
18. For information about issues with student evaluation of instruction, see Shana K.
Carpenter, Amber E. Witherby, and Sarah K. Tauber, "On Students'(Mis)
judgments of Learning and Teaching Effectiveness," Journal of Applied
Research in Memory and Cognition, February 12, 2020. ↩
19. "Guidance for Interruptions of Study Related to Coronavirus (COVID-
19)," Federal Student Aid, Information for Financial Aid Professionals (IFAP),
March 20, 2020. ↩
20. Elin Johnson, "As Fires Rage, More Campuses Close," InsideHigherEd,
October 29, 2019; Jenni Fink, "Florida Universities Cancelling Classes,
Closing Campus Ahead of Potential Category 4 Hurricane
Dorian," Newsweek, August 29, 2019; and Perry Samson, "The Coronavirus
and Class Broadcasts," EDUCAUSE Review, March 3, 2020. ↩
Charles B. Hodges is a Professor of Instructional Technology at Georgia Southern
University.
Stephanie Moore is an Assistant Professor of Instructional Design and Technology in
the Curry School of Education at the University of Virginia.
Barbara B. Lockee is a Professor of Instructional Design and Technology, and Provost
Faculty Fellow, at Virginia Tech.
Torrey Trust is an Associate Professor of Learning Technology at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst.
M. Aaron Bond is Senior Director, Professional Development Network and Faculty
Digital Fluency at Virginia Tech.
© 2020 Charles B. Hodges, Stephanie Moore, Barbara B. Lockee, Torrey Trust, and M.
Aaron Bond. The text of this work is licensed under a Creative Commons BY-NC-ND
4.0 International License.