THE ASCE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION EQUATION
Task Committee on Standardization of Reference Evapotranspiration
Environmental and Water Resources Institute
the American Society of Civil Engineers
January, 2005
Final Report
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
THE ASCE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION EQUATION
PREPARED BY
Task Committee on Standardization of Reference
Evapotranspiration
Environmental and Water Resources Institute
TASK COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Ivan A. Walter (chair), Richard G. Allen (vice-chair), Ronald Elliott, Daniel Itenfisu,
Paul Brown, Marvin E. Jensen, Brent Mecham, Terry A. Howell, Richard Snyder,
Simon Eching, Thomas Spofford, Mary Hattendorf, Derrell Martin, Richard H.
Cuenca, and James L. Wright
PRINCIPAL EDITORS
Richard G. Allen, Ivan A. Walter, Ronald Elliott, Terry Howell, Daniel Itenfisu,
Marvin Jensen
ENDORSEMENTS
Irrigation Association, 2004
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
standardization
calculation
evapotranspiration (ET) as recommended by the Task Committee on Standardization
of Reference Evapotranspiration of the Environmental and Water Resources Institute
of the American Society of Civil Engineers. The purpose of the standardized
reference ET equation and calculation procedures is to bring commonality to the
calculation of reference ET and to provide a standardized basis for determining or
transferring crop coefficients for agricultural and landscape use. The basis of the
standardized reference ET equation is the ASCE Penman-Monteith (ASCE-PM)
method of ASCE Manual 70. For the standardization, the ASCE-PM method is
applied for two types of reference surfaces representing clipped grass (a short, smooth
crop) and alfalfa (a taller, rougher agricultural crop), and the equation is simplified to
a reduced form of the ASCE–PM. Standardized calculations for vapor pressure, net
radiation and wind speed adjustment are recommended for application to hourly and
daily calculation time steps. Guidelines on assessing weather data integrity and
estimating values for missing data are provided.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
THE ASCE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION EQUATION
Task Committee on Standardization of Reference Evapotranspiration
The concept of reference evapotranspiration (ET) was developed in the 1970’s as a
practical and definable replacement for the term potential ET. Reference ET is a
function of local weather, represents the ET from a defined vegetated surface, and
serves as an evaporative index by which engineers, hydrologists, water managers and
other technical professionals can predict ET for a range of vegetation and surface
conditions by applying “crop” coefficients for agricultural or landscaped areas.
During the past decade, for convenience and reproducibility, the reference surface has
been expressed as a hypothetical surface having specific characteristics. In the context
of this standardization, reference evapotranspiration is defined as the ET rate from a
uniform surface of dense, actively growing vegetation having specified height and
surface resistance, not short of soil water, and representing an expanse of at least 100
m of the same or similar vegetation. The EWRI Task Committee concluded that two
standardized surfaces were needed to serve the needs of the agricultural and
landscape communities and to provide for continuity with past reference ET usage.
The ASCE Penman-Monteith (ASCE-PM) equation of ASCE Manual 70 is used to
represent the standardized surface and is applied for two types of surfaces (short and
tall)-- clipped, cool-season grass and alfalfa.
This recommended standardization follows commonly used procedures for
calculating vapor pressure terms, net radiation, and soil heat flux. The
standardization represents reference ET for each of the reference surfaces using a
single equation having fixed constants and standardized computational procedures.
The computational procedures are relatively simple to apply, are understandable, are
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
supported by existing and historical data, are technically defensible, and are accepted
by science and engineering communities. The Task Committee recognizes that the
standardized reference equation, with fixed coefficients defining vegetation and
surface conditions, may not correspond precisely with local measurements of ET
from surfaces similar to the clipped, cool-season grass and full-cover alfalfa
definitions. However, the Task Committee encourages the use of the standardized
equation and procedure when possible to represent reference ET for the establishment
of reproducible and universally transferable ET estimates, climatic description, and
derived crop and landscape coefficients. The standardized equation has been
investigated over a wide range of locations and climates across the United States and
has the Task Committee’s confidence for use as a standardized index of
evapotranspirative demand.
Some of the computational procedures of the standardized reference method, for
example, the computation of net radiation, may be updated by EWRI from time to
time in the future, as developments and improvements in generalized computational
techniques are made.
The development of this standardization report by EWRI was made at the request of,
and has been endorsed by, the Irrigation Association.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
THE ASCE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF THE EQUATION
RECOMMENDATION
USE OF THE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
CALCULATING STANDARDIZED REFERENCE CROP
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
REQUIRED DATA FOR THE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EQUATION
CALCULATIONS REQUIRED FOR DAILY TIME-STEPS
Psychrometric and Atmospheric Variables
Latent Heat of Vaporization (λ)
Mean Air Temperature (T)
Atmospheric Pressure (P)
Psychrometric Constant (γ)
Slope of the Saturation Vapor Pressure-Temperature Curve (∆)
Saturation Vapor Pressure (es)
Actual Vapor Pressure (ea )
Net Radiation (Rn )
Net Solar or Net Short-Wave Radiation (Rns )
Net Long-Wave Radiation (Rnl )
Clear-Sky Solar Radiation (Rso)
Extraterrestrial Radiation for 24-Hour Periods (Ra )
Soil Heat Flux Density (G)
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
For Daily Periods
For Monthly Periods
Wind Profile Relationship
CALCULATIONS REQUIRED FOR HOURLY TIME-STEPS
Psychrometric and Atmospheric Variables
Latent Heat of Vaporization (λ)
Mean Air Temperature (T)
Atmospheric Pressure (P)
Psychrometric Constant (γ)
Slope of the Saturation Vapor Pressure-Temperature Curve (∆)
Saturation Vapor Pressure (es)
Actual Vapor Pressure (ea )
Net Radiation (Rn )
Net Solar or Net Short-Wave Radiation (Rns )
Net Long-Wave Radiation (Rnl )
Clear-sky solar radiation
Extraterrestrial radiation for hourly periods (Ra )
Soil Heat Flux Density (G)
Wind Profile Relationship
Negative Values Computed for ETsz
DEFINITION AND APPLICATION OF CROP COEFFICIENTS
TRANSFER AND CONVERSION OF CROP COEFFICIENTS
CALCULATION OF REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION DURING NON-
GROWING PERIODS
REFERENCES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - DESCRIPTION OF TASK COMMITTEE’S METHDOLOGY
AND PROCEDURES USED TO DERIVE THE
STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
APPENDIX B - SUMMARY OF REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
EQUATIONS USED IN EVALUATION
APPENDIX C - EXAMPLE CALCULATIONS FOR DAILY AND HOURLY
STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
APPENDIX D - WEATHER DATA INTEGRITY ASSESSMENT AND STATION
APPENDIX E - ESTIMATING MISSING CLIMATIC DATA
APPENDIX F - SUMMARY OF REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
COMPARISONS
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
LIST OF FIGURES
Daily Rs at Parma, Idaho during 1998 (elevation 703 m, Lat.
43.8o) and Rso envelope from Eq. 19.................................................. 21
Measured and calculated hourly Rso for two days at Parma,
Idaho during 1998 using Eq. 48 and using the more accurate
KB + KD method of Appendix D........................................................ 38
Figure A-1.
Frequency of ratio of daily ETo or ETos to daily ETo by
ASCE-PM equation for 56 site-years covering 33 locations.......... A-19
Figure A-2.
Frequency of ratio of daily ETr or ETrs to daily ETr by ASCE-
PM equation for 56 site-years covering 33 locations...................... A-20
Figure A-3.
Average ratio of daily ETo or ETos to daily ETo by ASCE-PM
ETo equation. .................................................................................. A-26
Figure A-4.
Average ratio of daily ETr or ETrs to daily ETr by ASCE-PM
equation........................................................................................... A-27
Figure A-5.
Mean daily ETo for the growing season computed using
various ETo methods and ETos vs. mean daily ETo for the
growing season using the full ASCE-PM equation, for daily
time steps. Each data point represents one-site year of data
(82 total site-years (see Table A-3 and App. F))............................. A-28
Figure A-6.
Mean daily ETr for the growing season computed using the
1982 Kimberly Penman method and ETrs vs. mean daily ETr
for the growing season using the full ASCE-PM equation, for
daily time steps. Each data point represents one-site year of
data (82 total site-years (see Table A-3 and App. F)).................... A-29
Figure A-7.
Average ratio of summed hourly ETo or ETos to daily ETo by
ASCE-PM ETo equation. ................................................................ A-30
Figure A-8.
Average ratio of summed hourly ETr or ETrs to daily ETr by
ASCE-PM ETr equation.................................................................. A-31
Figure D-1.
Daily Measured Rs and Calculated Rso using Eq. 19 of the text
and using Eq. D.1 – D.5 for Calipatria (top) and Seeley
(bottom), California CIMIS stations in the Imperial Valley
during 1999 ..................................................................................... D-11
Figure D-2.
Daily Measured Rs and Calculated Rso using Eq. 19 of the
text and using Eq. D.1 – D.5 for Greeley, Colorado during
2000................................................................................................. D-13
Figure D-3.
Hourly measured solar radiation and clear-sky envelopes for
two days in August, 2000 near Greeley, Colorado. ........................ D-14
Figure D-4.
Measured and calculated hourly net radiation for one day at
Kimberly, Idaho over clipped grass (Rn was calculated using
Eq. 42-44). Data courtesy of Dr. J.L. Wright, USDA-ARS,
Kimberly. ........................................................................................ D-15
Figure D-5.
Measured daily minimum air temperature and mean daily
dewpoint temperature (top) and daily maximum and minimum
relative humidity (bottom) recorded for Rocky Ford, Colorado
during 1999. .................................................................................... D-19
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Figure D-6.
Measured daily minimum air temperature and mean daily
dewpoint temperature for Rocky Ford, Colorado during 1999,
where Tdew for days 15 to 200 was replaced by estimates
using Eq. D-8. ................................................................................. D-20
Figure D-7.
Hourly air temperature and measured dewpoint temperature
from dual sensor systems near Kimberly, Idaho, July 17,
1990. Data courtesy of Dr. J.L. Wright, USDA-ARS,
Kimberly, Idaho. ............................................................................. D-22
Figure D-8.
ETos by month for the summer of 2000 at Parker, AZ
computed using meteorological data collected under reference
(alfalfa) and non-reference (fallow) conditions. ............................. D-25
Figure D-9.
a) Daily minimum air temperature and daily mean dew point
temperature vs. day of the year and b) daily maximum and
daily minimum relative humidity vs. day of the year for
Greeley, Colorado, during 2000...................................................... D-26
Figure D-10. Hourly dewpoint from four irrigated regions of southeast
Idaho and from a desert weather station (Flint Creek) on July
6, 2000. Also shown are air temperatures at Aberdeen and
Flint Creek....................................................................................... D-28
Figure D-11. a) Plot showing the increase in the gust factor at Eloy, AZ
during a period when an anemometer was failing due to
bearing contamination.
b) Ratio of daily mean wind speeds at Eloy, AZ to those at
Maricopa, AZ during the period of anemometer failure
described in a)................................................................................. D-33
Figure D-12
Daily mean wind speeds recorded at three neighboring AWS
stations in SE Colorado during 1995 (a) and ratios of wind
speeds to those at Rocky Ford for the same stations (b)................. D-35
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
LIST OF TABLES
Values for Cn and Cd in Eq. 1............................................................... 5
ASCE Penman-Monteith Terms Standardized for
Application of the Standardized Reference
Evapotranspiration Equation ................................................................ 5
Preferred method for calculating ea for daily ETsz............................. 12
Preferred method for calculating ea for ETsz for hourly
periods................................................................................................. 30
Table A-1.
Reference Evapotranspiration Equations and Procedures
Evaluated1....................................................................................... A-14
Table A-2.
Statistical summary of the comparisons between the
Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equations and
ASCE Penman-Monteith for the growing season for 82
site-years at 49 locations................................................................. A-23
Table A-3.
Summary of weather station sites in the study (listed from
east to west longitude)..................................................................... A-25
Table B-1.
Parameter equation numbers, etc. used in the Reference
Equations Evaluated.......................................................................... B-2
Table C-1.
Characteristics of the Greeley, Colorado weather station................. C-2
Table C-2.
Calculation constants for the Greeley, Colorado weather
station................................................................................................ C-2
Table C-3.
Measured data, calculations, and ETos and ETrs for daily
time steps for July 1-10, 2000 near Greeley, Colorado. ................... C-5
Table C-4.
Measured data, calculations, and ETos and ETrs for hourly
time steps for July 1-2, 2000 near Greeley, Colorado. ................... C-10
Table E-1.
General classes of wind speed data (taken from FAO-56) ................E-8
Table F-1.
Summary of weather station sites used in the study (listed
from east to west longitude)...............................................................F-2
Table F-2.
Statistical summary of the comparisons between various
reference ET methods, using growing-season results from
82 site-years of daily and 76 site-years of hourly data. .....................F-3
Ratio of method Daily ETo to Daily ASCE-PM ETo ........................F-4
Table F-4.
Ratio of Hourly Sum ETo to Daily ETo (within Method)..................F-6
Table F-5.
Ratio of Hourly Sum ETo to Daily ASCE-PM ETo...........................F-8
Table F-6.
Ratio of method Hourly Sum ETo to Hourly Sum ASCE
Table F-7.
Ratio of Daily ETr to Daily ASCE PM ETr.....................................F-12
Table F-8.
Ratio of Hourly Sum ETr to Daily ETr (within method).................F-15
Table F-9.
Ratio of Hourly Sum ETr to Daily ASCE-PM ETr..........................F-18
Table F-10.
Ratio of Hourly Sum ETr to Hourly Sum ASCE PMD ETr
..................................................................................................................................F-21
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
THE ASCE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
Task Committee on Standardization of Reference Evapotranspiration1 of the
Environmental and Water Resources Institute of the American Society of Civil
INTRODUCTION
In May 1999, The Irrigation Association (IA) requested the Evapotranspiration in
Irrigation and Hydrology Committee – Environmental and Water Resources Institute
(American Society of Civil Engineers) (ASCE-ET) to establish and define a
benchmark reference evapotranspiration equation. The purpose of the benchmark
equation is to standardize the calculation of reference evapotranspiration and to
improve transferability of crop coefficients.
IA envisioned an equation that would be accepted by the U.S. scientific community,
engineers, courts, policy makers, and end users. The equation would be applicable to
agricultural and landscape irrigation and would facilitate the use and transfer of crop
and landscape coefficients. In addition, IA requested guidelines for using the
equation in regions where climatic data are limited and recommendations for
1I. A. Walter2,a, R. G. Allen2,3,b, R. Elliott2, D. Itenfisu2, P. Brown2, M. E. Jensen2, B.
Mecham3, T. A. Howell2,3, R. Snyder2, S. Eching2, T. Spofford2,3, M. Hattendorf2, D.
Martin2, R. H. Cuenca2, and J. L. Wright2
2 Member, EWRI TC
3Member, Irrigation Association Water Management Committee (IA-WM)
aChair of the EWRI TC; bVice-chair of the EWRI TC
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
incorporating existing crop and landscape coefficients and existing reference ET
calculations.
An ASCE-ET Task Committee (TC) comprised of the authors of this report
responded to the request by IA. Their initial response is included in Appendix A.
Members of the TC jointly authored several papers at the IA 4th National Irrigation Symposium in November
2000 that described issues, challenges and analyses conducted by the TC. This report
development
Standardized
recommendations on use of the equation, and example calculations. In addition, this
report provides guidelines for assessing the integrity of weather data used for
estimating ET and methodologies that can be used where data are limited or missing.
DEFINITION OF THE EQUATION
Evapotranspiration (ET) represents the loss of water from the earth’s surface through
the combined processes of evaporation (from soil and plant surfaces) and plant
transpiration (i.e., internal evaporation). Reference evapotranspiration (ETref) is the
rate at which readily available soil water is vaporized from specified vegetated
surfaces . For convenience and reproducibility, the reference
surface has recently been expressed as a hypothetical crop (vegetative) surface with
specific characteristics . In
the context of this standardization report, reference evapotranspiration is defined as
the ET rate from a uniform surface of dense, actively growing vegetation having
specified height and surface resistance, not short of soil water, and representing an
expanse of at least 100 m of the same or similar vegetation.
ASCE-ET recommends that the equation be referred to as the “Standardized
Reference Evapotranspiration Equation” (ETsz). ASCE-ET is of the opinion that use
of the terms standard or benchmark may lead users to assume that the equation is
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
intended for comparative purposes (i.e., a level to be measured against). Rather, the
use of the term “standardized” is intended to infer that the computation procedures
have been fixed, and not that the equation is a standard or a benchmark or that the
equation has undergone the degree of review in the approval process necessary for
standards adopted by ASCE, ASAE, American National Standards Institute, or the
International Organization for Standardization.
ASCE-ET and IA-WM members concluded that two ETref surfaces with standardized
computational procedures were needed. The two adopted ETref surfaces are (1) a
short crop (similar to clipped grass) and (2) a tall crop (similar to full-cover alfalfa).
Additionally, the TC recognized that an equation capable of calculating both hourly
and daily ETref was needed.
RECOMMENDATION
ETref from each of the two surfaces is modeled using a single Standardized Reference
Evapotranspiration
appropriate
standardized
computational procedures. The surfaces/equation are defined as:
Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation, Short (ETos): Reference ET for
a short crop with an approximate height of 0.12 m (similar to clipped, cool-season
Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation, Tall (ETrs): Reference ET for
a tall crop with an approximate height of 0.50 m (similar to full-cover alfalfa).
The two surfaces are similar to known full-cover crops of alfalfa and clipped, coolseason grass that have received widespread use as ETref across the United States.
Each reference has unique advantages for specific applications and times of the year.
As a part of the standardization, the ASCE Penman-Monteith (ASCE-PM) equation
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
 , and associated equations for calculating
aerodynamic and bulk surface resistance have been combined and condensed into a
single equation that is applicable to both surfaces.
The Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation is intended to simplify and
clarify the presentation and application of the method. As used in this report, the
term ETsz refers to both ETos and ETrs. Eq. 1 presents the form of the Standardized
Reference Evapotranspiration Equation:
= standardized reference crop evapotranspiration for short (ETos) or
tall (ETrs) surfaces (mm d-1 for daily time steps or mm h-1 for hourly
time steps),
= calculated net radiation at the crop surface (MJ m-2 d-1for daily time
steps or MJ m-2 h-1 for hourly time steps),
= soil heat flux density at the soil surface (MJ m-2 d-1 for daily time
steps or MJ m-2 h-1 for hourly time steps),
= mean daily or hourly air temperature at 1.5 to 2.5-m height (°C),
= mean daily or hourly wind speed at 2-m height (m s-1),
= saturation vapor pressure at 1.5 to 2.5-m height (kPa), calculated for
daily time steps as the average of saturation vapor pressure at
maximum and minimum air temperature,
= mean actual vapor pressure at 1.5 to 2.5-m height (kPa),
= slope of the saturation vapor pressure-temperature curve (kPa °C-1),
= psychrometric constant (kPa °C-1),
= numerator constant that changes with reference type and calculation
time step (K mm s3 Mg-1 d-1 or K mm s3 Mg-1 h-1) and
= denominator constant that changes with reference type and
calculation time step (s m-1).
Units for the 0.408 coefficient are m2 mm MJ-1.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Table 1 provides values for Cn and Cd. The values for Cn consider the time step and
aerodynamic roughness of the surface (i.e., reference type). The constant in the
denominator, Cd, considers the time step, bulk surface resistance, and aerodynamic
roughness of the surface (the latter two terms vary with reference type, time step and
daytime/nighttime). Cn and Cd were derived by simplifying several terms within the
ASCE-PM equation and rounding the result. Equations associated with calculation of
required parameters in Eq. 1, the detailed derivation of the parameters in Table 1 and
simplification of the terms listed in Table 2 are explained in more detail in Appendix
B. Daytime is defined as occurring when the average net radiation, Rn, during an
hourly period is positive.
Table 1. Values for Cn and Cd in Eq. 1
Calculation Time
Reference,
Reference,
MJ m-2 d-1
Hourly during
MJ m-2 h-1
Hourly during
MJ m-2 h-1
Table 2. ASCE Penman-Monteith Terms Standardized for Application of the
Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Reference vegetation height, h
Height of air temperature and humidity
measurements, zh
1.5 – 2.5 m
1.5 – 2.5 m
Height corresponding to wind speed, zw
Zero plane displacement height
Latent heat of vaporization
2.45 MJ kg-1
2.45 MJ kg-1
Surface resistance, rs, daily
Surface resistance, rs, daytime
Surface resistance, rs, nighttime
Value of Rn for predicting daytime
Value of Rn for predicting nighttime
a The zero plane displacement height for ETrs assumes that the wind speed
measurement is over clipped grass, even though the reference type is tall. This
is done to accommodate a majority of weather stations that are located over
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
grass. See comments in Appendix B following Eq. B.14b. When wind speed
is measured over a surface having vegetation taller than about 0.3 m, it is
recommended that the “full” ASCE Penman-Monteith method (Eq. B.1) be
employed, where the zero plane displacement can be varied. However, the
standardized ETsz equation can be used if wind speed are adjusted following
guidelines in Appendix B.
USE OF THE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
Based on an intensive review of reference evapotranspiration calculated for 49 sites
throughout the United States (as described in the following section), ASCE-ET found
the standardized reference evapotranspiration equation to be reliable and recommends
its use for:
• Calculating reference evapotranspiration and, in turn, crop evapotranspiration
• Developing new crop coefficients
• Facilitating transfer of existing crop coefficients
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
CALCULATING STANDARDIZED REFERENCE CROP
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
This section describes data requirements, equations, and procedures necessary for
calculating ETsz on a daily and hourly time step. A daily time step has historically
been commonly used in the calculation of ETref. Selection of the appropriate time
step is a function of data availability, climate, the intended application, and user
preference.
REQUIRED DATA FOR THE STANDARDIZED REFERENCE EQUATION
The calculation of ETsz requires measurements or estimates for air temperature,
humidity, solar radiation, and wind speed. These parameters are considered to be the
minimum requirements to estimate ETos and ETrs. Examples of the calculation of
ETsz are provided in Appendix C. When humidity, solar radiation or wind speed
measurements are not available, substitute values for daily and longer time periods
may be estimated using procedures described in Appendix E.
The accuracy of any evapotranspiration calculation depends on the quality of the
weather data, which requires good quality control and quality assurance procedures.
When possible, weather data should be measured at stations that are located in open,
well-watered, vegetated settings (preferably grass). Preferred locations have low
growing, well-watered vegetation in the immediate and near vicinity of the weather
station (~50 m) and mostly the same or other well-watered vegetation for a few
hundred meters beyond that2. Suggestions for assessing and improving the integrity
of collected weather data are described in Appendix D. Appendix D also provides
2 This recommendation is similar to those found in ASAE Engineering Practice EP505
 .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
guidelines for evaluating the weather station site and the possible impact upon the
measured meteorological parameters. Suggestions for replacing missing data or data
that are of poor quality are presented in Appendix E.
Appendix B provides background on the development of the standardized form of the
ASCE equation. The full form of the ASCE-PM equation, which includes explicit
terms for aerodynamic and surface resistance, is not required, nor is it recommended,
for calculation of ETsz. The full form of the ASCE-PM equation is recommended
when ET is measured over grass or alfalfa vegetation having substantially different
height than the 0.12 m height defined for the short reference (grass) or 0.50 m height
defined for the tall reference (alfalfa). Values for vegetation height are fixed in the
standardized equation.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
CALCULATIONS REQUIRED FOR DAILY TIME-STEPS
The calculation process for ETsz for daily time steps is presented in this section.
Several of the calculations are identical to those required for hourly time steps. Some
equations are repeated in the hourly calculation section so as to detail that calculation
process completely.
Psychrometric and Atmospheric Variables3
Latent Heat of Vaporization (λ)
The value of the latent heat of vaporization, λ, varies only slightly over the ranges of
air temperature that occur in agricultural or hydrologic systems. For ETsz, a constant
value of λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 is recommended. The inverse of λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 is
approximately 0.408 kg MJ-1. The density of water (ρw) is taken as 1.0 Mg m-3 so
that the inverse ratio of λ ρw times energy flux in MJ m-2 d-1 equals 1.0 mm d-1.
Mean Air Temperature (T)
For the standardized method, the mean air temperature, T, for a daily time step is
preferred as the mean of the daily maximum and daily minimum air temperatures
rather than as the average of hourly temperature measurements to provide for
consistency across all data sets.
= daily mean air temperature [°C]
= daily maximum air temperature [°C]
= daily minimum air temperature [°C]
3 Many of the equations presented here are the same as those reported in ASCE
Manual 70 and in FAO-56 .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Atmospheric Pressure (P)
The mean atmospheric pressure at the weather site is predicted from site elevation
using a simplified formulation of the Universal Gas Law4:
= mean atmospheric pressure at station elevation z [kPa], and
= weather site elevation above mean sea level [m].
Psychrometric Constant (γ)
The standardized application using λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 results in a value for the
psychrometric constant, γ, that is proportional to the mean atmospheric pressure:
where P has units of kPa and γ has units of kPa °C-1.
Note: The variable γ is not the same variable as γpsy used later in Eqs. 9 and 10 for
converting psychrometric data (wet bulb and dry bulb temperature) to vapor pressure.
Slope of the Saturation Vapor Pressure-Temperature Curve (∆)
The slope of the saturation vapor pressure-temperature curve5, ∆, is computed as:
4 Reference: Burman et al. 
5 References: Tetens , Murray 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= slope of the saturation vapor pressure-temperature curve [kPa °C-1],
= daily mean air temperature [°C].
Saturation Vapor Pressure (es)
The saturation vapor pressure6 (es) represents the capacity of the air to hold water
For calculation of daily ETsz , es is given by:
= saturation vapor pressure function (Eq. 7) [kPa]
The function to calculate saturation vapor pressure is:
where vapor pressure is in units of kPa and temperature is in °C.
Actual Vapor Pressure (ea )
Actual vapor pressure (ea) is used to represent the water content (humidity) of the air
at the weather site. The actual vapor pressure can be measured or it can be calculated
from various humidity data, such as measured dew point temperature, wet-bulb and
dry-bulb temperature, or relative humidity and air temperature data.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Preferred procedures for calculating ea
When multiple types of humidity or psychrometric data are available for estimating
ea, the preferences listed in Table 3 are recommended for the calculation method.
These recommendations are based on the likelihood that the data will have integrity
and that estimates for ea will be representative. The availability and quality of local
data, as well as site conditions, may justify a different order of preference.
Table 3. Preferred method for calculating ea for daily ETsz
Method No.
Preference
Equation(s)
ea averaged over the daily period (based on
hourly or more frequent measurements of
humidity)a,b
temperature averaged over the daily period
temperature
averaged over the daily period
Measured or computed dew point or
temperature at 7 or 8 am
8 or 7, 9, 10
Daily maximum and minimum relative
Daily maximum relative humidity
Daily minimum relative humidity
Daily minimum air temperature (see
Appendix E)
Daily mean relative humidity
a In many data sets, ea may be expressed in terms of an equivalent dew point
temperature.
b Some data logging systems may measure relative humidity (RH) and T, but calculate
ea or Tdew internally for output as averaged values over some time interval. See
ASAE for further detail.
6 Reference: Jensen et al. and Tetens 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
When humidity and psychrometric data are missing or are of questionable integrity,
dew point temperature can be estimated from daily minimum air temperature as
described in Appendix E. This estimation process should be verified locally. The
assessment of weather data integrity is discussed in Appendix D.
ea from measured dew point temperature
The dew point temperature (Tdew) is the temperature to which the air must cool to
reach a state of saturation. For daily calculation time steps, average dew point
temperature can be computed by averaging over hourly periods or, for purposes of
estimating ETsz, it can be determined by an early morning measurement (generally at
0700 or 0800 hours). The value for ea is calculated by substituting Tdew into Eq. 7
resulting in:
ea from psychrometric data
The actual vapor pressure can also be determined from the difference between the dry
and wet bulb temperatures (i.e., the wet bulb depression) of the air:
= actual vapor pressure of the air [kPa],
e°(Twet) = saturation vapor pressure at the wet bulb temperature [kPa] (Eq. 7),
= psychrometric constant for the psychrometer [kPa °C-1], and
Tdry - Twet = wet bulb depression,
= dry bulb temperature and
= the wet bulb temperature [°C] (measured simultaneously).
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
The psychrometric constant for the psychrometer at the weather measurement site is
= coefficient depending on the type of ventilation of the wet bulb
[°C-1], and
= mean atmospheric pressure [kPa].
The coefficient apsy depends primarily on the design of the psychrometer and on the
rate of ventilation around the wet bulb. The following values are often used7:
= 0.000662 for ventilated (Asmann type) psychrometers having air
movement between 2 and 10 m s-1 for Twet ≥ 0 and 0.000594 for
= 0.000800 for naturally ventilated psychrometers having air
movement of about 1 m s-1, and
= 0.001200 for non-ventilated psychrometers installed in glass or
plastic greenhouses.
Generally, the wet-bulb and dry-bulb temperature data are measured once during the
ea from relative humidity data
The actual vapor pressure of air can be calculated from relative humidity (RH) and
the corresponding air temperature. When using RH data, it is essential that the RH
and air temperature data are “paired,” i.e., that they represent the same time of day or
time period and that they are taken at the weather measurement site. For daily data,
daily maximum relative humidity (RHmax) can be paired with Tmin, which will both
7 Allen et al., .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
occur, generally, during early morning. Daily minimum relative humidity (RHmin) is
paired with Tmax.
Depending on the availability of the RH data, the following equations apply, with
preference of method listed in Table 3:
• Daily ea from RHmax and RHmin.
= actual vapor pressure [kPa],
e°(Tmin) = saturation vapor pressure at daily minimum temperature [kPa],
e°(Tmax) = saturation vapor pressure at daily maximum temperature [kPa],
= daily maximum relative humidity [%], and
= daily minimum relative humidity [%].
When computing the average daily ETsz during a week, a ten-day period or a month,
RHmax and RHmin are obtained by averaging daily RHmax or RHmin values.
• Daily ea from RHmax
Older styles of electronic relative humidity sensors, for example those manufactured
before about 1990, often experienced difficulty in accurately measuring RH when at
low levels. When using equipment where errors in estimating RHmin may be large,
or when integrity of the RH data is doubtful, the actual vapor pressure can be
computed from RHmax:
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
When accuracy of RH data is in doubt, error in RHmax causes smaller error in ea than
error in RHmin, due to the smaller value for the multiplier eo(Tmin) as compared to
eo(Tmax). In addition, RHmax data are generally easier to assess for accuracy than is
RHmin. The value of RHmax generally exceeds 90% and approaches 100% in wellwatered settings such as within irrigation projects and in sub-humid and humid
climates. This proximity to 100% serves as a first check on reasonableness,
representativeness, and integrity of the data. Exceptions to this trend are where
substantial advection of dry or warm air from dry regions outside the area occurs
during nighttime, including, but not limited to,some desert areas of New Mexico,
Arizona and California.
• Daily ea from RHmin
Sometimes, only high quality estimates of daily RHmin are available and must be
used to predict ea:
However, estimates using Eq. 13 may be less desirable than estimates using Eq. 11 or
12, due to greater impact of error in RHmin on ea, as discussed previously. In
addition, it is more difficult to assess the integrity of RHmin data (see Appendix D):
• Daily ea from RHmean
In the absence of RHmax and RHmin data, but where daily RHmean data are available,
the actual vapor pressure may be estimated as:
where RHmean is the mean daily relative humidity, generally defined as the average
between RHmax and RHmin and Tmean is mean daily air temperature, defined in Eq. 2
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Eq. 14 is less desirable than Eqs. 12 or 13 because the eo(T) relationship is nonlinear.
Eq. 14 produces estimates of ea that are closer to those by Eq. 11 and to daily average
ea computed from hourly values than is the use of alternative forms of Eq. 14, such as
ea = RHmean/100 [eo(Tmax)+eo(Tmin)]/2 described in Allen et al., or as ea =
RHmean/100 [1/(50/eo(Tmax) + 50/eo(Tmin))] described in Smith et al., . These
latter two methods are not recommended in the standardized procedure.
Net Radiation (Rn )
Net radiation (Rn) is the net amount of radiant energy available at a vegetation or soil
surface for evaporating water, heating the air, or heating the surface. Rn includes
both short and long wave radiation components8:
= net short-wave radiation, [MJ m-2 d-1] (defined as being positive
downwards and negative upwards),
= net outgoing long-wave radiation, [MJ m-2 d-1] (defined as being
positive upwards and negative downwards),
Rns and Rnl are generally positive or zero in value.
Net radiation is difficult to measure because net radiometers are problematic to
maintain and calibrate. There is good likelihood of systematic biases in Rn
measurements. Therefore, Rn is often predicted from observed short wave (solar)
radiation, vapor pressure, and air temperature. This prediction is routine and
generally highly accurate. If Rn is measured, then care and attention must be given to
the calibration of the radiometer, the surface over which it is located, maintenance of
8 Reference: Brutsaert , Jensen et al., , Wright , Doorenbos and
Pruitt , Allen et al., .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
the sensor domes, and level of the instrument. The condition of the vegetation
surface is as important as the sensor. For purposes of calculating ETsz, the
measurement surface for Rn is generally assumed to be clipped grass or alfalfa at full
Net Solar or Net Short-Wave Radiation (Rns )
Net short-wave radiation resulting from the balance between incoming and reflected
solar radiation is given by:
= net solar or short-wave radiation [MJ m-2 d-1],
= albedo or canopy reflection coefficient, is fixed at 0.23 for the
standardized short and tall reference surfaces [dimensionless], and
= incoming solar radiation [MJ m-2 d-1].
The calculation of ETsz uses the constant value of 0.23 for albedo for daily and
hourly periods. It is recognized that albedo varies somewhat with time of day and
with time of season and latitude due to change in sun angle. However, because the
solar intensity is less during these periods, the error introduced in fixing albedo at
0.23 is relatively small . Users may elect to use a different
prediction for albedo, however, it is essential to ascertain the validity and accuracy of
an alternative method using good measurements of incoming and reflected solar
radiation. Some types of pyranometers are invalid for measuring reflected radiation
due to the difference in spectral response between the instrument and reflecting
surface. Predictions of Rn made using an alternate method for albedo (i.e., other than
0.23) may not agree with those made using the ASCE standardized procedure.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Net Long-Wave Radiation (Rnl )
There are several variations and coefficients developed for predicting the net long
wave component of total net radiation. The standardized ASCE procedure is the
same as that adopted by FAO-56 and is based on the Brunt approach for
predicting net emissivity. If users intend to utilize a different approach for calculating
Rnl, it is essential to ascertain the validity and accuracy of their Rn method using net
radiometers in excellent condition and that are calibrated to some dependable and
recognized standard. In all situations, users should compare measured Rn or Rn
computed using an alternative method with Rn calculated using the standardized
procedure. Substantial variation (more than 5 %) should give cause for concern and
should indicate the need to reconcile or justify the differences.
Rnl, net long-wave radiation, is the difference between upward long-wave radiation
from the standardized surface (Rlu) and downward long-wave radiation from the sky
(Rld), so that Rnl = Rlu – Rld. The following calculation for daily Rnl follows the
method of Brunt of using vapor pressure to predict net emissivity:
= net long-wave radiation [MJ m-2 d-1],
= Stefan-Boltzmann constant [4.901 x 10-9 MJ K-4 m-2 d-1],
= cloudiness function [dimensionless] (limited to 0.05 ≤ fcd ≤ 1.0),
= actual vapor pressure [kPa],
= maximum absolute temperature during the 24-hour period [K] (K =
°C + 273.16),
= minimum absolute temperature during the 24-hour period [K] (K =
°C + 273.16).
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
The superscripts “4” in Eq. 17 indicate the need to raise the air temperature,
expressed in Kelvin units, to the power of 4. For daily and monthly calculation
timesteps, fcd is calculated as9:
= relative solar radiation (limited to 0.3 ≤ Rs/Rso ≤ 1.0),
= measured or calculated solar radiation [MJ m-2 d-1], and
= calculated clear-sky radiation [MJ m-2 d-1].
The ratio Rs/Rso in Eq. 18 represents relative cloudiness and is limited to 0.3 < Rs/Rso
≤1.0 so that fcd has limits of 0.05 ≤ fcd ≤ 1.0.
Clear-Sky Solar Radiation (Rso)
Clear-sky solar radiation (Rso) is used in the calculation of net radiation (Rn). Clearsky solar radiation is defined as the amount of solar radiation (Rs) that would be
received at the weather measurement site under conditions of clear-sky (i.e., cloudfree). The ratio of Rs to Rso in the equation for Rn is used to characterize the impact
of cloud-cover on the downward emission of thermal radiation to the earth’s surface.
Daily Rso is a function of the time of year and latitude. Rso is also impacted by
station elevation (affecting atmospheric thickness and transmissivity), the amount of
precipitable water in the atmosphere (affecting the absorption of some short-wave
radiation), and the amount of dust or aerosols in the air.
Extraterrestrial radiation (Ra), as defined in Eq. 21, can be used as a means for
determining a theoretical Rsoenvelope as illustrated in Figure 1. The envelope can be
expressed in tabular form or as an equation. In this section, a simple procedure10 is
9 Jensen et al., ; Allen et al., 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
10 Reference: Allen 
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
demonstrated for estimating Rso for purposes of predicting net radiation. A more
involved procedure, useful for evaluating Rs data integrity, is described in Appendix
D. The clear sky envelope can alternatively be developed using measured Rs from a
period of one year or longer. The measured data should be confirmed for accuracy,
including sensor calibration and maintenance (levelness and cleanliness). When
measured Rs data are used to define an Rso envelope for a location, the resulting
envelope should be compared with a theoretically derived envelope to confirm that
there are no substantial differences in shape or magnitude. In general, the
theoretically derived curve (Figure 1) is recommended.
Solar Radiation, MJ/m2/day
Day of Year
Rs Measured
Rso = 0.76 Ra
Parma, Idaho, 1998
Figure 1. Daily Rs at Parma, Idaho during 1998 (elevation 703 m, Lat. 43.8o) and Rso
envelope from Eq. 19.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
When a dependable, locally calibrated procedure for determining Rso is not available,
Rso, for purposes of calculating Rn, can be computed as:
= station elevation above sea level [m].
Eq. 19 predicts progressively higher levels of clear sky radiation with increasing
elevation, and is the basis for the “0.76” factor for the Rso curve drawn in Figure 1.
Elevation serves as a surrogate for total air mass and atmospheric transmissivity
above the measurement site.
When dependable, locally calibrated values are available for applying the
“Angstrom” formula (see Eq. A.44), the clear sky radiation can be computed as:
= clear-sky solar radiation [MJ m-2 d-1],
= extraterrestrial radiation [MJ m-2 d-1],
= coefficient that can be derived from the as and bs coefficients of the
Angstrom formula, where Kab = as + bs, and where Kab represents
the fraction of extraterrestrial radiation reaching the earth on clearsky days,
= constant expressing the fraction of extraterrestrial radiation reaching
the earth’s surface on completely overcast days (see Eq. E.2 in
Appendix E), and
= constant expressing the additional fraction of extraterrestrial
radiation reaching the earth’s surface on a clear day (see Eq. E.2 in
Appendix E).
Eqs. 19 or 20 are generally adequate for use in estimating Rso in Eq. 18 when
predicting net radiation, Rn. More complex estimates for Rso, which include impacts
of turbidity and water vapor on radiation absorption, can be used for assessing
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
integrity of solar radiation data and are discussed in Appendix D. The difference in
ETrs or ETos resulting from the use of Eq. 19 or 20, as opposed to the more
complicated and accurate Rso equations D.1 – D.5 of Appendix D, will be generally
less than a few percent over an annual period.
Extraterrestrial Radiation for 24-Hour Periods (Ra )11
Extraterrestrial radiation, Ra, defined as the short-wave solar radiation in the absence
of an atmosphere, is a well-behaved function of the day of the year, time of day, and
latitude. It is needed for calculating Rso, which is in turn used in calculating Rn. For
daily (24-hour) periods, Ra can be estimated from the solar constant, the solar
declination, and the day of the year:
= extraterrestrial radiation [MJ m-2 d-1],
= solar constant [4.92 MJ m-2 h-1],
= inverse relative distance factor (squared) for the earth-sun [unitless],
= sunset hour angle [radians],
= latitude [radians], and
= solar declination [radians].
The latitude, ϕ, is positive for the Northern Hemisphere and negative for the Southern
Hemisphere. The conversion from decimal degrees to radians is given by:
and dr and δ are calculated as:
11 Reference: Duffie and Beckman .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
J is the number of the day in the year between 1 (1 January) and 365 or 366 (31
December). The constant 365 in Eqs. 23 and 24 is held at 365 even during a leap
year. J can be calculated as12:
= the day of the month (1-31),
= the number of the month (1-12), and
= the number of the year .
The "Int" function in Eq. 25 finds the integer number of the argument in parentheses
by rounding downward. The "Mod(Y,4)" function finds the modulus (remainder) of
the quotient Y/4.
For monthly periods, the day of the year at the middle of the month (Jmonth) is
approximately:
The sunset hour angle, ωs, is given by:
The “arccos” function is the arc-cosine function and represents the inverse of the
cosine. This function is not available in all computer languages, so that ωs can
alternatively be computed using the arc-tangent (inverse tangent) function:
12 Reference: Allen .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Soil Heat Flux Density (G)
Soil heat flux density is the thermal energy utilized to heat the soil. G is positive
when the soil is warming and negative when the soil is cooling.
For Daily Periods
The magnitude of the daily, weekly or ten-day soil heat flux density, G, beneath a
fully vegetated grass or alfalfa reference surface is relatively small in comparison
with Rn. Therefore, it is ignored so that:
Gday = daily soil heat flux density [MJ m-2 d-1].
For Monthly Periods
Over a monthly period, G for the soil profile can be significant. Assuming a constant
soil heat capacity of 2.0 MJ m-3 °C-1 and an effectively warmed soil depth of 2 m, G
for monthly periods in MJ m-2 d-1 is estimated from the change in mean monthly air
temperature as:
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
or, if Tmonth,i+1 is unknown:
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= mean air temperature of month i [°C],
Tmonth,i-1
= mean air temperature of previous month [°C], and
Tmonth,i+1
= mean air temperature of next month [°C].
Wind Profile Relationship
Wind speed varies with height above the ground surface. For the calculation of ETsz,
wind speed at 2 meters above the surface is required, therefore, wind measured at
other heights must be adjusted. To adjust wind speed data to the 2-m height, Eq. 33
should be used for measurements taken above a short grass (or similar) surface, based
on the full logarithmic wind speed profile equation B.14 given in Appendix B:
= wind speed at 2 m above ground surface [m s-1],
= measured wind speed at zw m above ground surface [m s-1], and
= height of wind measurement above ground surface [m].
For wind measurements above surfaces other than clipped grass, the user should
apply the full logarithmic equation B.14. A special application of Eq. B.14 is given
in Appendix B for wind measured above alfalfa or similar vegetation having about
0.5 m height. It is noted that wind speed data collected at heights above 2 m are
acceptable for use in the standardized equations following adjustment to 2 m, and
may be preferred if vegetation adjacent to the station commonly exceeds 0.5 m.
Measurement at a greater height, for example 3m, reduces the influence of the taller
vegetation surrounding the weather measurement site.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005 Daily Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
CALCULATIONS REQUIRED FOR HOURLY TIME-STEPS
Many weather data networks collect and summarize hourly data that allow the user to
calculate ETsz for hourly periods. This capability is important where significant
shifts in wind and humidity occur hourly. The calculation process for hourly time
steps is analogous to that for daily calculations. The hourly equations can be used for
shorter time periods, using fractional hours as the time parameter, but care must be
taken to multiply the resultant ET rate in mm/h by the fractional hour. For example,
if 30-minute data are used, one would input radiation in units of MJ m-2 h-1. Then
the output, in mm h-1, would need to be multiplied by 0.5 h to arrive at the ET for the
30-minute period.
Psychrometric and Atmospheric Variables13
Latent Heat of Vaporization (λ)
The value of the latent heat of vaporization (λ), varies only slightly over the ranges of
air temperature that occur in agricultural or hydrologic systems. For ETsz, a constant
value of λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 is selected. The inverse of λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 is
approximately 0.408 kg MJ-1. The density of water (ρw) is taken as 1.0 Mg m-3 so
that the inverse ratio of λ ρw times energy flux in MJ m-2 h-1 equals 1.0 mm h-1.
Mean Air Temperature (T)
For hourly periods, the mean air temperature, T, represents an average over the
13 Many of the equations presented here are the same as those reported in ASCE
Manual 70 and used in FAO-56 .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Atmospheric Pressure (P)
The mean atmospheric pressure at the weather site is predicted from site elevation
using a simplified formulation of the Universal Gas Law14:
= mean atmospheric pressure at station elevation z [kPa], and
= weather site elevation above mean sea level [m].
Psychrometric Constant (γ)
The standardized application using λ = 2.45 MJ kg-1 results in a value for the
psychrometric constant, γ, that is proportional to the mean atmospheric pressure:
where P has units of kPa and γ has units of kPa °C-1.
The variable γ is not the same variable as γpsy used later in Eqs. 39 and 40 for
converting psychrometric data (wet bulb and dry bulb temperature) to vapor pressure.
Slope of the Saturation Vapor Pressure-Temperature Curve (∆)
The slope of the saturation vapor pressure-temperature curve15, ∆, is computed as:
14 Reference: Burman et al. 
15 References: Tetens , Murray 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= slope of the saturation vapor pressure-temperature curve [kPa °C-1],
= mean air temperature [°C].
Saturation Vapor Pressure (es)
The saturation vapor pressure16, es, represents the capacity of the air to hold water
For calculation of hourly ETsz , es is given by:
where vapor pressure is in units of kPa and T is mean air temperature during the
hourly period in °C. eo(T) is the saturation vapor pressure function.
Actual Vapor Pressure (ea )
Actual vapor pressure (ea) is used to represent the water content (humidity) of the air
at the weather site. The actual vapor pressure can be measured or it can be calculated
from various humidity data, such as measured dew point temperature, wet-bulb and
dry-bulb temperature, or relative humidity and air temperature data.
Preferred procedures for calculating e a
When multiple types of humidity or psychrometric data are available for estimating
ea, the preferences listed in Table 4 are recommended for calculation method. These
recommendations are based on the likelihood that the data will have integrity and that
estimates for ea will be representative of the reference ET environment. The
availability and quality of local data may justify a different order of preference.
16 Reference: Jensen et al. and Tetens 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Table 4. Preferred method for calculating ea for ETsz for hourly periods
Equation(s)
ea averaged over perioda,b
calculated
temperature averaged over period
Average RH and T for the hour
Wet-bulb and dry-bulb temperature
38, 39, 40
temperature
Appendix E)
a In many data sets, ea may be expressed in terms of an equivalent dew point
temperature.
b Some data logging systems may measure RH and T, but calculate ea or Tdew
internally for output as averaged values over some time interval.
When humidity and psychrometric data are missing or are of questionable integrity,
dew point temperature can be estimated from daily minimum air temperature as
described in Appendix E. This estimation procedure should be verified locally. The
assessment of weather data integrity is discussed in Appendix D.
ea from measured dew point temperature
The dew point temperature, Tdew, is the temperature to which the air must be cooled
to reach a state of saturation. The value for ea is calculated by substituting Tdew into
Eq. 37 resulting in:
ea from psychrometric data
The actual vapor pressure can also be determined from the difference between the dry
and wet bulb temperatures (i.e., the wet bulb depression) of the air:
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= actual vapor pressure of the air [kPa],
e°(Twet) = saturation vapor pressure at the wet bulb temperature [kPa] (Eq. 37),
= psychrometric constant for the psychrometer [kPa °C-1], and
Tdry-Twet = wet bulb depression, where Tdry is the dry bulb temperature and
Twet is the wet bulb temperature [°C] (measured simultaneously).
The psychrometric constant for the psychrometer at the weather measurement site is
= coefficient depending on the type of ventilation of the wet bulb [°C-
= mean atmospheric pressure [kPa].
The coefficient apsy depends primarily on the design of the psychrometer and on the
rate of ventilation around the wet bulb. The following values are often used17:
= 0.000662 for ventilated (Asmann type) psychrometers having air
movement between 2 and 10 m s-1 for Twet ≥ 0 and 0.000594 for
= 0.000800 for naturally ventilated psychrometers with air movement
of about 1 m s-1), and
= 0.001200 for non-ventilated psychrometers installed in glass or
plastic greenhouses .
ea from relative humidity data
The actual vapor pressure of air for hourly periods can be calculated from relative
humidity (RH) and saturation vapor pressure at the corresponding air temperature
(from Eq. 37):
17 Allen et al., .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= mean relative humidity for the hourly period, %, and
= mean air temperature for the hourly period, oC.
Net Radiation (Rn )
Net radiation (Rn) is the net amount of radiant energy available at the vegetation or
soil surface for evaporating water, heating the air, or heating the surface. Rn includes
both short and long wave radiation components 18:
= net shortwave radiation, [MJ m-2 h-1] (defined as being positive
downwards and negative upwards),
= net outgoing long-wave radiation, [MJ m-2 h-1] (defined as being
positive, upwards and negative downwards),
Rns and Rnl are generally positive or zero in value.
Net radiation is difficult to measure because net radiometers are problematic to
maintain and calibrate. There is good likelihood of systematic biases in Rn
measurements. Therefore, Rn is often predicted from observed short wave (solar)
radiation, vapor pressure, and air temperature. This prediction is routine and
generally highly accurate. If Rn is measured, care and attention must be given to the
calibration of the radiometer, the surface over which it is located, maintenance of the
sensor domes, and level of the instrument. The condition of the vegetation surface is
18 Reference: Brutsaeart , Jensen et al., , Wright , Doorenbos and
Pruitt, , Allen et al., .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
as important as the sensor. For purposes of calculating ETsz , the measurement
surface for Rn is generally assumed to be clipped grass or alfalfa at full cover.
Net Solar or Net Short-Wave Radiation (Rns )
Net short-wave radiation resulting from the balance between incoming and reflected
solar radiation is given by:
= net solar or short-wave radiation [MJ m-2 h-1],
= albedo or canopy reflection coefficient, is fixed at 0.23 for the
standardized short and tall reference surfaces [dimensionless], and
= the incoming solar radiation [MJ m-2 h-1].
The calculation of ETsz uses the constant value of 0.23 for albedo for daily and
hourly periods. It is recognized that albedo varies somewhat with time of day and
with time of season and latitude due to change in sun angle. However, because the
solar intensity is less during these periods, the error introduced in fixing albedo at
0.23 is relatively small . Users may elect to use a different
prediction for albedo, however, they are strongly encouraged to ascertain the validity
and accuracy of an alternative method using good measurements of incoming and
reflected solar radiation. Some types of pyranometers are invalid for measuring
reflected radiation due to the difference in spectral response between the instrument
and reflecting surface. Predictions of Rn made using an alternate method for albedo
(i.e., other than 0.23) may not agree with those made using the ASCE standardized
procedure.
Net Long-Wave Radiation (Rnl )
There are several variations and coefficients developed for predicting the net long
wave component of total net radiation. The standardized ASCE procedure is the
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
same as that adopted by FAO-56 and is based on the Brunt approach for
predicting net surface emissivity. If users intend to utilize a different approach for
calculating Rn, it is essential to ascertain the validity and accuracy of their method
using net radiometers in excellent condition and that are calibrated to some
dependable and recognized standard. In all situations, users should compare
measured Rn or Rn computed using an alternative method with Rn calculated using
the standardized procedure. Substantial variation (more than 5 %) should give cause
for concern and should indicate the need to reconcile or justify the differences.
Rnl is the difference between long-wave radiation radiated upward from the
standardized surface (Rlu) and long-wave radiation radiated downward from the
atmosphere (Rld), so that Rnl = Rlu – Rld. The following calculation for Rnl is the
method introduced by Brunt that uses near surface vapor pressure to
predict net surface emissivity:
= net outgoing long-wave radiation [MJ m-2 h-1],
= Stefan-Boltzmann constant [ 2.042 x 10-10 MJ K-4 m-2 h-1],
= cloudiness function [dimensionless] (limited to 0.05 ≤ fcd ≤ 1.0),
= actual vapor pressure [kPa],
= mean absolute temperature during the hourly period [K] (K = °C +
The superscript “4” in Eq. 44 indicates the need to raise the air temperature,
expressed in Kelvin units, to the power of 4. For periods during daytime when the
sun is more than about 15o above the horizon (see procedures below), fcd is calculated
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= relative solar radiation (limited to 0.3 ≤ Rs/Rso ≤ 1.0),
= measured or calculated solar radiation [MJ m-2 h-1], and
= calculated clear-sky radiation [MJ m-2 h-1].
The ratio Rs/Rso in Eq. 45 represents relative cloudiness and is limited to 0.3 < Rs/Rso
≤ 1.0 so that fcd has limits of 0.05 ≤ fcd ≤ 1.0.
During nighttime, Rso, by definition, equals 0, and Eq. 45 is undefined. Furthermore,
even small out of level of a pyranometer or imperfect correction for cosine error of
the instrument (required for accurate measurement at low sun angle) can cause
substantial deviation in the value for Rs/Rso when the sun is near the horizon (i.e.,
when Rso is small). Therefore, fcd during periods of low sun angle and nighttime is
defined using fcd from a prior period having sufficient sun angle.
When sun angle above the horizon (β)19 at the midpoint of the hourly or shorter time
period is less than 0.3 radians (~17o), then:
fcd β>0.3 = cloudiness function for the time period prior to when sun angle β (in
the afternoon or evening) falls below 0.3 radians [dimensionless].
Note that if the time period is shorter than one hour, fcd from several periods can be
averaged into fcd β>0.3 to obtain a representative average value. In mountain valleys
where the sun may set near or above 0.3 radians (~17o), the user should increase the
sun angle at which fcd β>0.3 is computed and imposed. For example, for a location
where mountain peaks are 20o above the horizon, a period should be selected for
computing fcd β>0.3 where the sun angle at the end of the time period is 25 to 30o
19 The sun angle β is defined as the angle of a line from the measurement site to the
center of the sun’s disk relative to a line from the measurement site to directly below
the sun and tangent to the earth’s surface. This definition assumes a flat surface.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
above the horizon. The same adjustment is necessary when deciding when to resume
computation of fcd during morning hours when mountains lie to the east.
Only one value for fcd β>0.3 is calculated per day for use during dusk, nighttime and
dawn periods. That value for fcd β>0.3 is hen applied to the time period when β at the
midpoint of the period first falls below 0.3 radians (~15o) and to all subsequent
periods until after sunrise when β again exceeds 0.3 radians. Computation of β is
given in Eq. 62 in the following section.
Equations 45 – 46 will not apply at latitudes and times of the year when there are no
hourly (or shorter) periods having sun angle of 0.3 radians or greater. These
situations occur for latitudes at 50o for about one month per year (in winter), for
latitudes at 60o for about 5 months per year, and for latitudes at 70o for about 7
months per year. At extreme latitudes, some fall and winter months have little or no
daylight. Under these conditions, the application can average fcd β>0.3 from fewer
time periods or, in the absence of any daylight, can assume a ratio of Rs/Rso ranging
from 0.3 for complete cloud cover to 1.0 for no cloud cover. Under these extreme
conditions, the prediction of Rn during nighttime and low sun angle is only
approximate.
The application of Eq. 46 presumes that cloudiness during periods of low sun angle
and nighttime is similar to that during late afternoon or early evening. This is
generally a reasonable assumption and is commensurate with the relative simplicity
and moderate accuracy of Eq. 45. Some applications may wish to split the nighttime
period into two halves, with the first half using fcd β>0.3 computed from late afternoon
or early evening and the second half using fcd β>0.3 computed from Rs measured
during the following morning (for the period when β is first > 0.3 radians). However,
this additional computation requires looking ahead within a data set and will
generally not add accuracy to the computations, since the timing of any shift in
cloudiness during nighttime is unknown and due to the general, approximate accuracy
of the fcd function (Eq. 45).
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Clear-sky solar radiation
Clear-sky solar radiation, Rso, is used in the calculation of net radiation, Rn. Clearsky solar radiation is defined as the amount of solar radiation, Rs, that would be
received at the weather measurement site under conditions of clear-sky (i.e., cloudfree). The ratio of Rs to Rso in the equation for Rn is used to characterize the impact
of cloud-cover on the downward emission of thermal radiation to the earth’s surface.
The value for Rso is a function of the time of year and latitude, and, in addition, the
time of day for hourly calculation periods. These parameters affect the potential
incoming solar radiation from the sun. Clear-sky solar radiation is also impacted by
the station elevation (affecting atmospheric thickness and transmissivity), the amount
of precipitable water in the atmosphere (affecting the absorption of some short wave
radiation), and the amount of dust or aerosols in the air.
A daily Rso “envelope” was developed earlier in Figure 1 and compared to measured
Rs. For purposes of calculating Rn, hourly Rso can be calculated using the following
simple approach:
= clear-sky solar radiation [MJ m-2 h-1],
= station elevation above sea level [m], and
= extraterrestrial radiation [MJ m-2 h-1].
Equation 47 predicts progressively higher levels of clear sky radiation with increasing
elevation. Elevation serves as a surrogate for total air mass and atmospheric
transmissivity above the measurement site. Equation 47 is generally adequate for use
in predicting the ratio Rs/Rso when calculating net radiation, Rn. Other more
complex estimates for Rso, which include turbidity and water vapor effects as well as
impact of sun angle are discussed in Appendix D. Those equations are recommended
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
for assessing integrity of solar radiation data and may provide improved estimates for
Rso for calculating Rn. The impact on ETsz of using the equations in Appendix D for
Rso rather than Eq. 47 will generally be less than a few percent across a day and over
an annual period.
Figure 2 illustrates a comparison of measured hourly solar radiation with Rso
computed using Eq. 47 and using the more complicated, but generally more accurate,
method presented as Eq. D.1-D.5 of Appendix D. Data from two days in late June are
plotted. June 19 had some morning and mid-day cloudiness. June 20 was a cloudfree day. The Rs data from June 20 compare relatively well with both Rso methods
throughout the day. The measured data plot slightly higher than either Rso estimate at
mid-day, with the more complicated Rso method from Appendix D having better
agreement than Eq. 48. Measured Rs exceeded the Rso curves for the 1100 reading
on June 19 because of reflection from clouds near the weather site. In general, the
solar radiation data appear to be of excellent quality and calibration.
Solar Radiation, MJ/m2/h
Day of Year
Parma, Idaho
June 19, 20, 1998
Figure 2. Measured and calculated hourly Rso for two days at Parma, Idaho during 1998
using Eq. 47 and using the more accurate KB + KD method of Appendix D.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Extraterrestrial radiation for hourly periods (Ra )20
Extraterrestrial radiation, Ra, defined as the short-wave solar radiation in the absence
of an atmosphere, is a well-behaved function of the day of the year, time of day,
latitude, and longitude. For hourly time periods, the solar time angle at the beginning
and end of the period serve as integration endpoints for calculating Ra:
= extraterrestrial radiation during the hour (or shorter) period [MJ m-2
= solar constant = 4.92 MJ m-2 h-1,
= inverse relative distance factor (squared) for the earth-sun [unitless],
= solar declination [radians],
= latitude [radians],
= solar time angle at beginning of period [radians], and
= solar time angle at end of period [radians].
The latitude, ϕ, expressed in radians is positive for the Northern Hemisphere and
negative for the Southern Hemisphere. The conversion from decimal degrees to
radians is given by:
and dr and δ are calculated as:
20 Reference: Duffie and Beckman .
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
where J is the number of the day in the year between 1 (1 January) and 365 or 366 (31
December). The constant 365 in Eqs. 50 and 51 is held at 365 even during a leap
year. J can be calculated as21:
= the day of the month (1-31),
= the number of the month (1-12), and
= the number of the year .
The "Int" function in Eq. 52 finds the integer number of the argument in parentheses
by rounding downward. The "Mod(Y,4)" function finds the modulus (remainder) of
the quotient Y/4.
The solar time angles at the beginning and end of each period are given by:
= solar time angle at the midpoint of the period [radians], and
= length of the calculation period [hour]: i.e., 1 for hourly periods or
0.5 for 30-minute periods.
The solar time angle at the midpoint of the period is:
21 Reference: Allen 
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= standard clock time at the midpoint of the period [hour] (after
correcting time for any daylight savings shift). For example for a
period between 1400 and 1500 hours, t = 14.5 hours,
= longitude of the center of the local time zone [expressed as positive
degrees west of Greenwich, England]. In the United States, Lz =
75, 90, 105 and 120° for the Eastern, Central, Rocky Mountain and
Pacific time zones, respectively, and Lz = 0° for Greenwich, 345°
for Paris (France), and 255° for Bangkok (Thailand),
= longitude of the solar radiation measurement site [expressed as
positive degrees west of Greenwich, England], and
= seasonal correction for solar time [hour].
Because ωs is the sunset hour angle and -ωs is the sunrise hour angle (noon has ω =
0), values of ω < -ωs or ω > ωs from Eq. 55 indicate that the sun is below the horizon,
so that, by definition, Ra and Rso are zero and their calculation has no meaning.
When the values for ω1 and ω2 span the value for -ωs or for ωs, this indicates that
sunrise or sunset occurs within the hourly (or shorter) period. In this case, the
integration limits for applying Eq. 48 should be correctly set using the following
conditionals:
If ω1 < -ωs then ω1 = -ωs
If ω2 < -ωs then ω2 = -ωs
If ω1 > ωs then ω1 = ωs
If ω2 > ωs then ω2 = ωs
If ω1 > ω2 then ω1 = ω2
The above conditionals can be applied for all timesteps to insure numerical stability
of the application of Eq. 48 as well as correctly computing the theoretical quantity of
solar radiation early and late in the day. The user should recognize that Eqs. 48-56
and 62 presume an extensive, flat ground surface and are based on a vector to the
center of the sun’s disk. The calculations do not account for diffuse radiation
occurring shortly before sunrise and shortly after sunset. Where there are hills or
mountains, the hour angle when the sun first appears or disappears may increase for
sunrise or decrease for sunset.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
The seasonal correction for solar time is:
where J is the number of the day in the year and b has units of radians.
The sunset hour angle, ωs, is given by:
The “arccos” function is the arc-cosine function and represents the inverse of the
cosine. This function is not available in all computer languages, so that ωs can
alternatively be computed using the arc tangent (inverse tangent) function:
The user should confirm accurate setting of the datalogger clock. If clock times are in
error by more than 5-10 minutes, estimates of extraterrestrial and clear sky radiation
may be significantly impacted. This can lead to errors in estimating Rn on an hourly
or shorter basis, especially early and late in the day. A shift in “phase” between
measured Rs and Rso predicted from Ra according to the data logger clock can
indicate error in the reported time. More discussion is given in Appendix D.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
The angle of the sun above the horizon, β, at the midpoint of the hourly or shorter
time period is computed as:
= angle of the sun above the horizon at midpoint of the period
[radians],
= latitude [radians],
= solar declination [radians],
= solar time angle at the midpoint of the period [radians] (from Eq.
The “arcsin” function is the arc-sine function and represents the inverse of the sine.
This function is not available in all computer languages, so that β can alternatively be
computed using the arc tangent (inverse tangent) function:
and all other parameters are defined following Eq. 62.
Soil Heat Flux Density (G)
Soil heat flux density is the thermal energy that is utilized to heat the soil. G is
positive when the soil is warming and negative when the soil is cooling. For hourly
calculation periods, G beneath a dense cover of grass or alfalfa does not correlate well
with air temperature, but can be significant. Hourly G generally correlates well with
net radiation and amount of vegetative cover and can be approximated as a fraction of
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Rn. The following equations are based on Eq. B.13 of Appendix B for fixed
vegetation height and leaf area index22.
For the standardized short reference ETos :
where G and Rn have the same measurement units (MJ m-2 h-1 for hourly or shorter
time periods). For the standardized tall reference ETrs :
For standardization, nighttime is defined as when measured or calculated hourly net
radiation Rn is < 0 (i.e., negative). When the soil is warming, the soil heat flux
density, G, has a positive value. The amount of energy consumed by G is subtracted
from Rn when estimating ETos or ETrs.
Wind Profile Relationship
Wind speed varies with height above the ground surface. For the calculation of ETsz,
wind speed at 2 meters above the surface is required, therefore, wind measured at
other heights must be adjusted. To adjust wind speed data to the 2-m height, Eq. 68
should be used for measurements above a short grass (or similar) surface, based on
the full logarithmic wind speed profile equation B.14 given in Appendix B.
= wind speed at 2 m above ground surface [m s-1],
= measured wind speed at zw m above ground surface [m s-1], and
22 Leaf area index (LAI) is defined as the area (one-sided) of leaves per unit area of
ground surface. Units are dimensionless (i.e., m2 m-2)
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
= height of wind measurement above ground surface [m].
For wind measurements above surfaces other than clipped grass, the user should
apply the full logarithmic equation B.14. A special application of Eq. B.14 is given in
Appendix B for wind measured above alfalfa or similar vegetation having about 0.5
m height. It is noted that wind speed data collected at heights above 2 m are
acceptable for use in the standardized equations following adjustment to 2 m, and
may be preferred if vegetation adjacent to the station commonly exceeds 0.5 m.
Measurement at a greater height, for example 3 m, reduces the influence of the taller
vegetation.
Negative Values Computed for ET
Values calculated for reference ET for nighttime hours occasionally take on negative
values. In practice, the user may wish to set negative values to zero before summing
over the 24-hour period. However, in some situations, negative hourly computed
ETos or ETrs may indicate some condensation of vapor during periods of early
morning dew and should therefore be registered as negative during the summing of
24-hour ET. In other situations, negative hourly ETos or ETrs during nighttime reflect
the uncertainties in some parameter estimates including Rn and assumptions implicit
to the combination equation. The impact of negative hourly values on ET summed
over daily periods is usually less than a few percent. In general, it may be appropriate
to retain the negative values.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
Hourly Timestep Section
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
DEFINITION AND APPLICATION OF CROP COEFFICIENTS
Calculation of crop evapotranspiration (ETc) requires the selection of the appropriate
crop coefficient (Kc) for use with the standardized reference evapotranspiration (ETos
or ETrs). It is recommended that the abbreviation for crop coefficients developed for
use with ETos be denoted as Kco and the abbreviation for crop coefficients developed
for use with ETrs be denoted as Kcr. ETc is calculated as:
ETc = Kco * ETos or ETc = Kcr * ETrs
TRANSFER AND CONVERSION OF CROP COEFFICIENTS
Crop coefficients (Kc) and landscape coefficients available in the literature are
referenced to either clipped, cool season grass or full-cover alfalfa. Without
appropriate adjustment, crop coefficients for the two references are not
interchangeable. For this standardization effort, a grass reference crop is defined as
an extensive, uniform surface of dense, actively growing, cool-season grass with a
height of 0.12 m, and not short of soil water. A full-cover alfalfa reference crop is
defined here as an extensive, uniform surface of dense, actively growing alfalfa with
a height of 0.50 m, and not short of soil water.
Grass-based crop coefficients should be used with ETos, and alfalfa-based
coefficients should be used with ETrs. If a calculated or measured reference other
than ETos or ETrs was used to develop the crop coefficients, it must be established
that the reference equation or reference measurements provide values that are
equivalent to ETos or ETrs (see Appendix A for comparisons between selected
methods). It is important to establish the differences between ET equations since
some equations developed to estimate grass or alfalfa reference ET may not agree
exactly with ETos or ETrs during all time periods or under all climatic conditions.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
Kc values that can be used with ETos without adjustment include those reported in
FAO-56 and ASCE Manual 70 .
Coefficients that can be used as is with ETos for most practical applications are those
reported by FAO-24 and SCS NEH Part 623 Chapter 2
 . Coefficients based on the CIMIS Penman equation
 should not require adjustment for use with ETos. Kc values
that can be used as is with ETrs for most practical applications are those reported by
Wright and ASCE Manual 70 . There
is a tendency for relatively minor overestimation of ET using Kc from Wright 
with ETrs in spring and fall. Thus, the Kc values by Wright have been
converted for direct use with ETrs, with ETrs calculated on a 24-h time step .
Some grass and alfalfa based crop coefficients are “mean” crop coefficients . Mean crop coefficients
incorporate the effects of irrigation, rainfall, and soil type at the development site.
Users of these mean crop coefficients are cautioned that differences in irrigation
frequency, rainfall patterns, and/or soil drying characteristics between the
development site and the study site could cause error in the ETc estimate.
The publications referenced in the above paragraphs contain descriptions on
determination and application of crop coefficients during growing periods. This
information will not be presented here. The following section discusses the
application of ETsz and Kc during non-growing periods.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation
CALCULATION OF REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION DURING
NON-GROWING PERIODS
During cold periods in many regions, freezing temperatures preclude vegetation from
remaining green and actively growing. These periods are referred to as non-growing
periods. Evapotranspiration from non-active vegetation during non-growing periods
is generally less than reference ET because plants may be dormant and therefore may
have substantially increased surface resistance. Besides surface resistance, albedo or
reflectance of dormant or dead vegetation is generally greater than that of green
vegetation. Both of these characteristics reduce the potential rate of ET from plant
residue. This may make it difficult to assess the validity of reference ET equations
under these conditions.
While it is recognized that the reference ET equations do not represent measurable
quantities during non-growing periods, the ETsz equation can still be useful as an
evaporative index. However, the user must be aware that conditions for the reference
surfaces for ETos and ETrs may not exist during non-growing periods. Under many
non-growing conditions, it is possible to incorporate the differences between dormant
or dead vegetation ET and ETsz into the Kc value. However there are other factors to
be considered. For example, the soil heat flux estimates may be uncertain, low sun
angles and snow cover will influence albedo, and short day lengths will affect the
calculation of net radiation and ETsz for daily time steps.
In this document the Task Committee will not recommend a methodology for the
application of reference evapotranspiration during non-growing seasons. Two other
ASCE Task Committees are investigating evaporative losses during non-growing
seasons and are developing estimation methodologies.
ASCE-EWRI Task Committee Report, January, 2005
ASCE Standardized Reference Evapotranspiration Equation