The Genetics Concept Assessment: A New Concept
Inventory for Gauging Student Understanding of Genetics
Michelle K. Smith, William B. Wood, and Jennifer K. Knight
Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
80309-0347; and Science Education Initiative, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
Submitted August 5, 2008; Revised September 19, 2008; Accepted September 22, 2008
Monitoring Editor: Diane Ebert-May
We have designed, developed, and validated a 25-question Genetics Concept Assessment (GCA)
to test achievement of nine broad learning goals in majors and nonmajors undergraduate
genetics courses. Written in everyday language with minimal jargon, the GCA is intended for use
as a pre- and posttest to measure student learning gains. The assessment was reviewed by
genetics experts, validated by student interviews, and taken by 600 students at three institutions. Normalized learning gains on the GCA were positively correlated with averaged exam
scores, suggesting that the GCA measures understanding of topics relevant to instructors.
Statistical analysis of our results shows that differences in the item difficulty and item discrimination index values between different questions on pre- and posttests can be used to distinguish
between concepts that are well or poorly learned during a course.
INTRODUCTION
Physics instruction has been improved by the use of carefully developed multiple-choice tests (concept inventories)
that examine student conceptual understanding on a narrow
set of topics . Data collected using these assessments in a variety of physics
courses clearly indicate that student learning of these concepts is greater in interactive courses than in traditional
courses .
Biology educators also have begun to compare the effectiveness of different instructional approaches in their courses.
Limited evidence suggests that, as in physics, replacement of
traditional lectures with more interactive approaches can
result in higher student learning gains . Although some assessment tools are available that could be
suitable for widespread comparison of different instructional
approaches
Klymkowsky et al., 2003; Garvin-Doxas et al., 2007; Bowling
et al., 2008), more are needed to evaluate the effectiveness of
teaching reforms in different subdisciplines of the life sciences, including genetics.
For this purpose, we developed and validated the Genetics Concept Assessment (GCA). The GCA consists of 25
multiple-choice questions, designed to be clear, concise, and
as free of jargon as possible. The questions assess understanding of a set of basic genetics concepts likely to be taught
in courses for both majors and nonmajors. The GCA is
designed to be administered at the start of a course as a
pretest and at the end of the course as a posttest, to measure
student learning gains .
In this article, we describe our validation of the GCA
through student interviews, pilot testing, and expert review.
Statistical analysis of test answers from 600 students at
three institutions demonstrates that the GCA has an acceptable range of question difficulty and shows high reliability
when taken by two similar populations of students in subsequent semesters. We also describe how the GCA can be
used to evaluate which concepts students have learned well
and which still cause them persistent difficulties after taking
a genetics course.
Development of GCA
We are in the process of restructuring our majors and nonmajors
genetics courses as part of the Science Education Initiative (SEI;
www.colorado.edu/sei) at University of Colorado, Boulder (CU).
The SEI is a 5-yr project designed to “transform” the core majors
courses in five science departments by introducing proven teaching
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.08–08–0045
Address correspondence to: Michelle K. Smith (michelle.k.smith@
colorado.edu).
CBE—Life Sciences Education
Vol. 7, 422–430, Winter 2008
© 2008 by The American Society for Cell Biology
practices such as formulation of specific learning goals, increased
use of class time for interactive and group learning activities, increased use of formative assessments including “clicker” questions,
and pre/post assessment to measure learning gains. We developed
the GCA to have a validated, reliable, multiple-choice assessment
instrument for evaluating how these changes would affect student
learning and conceptual understanding in genetics. Following several examples of assessment development ,
we established a set of learning goals for undergraduate genetics
courses by interviewing course instructors and other genetics experts. We then created an assessment consisting of questions that
address these learning goals using student-provided distracters,
validated these questions through student interviews and expert
reviews, and further refined the assessment based on pilot study
results. When we began, at least four other assessments designed
to measure genetics knowledge were available or under development. However, two of these were not validated by student
interviews or input from multiple faculty members ; and the third, although
validated by experts and student focus groups, was designed
primarily for testing of nonscience majors .
Furthermore, the statistical evaluation of the third instrument
was largely limited to data collected before genetics instruction
and was not used to measure learning gains. A fourth assessment
reported to be in development was not
yet available for use.
We used a multistep process to develop the GCA (Table 1). To
identify question topics, we began by reviewing literature that
highlighted common misconceptions in genetics . We also interviewed faculty who teach genetics at CU, asking them to list major
concepts in their genetics courses and to provide examples of multiple-choice questions they thought were effective at addressing
common student misunderstandings. From this information, we
created a series of 25 new questions, each specifically designed to
address one or more of the nine major learning goals associated
with the CU genetics courses (Table 2). The questions were intended
to assess conceptual understanding of the learning goals rather than
simple factual recall. Supplemental Material 1 contains two examples of GCA questions. The full set of questions is available upon
request (see Discussion).
We gave a pilot version of the GCA in spring 2007 to 358 students
in the CU Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (MCDB)
majors genetics course at the beginning and end of the semester. To
identify jargon that might be unfamiliar, we asked a group of these
students to circle any words they did not understand when taking
the GCA at the beginning of the course, and we substituted more
familiar words in subsequent versions. To make the GCA appropriately difficult for measurement of learning gains, we rewrote questions answered correctly by 70% of students on the pretest, and we
reworded rarely chosen distracters (incorrect answers) to make
them more plausible.
Validation
During the 2007–2008 academic year, we validated the GCA
through 33 student interviews (described in detail below), as well as
input from 10 genetics faculty experts at several institutions. After
revision based on this feedback and the pilot testing described
above, we and several cooperating faculty at other institutions gave
the GCA to a total of 607 students in five majors and nonmajors
genetics courses in fall 2007 and spring 2008 semesters. Eight instructors were involved in these courses. One of us (J.K.K.) taught
the CU nonmajors genetics course; another (M.K.S.) helped to write
materials for both CU majors courses. Except for distributing the
Table 2. Course learning goals for the CU majors genetics
course and corresponding questions on the GCA
Course learning goal
Question no.a
1. Analyze phenotypic data and deduce
patterns of inheritance from family
2. Describe the molecular anatomy of
genes and genomes
9, 10, 15, 24
3. Describe the mechanisms by which
an organism’s genome is passed on
to the next generation
7, 8, 16, 17, 25
4. Describe the phenomenon of linkage
and how it affects assortment of
alleles during meiosis
5. Extract information about genes,
alleles, and gene functions by
analyzing the progeny from genetic
6. Describe the processes that can affect
the frequency of phenotypes in a
population over time
7. Compare different types of
mutations and describe how each can
affect genes and the corresponding
mRNAs and proteins
2, 5, 6, 22
8. Apply the results of molecular
genetic studies in model organisms
to understanding aspects of human
genetics and genetic diseases
9. Interpret results from molecular
analyses to determine the inheritance
patterns and identities of human
genes that can mutate to cause
a The learning goals associated with each question are those intended by the authors. These associations are supported by expert
responses (see Table 3) but have not been further verified through
student interviews or other means.
Table 1. Overview of the GCA development process
Multistep process used to develop the GCA
1. Review literature on common misconceptions in genetics
2. Interview faculty who teach genetics, and develop a set of
learning goals that most instructors would consider vital to
the understanding of genetics
3. Develop and administer a pilot assessment based on known
and perceived misconceptions
4. Reword jargon, replace distracters with student supplied
incorrect answers, and rewrite questions answered correctly
by 70% of students on the pretest
5. Validate and revise the GCA through 33 student interviews
and input from 10 genetics faculty experts at several
institutions
6. Give current version of the GCA to a total of 607 students in
both majors and nonmajors genetics courses at three different
institutions
7. Evaluate the GCA by measuring item difficulty, item
discrimination, and reliability
Genetics Concept Assessment
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
GCA, we had no influence on the design or teaching of the two
other courses. We describe the analysis of our results below.
Student Interviews
We interviewed 33 volunteers from three different courses at CU,
taking care to obtain a diverse group of students. Twenty-one
students had completed the majors genetics course within the past
year and had earned grades ranging from A to D (9 “A’s,” 8 “B’s,”
and 4 “C’s” or below). We also interviewed two students who had
taken the CU nonmajors genetics course (which addresses all of the
learning goals in Table 2 except goal 6 and goal 8) and 10 students
who had completed one introductory biology course in the Ecology
and Evolutionary Biology Department (this course includes a brief
section on Mendelian inheritance and population genetics, but it
does not explicitly cover any other concepts addressed in the GCA).
In total, we interviewed 11 males and 22 females.
We conducted one-on-one interviews with these students, asking
them to think aloud as they worked through the questions. In the
first five interviews, we gave questions without correct answers or
distracters and asked students to provide answers in their own
words. In the subsequent interviews, students selected a multiplechoice answer to each question and then explained to the interviewer why they thought their choice was correct and the other
answers incorrect. All the authors reviewed the interview transcripts and together revised the GCA to include student-generated
correct and incorrect answers in simple language with minimal
At least 10 students were interviewed on the final versions of all
25 GCA questions. For each question, at least five students chose the
right answer using correct reasoning. However, for 11 questions,
some students chose the right answer for incomplete or incorrect
reasons. For these 11 questions, additional students were interviewed, resulting in an average total of 26 student interviews per
question. For each question on the final version of the GCA, at least
86% of these students who chose the right answer did so using
correct reasoning.
Of the 78 total distracters on the GCA, 43 were chosen by at least
15% of the students on the pretest. We obtained an average of five
student interview explanations for each of the 43 distracters, with
the exception of choice a on question 14 (see Supplemental Material 1,
example B), which no student chose. We used the multiple reasons for
incorrect choices to identify the commonly held misconceptions that
lead students to select particular distracters.
During this process, we discovered that interviewing students at
different achievement levels was essential for assessment development. In general, students who earned “A’s” in a genetics course
were able to select the correct answers. More importantly, their
explanations of why answers were correct helped us determine
whether students were picking the correct answers for the right
reasons. Students who earned “B’s” and “C’s” sometimes revealed
persistent misconceptions, and their responses helped us write better distracters for multiple-choice questions. Finally, students who
received “D’s” often based their answer choices on noncontent clues
to the correct answer. For example, one such student chose the
correct answer to a question by eliminating other choices that included the words “only” or “never.” When students selected the
correct answer to a question for a nonscientific reason, we revised
the question so the answer could not easily be guessed using such
strategies.
Faculty Reviews
To determine whether other faculty who teach genetics would see
the GCA as valuable for assessing their students’ conceptual understanding of genetics, we presented question ideas and examples to
faculty groups at CU. We also asked 10 Ph.D. geneticists (experts) at
other institutions to take the GCA online, respond to three queries
about each question, and offer suggestions for improvement. A
summary of their responses is presented in Table 3. The expert
suggestions were primarily to reword a few of the questions to
increase precision and eliminate possible ambiguities. Although
student interview data indicated no difficulties in interpreting the
questions that elicited expert comments, we will incorporate some
of these suggestions into future updated versions of the GCA to
maximize its perceived usefulness to faculty.
Large-scale Administration and Analysis
To validate our assessment for use in a variety of instructional
situations, increase our student sample size, and decrease any possible effect of having developers of the GCA involved in teaching
the assessed students, we arranged to have the GCA given to
students in five genetics courses at three different institutions during the 2007–2008 academic year. In the MCDB Department at CU,
we administered the GCA in both nonmajors and majors genetics
courses. The fall semester nonmajors human genetics course (n  61
students) has no prerequisites and is taken primarily by nonscience
majors. For the majors genetics course, which is taught by different
instructors in the fall (n  107) and spring (n  321) semesters, the
prerequisite is a one-semester course, Introduction to Molecular and
Cellular Biology, which has no overlapping learning goals with
Genetics except basic understanding of the Central Dogma (DNA 3
RNA 3 protein). Genetics is required of all MCDB majors and is
also taken by majors in Integrative Physiology and Psychology, as
well as by premedical students in various other majors. The GCA
also was given in two majors genetics courses at other institutions:
a small liberal arts college (n  30 students) and a large private
research university (n  88 students) during the fall 2007 semester.
Students at these two institutions typically take genetics as sophomores, and at both institutions, the prerequisite is a two-semester
introductory course that spans molecular to ecosystem biology.
Both these introductory courses include units on the Central Dogma
and basic Mendelian Genetics.
In all five courses, students took the GCA pretest as a 30-min
survey on paper during the first day of class. Course credit was
awarded for taking the pretest, but it was not graded. At the end of
the course, students were given the identically worded posttest,
imbedded as a small proportion of the final exam (the first 25
questions). These questions were graded along with the rest of the
exam; students were not aware in advance about inclusion of the
GCA questions.
In total, 607 students took both the pre- and the posttest. The
actual number of students in each course was higher than reported
here, but only students who took both pre- and posttests were
included in our analysis. The mean pretest scores, posttest scores,
and normalized learning gains ([100  (post  pre)/(100  pre)];
Hake, 1998) were calculated for all five courses. In addition, we
evaluated how well pretest, posttest, and normalized learning gain
scores correlated with average exam scores in the spring 2008 CU
majors course, a large course (n  321) that included several elements
not typically found in a traditional lecture course (e.g., an average of
Table 3. Summary of expert responses to three queries about the 25
GCA questions
Subject of query
Agreement of
90%, 80%, 70%
The question tests achievement of the
specified learning goal
The information given in this question is
scientifically accurate
The question is written clearly and precisely
M. K. Smith et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
five clicker questions per class with peer discussion, weekly peer-led
study groups that encouraged student-student interaction, and a “help
room” staffed by course instructors and teaching assistants [TAs] for
30 h/wk to facilitate problem solving). Because the five courses in
which the GCA was administered involved multiple uncontrolled
variables (e.g., different institutions, student populations, instructors,
and teaching approaches), we did not attempt to compare students’
overall course performances, and almost all our analyses are based on
pooled data.
Statistical Characterization of Assessment
Assessment instruments are commonly evaluated by statistical tests
for several attributes, including item difficulty, item discrimination,
and reliability . The item
difficulty index (P) for a question is calculated as the total number
of correct responses (N1) divided by the total number of responses
(N); thus, P is the fraction of correct answers. The item discrimination index (D) measures how well each question distinguishes between students whose total pre- or posttest scores identify them as
generally strong or weak. To calculate D for individual questions on
either the pre- or the posttest, we divided the 607 students into top,
middle, and bottom groups based on their total scores for that test
 and used the following formula: D  (NH 
NL)/(N/3), where NH is number of correct responses by the top 33%
of students, NL is number of correct responses in the bottom 33%,
and N is total number of student responses .
To evaluate reliability, we compared pretest responses from the
CU fall 2007 (n  107) and spring 2008 (n  321) MCDB majors
courses. Assuming that there was little variation in these two large
student populations within the same school year, we chose to use
the test-retest method to calculate an r value called the coefficient of
stability . We used the test-retest method
rather than an internal measure of reliability such as Cronbach’s ,
which does not measure the stability of test scores over time
 . To determine whether the spread of
incorrect and correct answer choices was similar in the two semesters, we also compared the percentages of students who answered
each choice for every question using chi-square analysis.
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Protocols
We received approval for administration of pre- and posttests in CU
classes (exempt status, protocol 0108.9) and for student interviews
(expedited status, protocol 0603.08) from the CU IRB. Data obtained
from other institutions contained no student identifiers.
The mean pretest scores, posttest scores, and normalized
learning gains for the 607 students from five institutions are
listed in Table 4. Ninety-six percent of the students had
positive normalized learning gains. At CU, the pre- and
posttests also were taken by the graduate TAs and a group
of undergraduates who served in the course as learning
assistants (LAs), helping to staff the genetics “help room”
and leading study groups. On both the pre- and posttests the
TAs and LAs, all of whom had had previous genetics course
work, performed significantly better (analysis of variance
[ANOVA], Tukey’s post hoc test, p  0.05) than students in
the courses. Genetics experts from a variety of institutions
(n  10) had a mean score that was significantly higher than
student pre- and posttest mean scores and TA/LA pretest
mean scores (ANOVA, Tukey post hoc test, p  0.05) but not
significantly higher than the TA/LA posttest mean score
(Table 4).
Correlation of pretest score versus average exam score (A), posttest score versus average exam score (B), and learning gain versus
average exam score (C). The equation of the trend line and R2 value are displayed on each graph.
Table 4. Mean pretest, posttest, and learning gain scores for students, TAs/LAs, and genetics experts
Mean pretest ( SE), %
Mean posttest ( SE), %
Mean learning gain ( SE), %
40.5 ( 0.6)
74.0 ( 0.7)
56.7 ( 1.0)
76.9 ( 3.7)
87.8 ( 3.8)
40.0 ( 12.1)
Genetics experts
93.0 ( 5.2)
a Number of people who took the GCA. Students were enrolled in either majors or nonmajors genetics courses at three different institutions.
TAs and LAs were graduate and undergraduate students, respectively, at CU. Genetics experts from several institutions (see text) who took
the GCA are included for comparison.
b NA, not applicable.
Genetics Concept Assessment
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
Next, we determined how well pretest, posttest, and
learning gain scores correlated with course exam scores for
the spring 2008 CU majors course. Because the posttest
questions were included on the final exam, we recalculated
the average exam score for each student so that it no longer
included their score on the 25 GCA questions. Correlations
with average exam scores were higher for posttest scores
and learning gains than for pretest scores (Figure 1).
Descriptive Statistics
As described above, the item difficulty index (P) for a question is equal to the fraction of students who answered it
correctly; that is, P values are high for easy questions and
low for difficult questions. Figure 2 shows the pre- and
posttest P values for each question on the GCA.
The item D measures how well each question distinguishes “strong” (top 33% of the total scores on the GCA)
from “weak” (bottom 33%) students. The higher the D value,
the better the question discriminates between strong and
weak students . Figure 3 shows the D values
calculated for each question on both the pretest and the
Reliability
We measured reliability of the GCA by comparing pretest
scores from the CU fall 2007 and spring 2008 majors genetics
courses. Students in both courses must take the same prerequisite one-semester introductory course, which is typically their only previous college biology experience. Using
the test-retest method as described above, we calculated the
mean coefficient of stability for the pretest in these two
semesters to be 0.93. The closer the coefficient of stability is
to 1, the greater the reliability of the assessment. Although
there is no minimum standard for coefficient of stability
measurements, values of 0.80–0.90 were reported for commercially available tests .
We also compared the range of all correct and incorrect
answer choices for the fall 2007 and spring 2008 pretests by
using chi-square analysis. This analysis helped us to determine how much students from these two semesters differed
in their preferences for particular distracters. Only four
questions: 8 (p  0.029), 10 (p  0.004), 22 (p  0.039), and 24
(p  0.001) showed a significantly (p  0.05) different spread
of answers in the fall and spring pretests.
DISCUSSION
Summary of Results
We developed an assessment instrument in simple language, named the GCA, for gauging student understanding
of basic concepts in genetics at the undergraduate level. We
validated the GCA through student interviews and expert
responses, and we showed that it is reliable when administered in two different courses at the same level (coefficient of
stability 0.93). Chi-square analysis revealed that only four
questions exhibited a significantly different (p  0.05) spread
of distracter choices on pretests in the fall 2007 and spring
2008 semesters for the CU majors genetics course, and interviews indicated that interpretation of these distracters was
consistent. The exam scores that students earned in the CU
spring 2008 majors genetics course were not well correlated
to GCA pretest scores, but were well correlated to both
posttest scores and normalized learning gains (Figure 1). We
saw similar trends in the other courses that administered the
GCA (data not shown). The stronger correlation of posttest
scores and normalized learning gains with exam scores suggests that this instrument measures knowledge that is
gained during a genetics course and valued by course instructors.
Uses for the GCA
When administered as a pre- and posttest to measure normalized learning gains , the GCA can judge
student learning in a variety of ways. Like the Force
Concept Inventory in physics and other
similar assessments (see Introduction), the GCA can be
P values for each question on the GCA pretest and posttest. P values represent percentages of correct answers; therefore, lower
values indicate more difficult questions. Results are based on combined responses from 607 students in five different genetics courses.
Different colored bars show the increase in correct answer percentages between pretest and posttest for each question, indicating the extent
of student learning on the corresponding concepts. Questions are grouped according to learning goal (see Table 2).
M. K. Smith et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
used to compare student learning outcomes achieved with
different modes of instruction (e.g., traditional lecture,
lecture with in-class questions and peer discussion, workshop classes built around group problem solving). The
mean normalized learning gain for all students provides
an overall measure of course effectiveness , whereas the distribution of learning gains achieved
by individual students gives a more nuanced picture of
instructional impact on the student population .
finer-grained
evaluation
instructional
approaches within a course, the GCA can test the achievement of specific learning goals, assuming that particular
questions are assessing achievement of specific goals (Table 2). For example, the gain in understanding of different
concepts is evident from the distribution of P values for
each question on the assessment (Figure 2), where a
higher P value corresponds to a higher percentage of
students answering that question correctly. Questions
with low P values on the pretest and high P values on the
posttest represent concepts for which student understanding improved during the course.
The D values (Figure 3) also can be used to evaluate
student learning for different concepts. For example, a
high positive D value for a question on the pretest indicates that strong incoming students, as judged by their
total assessment score on the pretest, are more likely to
understand the corresponding concept than are weak students. If a question still has a high positive D value on the
posttest, we can conclude that in spite of instruction, only
the stronger students understand the corresponding concept. For example, questions 3 and 12, which we classified
under learning goal 6 (“Describe the processes that can
affect the frequency of phenotypes in a population over
time”), consistently showed high positive D values on
both the pre- and posttests (Figure 3). These results suggest that the mechanism by which new alleles arise in a
population remains a difficult concept for all but the
stronger students.
The extensive student interviews we conducted provided
us further insight into some commonly held student misconceptions that are addressed in questions 3 and 12. For
question 3, a student who earned a grade of “B” in majors
genetics said that the origin of mutations is not random
because “that is too easy, it is just like saying luck is the right
answer.” When asked about the appearance of a new allele
in an isolated population, another student who earned a
grade of “A” in majors genetics said that the environment
rather than mutations is probably responsible because “It
seems more like an outside factor rather than an inside
factor would be important” and “it is so rare to have a
mutation, so that is not likely to do anything.” High posttest
D values for questions 3 and 12 on the GCA and comments
during student interviews suggest that many students retain
misconceptions about core evolution concepts even after
taking a genetics course. In future genetics courses at CU, we
will try to dispel these misconceptions through additional
instruction coupled with new formative assessments, such
as clicker and homework questions.
In contrast to the above-mentioned example, the GCA also
can identify concepts on which the majority of students
gained understanding. Questions addressing such concepts
showed P values that were low on the pretest and high on
the posttest. In addition, such questions had D values that
were high on the pretest but low on the posttest, indicating
that although primarily only the stronger students answered
these questions correctly on the pretest, both strong and
weak students answered them correctly at the end of the
course. Questions 8 and 17, which address learning goal 3
(“Describe the mechanisms by which an organism’s genome
D values for questions on the GCA pretest and posttest. Results were calculated (see Methods) from the same data set as in
Figure 2. Questions that have higher D values more effectively discriminate between students whose overall test scores identify them
as strong or weak students . Questions that show high D values on the pretest (only strong students answered them
correctly) and low D values on the posttest (most students answered correctly) correspond to concepts on which most students gained
understanding during the course. Questions with high D values on both the pre- and posttests correspond to concepts that primarily
only the stronger students understood at the end of the course. Questions are grouped according to learning goal (see Table 2).
Genetics Concept Assessment
Vol. 7, Winter 2008
is passed on to the next generation”) show these characteristics (Figures 2 and 3).
Interviews on these questions (8 and 17) revealed that
even students who did not perform well overall in their
genetics course (awarded a grade of “C” or below) were able
to provide correct answers and adequate explanations on
this topic. For example, a “C” student who correctly answered question 8, which asks about whether a somatic skin
cell mutation can be inherited (see Supplemental Material 1),
said “Since the mutation is in a single skin cell, it will not
occur in his gametes and he will not pass it on to the next
generation.” Question 17 asks students to consider a diploid
germ cell with two pairs of chromosomes whose members
carry different alleles (Pp on chromosome pair 1 and Qq on
chromosome pair 2) and predict all the possible allele combinations in sperm produced from this cell. A student who
received a grade of “D” in the course selected the correct
answer in the interview and stated that after normal meiosis
“you must have one copy of each chromosome.” High
pretest and low posttest item D values along with high
posttest P values, similar to those observed for questions
8 and 17, can inform instructors that their course was
successful in helping both strong and weak students learn
the corresponding concepts.
A comparison of P and D values also can suggest that
some ways of teaching a concept are more effective than
others. For example, for a question on mitochondrial inheritance (question 13), students from two courses (designated courses 1 and 2) had statistically equivalent mean
pretest P values (ANOVA, Tukey post hoc test, p  0.05)
and similar mean pretest D values (Figure 4). Because D
values have no sampling distribution , it is not possible to determine whether their
differences between courses 1 and 2 are significant. However, on the posttest, course 1 had a significantly higher
mean P value (ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test p  0.05)
and a lower mean D value than course 2, indicating that a
higher fraction of students in course 1 understood the
concept at the end of the course. When we compared how
this topic was taught and assessed in the two courses
(based on classroom observations), we found a clear difference. Instructor 1 discussed mitochondrial inheritance
in lecture, formatively assessed understanding in class
using a clicker question with peer instruction , and asked about this concept on homework problems as well as on two different exams. Instructor 2 lectured on mitochondrial inheritance but only asked students about this concept on exams. These differences and
the resulting performance on this question indicate that
the GCA can be useful in evaluating instructional approaches and materials.
Statistical Criteria for Utility
Some of the statistical criteria used by psychometricians
to gauge the usefulness of standardized tests must be
viewed differently for assessments such as the GCA and
other concept inventories. For standardized assessments
such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), it is considered desirable for D values to be 0.3 for all questions
 . Another commonly calculated statistical
parameter, the point biserial coefficient (rpbs), also indicates how well performance on each question correlates
with performance on the test as a whole, and values 0.2
for all questions are considered desirable .
However, these guidelines are useful only for design of
assessments such as the SAT, where all questions are
testing essentially the same set of skills at one point in
time. In contrast, the questions on the GCA are specifically intended to assess understanding of many different
concepts, both before and after instruction, so that instructors can evaluate success in achieving a variety of different learning goals. For example, GCA questions 8 and 17
mentioned above had D values above the cut-off value of
0.3 for the pretest but below this value for the posttest,
which would disqualify them from inclusion on the assessment if we were to apply accepted psychometric standards. However, as demonstrated above, it is precisely
this difference between D values on the pre- and posttests
that can provide useful information about student learning of the corresponding concepts as well as identifying
areas where improved instruction may be needed. Because the standard interpretation of point biserial coefficient cut-offs is similarly inapplicable to assessments such
as the GCA, we have not reported rpbs values for our
questions.
Conclusion, Future Directions, and Accessibility of
The GCA is a validated, reliable conceptual assessment instrument that can be used by genetics instructors to measure
Item difficulty (A) and item discrimination (B) index
values for question 13 in two majors genetics courses taught by
different instructors. Students in courses 1 and 2 showed similar P
and D index values on the pretest, but on the posttest, students in
course 1 had a significantly (p  0.05) higher P value and a lower D
value compared with students in course 2. These results suggest
that the instruction in course 1 was more effective in promoting
student learning gains for the concept addressed in this question
(see legends to Figures 2 and 3).
M. K. Smith et al.
CBE—Life Sciences Education
students’ learning gains as well as to identify strengths and
weaknesses in teaching approaches for specific concepts.
Due to the concern that circulation of the GCA among
students might decrease its value to instructors, we have not
published the full set of questions in this article. However,
we hope that appropriate use of the GCA will become
widespread, and we will supply the complete set of questions, with answers, on request. Interested instructors
should contact M.K.S.
We welcome comments and suggestions from GCA users,
and we will continue to revise the GCA as we obtain feedback. We will review all suggestions and validate any significant revisions by student interviews before they are incorporated into a new version of the GCA. At least eight
institutions have agreed to test updated versions of the GCA
during the 2008–2009 academic year. Analysis of the combined data from these and additional future tests will be
posted online at www.colorado.edu/sei/departments/mcdb_
assessment.htm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Carl Wieman, Kathy Perkins, and Wendy Adams of the
SEI for intellectual support throughout this project, guidance in
statistical analysis of our results, and helpful comments on the
manuscript. Sylvia Fromherz and Mark Winey provided ideas for
the original questions on the pilot version of the assessment. Special
thanks to Christy Fillman, Sylvia Fromherz, Ken Krauter, Robyn
Puffenbarger, Ronda Rolfes, Tin Tin Su, and Mark Winey for administering the assessment in courses and sharing data. We also
thank our GCA expert reviewers for valuable comments on the
assessment questions. Finally, we are grateful to the Science Education Initiative of CU for full support of M.K.S. and partial support
of J.K.K. during this project.