Stakeholders in Explainable AI
Alun Preece and Dan Harborne
Crime and Security Research Institute
Cardiff University, UK
Email: {PreeceAD|HarborneD}@cardiff.ac.uk
Dave Braines and Richard Tomsett
IBM Research
Hursley, Hampshire, UK
Email: {dave braines|rtomsett}@uk.ibm.com
Supriyo Chakraborty
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, New York, USA
Email: 
There is general consensus that it is important for artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning systems to be explainable and/or interpretable. However, there is no general
consensus over what is meant by ‘explainable’ and ‘interpretable’. In this paper, we argue that this lack of consensus is due to there being several distinct stakeholder communities. We note that, while the concerns of the individual
communities are broadly compatible, they are not identical,
which gives rise to different intents and requirements for explainability/interpretability. We use the software engineering
distinction between validation and veriﬁcation, and the epistemological distinctions between knowns/unknowns, to tease
apart the concerns of the stakeholder communities and highlight the areas where their foci overlap or diverge. It is not
the purpose of the authors of this paper to ‘take sides’ — we
count ourselves as members, to varying degrees, of multiple
communities — but rather to help disambiguate what stakeholders mean when they ask ‘Why?’ of an AI.
Introduction
Explainability in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is not a new
problem, nor was it ever considered a solved problem. The
issue ﬁrst came to prominence during the ‘knowledge engineering era’ of the late 1970s and early 1980s, when the
focus was on building expert systems to emulate human reasoning in specialist high-value domains such as medicine,
engineering and geology . It
was soon realised that explanations were necessary for two
distinct reasons: system development, particularly testing,
and engendering end-user trust . Because the
systems were based on symbolic knowledge representations,
This research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the UK Ministry of Defence under Agreement Number
W911NF-16-3-0001. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied,
of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government, the
UK Ministry of Defence or the UK Government. The U.S. and UK
Governments are authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
it was relatively straightforward to generate symbolic traces
of their execution. However, these traces were often complex
and hard for developers to interpret, while also being largely
unintelligible to end-users because the reasoning mechanisms of the system were unrecognisable to human subjectmatter experts. The latter problem led to approaches aimed
at re-engineering knowledge bases to make the elements of
the machine reasoning more recognisable, and to make the
generated explanations more trustworthy . These latter, ‘stronger’ approaches to explainable AI were arrived at only when the knowledge engineering boom was effectively over, so they gained little
traction at the time.
The last decade has seen a number of signiﬁcant breakthroughs in machine learning via deep neural network approaches that has reinvigorated the AI ﬁeld . In this generation of AI development,
the issue of explainability has again come into focus, though
the term interpretability is nowadays more commonly used,
indicating an emphasis on humans being able to interpret
machine-learned models. As in the 1970s and 1980s, there
are differing motives between system developers and users
in seeking explanations from an AI system: the former want
to verify how the system is working (correctly or otherwise)
while the latter want assurance that the outputs of the system can be trusted . Unlike classical expert systems, deep neural network models
are not symbolic so there is no prospect of generating intelligible ‘reasoning traces’ at the level of activation patterns of artiﬁcial neurons. Consequently, a distinction has
been made between interpretability approaches that emphasise transparency and those that are post-hoc .
The former are explanations expressed in terms of the inner
workings of a model while the latter are explanations derived
‘after the fact’ from the workings of the model, such as an
explanation in terms of similar ‘known’ examples from the
training data.
However, terminology in relation to explainability in
modern AI is far from settled. A recent UK Government
report on the state of AI received substantial expert evidence and noted, ‘The terminology used by our witnesses
 
varied widely. Many used the term transparency, while others used interpretability or ‘explainability’, sometimes interchangeably. For simplicity, we will use ‘intelligibility’
to refer to the broader issue’ . Others have used the term legibility while recent thinking once again emphasises ‘strong’ notions of explainability in causal terms . Terminology is further complicated
by concerns over the accountability 
and fairness of modern AI systems which,
while overlapping the issue of end-user trust, extend into
ethical and legal domains. These various perspectives and
distinct groups of stakeholders have led to the rapid creation of a large and growing body of research, development, and commentary. Recent work seeks to place the ﬁeld
on a more rigorous scientiﬁc and engineering basis by, for
example, examining axiomatic approaches to model interpretability , exploring more sophisticated methods for revealing
the inner workings of deep networks , and
arguing for increased use of theoretical veriﬁcation techniques .
In summary, today there is a large community focused
on the problem of explainable AI, with some seeking to
advance the state of the art, others seeking to assess, critique, or control the technology, and still others seeking to
exploit and/or use AI in a wide variety of applications. In
our own recent work, we examined explainability and interpretability from the perspective of explanation recipients,
of six kinds : system creators, system
operators, executors making a decision on the basis of system outputs, decision subjects affected by an executor’s decision, data subjects whose personal data is used to train a
system, and system examiners, e.g., auditors or ombudsmen.
We found this Interpretable to whom? framework useful in
thinking about what constitutes an acceptable explanation
or interpretation for each type of recipient. In this paper,
we take a slightly different tack, examining the stakeholder
communities around explainable AI, and arguing that there
are useful distinctions to be made between stakeholders’
motivations, which lead to further reﬁnement of the classical
AI distinction between developers and end-users.
Four Stakeholder Communities
Developers:
people concerned with building AI applications. Many members of this community are in industry
— large corporates and small/medium enterprises — or the
public sector, though some are academics or researchers
creating systems for a variety of reasons including to assist them with their work. This community uses both terms
‘explainability’ and ‘interpretability’. Their primary motive
for seeking explainability/interpretability is quality assurance, i.e., to aid system testing, debugging, and evaluation,
and to improve the robustness of their applications. They
may use open source libraries created for generating explanations; some well-known and widely-used examples include LIME , deep Taylor decomposition , inﬂuence functions and Shapley Additive Explanations . Members of the developer community may have created their own explanationgenerating code, motivated by an aim to aid practical system development rather than to advance AI theory. In terms
of our Interpretable to whom? framework, members of the
developer community are system creators.
Theorists:
people concerned with understanding and advancing AI theory, particularly around deep neural networks. Members of this community tend to be in academic
or industrial research units. Many are also active practitioners, though the theorist community is distinguished from
developers by their chief motivation being to advance the
state of the art in AI rather than deliver practical applications. Members of the theorist community tend to use the
term ‘interpretability’ rather than ‘explainability’. The motive to better understand fundamental properties of deep neural networks has led to some interpretability research being labelled ‘artiﬁcial neuroscience’ . A wellknown early piece of work identiﬁed properties of activation
patterns, and also how deep neural networks are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks . Recent work in
this milieu has looked at feature visualisation to better interpret properties of hidden layers in deep networks . It has also been suggested that such interpretations
may provide new kinds of cognitive assistance to human understanding of complex problem spaces . Membership of this community of course overlaps
with the developer community. For example, in the case of
an industry researcher who carries out theoretical work on
deep neural network technology (theorist) while also applying the technology to build systems (developer). In our ‘Interpretable to whom?’ framework, members of the theorist
community are considered system creators.
Ethicists:
people concerned with fairness, accountability
and transparency1 of AI systems, including policy-makers,
commentators, and critics. While this community includes
many computer scientists and engineers, it is widely interdisciplinary, including social scientists, lawyers, journalists,
economists, and politicians. As well as using ‘explainability’
and ‘interpretability’, members of this community use ‘intelligibility’ and ‘legibility’ as noted in the introduction. A
subset of this community will also be members of the developer and/or theorist communities2 but their motives in seeking explanations are different: for the ethicist community,
explanations need to go beyond technical software quality
to provide assurances of fairness, unbiased behaviour, and
intelligible transparency for purposes including accountability and auditability — including legal compliance in cases
such as the European Union’s GDPR legislation . Our Interpretable to whom? framework
considers members of ethicist community to be dispersed
across all six roles, though the distinct explanation-seeking
1‘Transparency’ in the common usage of the term rather than
the speciﬁc usage by and others.
2Indeed, professional bodies including ACM, BCS and IEEE all
place signiﬁcant emphasis on recognising ethical, legal and societal
issues in software development.
motive of the ethicist community aligns most closely with
system examiners, creators, data subjects and decision subjects.
people who use AI systems. The ﬁrst three communities comprise the vast majority of people who contribute to
the growing literature on AI explainability/interpretability,
whereas our fourth generally does not. Members of the
user community need explanations to help them decide
whether/how to act given the outputs of the system, and/or
to help justify those actions. This community includes both
‘hands on’ end-users but also everyone involved in processes
that are impacted by an AI system. Consider an insurance
company that uses an AI tool to help decide whether and at
what cost to sell policies to clients. The end-users of the tool,
the director of the company, and the clients are all members
of the user community. Again, members of the user community may also be in other stakeholder communities, sometimes in relation to the same AI system; for example, an
academic criminologist who has learned how to apply AI
technology to create a predictive analytics tool (developer)
to assist them in their research (user), while being aware of
societal impacts of their work (ethicist). The Interpretable
to whom? framework places system operators and decision
executors in the user community, along with decision subjects.3
Engineering and Epistemological Perspectives
Explanation is closely linked to evaluation of AI systems.
As noted in the introduction, early AI explanation efforts
aimed to help system developers diagnose incorrect reasoning paths. Modern transparent interpretation methods are
akin to such ‘traces’, while post-hoc explanation techniques
can be regarded as ‘diagnostic messages’. Moreover, explanations speak to issues of user trust and system impact, to
the user and ethicist communities. Colloquially, in software
engineering, veriﬁcation is about ‘building the system right’
whereas validation is about ‘building the right system’. In
terms of explanation, veriﬁcation is mainly associated with
transparent techniques; ‘glass box’ approaches are essential
because it matters greatly how the system is built. Validation
is more concerned with what the system does (and does not
do) and so post-hoc techniques are often useful here.
In line with this thinking, and at risk of overgeneralising, we assert that the developer and theorist communities
tend to focus more on veriﬁcation: the former because they
want a system that is ‘built right’, and the latter because they
are interested understanding how the various kinds of deep
neural networks work, and what are their theoretical limits.
We suggest that the user and ethicist communities are more
focused on validation, being more concerned with what an
AI system does than about how it is built. This means that
the developer and theorist communities tend to focus on
transparency-based explanation techniques, while user and
ethicist communities value post-hoc techniques.
3Arguably, decision subjects will be aligned with the user or
ethicist communities, depending on how ‘empowered’ they perceive themselves to be in relation to the effects of the system outputs.
From an epistemological perspective, we can consider the
familiar framing in terms of knowns and unknowns:
Known knowns: for an AI system based on machine
learning, these constitute the set of available training and test
data. The ability of the system to deal with known knowns
is veriﬁed by standard testing approaches (e.g., n-fold crossvalidation) and reported in terms of accuracy measures.
Within the bounds of the known knowns, transparencybased explanation techniques such as deep Taylor decomposition or feature visualisation can be used to ‘trace’ the relationships between
features (in input and hidden layers) and outputs. All four
stakeholder communities have a clear interest in understanding the space of known knowns, though we would argue that
it tends to be the developer constituency that are most focused on this space: maximising system performance within
the space, deﬁning the bounds of the space, and widening
those bounds as much as is feasible.
Known unknowns: these constitute the space of queries,
predictions, or behaviours that the AI system is intended to
perform. The accuracy measures produced in system testing
(veriﬁcation) provide an estimate of the ability of the system
to deal well with the space of known unknowns. The value
of a system to members of the user community is in terms
of this ability (otherwise the system is nothing more than
a retrieval tool for known knowns). Feedback processes are
needed because system system outputs may prove to be invalid at run-time (e.g., the system recommends an action that
turns out to be inappropriate) leading to the generation of additional data for the training (known knowns) space. Members of the theorist community are interested in better understanding how AI systems process known unknowns , and creating improved architectures for doing so.
Unknown knowns: from the perspective of the AI system, these are things that are outside its scope, but known
more widely. Some biases of concern to the ethicist constituency fall into this category: a narrowness or skew in the
training data results in a model that is ‘blind’ to particular
prejudices . Validation is
key to revealing such unknown knowns.
Unknown unknowns: these have recently been highlighted as a key concern in AI system robustness , with a variety of methods being proposed to deal with
them, including employing a portfolio of models to mitigate
against weaknesses in individual models, and creating AI
systems that build causal models of the world and/or or are aware of their own uncertainty . Clearly, all four communities have reason to
be concerned with unknown unknowns: developers in terms
of system robustness, theorists in terms of seeking stronger
theories and architectures, ethicists in terms of ethical and
legal implications of AI system failings, and users in terms
of impacts on themselves and their livelihoods.
In software engineering, formal veriﬁcation techniques
have been used to mathematically deﬁne the space of
knowns — in terms of a system speciﬁcation — leaving
only the unknown unknowns fully excluded from that space.
The theorist community is beginning to think along these
Figure 1: Example saliency map for trafﬁc congestion: the
red regions of the input image are most signiﬁcant in classifying the image as congested
lines , though
how to formally specify the intended behaviour of a deep
neural network-based AI system remains an open question.
This difﬁculty has been highlighted in recent years by research into ‘adversarial examples’, which are designed to
fool machine learning models by minimally perturbing input
data to cause incorrect classiﬁcations . Such examples
take advantage of the difﬁculty in learning correct classiﬁcation decision boundaries from limited, high-dimensional
data. While several methods to mitigate against such attacks
have been proposed , none amounts to a formal veriﬁcation of the
model’s behaviour on adversarial inputs ). Building uncertainty awareness into
models so that they can recognise and explicitly deal with
such unknown unknowns may be a reliable way of improving system robustness , though with
unkown implications for human interpretability.
Explanation Types and Discussion
Transparency-based explanations:
The deﬁnition of
transparency in appears consistent with the
notion of ‘full technical transparency’ in . Both sources conclude
that achieving full transparency is not realistic for anything
other than small models, e.g., shallow decision trees or rule
bases. A more limited form of transparency is exhibited by
attribution techniques that visualise activations in the input
or hidden layers of a network , feature visualisation ) often as a saliency map showing the features of
the input that had most signiﬁcance in determining the output. While noting that the visualisation element of these approaches is a post-hoc technique , we nevertheless consider these methods transparency-based, to distinguish them from ‘purely post-hoc’ approaches that do not
derive at all from inner states of the model.
Figure 1 shows an example saliency map for a trafﬁc congestion monitoring system, from 4.
4The example map was generated using the LIME software which does not conform
Figure 2: Example explanation-by-example for a trafﬁc congestion classiﬁcation: the input image is in the middle; the
left and right images are training examples with congestional classiﬁcation probabilities slightly lower and higher,
respectively, than the input
From a system veriﬁcation perspective, such explanations
would seem of immediate value to the developer and theorist communities, though with the caveat that many attribution methods are unstable and/or unreliable . In addition to these technical concerns, attribution
visualisations can be hard to interpret by members of the
user and ethicist community where the explanation does not
clearly highlight meaningful features of the input. Therefore,
such explanations are in danger of making members of these
communities less inclined to trust the system because they
appear to reveal a system that operates in an unintelligible,
unstable, ‘inscrutable’ or ‘alien’ manner. Even when an explanation seems ‘convincing’ because it highlights meaningful and plausible features, there is a danger of conﬁrmation
bias in the receiver unless counterfactual cases are also included. Providing detailed transparency-based explanations
may also overwhelm the recipient — more information is
not necessarily better for user performance , or in the form of a decision tree . Such techniques provide explanations
that appear similar to those generated by transparency-based
techniques and, if offered to users or ethicists, it is important to communicate clearly that they are actually post-hoc
approximations. Explanations in terms of examples — see
Figute 2 — are a traditional approach favoured by subjectmatter experts and therefore especially appropriate for the user and ethicist communities. Approaches
here include identifying instances from the training set most
signiﬁcant to a particular output and
employing case-based reasoning techniques to retrieve similar training examples . Such approaches
have an advantage that counterfactual examples can also be
provided. Another common post-hoc technique targeted towards users is to generate text explanations; the approach
in uses background domain knowledge to train the system to generate explanations that emto our deﬁnition as being transparency-based because it generates
a local approximation of the learned model; it is included here only
as an example of what a saliency map looks like in general.
phasise semantically-signiﬁcant features of the input.
Layered explanations:
From the above discussion, it may
seem that the sensible approach is to offer different explanations tailored to the different stakeholders, but can we envisage instead a composite explanation object that packs together all the information needed to satisfy multiple stakeholders, and can be unpacked (e.g., by accessor methods)
per a recipient’s particular requirements. Moreover, we can
view such an object being layered as follows:
Layer 1 — traceability: transparency-based bindings to internal states of the model so the explanation isn’t entirely a
post-hoc rationalisation and shows that the system ‘did the
thing right’ [main stakeholders: developers and theorists];
Layer 2 — justiﬁcation: post-hoc representations (potentially of multiple modalities) linked to layer 1, offering semantic relationships between input and output features to
show that the system ‘did the right thing’ [main stakeholders: developers and users];
Layer 3 — assurance: post-hoc representations (again, potentially of multiple modalities) linked to layer 2, with explicit reference to policy/ontology elements required to give
recipients conﬁdence that the system ‘does the right thing’
(in more global terms than Layer 2) [main stakeholders:
users and ethicists].
Example — wildlife monitoring system: Layer 1 (traceability): saliency map visualisation of input layer features
for classiﬁcation ‘gorilla’; Layer 2 (justiﬁcation): ‘right for
the right reasons’ semantic annotation of salient gorilla features; Layer 3 (assurance): counterfactual examples showing
that images of humans are not miss-classiﬁed as ‘gorilla’.
Conclusion
In this paper we have attempted to ‘tease apart’ some of the
issues in explainable AI by focusing on the various stakeholder communities and arguing that their motives and requirements for explainable AI are not the same. We related notions of transparent and post-hoc explanations to
software veriﬁcation and validation, and consideration of
knowns/unknowns. We suggested that a ‘layered’ approach
to explanations that incorporates transparency with local and
global post-hoc representations may serve the needs of multiple stakeholders.
On a ﬁnal note, the most inﬂuential of our four stakeholder communities is the users — the one that’s barely represented in the literature — because, as in the 1980s, failure
to satisfy users of AI technology in the long run will be the
most likely cause of another ‘AI Winter’. Unfulﬁlled expectations and/or a smaller-than-hoped-for market will lead to
investment drying up.