Ask Your Neurons: A Neural-based Approach to
Answering Questions about Images
Mateusz Malinowski1
Marcus Rohrbach2
Mario Fritz1
1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
2UC Berkeley EECS and ICSI, Berkeley, CA, United States
We address a question answering task on real-world images that is set up as a Visual Turing Test. By combining
latest advances in image representation and natural language processing, we propose Neural-Image-QA, an endto-end formulation to this problem for which all parts are
trained jointly. In contrast to previous efforts, we are facing
a multi-modal problem where the language output (answer)
is conditioned on visual and natural language input (image
and question). Our approach Neural-Image-QA doubles the
performance of the previous best approach on this problem.
We provide additional insights into the problem by analyzing how much information is contained only in the language
part for which we provide a new human baseline. To study
human consensus, which is related to the ambiguities inherent in this challenging task, we propose two novel metrics
and collect additional answers which extends the original
DAQUAR dataset to DAQUAR-Consensus.
1. Introduction
With the advances of natural language processing and
image understanding, more complex and demanding tasks
have become within reach. Our aim is to take advantage
of the most recent developments to push the state-of-theart for answering natural language questions on real-world
images. This task unites inference of question intends and
visual scene understanding with a word sequence prediction
Most recently, architectures based on the idea of layered, end-to-end trainable artiﬁcial neural networks have
improved the state of the art across a wide range of diverse
tasks. Most prominently Convolutional Neural Networks
have raised the bar on image classiﬁcation tasks and
Long Short Term Memory Networks are dominating performance on a range of sequence prediction tasks such as
machine translation .
Very recently these two trends of employing neural architectures have been combined fruitfully with methods that
Figure 1. Our approach Neural-Image-QA to question answering
with a Recurrent Neural Network using Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM). To answer a question about an image, we feed in both,
the image (CNN features) and the question (green boxes) into the
LSTM. After the (variable length) question is encoded, we generate the answers (multiple words, orange boxes). During the answer
generation phase the previously predicted answers are fed into the
LSTM until the ⟨END⟩symbol is predicted.
can generate image and video descriptions . Both
are conditioning on the visual features that stem from deep
learning architectures and employ recurrent neural network
approaches to produce descriptions.
To further push the boundaries and explore the limits
of deep learning architectures, we propose an architecture
for answering questions about images. In contrast to prior
work, this task needs conditioning on language as well
visual input. Both modalities have to be interpreted and
jointly represented as an answer depends on inferred meaning of the question and image content.
While there is a rich body of work on natural language
understanding that has addressed textual question answering tasks based on semantic parsing, symbolic representation and deduction systems, which also has seen applications to question answering on images , there is initial
evidence that deep architectures can indeed achieve a similar goal . This motivates our work to seek end-to-end
architectures that learn to answer questions in a single holistic and monolithic model.
We propose Neural-Image-QA, an approach to question
 
answering with a recurrent neural network. An overview
is given in Figure 1. The image is analyzed via a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and the question together
with the visual representation is fed into a Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) network. The system is trained to produce the correct answer to the question on the image. CNN
and LSTM are trained jointly and end-to-end starting from
words and pixels.
Contributions: We proposes a novel approach based on recurrent neural networks for the challenging task of answering of questions about images. It combines a CNN with a
LSTM into an end-to-end architecture that predict answers
conditioning on a question and an image. Our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms prior work on this task – doubling
the performance. We collect additional data to study human
consensus on this task, propose two new metrics sensitive
to these effects, and provide a new baseline, by asking humans to answer the questions without observing the image.
We demonstrate a variant of our system that also answers
question without accessing any visual information, which
beats the human baseline.
2. Related Work
As our method touches upon different areas in machine
learning, computer vision and natural language processing,
we have organized related work in the following way:
Convolutional Neural Networks for visual recognition.
We are building on the recent success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for visual recognition , that
are directly learnt from the raw image data and pre-trained
on large image corpora. Due to the rapid progress in this
area within the last two years, a rich set of models 
is at our disposal.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) for sequence modeling.
Recurrent Neural Networks allow Neural Networks
to handle sequences of ﬂexible length. A particular variant
called Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) has shown
recent success on natural language tasks such as machine
translation .
Combining RNNs and CNNs for description of visual
The task of describing visual content like still
images as well as videos has been successfully addressed
with a combination of the previous two ideas . This is achieved by using the RNN-type model that
ﬁrst gets to observe the visual content and is trained to afterwards predict a sequence of words that is a description of
the visual content. Our work extends this idea to question
answering, where we formulate a model trained to generate
an answer based on visual as well as natural language input.
Grounding of natural language and visual concepts.
Dealing with natural language input does involve the association of words with meaning. This is often referred to as
grounding problem - in particular if the “meaning” is associated with a sensory input. While such problems have been
historically addressed by symbolic semantic parsing techniques , there is a recent trend of machine learningbased approaches to ﬁnd the associations. Our
approach follows the idea that we do not enforce or evaluate
any particular representation of “meaning” on the language
or image modality. We treat this as latent and leave this to
the joint training approach to establish an appropriate internal representation for the question answering task.
Textual question answering.
Answering on purely textual questions has been studied in the NLP community
 and state of the art techniques typically employ
semantic parsing to arrive at a logical form capturing the
intended meaning and infer relevant answers. Only very
recently, the success of the previously mentioned neural
sequence models as RNNs has carried over to this task
 . More speciﬁcally uses dependency-tree Recursive NN instead of LSTM, and reduce the questionanswering problem to a classiﬁcation task. Moreover, according to their method cannot be easily applied to vision. propose different kind of network - memory networks - and it is unclear how to apply to take advantage
of the visual content. However, neither nor show
an end-to-end, monolithic approaches that produce multiple
words answers for question on images.
Visual Turing Test.
Most recently several approaches
have been proposed to approach Visual Turing Test ,
i.e. answering question about visual content. For instance
 have proposed a binary (yes/no) version of Visual Turing Test on synthetic data. In , we present a question
answering system based on a semantic parser on a more varied set of human question-answer pairs. In contrast, in this
work, our method is based on a neural architecture, which
is trained end-to-end and therefore liberates the approach
from any ontological commitment that would otherwise be
introduced by a semantic parser.
We like to note that shortly after this work, several
neural-based models have also been suggested.
Also several new datasets for Visual Turing Tests have just
been proposed that are worth further investigations.
3. Approach
Answering questions on images is the problem of predicting an answer a given an image x and a question q according to a parametric probability measure:
ˆa = arg max
p(a|x, q; θ)
where θ represent a vector of all parameters to learn and A
is a set of all answers. Later we describe how we represent
x, a, q, and p(·|x, q; θ) in more details.
Figure 2. Our approach Neural-Image-QA, see Section 3 for details.
In our scenario questions can have multiple word answers and we consequently decompose the problem to predicting a set of answer words aq,x =
a1, a2, ..., aN(q,x)
where at are words from a ﬁnite vocabulary V′, and
N(q, x) is the number of answer words for the given question and image. In our approach, named Neural-Image-QA,
we propose to tackle the problem as follows. To predict
multiple words we formulate the problem as predicting a sequence of words from the vocabulary V := V′ ∪{$} where
the extra token $ indicates the end of the answer sequence,
and points out that the question has been fully answered.
We thus formulate the prediction procedure recursively:
ˆat = arg max
p(a|x, q, ˆAt−1; θ)
where ˆAt−1 = {ˆa1, . . . , ˆat−1} is the set of previous words,
with ˆA0 = {} at the beginning, when our approach has not
given any answer so far. The approach is terminated when
ˆat = $. We evaluate the method solely based on the predicted answer words ignoring the extra token $. To ensure
uniqueness of the predicted answer words, as we want to
predict the set of answer words, the prediction procedure
can be be trivially changed by maximizing over V \ ˆAt−1.
However, in practice, our algorithm learns to not predict any
previously predicted words.
As shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, we feed Neural-Image-
QA with a question as a sequence of words, i.e. q =
q1, . . . , qn−1, J?K
, where each qt is the t-th word question and J?K := qn encodes the question mark - the end of
the question. Since our problem is formulated as a variablelength input/output sequence, we model the parametric distribution p(·|x, q; θ) of Neural-Image-QA with a recurrent
neural network and a softmax prediction layer. More precisely, Neural-Image-QA is a deep network built of CNN
 and Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) . LSTM has
been recently shown to be effective in learning a variablelength sequence-to-sequence mapping .
Both question and answer words are represented with
Forget Gate
Input Modulation Gate
Figure 3. LSTM unit. See Section 3, Equations (3)-(8) for details.
one-hot vector encoding (a binary vector with exactly one
non-zero entry at the position indicating the index of the
word in the vocabulary) and embedded in a lower dimensional space, using a jointly learnt latent linear embedding.
In the training phase, we augment the question words sequence q with the corresponding ground truth answer words
sequence a, i.e. ˆq := [q, a]. During the test time, in the
prediction phase, at time step t, we augment q with previously predicted answer words ˆa1..t := [ˆa1, . . . , ˆat−1], i.e.
ˆqt := [q, ˆa1..t]. This means the question q and the previous
answers are encoded implicitly in the hidden states of the
LSTM, while the latent hidden representation is learnt. We
encode the image x using a CNN and provide it at every
time step as input to the LSTM. We set the input vt as a
concatenation of [x, ˆqt].
As visualized in detail in Figure 3, the LSTM unit takes
an input vector vt at each time step t and predicts an output word zt which is equal to its latent hidden state ht. As
discussed above zt is a linear embedding of the corresponding answer word at. In contrast to a simple RNN unit the
LSTM unit additionally maintains a memory cell c. This
allows to learn long-term dynamics more easily and signiﬁcantly reduces the vanishing and exploding gradients problem . More precisely, we use the LSTM unit as described
in and the Caffe implementation from . With the
sigmoid nonlinearity σ : R 7→ , σ(v) = (1 + e−v)−1
and the hyperbolic tangent nonlinearity φ : R 7→[−1, 1],
φ(v) = ev−e−v
ev+e−v = 2σ(2v) −1, the LSTM updates for time
step t given inputs vt, ht−1, and the memory cell ct−1 as
it = σ(Wvivt + Whiht−1 + bi)
f t = σ(Wvfvt + Whfht−1 + bf)
ot = σ(Wvovt + Whoht−1 + bo)
gt = φ(Wvgvt + Whght−1 + bg)
ct = f t ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙gt
ht = ot ⊙φ(ct)
where ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication.
weights W and biases b of the network are learnt jointly
with the cross-entropy loss.
Conceptually, as shown in
Figure 3, Equation 3 corresponds to the input gate, Equation 6 the input modulation gate, and Equation 4 the forget
gate, which determines how much to keep from the previous memory ct−1 state. As Figures 1 and 2 suggest, all the
output predictions that occur before the question mark are
excluded from the loss computation, so that the model is
penalized solely based on the predicted answer words.
Implementation
We use default hyper-parameters of
LSTM and CNN . All CNN models are ﬁrst pretrained on the ImageNet dataset , and next we randomly
initialize and train the last layer together with the LSTM
network on the task. We ﬁnd this step crucial in obtaining
good results. We have explored the use of a 2 layered LSTM
model, but have consistently obtained worse performance.
In a pilot study, we have found that GoogleNet architecture
 consistently outperforms the AlexNet architecture
 as a CNN model for our task and model.
4. Experiments
In this section we benchmark our method on a task of
answering questions about images. We compare different
variants of our proposed model to prior work in Section 4.1.
In addition, in Section 4.2, we analyze how well questions
can be answered without using the image in order to gain
an understanding of biases in form of prior knowledge and
common sense. We provide a new human baseline for this
task. In Section 4.3 we discuss ambiguities in the question
answering tasks and analyze them further by introducing
metrics that are sensitive to these phenomena. In particular,
the WUPS score is extended to a consensus metric that
considers multiple human answers. Additional results are
available in the supplementary material and on the project
webpage 1.
Experimental protocol
We evaluate our approach on the
DAQUAR dataset which provides 12, 468 human question answer pairs on images of indoor scenes and follow the same evaluation protocol by providing results on
accuracy and the WUPS score at {0.9, 0.0}. We run experiments for the full dataset as well as their proposed reduced
set that restricts the output space to only 37 object categories and uses 25 test images. In addition, we also evaluate
the methods on different subsets of DAQUAR where only 1,
2, 3 or 4 word answers are present.
WUPS scores
We base our experiments as well as the
consensus metrics on WUPS scores . The metric is a
generalization of the accuracy measure that accounts for
word-level ambiguities in the answer words. For instance
‘carton’ and ‘box’ can be associated with a similar concept,
1 
visual-turing-challenge
Malinowski et al. 
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Human answers 
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Human answers, no images
Table 1. Results on DAQUAR, all classes, single reference, in %.
and hence models should not be strongly penalized for this
type of mistakes. Formally:
WUPS(A, T) = 1
t∈T i µ(a, t),
a∈Ai µ(a, t)}
To embrace the aforementioned ambiguities, suggest
using a thresholded taxonomy-based Wu-Palmer similarity
 for µ. The smaller the threshold the more forgiving
metric. As in , we report WUPS at two extremes, 0.0
4.1. Evaluation of Neural-Image-QA
We start with the evaluation of our Neural-Image-QA on
the full DAQUAR dataset in order to study different variants and training conditions. Afterwards we evaluate on the
reduced DAQUAR for additional points of comparison to
prior work.
Results on full DAQUAR
Table 1 shows the results of
our Neural-Image-QA method on the full set (“multiple
words”) with 653 images and 5673 question-answer pairs
available at test time. In addition, we evaluate a variant that
is trained to predict only a single word (“single word”) as
well as a variant that does not use visual features (“Language only”). In comparison to the prior work (shown
in the ﬁrst row in Table 1), we observe strong improvements
of over 9% points in accuracy and over 11% in the WUPS
scores [second row in Table 1 that corresponds to “multiple words”]. Note that, we achieve this improvement despite the fact that the only published number available for
the comparison on the full set uses ground truth object annotations – which puts our method at a disadvantage.
Further improvements are observed when we train only on
a single word answer, which doubles the accuracy obtained
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
Language only (ours)
Table 2. Results of the single word model on the one-word answers
subset of DAQUAR, all classes, single reference, in %.
Words number
Words number
Figure 4. Language only (blue bar) and Neural-Image-QA (red
bar) “multi word” models evaluated on different subsets of
DAQUAR. We consider 1, 2, 3, 4 word subsets. The blue and
red horizontal lines represent “single word” variants evaluated on
the answers with exactly 1 word.
in prior work. We attribute this to a joint training of the language and visual representations and the dataset bias, where
about 90% of the answers contain only a single word.
We further analyze this effect in Figure 4, where we
show performance of our approach (“multiple words”) in
dependence on the number of words in the answer (truncated at 4 words due to the diminishing performance). The
performance of the “single word” variants on the one-word
subset are shown as horizontal lines. Although accuracy
drops rapidly for longer answers, our model is capable of
producing a signiﬁcant number of correct two words answers. The “single word” variants have an edge on the single answers and beneﬁt from the dataset bias towards these
type of answers. Quantitative results of the “single word”
model on the one-word answers subset of DAQUAR are
shown in Table 2. While we have made substantial progress
compared to prior work, there is still a 30% points margin to
human accuracy and 25 in WUPS score [“Human answers”
in Table 1].
Results on reduced DAQUAR
In order to provide performance numbers that are comparable to the proposed Multi-
World approach in , we also run our method on the reduced set with 37 object classes and only 25 images with
297 question-answer pairs at test time.
Table 3 shows that Neural-Image-QA also improves on
the reduced DAQUAR set, achieving 34.68% Accuracy and
40.76% WUPS at 0.9 substantially outperforming by
Malinowski et al. 
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Results on reduced DAQUAR, single reference, with
a reduced set of 37 object classes and 25 test images with 297
question-answer pairs, in %
21.95% Accuracy and 22.6 WUPS. Similarly to previous
experiments, we achieve the best performance using the
“single word” variant.
4.2. Answering questions without looking at images
In order to study how much information is already contained in questions, we train a version of our model that
ignores the visual input. The results are shown in Table 1
and Table 3 under “Language only (ours)”. The best “Language only” models with 17.15% and 32.32% compare very
well in terms of accuracy to the best models that include vision. The latter achieve 19.43% and 34.68% on the full and
reduced set respectively.
In order to further analyze this ﬁnding, we have collected
a new human baseline “Human answer, no image”, where
we have asked participants to answer on the DAQUAR
questions without looking at the images. It turns out that
humans can guess the correct answer in 7.86% of the cases
by exploiting prior knowledge and common sense. Interestingly, our best “language only” model outperforms the
human baseline by over 9%. A substantial number of answers are plausible and resemble a form of common sense
knowledge employed by humans to infer answers without
having seen the image.
4.3. Human Consensus
We observe that in many cases there is an inter human
agreement in the answers for a given image and question
and this is also reﬂected by the human baseline performance
on the question answering task of 50.20% [“Human answers” in Table 1]. We study and analyze this effect further by extending our dataset to multiple human reference
answers in Section 4.3.1, and proposing a new measure –
inspired by the work in psychology – that handles disagreement in Section 4.3.2, as well as conducting
additional experiments in Section 4.3.3.
Human agreement
Fraction of data
Human agreement
Fraction of data
Figure 5. Study of inter human agreement. At x-axis: no consensus (0%), at least half consensus (50%), full consensus (100%).
Results in %. Left: consensus on the whole data, right: consensus
on the test data.
DAQUAR-Consensus
In order to study the effects of consensus in the question answering task, we have asked multiple participants to answer
the same question of the DAQUAR dataset given the respective image. We follow the same scheme as in the original
data collection effort, where the answer is a set of words or
numbers. We do not impose any further restrictions on the
answers. This extends the original data to an average
of 5 test answers per image and question. We refer to this
dataset as DAQUAR-Consensus.
Consensus Measures
While we have to acknowledge inherent ambiguities in our
task, we seek a metric that prefers an answer that is commonly seen as preferred. We make two proposals:
Average Consensus:
We use our new annotation set that
contains multiple answers per question in order to compute
an expected score in the evaluation:
a∈Ai µ(a, t)}
where for the i-th question Ai is the answer generated by the
architecture and T i
k is the k-th possible human answer corresponding to the k-th interpretation of the question. Both
answers Ai and T i
k are sets of the words, and µ is a membership measure, for instance WUP . We call this metric
“Average Consensus Metric (ACM)” since, in the limits, as
K approaches the total number of humans, we truly measure the inter human agreement of every question.
Min Consensus:
The Average Consensus Metric puts
more weights on more “mainstream” answers due to the
summation over possible answers given by humans. In order to measure if the result was at least with one human in
Subset: No agreement
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Subset: ≥50% agreement
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Subset: Full Agreement
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Table 4. Results on DAQUAR, all classes, single reference in %
(the subsets are chosen based on DAQUAR-Consensus).
agreement, we propose a “Min Consensus Metric (MCM)”
by replacing the averaging in Equation 9 with a max operator. We call such metric Min Consensus and suggest using
both metrics in the benchmarks. We will make the implementation of both metrics publicly available.
a∈Ai µ(a, t)}
Intuitively, the max operator uses in evaluation a human answer that is the closest to the predicted one – which represents a minimal form of consensus.
Consensus results
Using the multiple reference answers in DAQUAR-
Consensus we can show a more detailed analysis of inter human agreement. Figure 5 shows the fraction of the
data where the answers agree between all available questions (“100”), at least 50% of the available questions and
do not agree at all (no agreement - “0”). We observe that
for the majority of the data, there is a partial agreement,
but even full disagreement is possible. We split the dataset
Average Consensus Metric
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Min Consensus Metric
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Table 5. Results on DAQUAR-Consensus, all classes, consensus
into three parts according to the above criteria “No agreement”, “≥50% agreement” and “Full agreement” and evaluate our models on these splits (Table 4 summarizes the
results). On subsets with stronger agreement, we achieve
substantial gains of up to 10% and 20% points in accuracy
over the full set (Table 1) and the Subset: No agreement
(Table 4), respectively. These splits can be seen as curated
versions of DAQUAR, which allows studies with factored
out ambiguities.
The aforementioned “Average Consensus Metric” generalizes the notion of the agreement, and encourages predictions of the most agreeable answers. On the other hand
“Min Consensus Metric” has a desired effect of providing a
more optimistic evaluation. Table 5 shows the application
of both measures to our data and models.
Moreover, Table 6 shows that “MCM” applied to human answers at test time captures ambiguities in interpreting questions by improving the score of the human baseline
from (here, as opposed to Table 5, we exclude the original human answers from the measure). It also cooperates
well with WUPS at 0.9, which takes word ambiguities into
account, gaining an about 20% higher score.
4.4. Qualitative results
We show predicted answers of different variants of our
architecture in Table 7, 8, and 9. We have chosen the examples to highlight differences between Neural-Image-QA
and the “Language only”. We use a “multiple words” approach only in Table 8, otherwise the “single word” model
Despite some failure cases, “Language only”
makes “reasonable guesses” like predicting that the largest
object could be table or an object that could be found on the
ACM (ours)
MCM (ours)
Min and Average Consensus on human answers from
DAQUAR, as reference sentence we use all answers in DAQUAR-
Consensus which are not in DAQUAR, in %
bed is either a pillow or doll.
4.5. Failure cases
While our method answers correctly on a large part of
the challenge (e.g. ≈35 WUPS at 0.9 on “what color”
and “how many” question subsets), spatial relations (≈
21 WUPS at 0.9) which account for a substantial part of
DAQUAR remain challenging. Other errors involve questions with small objects, negations, and shapes (below 12
WUPS at 0.9). Too few training data points for the aforementioned cases may contribute to these mistakes.
Table 9 shows examples of failure cases that include
(in order) strong occlusion, a possible answer not captured
by our ground truth answers, and unusual instances (red
5. Conclusions
We have presented a neural architecture for answering
natural language questions about images that contrasts with
prior efforts based on semantic parsing and outperforms
prior work by doubling performance on this challenging
task. A variant of our model that does not use the image to
answer the question performs only slightly worse and even
outperforms a new human baseline that we have collected
under the same condition. We conclude that our model has
learnt biases and patterns that can be seen as forms of common sense and prior knowledge that humans use to accomplish this task. We observe that indoor scene statistics, spatial reasoning, and small objects are not well captured by
the global CNN representation, but the true limitations of
this representation can only be explored on larger datasets.
We extended our existing DAQUAR dataset to DAQUAR-
Consensus, which now provides multiple reference answers
which allows to study inter-human agreement and consensus on the question answer task. We propose two new metrics: “Average Consensus”, which takes into account human
disagreement, and “Min Consensus” that captures disagreement in human question answering.
Acknowledgements.
Marcus Rohrbach was supported by
a fellowship within the FITweltweit-Program of the German
Academic Exchange Service (DAAD).
What is on the right side of the cabinet?
How many drawers are there?
What is the largest object?
Neural-Image-QA:
Language only:
Table 7. Examples of questions and answers. Correct predictions are colored in green, incorrect in red.
What is on the refrigerator?
What is the colour of the comforter?
What objects are found on the bed?
Neural-Image-QA:
magnet, paper
blue, white
bed sheets, pillow
Language only:
magnet, paper
blue, green, red, yellow
doll, pillow
Table 8. Examples of questions and answers with multiple words. Correct predictions are colored in green, incorrect in red.
How many chairs are there?
What is the object ﬁxed on the window?
Which item is red in colour?
Neural-Image-QA:
remote control
Language only:
Ground truth answers:
Table 9. Examples of questions and answers - failure cases.
References
 S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. L.
Zitnick, and D. Parikh.
Vqa: Visual question answering.
 
 J. Berant and P. Liang. Semantic parsing via paraphrasing.
In ACL, 2014.
 K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C. Gulcehre, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, D. Bahdanau, and Y. Bengio. Learning phrase
representations using rnn encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP, 2014.
 J. Cohen et al. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales.
Educational and psychological measurement, 1960.
 J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach,
S. Venugopalan, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell. Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description. In CVPR, 2015.
 J. L. Fleiss and J. Cohen. The equivalence of weighted kappa
and the intraclass correlation coefﬁcient as measures of reliability. Educational and psychological measurement, 1973.
 H. Gao, J. Mao, J. Zhou, Z. Huang, L. Wang, and W. Xu.
Are you talking to a machine? dataset and methods for multilingual image question answering. In NIPS, 2015.
 D. Geman, S. Geman, N. Hallonquist, and L. Younes. Visual
turing test for computer vision systems. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 2015.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory.
Neural Computation, 1997.
 M. Iyyer, J. Boyd-Graber, L. Claudino, R. Socher, and H. D.
III. A neural network for factoid question answering over
paragraphs. In EMNLP, 2014.
 Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell. Caffe: Convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding. arXiv:1408.5093,
 A. Karpathy and L. Fei-Fei.
Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descriptions. In CVPR, 2015.
 A. Karpathy, A. Joulin, and L. Fei-Fei. Deep fragment embeddings for bidirectional image sentence mapping. In NIPS,
 C. Kong, D. Lin, M. Bansal, R. Urtasun, and S. Fidler. What
are you talking about? text-to-image coreference. In CVPR,
 J. Krishnamurthy and T. Kollar. Jointly learning to parse and
perceive: Connecting natural language to the physical world.
TACL, 2013.
 A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton.
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In
NIPS, 2012.
 Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradientbased learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.
 P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein. Learning dependencybased compositional semantics. Computational Linguistics,
 L. Ma, Z. Lu, and H. Li.
Learning to answer questions from image using convolutional neural network.
 
 M. Malinowski and M. Fritz.
A multi-world approach to
question answering about real-world scenes based on uncertain input. In NIPS, 2014.
 M. Malinowski and M. Fritz. Towards a visual turing challenge. In Learning Semantics (NIPS workshop), 2014.
 C. Matuszek, N. Fitzgerald, L. Zettlemoyer, L. Bo, and
A joint model of language and perception for
grounded attribute learning. In ICML, 2012.
 N. Nakashole, T. Tylenda, and G. Weikum.
Fine-grained
semantic typing of emerging entities. In ACL, 2013.
 M. Ren, R. Kiros, and R. Zemel. Image question answering:
A visual semantic embedding model and a new dataset. In
NIPS, 2015.
 O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein,
A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. arXiv:1409.0575, 2014.
 N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P. Kohli, and R. Fergus. Indoor
segmentation and support inference from rgbd images. In
ECCV, 2012.
 K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman.
Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
 
 I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In NIPS. 2014.
 C. Szegedy,
P. Sermanet,
D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich.
Going deeper with convolutions. arXiv:1409.4842, 2014.
 S. Venugopalan, M. Rohrbach, J. Donahue, R. Mooney,
T. Darrell, and K. Saenko. Sequence to sequence – video
to text. In ICCV, 2015.
 S. Venugopalan,
J. Donahue,
M. Rohrbach,
R. Mooney, and K. Saenko. Translating videos to natural
language using deep recurrent neural networks. In NAACL,
 O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan. Show and
tell: A neural image caption generator.
 
 J. Weston, S. Chopra, and A. Bordes. Memory networks.
 
 Z. Wu and M. Palmer. Verbs semantics and lexical selection.
In ACL, 1994.
 L. Yu, E. Park, A. C. Berg, and T. L. Berg. Visual madlibs:
Fill in the blank image generation and question answering.
 
 W. Zaremba and I. Sutskever. Learning to execute. arXiv
 
 C. L. Zitnick, D. Parikh, and L. Vanderwende. Learning the
visual interpretation of sentences. In ICCV, 2013.
Ask Your Neurons: A Neural-based Approach to
Answering Questions about Images
- A Supplementary Material
Mateusz Malinowski1
Marcus Rohrbach2
Mario Fritz1
1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
2UC Berkeley EECS and ICSI, Berkeley, CA, United States
Malinowski et al. 
Neural-Image-QA (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Human answers 
Language only (ours)
- multiple words
- single word
Human answers, no images
Table 1. Results on DAQUAR, all classes, single reference, in %.
Replication of Table 1 from the main paper for convenience.
In this supplemental material, we additionally provide
qualitative examples of different variants of our architecture
and show the correlations of predicted answer words and
question words with human answer and question words.
The examples are chosen to highlight challenges as well
as differences between “Neural-Image-QA” and “Language
only” architectures. Table 9 also shows a few failure cases.
In all cases but “multiple words answer”, we use the best
“single word” variants. Although “Language only” ignores
the image, it is still able to make “reasonable guesses” by
exploiting biases captured by the dataset that can be viewed
as a type of common sense knowledge. For instance, “tea
kettle” often sits on the oven, cabinets are usually “brown”,
“chair” is typically placed in front of a table, and we commonly keep a “photo” on a cabinet (Table 2, 4, 5, 8). This
effect is analysed in Figure 1. Each data point in the plot
represents the correlation between a question and a predicted answer words for our “Language only” model (xaxis) versus the correlation in the human answers (y-axis).
Despite the reasonable guesses of the “Language only”
architecture, the “Neural-Image-QA” predicts in average
better answers (shown in Table 1 that we have replicated
Figure showing correlation between question and answer words of the “Language only” model (at x-axis), and a similar correlation of the “Human-baseline” (at y-axis).
from the main paper for the convenience of the reader) by
exploiting the visual content of images. For instance in Table 6 the “Language only” model incorrectly answers “6”
on the question “How many burner knobs are there ?” because it has seen only this answer during the training with
exactly the same question but on different image.
Both models, “Language only” and “Neural-Image-
QA”, have difﬁculties to answer correctly on long questions
or such questions that expect a larger number of answer
words (Table 9). On the other hand both models are doing
well on predicting a type of the question (e.g. “what color
...” result in a color name in the answer, or “how many ...”
questions result in a number), there are a few rare cases with
an incorrect type of the predicted answer (the last example
in Table 9).