Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
 
Slant from texture and disparity cues:
Optimal cue combination
James M. Hillis
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Simon J. Watt
Department of Psychology, University of Wales,
Bangor, Wales, UK
Michael S. Landy
Department of Psychology & Center for Neural Science,
New York University, New York, NY, USA
Martin S. Banks
Vision Science Program, Department of Psychology, &
Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA
How does the visual system combine information from different depth cues to estimate three-dimensional scene
parameters? We tested a maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) model of cue combination for perspective (texture) and
binocular disparity cues to surface slant. By factoring the reliability of each cue into the combination process, MLE
provides more reliable estimates of slant than would be available from either cue alone. We measured the reliability of
each cue in isolation across a range of slants and distances using a slant-discrimination task. The reliability of the texture
cue increases as |slant| increases and does not change with distance. The reliability of the disparity cue decreases as
distance increases and varies with slant in a way that also depends on viewing distance. The trends in the single-cue data
can be understood in terms of the information available in the retinal images and issues related to solving the binocular
correspondence problem. To test the MLE model, we measured perceived slant of two-cue stimuli when disparity and
texture were in conflict and the reliability of slant estimation when both cues were available. Results from the two-cue
study indicate, consistent with the MLE model, that observers weight each cue according to its relative reliability: Disparity
weight decreased as distance and |slant| increased. We also observed the expected improvement in slant estimation
when both cues were available. With few discrepancies, our data indicate that observers combine cues in a statistically
optimal fashion and thereby reduce the variance of slant estimates below that which could be achieved from either cue
alone. These results are consistent with other studies that quantitatively examined the MLE model of cue combination.
Thus, there is a growing empirical consensus that MLE provides a good quantitative account of cue combination and that
sensory information is used in a manner that maximizes the precision of perceptual estimates.
Keywords: depth perception, cue combination, stereopsis, Bayesian perception, texture gradient
Introduction
The fundamental problem in depth perception is due
to the geometry of perspective projection, which reduces
the three-dimensional (3D) coordinates of the visual scene
to the 2D coordinates of the retinal images. The third dimension of space has to be inferred from the 2D images.
The visual system uses several sources of information—
“depth cues” such as disparity, perspective, and motion
parallax—to estimate the layout of the 3D scene. Estimates
based on each individual cue are subject to error. By combining information from several depth cues, the visual system could estimate 3D layout with greater precision across
a wider variety of viewing situations than it could by relying
on any one cue alone. To realize this advantage, the reliability of each depth cue must be factored into the combination rule. Factoring in reliability is complicated because the
reliability of individual depth cues depends on scene parameters in different ways. Are variations in depth cue reliability with scene geometry factored into the cuecombination rule? To examine this question, we compared
human slant discrimination ability based on disparity and
texture cues to a model of statistically optimal cue combination. Slant estimation from texture and disparity is an
interesting case to examine because the reliabilities of disparity and texture cues vary in different ways with slant and
viewing distance. Knill and Saunders examined the
combination of texture and disparity as a function of slant
with a similar approach to what we present here. We have
expanded their experiments to include surfaces slanted
about a vertical axis and surfaces at multiple viewing distances (see Discussion: Comparison to other studies). We
measured the reliability of slant estimates from each cue in
isolation across a range of slants and distances and used an
doi:10.1167/4.12.1
Received January 20, 2004; published December 1, 2004
ISSN 1534-7362 © 2004 ARVO
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
optimal cue-combination rule to predict the appearance of
two-cue stimuli and the precision of slant estimation with
two-cue stimuli. We then compared these predictions to
the results of two-cue slant discrimination experiments.
Optimal cue combination
Visual estimates of slant from any depth cue are subject
to error. For example, perceived slant from a given texture
gradient will vary from one instance to another due to the
statistical nature of slant information from texture and errors in the measurement of the gradient . When more than one depth cue is available and
informative, one can in principle reduce the uncertainty
associated with any one of the cues by combining across
cues .
One approach to optimizing cue combination is statistical: What cue-combination rule results in an estimator
that is unbiased and has minimum variance? Assume that
the observer has unbiased estimates
of the slant
of a surface based on disparity and texture cues, respectively. Assume further that errors in these estimates are uncorrelated and have variances
σ . If we combine
the two estimates linearly, the rule that yields the minimum-variance, unbiased estimate is a weighted average that
satisfies 
and r are the reliabilities of the two cues (e.g.,
). Furthermore, if errors associated with the individual estimators are Gaussian, no other (nonlinear) rule
has lower variance.
An alternative approach is to apply Bayesian methods
 . In the absence of any
immediate consequences to an observer’s actions (payoffs
and penalties), the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate is
typically employed. That is, the observer chooses a slant
that is most probable given the image data. We
assume the image data can be segregated into those data
used to estimate slant from disparity and
tI used to estimate slant from texture. Thus, we choose the value of
that maximizes
. Applying Bayes’ rule, and assuming that the two cues are conditionally independent, we
The first two terms on the right side of the equation are the
likelihood functions for each cue characterizing the probability of observing the image data if
is the actual slant.
The last term is the prior distribution, which is the probability of observing S in the scene, independent of the image data. If the likelihoods and prior are Gaussian, the
MAP estimate has the same form as the minimum variance,
linear combination estimate
are the maximum-likelihood estimates the
observer would have made from each cue in isolation (the
mean of the respective Gaussian distributions), and
the mean of the prior. The
are the reliabilities of the
respective distributions (likelihoods and prior). If the prior
has large variance relative to the individual cue likelihoods,
Equations 4 and 5 reduce to Equations 1 and 2, which also
yields the most likely slant to have caused the current sensory data (i.e., it is the maximum-likelihood estimate or
MLE). For our conditions, the variance of the individual
cues is much smaller than the prior’s variance (see Ideal
observer models in Discussion), so we will use Equations 1
and 2 throughout.
By following the strategy described by Equation 2, the
variance of the weighted average
uivalently,
The variance of
is lower than the variance of either single-cue estimate.
Many investigations of sensory cue combination have
shown that cue reliability is taken into account in the estimation process . Only five studies, however, have tested the
quantitative predictions of the MLE model expressed by
Equations 1, 2, and 6, to determine if sensory cue combination is statistically optimal . These five studies measured
reliabilities of individual cues ( r in
Equations 2 and 6) and
empirically tested predictions for both the appearance and
discrimination thresholds for stimuli when both cues were
present (provided by Equations 1, 2, and 6). All five reported that the combination is quite close to the one predicted by those equations. In these five experiments, the
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
variances of estimates derived from single cues were measured by conducting two-interval, forced-choice (2IFC) discrimination experiments when only one cue was informative. For example, Ernst and Banks conducted sizediscrimination experiments for vision alone and haptics
alone and then fit cumulative Gaussians to the two psychometric functions. The variance parameter of the Gaussians provided estimates of the variances of the underlying
visual and haptic estimators. Equations 1, 2, and 6 were
then successfully used to predict the results of two-cue (visual-haptic) experiments.
The experiments presented here used the strategy of
Ernst and Banks to ask whether texture and disparity cues to slant are combined in a statistically optimal fashion. The reliability of texture and disparity cues to slant
vary with viewing geometry in different ways. First, the reliability of texture should increase with increasing slant because the image changes associated with a given change in
slant increase . This relationship between reliability and slant is reflected in human
performance . Theoretical and empirical
analyses of the reliability of disparity as a function of slant
have not been conducted, but it is unlikely that it changes
significantly .
Second, because the magnitude of binocular disparities for
a given depth difference decreases as viewing distance increases, the reliability of slant and curvature estimated from
binocular disparity should decrease as viewing distance is
increased. Experiments confirm that it does . On theoretical grounds, the
reliability of texture-specified slant, for a fixed retinal-image
density, should not change with distance. If a given textured surface is doubled in size and viewed from twice the
distance, the retinal image is unchanged. Thus, optimal
combination of disparity and texture cues to slant should
involve complex changes in the weights given to the two
cues depending on base slant and viewing distance.
We looked for evidence that the visual system weights
the two cues appropriately across a range of slants and distances. Because the reliability of the texture cue increases
with slant, we expect the texture weight to increase as slant
increases. Because the reliability of disparity decreases as
viewing distance increases, we expect the texture weight to
increase as distance increases. As in the previous studies, we
determined the reliability of the individual cues with 2IFC
discrimination experiments. Then, we measured the apparent slant and slant discrimination performance for two-cue
stimuli. As we shall see, the MLE cue-combination predictions based on the single-cue experiments (Equations 1, 2,
and 6) were largely in accord with the data from the twocue experiment.
Four observers participated. Two were not aware of the
experimental hypotheses (ACD and RM). All had normal
stereopsis and did not manifest eye misalignment in normal viewing situations.
All stimuli were displayed on a custom-designed stereoscope with two mirrors and two CRTs . Each mirror
and CRT was attached to an arm that rotated about a vertical axis passing through the eye’s center of rotation. With
this arrangement, the eye and stereoscope arm rotate on a
common axis, so when we change the vergence distance,
the mapping between the stimulus array and the retina is
unaltered (for fixed accommodation).
We used anti-aliasing to specify dot position to subpixel
accuracy. To ensure accurate reproduction of visual direction, we spatially calibrated each CRT to eliminate distortions in the images .
The observer’s head position was stabilized using a bite
bar fastened to an adjustable mount. Each observer had a
personal mount so that the vertical axes of rotation of left
and right eyes were collinear with the rotation axes of the
two stereoscope arms . The optical distance between the center of rotation
of each eye and the face of the CRT was 40 cm.
Stimuli were virtual planes slanted about a vertical axis
(i.e., tilt = 0 deg). We independently manipulated two cues
to slant: disparity and texture. In single-cue measurements,
we isolated one or the other of the two cues. In two-cue
measurements, both cues were informative, but could have
different slant values. Viewing distance was 19.1, 57.3, or
171.9 cm. Example stimuli are shown in Figure 1.
The texture cue was the perspective projection of planar patches textured with Voronoi patterns with an average
of 64 Voronoi cells per patch . The
actual number of cells varied from trial to trial depending
on the randomly selected width of the patch (i.e., cells with
a constant average area filled the area of the elliptical
patch). Voronoi patterns were generated from a jittered
grid of dots. On a frontoparallel plane, a regular grid of
points was defined. Then, each point on the dot grid was
perturbed horizontally and vertically (uniform distribution
from –0.3 to 0.3 deg). The Voronoi pattern defined by
these points was then computed. Finally, the resulting textured plane was rotated by an amount equal to the texturedefined slant. To isolate the texture cue, the stimuli were
viewed monocularly. The visible portion of the plane was
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
elliptical with a height of 15 deg. The width on each presentation was randomly chosen from a uniform distribution
from 15 to 20 deg when the stimulus was frontoparallel.
The stimulus was then rotated to the appropriate slant.
Thus, the retinal shape of the stimulus outline was an unreliable cue to slant.
The disparity cue to slant was the difference between
left- and right-eye projections (calculated for each observer’s
interpupillary distance). To isolate the disparity cue, the
stimulus was defined by sparse random dots (Figure 1, top
panel). Each stimulus consisted of 64 dots, with positions
randomly drawn from a uniform distribution (note that
the texture gradient specified by the dots was therefore consistent with a frontoparallel plane). Dot density was
~0.3 dots/deg2.
Figure 1. Examples of the stimuli. Cross fuse or divergently fuse
to see the appropriate slants. The upper stimulus is an example
of the disparity-alone stimulus. It has a negative slant (right side
near). The lower row provides examples of the texture-alone
stimulus when viewed monocularly and the disparity-texture
stimulus when viewed binocularly. The disparity- and texturespecified slants are positive (right side far).
When both cues were present, disparity and texture
could be consistent (
) or they could be in conflict.
In the no-conflict case, homogeneous Voronoi-textured
surfaces were projected directly to the two eyes. In cueconflict cases, we first calculated a perspective projection of
the texture with slant
at the Cyclopean eye (
left panel). We then found the intersections of rays through
this Cyclopean projection with a surface patch at the disparity-specified slant
(Figure 2, middle panel). The
markings on this latter surface were then projected to the
left and right eyes to form the two monocular images
(Figure 2, right panel).
Control experiments and procedures to
validate single-cue measurements
We went to some lengths to ensure that the single-cue
experiments measured the variances of the disparity and
texture estimators in a fashion appropriate for making twocue predictions. In this section, we describe control experiments and methodological procedures used to achieve
that goal.
1. Are disparity-alone measurements affected
by monocular slant signals?
To make sure that only binocular information determined slant discrimination in the disparity-alone case, we
conducted two control experiments.
First, to make sure that the stimulus did not provide a
monocular cue to slant, we measured monocular slant-
Project homogeneous
texture with slant to
Cyclopean eye
Project back onto
surface with target
disparity slant
Binocular projection
yields disparity cue
Creation of Cue-conflict Stimuli
Figure 2. Creation of the cue-conflict stimuli. Left: Perspective projection of a homogeneously textured surface with the Cyclopean eye
as the center of projection. This projection creates the texture-specified slant,
. The rays from the surface toward the eye are used in
the next step. Middle: A virtual surface with the disparity-specified slant,
, is created. The rays from the first step are back-projected
from the Cyclopean eye to find their intersections with the disparity-defined surface. They are marked in the diagram with black points.
Right: Viewing the black points binocularly yields the cue-conflict stimulus containing the texture-specified slant in the left panel and the
disparity-specified slant in the middle panel.
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
discrimination thresholds at various slants for the 64-dot
stimulus. Observers could not reliably discriminate anything but large slant changes, and those changes were at
least a factor of 10 larger than the thresholds in the disparity-alone experiment. We conclude that there is no useful
monocular slant information in the 64-dot random-dot
Second, we wanted to make sure that we presented
enough dots in the display for disparity-based thresholds to
be as low as possible while still isolating the disparity estimator. The details of this control experiment and the results are provided in Appendix A. We found that threshold
decreased as dot number increased from 2 to 32 and then
leveled off beyond 32 dots. With 64 dots, disparity-based
thresholds were as low as they could be. The results were
simpler for observer JMH than for ACD: ACD may have
given some weight to the texture signal at base slants different from 0 deg. We will return to this point when we discuss her two-cue data (in Discussion: Summary of results).
2. Are disparity-alone measurements based on
perceived slant or on only the disparity gradient?
To combine two cues for slant, the cues must be promoted to the same units. Disparity signals alone do not
provide a slant estimate because they must be scaled or
normalized for distance . We were concerned that observers might
perform the slant-discrimination task in the single-cue, disparity-alone case by comparing only the disparity gradients
in the two stimulus intervals. Said another way, they might
perform the task without normalizing the disparity signals
into slant estimates. To test the MLE model, we must acquire valid measures of the reliabilities of single-cue slant
estimates. In the disparity-alone condition, this means our
measure must reflect the process of scaling the disparity
signal into units of slant. If the task in the disparity-alone
condition were done without normalizing the disparity signal, the psychometric data would not reflect errors introduced by the scaling process (which, within the framework
of weighted-linear cue combination, is essential for combining disparity and texture signals), and we would underestimate the variance of disparity-based slant estimates. We
therefore looked for evidence that observers scale the disparity signal for distance in a discrimination task with our
disparity-alone stimuli. Observers performed the slantdiscrimination task with the disparity-alone stimulus, but
with the comparison stimuli appearing at different distances relative to the standard stimulus. We found that
most observers (importantly, JMH and ACD) take distance
into account when performing the slant-discrimination
task; that is, they do not perform the task by only comparing the disparity gradients in the two stimulus intervals.
The details of the experiment and results are described in
Appendix B. The results of this control experiment support
the assumption that the disparity-alone measurements provide valid estimates of the reliability of the disparity-based
slant estimator.
3. Are the estimates of the single-cue reliabilities
valid for the two-cue experiment?
The single-cue data were used to specify the model’s parameters (single-cue variances) and the model was then used
to predict the two-cue data. An important assumption is
that the appropriate variances are being measured in the
single-cue experiments. One might question this assumption for the measurements of the disparity estimator’s reliability because a different type of stimulus was used in the
single-cue, disparity-alone condition (random-dot stimuli)
than in the two-cue condition (Voronoi stimuli). This concern cannot be addressed by using Voronoi stimuli in the
disparity-alone condition because such stimuli provide salient texture cues to slant. We can, however, check the validity of using random-dot stimuli by comparing single-cue
thresholds with those stimuli to two-cue thresholds when
the texture weight is expected to be approximately zero.
This check, described in Results: Just-noticeable differences, confirmed the validity of our assumption for observer JMH (the only observer for whom the required data
were available).
A similar concern can be raised about using monocular
stimuli in the texture-alone condition to measure texture
reliability in the two-cue experiment. The stimulus in the
two-cue experiment is binocular, so the visual system receives two samples while there is only one sample in the
texture-alone experiment. The two samples will not be the
same because the texture-specified slant at the left eye necessarily differs from the texture slant at the right eye (see
Appendix D). Thus, the visual system must integrate two
texture-gradient signals into one binocular estimate before
combining with the slant estimated from disparity. The
presence of two samples in the two-cue experiment might
reduce the uncertainty associated with the texture cue in a
fashion similar to the reduction in contrast threshold with
binocular viewing . We can check this by
comparing the monocular single-cue thresholds to binocular two-cue thresholds when the texture weight is expected
to be approximately one. This check, described in Results:
Just-noticeable differences, confirmed the validity of our
assumption that the monocular measurements were a valid
estimate of the variance of the texture estimator in the twocue experiment.
4. Do unmodeled slant cues affect responses?
We wanted to isolate the cues of disparity and texture,
so we had to consider whether other slant cues might be
present in the display. Three cues—the blur gradient, accommodation, and the phosphor grid of the CRTs—always
signaled a slant of 0 deg. If the observer failed to ignore
those conflicting cues, the variances we measured would be
higher than the true variances associated with disparity and
texture. To reduce the salience of all three cues, we placed
diffusers on the faces of the CRTs to blur the stimuli
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
slightly. Blurring the stimuli decreases the probability that
the observers used the blur gradient because the blur gradient is a less reliable depth cue with blurred as opposed to
sharply focused stimuli . Blurring
should also decrease the probability that accommodation
was used as a depth cue because humans accommodate
inaccurately if at all to blurred stimuli . The
diffusers also made the phosphor grid invisible.
Procedure: Single-cue conditions
To estimate the reliabilities of the texture- and disparity-based slant estimates, we obtained psychometric functions for texture and disparity presented in isolation at several base slants (±70, ±60, ±45, ±30, ±15, and 0 deg) and
distances (19.1, 57.3, and 171.9 cm) for two observers
(ACD and JMH). The other two observers participated in a
subset of these conditions. We used a 2IFC task with no
feedback. On each trial, the observer indicated which of
two stimuli—one at the base slant and the other at the base
—had the greater apparent slant. The stimuli
were displayed for 1.5 s with a 0.3-s interstimulus interval.
We used staircases to control the value of
and four reversal rules—3-down/1-up, 1-down/3-up, 2-down/1-up, and
1-down/2-up—to sample points along the entire psychometric function. At least eight staircases were employed for
each psychometric function for ACD and JMH, which corresponds to approximately 350-450 trials per function (each
staircase was terminated after 12 reversals). At least two, but
typically more, staircases were employed for RM and MSB.
In each session, at least four interleaved staircases were run:
two base slants (one positive and one negative to avoid adaptation) with two staircases each. Viewing distance was
fixed in each session.
Procedure: Two-cue conditions
The procedure in the two-cue conditions was the same
as in the single-cue conditions except that a no-conflict
stimulus (disparity- and texture-specified slants equal to one
another) and a conflict stimulus (disparity and texture
slants not necessarily equal) were presented on each trial.
Figure 3 depicts the disparity- and texture-defined slants of
the no-conflict and conflict stimuli. In both panels, the
slant specified by the disparity cue is plotted on the abscissa
and the slant specified by the texture cue on the ordinate.
The conflict stimulus had one cue set to a base slant
= ±60, ±30, or 0 deg) and the other cue was perturbed.
The left panel depicts the conflict stimuli when disparity
was perturbed and the right panel shows the stimuli when
texture was perturbed. The perturbed cue had incremental
slants of ±10, ±5, or 0 deg relative to the unperturbed cue,
so the conflict was always small. In previous work with
quite similar stimuli, a difference of 10 deg between the
disparity- and texture-specified slants was generally not detectable . The five
possible perturbed cue values are represented along the
abscissa and ordinate in the left and right panels, respectively. On each trial, a conflict stimulus and a no-conflict
stimulus were presented and the observer indicated the one
containing the apparently greater slant. No feedback was
given. The value of the no-conflict stimulus was varied according to staircase procedures to map out the psychometric function. At least four staircases were run per experimental session: two conflict conditions for each of two base
Figure 3 also shows how we determined the point of
subjective equality (PSE), the value of the no-conflict stimulus
with the same average perceived slant as the conflict stimulus. The enlarged bold symbols—the dark-blue circle in the
left panel and black diamond in the right—represent two
particular conflict stimuli. ∆ represents the incremental
slant of the perturbed cue in the conflict stimulus, and δ
represents the increment given to the no-conflict stimulus
as the staircase procedure varies its slant. As δ is increased
and thereby the slant of the no-conflict stimulus is increased (represented in the figure by displacement up along
the main diagonal wher
d ), the observer will be
increasingly likely to report that it had greater slant than
the conflict stimulus. At some value of δ, the no-conflict
stimulus will on average have the same apparent slant as
the conflict stimulus; this is the PSE. If the cue weights are
constant across small variations in slant, we can determine
the weights from this value of
Consider first the conflict stimulus. From Equations
1-2 and the fact that disparity-defined stimulus slant
Disparity cue perturbed
Texture cue perturbed
conflict stimuli:
conflict stimuli: Sd = Sb + ∆
no-conflict stimulus:
St = Sd = Sb + δ
Stimulus Variation in Two-cue Experiment
St = Sb + ∆
Figure 3. Depiction of the stimulus values and their manipulation
in the two-cue experiment. Both graphs plot the disparityspecified slant (
) on the abscissa and the texture-specified
) on the ordinate for the conflict and no-conflict stimuli.
The base slant is represented by the origins (
). The conflict stimulus either had the disparity-specified slant perturbed
from the base slant by ∆ (depicted in the left panel) or the texture-specified slant perturbed by ∆ (right panel). Five different
conflicts were presented for each base slant and those are represented by the blue circles in the left panel and gray diamonds
in the right panel. In the no-conflict stimulus, the disparity- and
texture-specified slants were equal to one another. The staircase
procedure varied the increments added to the base slant:
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
+ ∆ (where
is the base slant), the expected value of the estimated slant of the conflict stimulus
Figure 4. Just-noticeable slant differences (JNDs) for the single-cue experiment. JNDs are plotted as a function of slant or horizontal
disparity. Different symbol colors represent data for different viewing distances: 19.1, 57.3, and 171.9 cm. Left and middle columns:
JNDs for texture-alone and disparity-alone, respectively, as a function of the absolute value of the slant. Error bars are 95% confidence
intervals. Right column: JNDs for disparity alone plotted in terms of HSR. The ordinate is the difference between the absolute values of
the natural log of HSR for the base slant and the just-noticeably different slant. The abscissa is the absolute value of the natural log of
HSR of the base slant. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals. The lines in the left column (texture-alone) and right column (disparityalone) are maximum-likelihood curve fits to the data (
). The break in the curve and the upward pointing arrow in JMH’s
disparity fit indicates that JNDs go to infinity somewhere between ln(HSR) of 0.58 and 0.97 (slants of 60 and 70 deg at 19.1 cm).
Now consider the no-conflict stimulus. From Equations 1-2
and the fact that
, the expected value of the
estimated slant of the no-conflict stimulus is
The conflict and no-conflict stimuli will have the same perceived slants when
Equations 7 and 8,
Thus, the two-cue experiment yields an estimate of the
PSE from which we can determine the weights given to
disparity and texture. The assumption that the weights are
constant for even small variations is inconsistent with statistically optimal slant estimation, in which the weights vary
as a function of slant. However, given the precision of our
measurements and the rate of change of cue reliability, the
fixed local weight assumption provides a reasonable approximation.
We can also plot the percentage of judgments for
which the no-conflict stimulus appeared to have greater
slant as a function of its slant. The slopes of such psychometric functions index the discriminability of the stimuli
(discussed below in Results: Just-noticeable differences).
Specifying the predictions
To quantify the predictions of the MLE model, we
need estimates of the variances of the single-cue estimators
σ , or equivalently, the reliabilities
Equations 2 and 6). To estimate these variances, we fit the
psychometric data with a cumulative Gaussian using a
maximum-likelihood criterion. The standard deviations of
the resulting functions were divided by
2 (because the
psychophysical procedure was 2IFC) to yield estimates of
the standard deviations of the underlying slant estimators
 . We call these just-noticeable differences (JNDs) because they represent the slant difference
that is correctly discriminated ~76% of the time.
Figure 4 shows the JND estimates for JMH and ACD
(JNDs for RM and MSB, whose performance was tested at
only one distance, were similar to the those shown here
and are plotted in Figure 1S). Each row of panels represents data from one observer. The left column shows the
|Slant| (deg)
JND |∆ln(HSR)|
Slant JNDs
|Slant| (deg)
Slant JNDs
Texture Cue
Disparity Cue
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
texture-alone data: JNDs in units of slant are plotted as a
function of the absolute value of base slant (there was no
apparent difference in the results for positive and negative
slants). Different symbols represent data from different
viewing distances. As expected, texture JNDs did not vary
systematically with distance. Also as expected , texture JNDs decreased as the absolute value of
slant increased.
The middle column of Figure 4 shows the data for the
disparity-alone condition: Slant JNDs are plotted as a function of the absolute value of base slant (there were no systematic differences for positive and negative slants). As expected from the viewing geometry , disparity slant JNDs increased systematically with an increase in viewing distance. JNDs also
tended to decrease with base slant at the medium and far
viewing distances . At the
near viewing distance, JNDs tended to increase with base
slant. In fact, as indicated by the symbol with the yellow
star, JMH’s thresholds were infinite at base slants of ±70°
and a viewing distance of 19.1 cm because the binocular
images could not be fused in this condition. This difference
in the trend between near and far distances can be understood in terms of the retinal signal to slant.
The right column of Figure 4 plots the same data as the
middle column but in units of relative disparity: specifically, the horizontal-size ratio (HSR) . JNDs plotted in these units increase with increasing ln(
HSR . This
increase may reflect difficulties in solving the binocularmatching problem as the disparity gradient (which is linearly related to HSR) increases . The increase may also reflect
the fact that surfaces with large ln
(HSR contain fewer
points near the Vieth-Müller Circle where stereoacuity is
highest. ln(
HSR increases more rapidly as a function of
slant at near distances (indicated by the fact that JMH’s
data at high base HSRs all come from the near viewing distance). For example, a change in slant from 60 to 70 deg
results in a change in ln(
from 0.58 to 0.97 at
19.1 cm and from 0.06 to 0.1 at 171.9 cm. (We did not
plot the point at 70 deg, ln
HSR = 0.97, because thresholds were infinite.) We will return to a discussion of the
effects of distance and base slant in Discussion: Comparison of observed and expected effects of slant and distance
on disparity- and texture-based JNDs.
To make predictions for the two-cue conditions, we
needed estimates of the variances of the disparity and texture estimators at slants between the ones for which we
have measurements. For the interpolation, we fit smooth
curves to the data (
, where x is slant and JND
is in deg [texture], or x is
HSR and JND is
[disparity], and α and β are free parameters). This was done
by performing a maximum-likelihood fit to all of the raw
psychometric data for a given condition (texture or disparity), varying α and β. The curves and the data are shown in
the left and right columns of Figure 4. The curve fits represent a fit to the data at all three viewing distances. Thus,
they give us a way to estimate disparity and texture reliability between slants where we have measurements, and they
also allow us to interpolate across distance. While the reliability of the disparity cue to slant, HSR, does not vary systematically with distance, the relationship between HSR and
slant varies significantly with viewing distance. Figure 5
shows how the reliability of disparity slant estimates varies
with slant and distance, based on the curve fits to JMH’s
data. The reliability of the disparity cue to slant decreases as
distance increases and the reliability of the disparity cue
varies with base slant in different ways at different distances. At near distances the disparity cue is more reliable
than the texture cue (and hence, should be given more
weight according to the MLE model).
Figure 5. JNDs of texture (orange) and disparity (blue) cues
across distance and slant estimated from curve fits to JMH’s
single-cue data (Figure 4).
Given a pair of JND values for texture and disparity, we
can use Equation 2 to calculate optimal weights. Predicted
weights determined solely from the standard deviations of
cumulative Gaussians fitted to single-cue psychometric data
are shown in Figure 6 as data points (based on the raw JND
data) and curves (based on the fitted curves in Figure 4).
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Slant (deg)
disparity data & fit
texture data & fit
Predicted Weights for Different Slants & Distances
Figure 6. Predicted weights for disparity and texture cues. From left to right, the panels show data from viewing distances of 19.1, 57.3,
and 171.9 cm. The weights were calculated using Equation 2 and the single-cue discrimination data and curve fits shown in Figure 4.
Unfilled diamonds are predicted weights for the texture cue and filled circles are predicted weights for the disparity cue. The solid lines
are predictions calculated from the curve fits in Figure 4. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.
(Similar plots for the other two observers are shown in
Figure 2S. The filled circles and blue curves are the predicted disparity weights and the unfilled diamonds and gray
curves are the predicted texture weights. Because JMH’s
thresholds were infinite at 70 deg in the disparity-alone
condition at 19.1 cm, the MLE weight given to disparity in
this condition is 0. The curve used to fit JMH’s disparity
data in Figure 4 does not capture this fact. To incorporate
this fact, we smoothly extrapolated the predicted weights
curve so that the disparity weight reached 0 at 70 deg.
The predicted weights exhibit two trends. First, with
increasing slant, the texture weight increases and the disparity weight decreases (data from RM and MSB showed
the same trend; Figure 2S) The reciprocal relationship between the texture and disparity weights occurs because the
weights are constrained to sum to 1. The texture weight
becomes relatively greater than the disparity weight with
increasing slant because it becomes a relatively more reliable estimate (Figure 4). Knill and Saunders observed a similar effect. Second, with increasing distance,
disparity weight decreases (and texture weight increases).
Although the reliability of the texture estimator does not
change with distance, its relative reliability increases because the reliability of the disparity estimator decreases.
Individual differences in disparity and texture estimators
(i.e., the single-cue data, Figure 4) are manifest in their predicted weights, a point we will discuss later.
Points of subjective equality (PSEs)
From the two-cue data, we can derive the weights the
observers actually gave the disparity- and texture-specified
slants. Figures 3 and 7 illustrate how this was done. The left
panel of Figure 7 shows one observer’s psychometric data
for a base slant of 0 deg and viewing distance of 57.3 cm. It
plots the proportion of trials on which the observer indicated that the no-conflict stimulus appeared to have greater
slant (right side farther away) than the conflict stimulus.
Psychometric data from four cue-conflict conditions are
shown. Unfilled diamonds represent data for which the
disparity-specified slant was 0 deg and the texture-specified
slant was -10 (gray) or +10 deg (black). Filled circles represent data when the texture slant was 0 deg and the disparity
slant was -10 (light blue) or +10 deg (dark blue). It is readily
apparent that the texture and disparity cues both affected
perceived slant because perturbing the texture-specified
slant affected judgments (shown by the separation between
the gray and black diamonds) and perturbing the disparityspecified slant also affected judgments (the separation between the light and dark blue circles). The effect of disparity perturbation was greater than the effect of texture perturbation, so the weight given to disparity was larger in this
condition. PSEs, the no-conflict stimulus values that appeared on average to have the same slant as the conflict
stimuli, are indicated by the arrows. The right panel of
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Figure 7 illustrates how those PSEs were used to determine
the empirical weights. If the perturbed cue (texture for the
diamonds and disparity for the circles) were the sole determinant of perceived slant (meaning that its weight equaled
1; Equation 1), the PSEs would lie along the diagonal line.
If the non-perturbed cue were the sole determinant, the
PSEs would fall on the horizontal line. The relative location
of the PSE data between these two extremes reflects the
weight given to the perturbed cue (Equation 9). In the same
format as Figure 7, Figures 8-10 compare PSE data from the
two-cue conditions (reflecting the weights observers actually
gave to the two cues) with MLE predictions based on the
single-cue data (Equation 1).
Figure 8 shows the data from observer JMH and
Figure 9 the data from ACD. The columns of panels show
data, from left to right, for viewing distances of 19.1, 57.3,
and 171.9 cm. The rows of panels show data, from top to
bottom, for base slants of +60, +30, 0, -30, and -60 deg
(indicated by orange numbers). The abscissa in each panel
is the value of the perturbed cue’s slant in the conflict
stimulus and the ordinate is the PSE. Figure 10 shows data
for RM and MSB at the 57.3-cm viewing distance. Here the
columns of panels correspond to different observers and
the rows are the same as in Figures 7 and 8.
Perturbed cue dominant
Proportoin No-conflict
More Slanted
No-conflict Slant,
Non-perturbed cue
Slant of Perturbed Cue,
Determining PSEs from the Psychometric Data
The blue and gray lines are MLE predictions for the
disparity-perturbed and texture-perturbed conditions, respectively. For each conflict stimulus, the reliability for
each cue was computed based on the fitted curves in
Figure 4. The optimal weights were then computed using
Equation 2. These weights, together with the displayed
slants for each cue, were combined using Equation 1 to
predict the PSE (i.e., the perceived slant for the conflict
stimulus). The predictions are curved because the relative
reliabilities (and hence the cue weights) change as the per-
Figure 7. Determination of points of subjective equality (PSEs)
from two-cue data. Left panel: one observer’s results for four
cue-conflict stimuli with
= 0 deg, ∆ = +/-10 deg, and distance = 57.3 cm. The conflict stimuli are:
(unfilled gray diamonds),
= 10 deg (unfilled blac
diamonds),
= 0 deg (filled light-blue circles),
= 0 deg (filled dark-blue circles). Data represent
the proportion of times the observer indicated the no-conflict
stimulus was more slanted than the conflict stimulus. Staircase
data with fewer than four observations at a given value of the noconflict stimulus have been removed for clarity. Curves are
maximum-likelihood fits of cumulative Gaussians (which used all
the points including the ones removed for the clarity). The means
of the fits are PSEs, the value of the no-conflict stimulus that on
average had the same apparent slant as the conflict stimulus.
The PSEs for each of the four conflict stimuli are indicated by the
arrows. Right panel: PSEs for the four psychometric functions.
Values of the no-conflict stimulus (indicated by arrows in left
panel) are plotted as a function of the conflict ∆. If perceived
slant were determined by one cue only (meaning its weight = 1),
the data would lie on the diagonal line labeled “Perturbed cue
dominant” when that cue was perturbed and on the horizontal
line labeled “Non-perturbed cue dominant” when the other cue
was perturbed. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.
Perturbed-cue Slant (deg)
BASE SLANT
disparity perturbed &
MLE preds.
texture perturbed &
MLE preds.
Figure 8. PSE data and predictions for observer JMH. PSE (slant
of the no-conflict stimulus perceived on average as the same as
conflict stimulus;
) is plotted as a function of the value of
the perturbed cue in the conflict stimulus (
). The left, middle, and right columns are data from viewing distances of 19.1,
57.3, and 171.9 cm. The rows are for base slants 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Perturbed-cue Slant (deg)
BASE SLANT
Perturbed-cue Slant (deg)
disparity perturbed
& MLE preds.
texture perturbed
& MLE preds.
BASE SLANT
Figure 10. PSE data and predictions for RM and MSB at the
57.3-cm viewing distance. Symbol conventions the same as in
Figures 8 and 9.
Figure 9. PSE data and predictions for observer ACD. Conventions the same as Figure 8.
turbation is changed . We used a shortcut to generate the prediction curves. Specifically, we used
the reliability based on the displayed slant to calculate the
weight, rather than the reliability based on the observer’s
estimate of slant from each cue (which varies from trial to
trial). Predictions based on a full Monte Carlo simulation
in which weights were calculated separately for each simulated trial were, however, indistinguishable from these.
The agreement between the PSE data and predictions
is generally excellent. The two main expected trends are
observed in the data: The influence of disparity decreases
with increasing distance and with increasing slant. We will
discuss exceptions to the close agreement in Discussion:
Summary of the results. We also plotted the MLE-predicted
and actual weights in a similar format to Figures 8-10.
These plots are shown in Figures 3S-5S. These plots show
that the weights are generally close to the MLE-predicted
weights and that the sums of the weights given to texture
and disparity do not differ from one.
Just-noticeable differences (JNDs)
The estimation model for cues with uncorrelated
noises (Equations 1-2) produces the least-variable estimate
of slant given the available cues. If observers employ this
cue-combination scheme, we should see improvements in
JNDs when both cues are available compared to when only
one cue is available. Equation 6 specifies the variance of the
optimal cue-combined estimator, which is lower than either
of the single-cue estimators. We used the estimates of JNDs
from the single-cue conditions (Figures 4 and 1S) and
Equation 6 to calculate the predicted JNDs when both cues
were available. Figure 11 shows measured and predicted
JNDs for JMH and ACD as a function of base slant for the
three distances. The pale symbols represent the single-cue
JNDs: diamonds for texture alone and circles for disparity
alone. The filled red squares are the observed two-cue JNDs
and the shaded red areas contain the 95% confidence intervals for the predictions. With few exceptions (discussed
in Summary of results), the two-cue data follow the predictions very closely. Importantly, two-cue JNDs are consistently lower than single-cue JNDs, which shows that
the visual system does benefit from having both cues available. Similar JND plots for RM and MSB are shown in
Figure 6S.
Earlier we mentioned a test of the assumption that the
reliability of the disparity estimator measured in the singlecue experiment with random-dot stimuli is a valid estimate
of the estimator’s reliability in the two-cue experiment with
Voronoi stimuli. We tested the assumption by examining
situations in the two-cue experiment in which the texture
weight was nearly zero. The texture weight was less than
0.15 in three situations, all with observer JMH: dis-
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Base Slant (deg)
MLE preds (95% c.i.)
Observed & Predicted JNDs
Figure 11. Predicted and observed JNDs. The just-noticeable difference in slant (JND) is plotted as a function of base slant
are the sigma parameters for the cumulative normal fits to the psychometric data divided by
and represent our estimates of the
standard deviation of the slant estimators. Filled red squares are observed JNDs when texture and disparity were both present. Faint
gray diamonds are observed JNDs for texture alone (Figure 4, left) and faint blue circles are observed JNDs for disparity alone
(Figure 4, middle). Disparity JNDs for ±70 deg base slant at 19.1 cm for JMH were infinite (indicated by pale blue symbols with yellow
stars). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. Red curves represent 95% confidence intervals for the predicted JNDs
(Equation 6). Left, middle, and right panels represent the data from viewing distances of 19.1, 57.3, and 171.9 cm.
tance = 19.1 cm and base slants of –15, 0, and +15 deg. His
two-cue thresholds in those situations were 2.9, 2.4, and
2.9 deg, respectively (Figure 11). His single-cue, disparityalone thresholds in the same situations were 3.2, 2.6, and
2.1 deg, respectively (Figure 4). The close correspondence
supports our assumption that the disparity-alone thresholds
provided an estimate of the appropriate reliability for the
two-cue experiment.
By similar reasoning, we can test the assumption that
the reliability of the texture estimator measured in the single-cue experiment with monocular stimuli is a valid estimate of the estimator’s reliability in the two-cue experiment
with binocular stimuli. To generate one slant estimate from
the texture-specified slants at the two eyes, the visual system
should combine the monocular signals in some fashion.
The combination could occur in two ways. (1) The visual
system might combine the two eyes’ images before computing slant. This could be done in principle by averaging the
visual directions for each corresponding point in the two
images. Then slant would be computed from the combined
Cyclopean image. (2) The visual system might estimate eyecentered slants before combining. Specifically, it could estimate the slants from the texture signals received by each
eye and then average the two estimates. These two means of
combining the monocular images are geometrically equivalent and yield the same slant as would be observed at the
Cyclopean eye as long as the coordinate origin is on the
Vieth-Müller Circle. At any rate, averaging the two eyes’
inputs is a reasonable way to form a texture-based slant estimate. If we assume that the two monocular inputs are
equally informative and that their noises are uncorrelated
(perhaps an implausible assumption), the variance of the
combined estimate would be half the variance of either
monocular estimate. In other words, discrimination thresholds based on the texture information alone would be
lower in the binocular than in the monocular case by
 . We tested this possibility by examining
situations in the two-cue experiment in which the disparity
weight was nearly zero. This occurred for JMH and ACD
across all slants at 171.9 cm. It also occurred for observer
JMH at 19.1 cm and base slant = ±70 deg. JMH’s texturealone JNDs at 171.9 cm for base slants of –45 to +45 deg
(the range of tested slants) were 2.3–8.0 deg (the lowest
values occurring at the greatest slants; Figure 4). His twocue JNDs at 171.9 cm for base slants of –45 to +45 deg
ranged from 3.4–5.9 deg (again the lowest values occurring
at the greatest slants; Figure 11). JMH’s texture-alone JNDs
at 19.1 cm for base slants of –70 and +70 deg were 1.5 and
1.0 deg, respectively, and his corresponding two-cue JNDs
were 1.4 and 1.4 deg. ACD’s texture-alone JNDs at
171.9 cm ranged from 2.4–5.3 deg and her two-cue JNDs
ranged from 3.3–4.1 deg. Thus, when the disparity weight
was low, the texture-alone thresholds were generally similar
to the corresponding two-cue thresholds. The good correspondence supports our assumption that the texture-alone
thresholds provided an estimate of the appropriate reliability for the two-cue experiment. It also implies that the slant
specified by texture is not made more reliable by averaging
the two eyes’ images, perhaps because the noises are highly
correlated.
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Discussion
Summary of the results
The generally excellent agreement between observed
and predicted PSEs and JNDs indicates that humans use a
statistically optimal strategy for combining slant information from disparity and texture. There are, however, three
cases in which the data deviated from the predictions.
(1) JMH’s PSEs in the two-cue condition at 19.1 cm
and base slants of –60 and +60 deg (Figure 8). The weight
given disparity was lower than predicted when the absolute
value of the perturbed-cue slant was greater than 60 deg. In
the disparity-alone ±70-deg, 19.1-cm conditions, JMH could
not fuse the random dot stimulus (thus, thresholds were
infinite). The same was true in the two-cue condition: Slant
judgments were made on diplopic images, making the task
more complicated. Our model does not consider how
depth judgments are made in diplopic conditions. Given
this, the discrepancy between observed and two-cue data is
understandable.
(2) ACD’s JNDs in the two-cue condition for all base
slants at 19.1 cm and for the larger base slants at 57.3 cm
(Figure 11). Her two-cue thresholds were consistently lower
than predicted. Moreover, ACD gave slightly more weight
to disparity than predicted for base slants of ±30 and
±60 deg at 57.3 cm (Figure 9). The most obvious explanation for these discrepancies is that the disparity-alone JNDs
(Figure 4) overestimated the variance of ACD’s disparity
estimator in the two-cue experiment. As described in
Methods (Figure 2), ACD may have given some weight to
the uninformative texture signal in the disparity-alone experiment for nonzero base slants. This would have caused
an overestimate of the variance of the disparity estimator
whenever the disparity weight was relatively high in the twocue experiment (which occurs when the viewing distance is
19.1 or 57.3 cm) and whenever the base slant differed significantly from zero.
(3) JMH’s and ACD’s disparity weights were higher
than predicted at 171.9 cm when the base slant was 0 deg.
We think this small discrepancy is caused by variation in
binocular fusion at long distances. Both observers reported
difficulty fusing the random-dot stimulus in the single-cue
experiment when the viewing distance was 171.9 cm (perhaps because of the conflict between vergence and accommodation). Thus, their thresholds at 171.9 cm may have
slightly overestimated the variance of the disparity estimator at that distance. (ACD also had difficulty fusing the
random-dot stimulus at 19.1 cm, which may have contributed to the apparent overestimate of the variance of the
disparity estimator as discussed under #2 above.) Both observers found it easier to fuse the Voronoi stimulus at
171.9 cm, presumably because that stimulus provides contours to guide vergence eye movements. The discrepancy is
most likely to show up when the base slant is 0 deg because
the disparity weight is highest in that case. Thus, this discrepancy between predicted and observed behavior is
probably caused by fusion difficulties in the single-cue experiment at the long distance.
The great majority of the data is consistent with the
MLE predictions and strongly supports the hypothesis that
observers combine the slant cues of disparity and texture in
a statistically optimal fashion.
Comparison to other studies
Five studies have examined quantitatively whether cue
combination is statistically optimal . In agreement
with our results, all five found that combination of cues
from different sensory modalities or different visual cues was quite close to
MLE predictions.
Knill and Saunders tested the MLE model for
combining texture and disparity cues to surface slant. Their
stimuli were slanted about a horizontal axis (tilt = 90 deg).
Like us, they took advantage of the fact that the relative
reliabilities of texture and disparity vary naturally with viewing geometry. They reported reasonable agreement between
observed and predicted behavior. We extended their investigation by examining texture and disparity combination
for surfaces slanted about a vertical axis (tilt = 0 deg) at
various distances. Our data are similar and dissimilar to
Knill and Saunders’. Our texture-alone data exhibited a
smaller effect of base slant on JNDs (compare our Figure 4
to their Figure 6). Average texture-alone JNDs in our study
were ~8 and ~1.5 deg at 0 and 70 deg, respectively (a ratio
of 5.3). The corresponding JNDs in Knill and Saunders
were ~40 and ~2 deg (a ratio of 20). The fact that our JNDs
were generally lower is undoubtedly because our Voronoi
patterns were more regular than Knill and Saunders’. The
differing effect of base slant is most likely due to differences
in how the angular subtense of the stimuli varied with
slant: Ours varied with base slant and theirs was constant.
To hold angular size constant, Knill and Saunders added
texture elements as slant increased, and this adds progressively more information as slant increases.
We also examined how viewing distance affects the
weights assigned to texture and disparity and found that
the weight assignment is essentially optimal. This result
seems to contradict numerous reports of failures to scale
veridically for distance in stereoscopic tasks. For example,
Johnston , Johnston, Cumming, and Parker ,
and Bradshaw, Glennerster, and Rogers had observers judge the amount of depth in disparity-defined cylinders, spheres, and ridges when presented at different distances. Responses were far from veridical, indicating that
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
depth was overestimated at near and underestimated at far
distances. How could we observe optimal weight changes as
a function of distance, while previous work showed apparent failures to take distance into account? We think the
answer lies in the influence of unmodeled cues. In all but
one of the previous experiments , the texture gradient specified a frontoparallel
plane. From our analysis, one would expect observers to
report seeing less depth at long distances, not because they
failed to take distance into account, but rather because they
gave increasing weight to a signal specifying that the stimulus is flat. This claim is supported by the observation that
making the texture gradient consistent with the disparityspecified shape generally makes judgments more veridical
 . Furthermore, when the task is to adjust the shape of a surface until
it appears planar and thereby consistent with the texturespecified shape, observers seem to take distance into account veridically .
If distance was not taken into account in scaling disparities, it is possible that this mis-scaling could be mistaken for a change in disparity weight with change in distance. This no-scaling hypothesis is considered and rejected
in Appendix C.
Dynamic determination of cue weights
MLE cue combination has the advantage that it produces the least-variable estimate of slant given the available
cues. But it requires the observer to choose weights based
on the reliability of the cues. In the case of texture, the reliability clearly depends on the slant, which is what the observer is trying to estimate. Thus, the choice of weights
must be made dynamically, with the possibility of varying
weights from trial to trial (or from location to location
within a stimulus, discussed shortly). The model suggests
that on each trial the observer makes an estimate of slant
from each cue, uses the value of slant for each cue along
with other relevant information to determine that cue’s current reliability. The relative reliabilities are then used to determine the cue weights
(Equation 2), followed by weighted cue combination
(Equation 1). In our experiments, the slant shown to the
observer was selected randomly before each trial from the
set of possible slants within each block. For performance to
approach optimality, the weights must have been determined in a trial-by-trial dynamic fashion. In a previous
study we also had clear-cut evidence of weights changing
from trial to trial . The reader may wonder how such dynamic computation could be accomplished
in a biological system without prior knowledge of the likelihood functions associated with each slant cue. Ernst and
Banks outlined a plausible neural model that could
carry out the computation automatically.
Comparison of observed and expected
effects of slant and distance on disparity-
and texture-based JNDs
We observed three effects in the single-cue experiments—a large improvement in discrimination threshold
with decreasing distance with disparity alone, a small improvement in threshold with increasing slant with disparity
alone , and a large improvement in discrimination threshold with increasing
slant with texture alone . Here, we ask whether the three observed effects are
expected from the slant information in the stimulus.
When the eyes are in forward gaze, as they were in
these experiments, the vergence is
where d is viewing distance and i is the inter-ocular distance. Slant from disparity (for tilt = 0) is given to close
approximation by
Thus, errors in the disparity and distance estimates will
both yield errors in the estimated slant. We calculated the
distribution of slant estimates for different viewing conditions under the assumption that the errors in HSR and
µ can be represented by additive, independent noises. Specifically, we conducted a Monte Carlo simulation to determine the standard deviation of slant estimates
Equation 11. The noises were Gaussian with mean = 0. We
adjusted the noise standard deviations,
obtain simulation JNDs similar to the observed JNDs. The
simulation results are displayed in Figure 12. The left panel
σ as a function of distance (the curves representing
different base slants) and the right panel shows
function of base slant (the curves representing different
distances).
The standard deviation of the slant estimate,
roughly proportional to viewing distance for all base slants
(left panel). This result is expected from Equation 11 because d
, so fixed additive noise in µ has an increasing
effect with distance. We found that
σ was proportional to
distance for a wide range of
; the key assumption is that the noise in disparity normalization is fixed and
additive in vergence. The data points in the lower left panel
are JNDs from observer JMH; clearly, his discrimination
thresholds increased monotonically with increasing distance in much the same way as the simulation. The data
from ACD were similar. Thus, the distance effect we observed in the disparity-alone experiment is expected if error
in disparity normalization is additive in units of vergence.
The right panel of Figure 12 shows that
σ is inversely
related to the absolute value of slant. This relationship was
observed for all values except when
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
relationship is expected from Equation 11 because
, so fixed additive noise in HSR has progressively less effect on
σ as base slant increases. The data
points in the lower right panel are JNDs from observer
JMH; data were similar for the other three observers. At
viewing distances of 57.3 and 171.9 cm, JMH’s discrimination thresholds decreased monotonically with slant magnitude much like the simulation’s standard deviations.
Thus, the base-slant effect we observed in the disparityalone condition is expected if error in disparity measurement is additive in HSR. Does this assumption make sense?
It does when HSR is not significantly different from 1,
which was true for distances of 57.3 and 171.9 cm (see
Figure 4). However, when HSR is quite different from 1,
points on the surface fall where stereo-acuity is low and
problems arise in solving the binocular correspondence
problem . HSR and the horizontal
gradient of horizontal disparity are closely related,
where DG is an approximation to the disparity gradient
 . From Equations 10 and 11
when d is small and S is large, HSR is quite different from 1
and thus DG will be quite different from 0. Burt and Julesz
 and others have shown that binocular correspondence becomes difficult when DG deviates significantly
from 0 and breaks down altogether when
DG ≈. Recent
results indicate that this is probably a by-product of a
matching process that is similar to cross-correlating the two
eyes’ images to estimate the disparity in a region of the visual field .
Distance (cm)
d = 171.9 cm
Slant (deg)
Sd = 0 deg
Ideal & Observed JNDs for Disparity Alone
Figure 13 plots the disparity gradient as a function of
slant for the three distances we used. DG increases rapidly
as a function of slant at the short distance, so we expect
performance to be worse at that distance for large slants.
JMH’s data exhibited this effect. His discrimination thresholds at 19.1 cm increased with slant, which is inconsistent
with the assumption that the sole source of error in disparity measurement is additive in HSR (Figure 12, lower-right
panel, gray curve). They were higher than predicted for
slant ≥30 deg which corresponds to a higher disparity gradient ( DG ≥0.19, HSR ≥1.2) than occurs at 57.3 and
171.9 cm. Thus, the base-slant effect in the disparity-alone
experiment is expected if error in disparity measurement is
additive in HSR except when HSR deviates significantly
from 1 where problems arise in solving correspondence.
Figure 12. Results of a simulation of slant from disparity estimation. We used a Monte Carlo simulation to calculate the standard
deviation of disparity-based slant estimates (Equation 11) for
different viewing conditions. We assumed that error in the slant
estimates stemmed from noise in HSR and µ (vergence angle)
and that these errors (the variances) were the same for all viewing distances. The noises were additive and Gaussian with
mean = 0, and we obtained simulation results for many sets of
parameters. The results for
= 0.012 and
= 0.012 radians, which fit the data reasonably well, are displayed in the figure. Left panel: the standard deviations of slant estimates are
plotted as a function of distance. Different curves represent different absolute values of base slant. The circles represent the
observed JNDs for observer JMH at the various distances. Different colors represent different absolute values of base slant.
Right panel: the standard deviations of slant estimates as a function of base slant. Different curves represent different viewing
distances. The circles represent the observed JNDs for observer
JMH. Different colors represent different distances.
Slant (deg )
Disparity Gradient
d = 171.9 cm
Figure 13. Disparity gradient as a function of slant at different
viewing distances. The disparity gradient was calculated from
Equation 12.
We also compared our observed texture-alone thresholds with those expected from the information in the various slant cues associated with the texture gradient. Knill
 described ideal observers for slant from texture when presented Voronoi stimuli like the stimuli in our
experiments. The stimulus parameters in our experiment
differed from those in his modeling and experiments in
First, the Voronoi patterns in our stimuli were more
regular than in his. From this one would expect the texturegradient cue to be more reliable in our experiment than in
Second, the angular subtense of our stimuli varied with
slant 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Slant (deg )
Ideal & Observed JNDs for Texture Alone
gular width so as to make the width an unreliable cue to
slant), so the average number of texture elements was constant across slant. To keep the angular subtense constant,
Knill added texture elements as slant increased, which adds
information. This added information probably explains
why his observed and predicted discrimination thresholds
varied more with slant than ours did.
Despite the differences in stimulus parameters, it is informative to compare ideal thresholds with our observers’
thresholds. The curve in Figure 14 shows the standard
deviation of slant estimates from Knill’s foreshortening
ideal observer . There is a striking effect of base slant. The data points are JMH’s thresholds in the texture-alone experiment; data were similar for
the other three observers. The data exhibit a base-slant effect like the ideal observer’s, but the effect is smaller in our
data for reasons described above. Therefore, the variation
we observed in texture-based slant thresholds is by and large
expected from the information content of the stimulus.
We conclude that the effects of distance and slant on
JNDs can be expected from the information present in the
stimuli. These effects are summarized in Figure 5.
What other variables might affect
cue weights?
Presumably, the visual system takes the disparity and
texture variances into account across many viewing situations. To do so, however, is complex because many viewing
properties will affect the likelihood functions associated
with disparity and texture cues. Here we list the most obvious properties and suggest how the relative weights assigned
to disparity and texture ought to be affected.
1. Regularity of texture.
The slant information contained in the texture gradient can be divided into three cues: (1) scaling, the change
in the projected sizes of texture elements, (2) foreshortening, the change in projected shapes of texture elements,
and (3) density, the change in the number of elements per
unit area in the projection . The reliability of scaling as a
slant signal depends on the variation in the sizes of the texture elements on the surface. With greater size variation,
the cue’s reliability decreases . The reliability
of foreshortening depends on the variation in the shapes of
the elements on the surface. For regular shapes, like circles,
reliability is greater than for irregular shapes, such as ellipses with variable aspect ratios . The reliability of the density cue depends on the
number of elements and the regularity of their positioning
on the surface. Presumably, many elements placed regularly
(i.e., in a grid) yield more reliable estimates than few elements placed randomly. All three cues are affected by the
field of view, particularly in the tilt direction, so slant discrimination from texture is more precise with large than
with small stimuli . If the
visual system takes the varying reliability of the texture gradient cue into account, all of these stimulus properties will
affect the relative weights assigned to disparity- and texturebased signals.
Figure 14. Ideal and measured JNDs for slant from texture as a
function of base slant. The solid line represents the standard
deviations of the slant estimates of the foreshortening ideal observer for Voronoi stimuli . The diamonds represent discrimination thresholds in the texture-alone
condition for observer JMH. Light gray diamonds are thresholds
at 19.1 cm, medium gray at 57.3 cm, and dark at 171.9 cm.
2. Surface tilt.
The direction of slant or tilt affects the amount of perceived slant in stereograms . The
disparity signal for surfaces slanted about a vertical axis
(tilt = 0 deg) is the horizontal gradient of horizontal disparities. We have quantified this as the horizontal-size ratio
(HSR). The disparity signal for surfaces slanted about a
horizontal axis (tilt = 90 deg) is the vertical gradient of
horizontal disparities. This disparity pattern is often referred to as horizontal-shear disparity .
Random-element stereograms simulating a slanted plane
with tilt = 0 deg generally produce less perceived slant than
planes with tilt = 90 deg . Similarly,
the amount of depth seen in curved disparity-defined surfaces varies with tilt . These tiltdependent variations in perceived depth are called slant
anisotropy. The phenomenon is most striking when the texture gradient specifies a frontoparallel plane, as is usually
the case with random-element stereograms. The phenomenon is not observed when disparity and texture signal the
same depth variation, as occurs with real surfaces . These observations strongly suggest that slant anisotropy is caused by conflicting disparity
and texture signals in conventional random-element stereograms. They also suggest that texture is generally given
more weight for tilt 0 (as in our experiments) and less
weight for tilt 90 . By the
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
argument presented here, this may be due to reduced disparity reliability for tilt 0 than for tilt 90 because there is no
obvious reason for the reliability of the monocular texture
cue to depend on tilt. There may, however, be differences
in the steps required to combine the texture and disparity
signals for different tilts. The issues involved in transforming texture-gradient signals into the same coordinates for combination with disparity signals are taken up in
Appendix D.
3. Reliability of estimated distance and azimuth.
To estimate slant from the measured disparities, the
visual system must “normalize” the disparities with a distance estimate and “correct” the disparities with an azimuth
estimate . Relaxing the assumption of
forward gaze in Equation 11, slant about a vertical axis
(tilt = 0) is
where µ is vergence, and γ is azimuth (the angle between
the head’s median plane and the Cyclopean line of sight)
 . µ is estimated both from extra-retinal
signals concerning the eyes’ vergence and from the horizontal gradient of vertical disparity . When vertical disparities are large, as occurs with
large stimuli at close range, they are the predominant
means for estimating distance. However, when vertical disparities are unreliable because the stimulus is small , or because the texture contains no
horizontal contours , the eyes’ vergence
becomes the predominant means of estimating distance
and the accuracy of disparity normalization drops .
The azimuth γ is used to correct disparities; it is estimated from extra-retinal, eye-position signals and from the
magnitude of vertical disparities .
When vertical disparities are large, as occurs with near
stimuli subtending a large angle, they are the predominant
means of estimating azimuth. When the stimulus is short
or when vertical disparities are unmeasurable, eye position
becomes the predominant means and the accuracy of disparity correction suffers .
Similar arguments apply for slant estimation with
tilt = 90 deg. In this case, slant around a surface point is
where µ is again the vergence angle, HSh is horizontal shear
disparity and τ is the cyclovergence of
the eyes (the difference in the eyes’ torsion). HSh must be
normalized for distance by an estimate of µ and corrected
for cyclovergence by an estimate of τ .
For our present purposes, when the viewing situation
reduces the reliability of the estimates of the normalizing
and/or correcting signals, the disparity estimate will become more variable. This will occur, for example, when the
stimulus subtends a small angle, when the surface markings
make the measurement of vertical disparity unreliable, and
when the stimulus is distant. If the visual system takes such
changes into account, the weight given to disparity should
decrease in those circumstances.
4. Duration.
Van Ee and Erkelens showed that the slant perceived from disparity-defined planes increases with stimulus
duration. Their random-element stereograms contained the
texture gradient associated with a frontoparallel plane, so
their results are consistent with a model in which the
weight given to disparity relative to texture increases over
time. Presumably, disparity and texture estimates both become more precise with increases in stimulus duration, but
the increase may be slower for disparity. Thus, stimulus
duration may also affect the relative weights given to disparity- and texture-based slant estimates.
Are cue weights computed locally?
It is interesting to consider whether the visual system
determines one set of weights for each surface or whether
the weights are calculated locally. That is, can the weights
vary from one patch on a surface to another? If they are
calculated locally, there are situations in which a cueconflict stimulus specifying a plane should appear curved.
Here we explain why this should happen and report that
the predicted curvature is in fact observed.
The left panel of Figure 15 shows how slant and distance vary with azimuth when the surface is a plane. For the
part of the plane that lies straight ahead, the slant is S and
the distance is d; for the part on the right, it is
where γ is the azimuth. The distance to the intersection of
the line and plane is
The left and middle panels of Figure 16 show how Sγ and
dγ vary with azimuth for different base slants and d = 19.1
cm. Because the local slant and distance vary with azimuth,
the statistically optimal weights for the texture and disparity
cues should vary with azimuth.
Now consider the cue-conflict stimulus in the middle
panel of Figure 15. For rightward gaze (γ < 0), slants
tS γ approach zero and distance dγ decreases. Our data
(Figure 6) show that texture weight is relatively low when
the absolute value of slant is ~0 and distance is short. Thus,
if the weights used in combining slant estimates are determined locally, one would expect the texture weight in this
situation to be lower on the right than straight ahead. 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
No-conflict Surface
texture-specified
disparity-specified
Cue-conflict Surface
increasing
texture weight
increasing
Predicted Percept
Figure 15. Change in slant with azimuth. Left panel: Definitions of local slant and distance. A plane is positioned straight ahead of the
Cyclopean eye. The surface normal at the intersection of the plane and the head’s median plane is shown. Slant S is the angle between
the normal and the Cyclopean line of sight to that point and d is the distance to that point. The azimuth to another point on the plane is
γ. The slant with respect to that point is
and the distance is
. Middle panel: Slants and local slants for a cue-conflict stimulus. The
disparity-specified slant of the stimulus is
= –25 deg and the texture-specified slant is
= –10 deg. The local slants at azimuth
. Right panel: Predicted perceived slants across the cue-conflict stimulus if cue weights are determined locally. The
thin red line represents the predicted slant if cue weights are fixed across the surface. The thick red line segments represent the predicted changes in slant if the weights are determined locally. The surface should appear concave in this case.
changes in local slant and distance with changes in azimuth
are unaffected by the direction in which the eyes are looking; they are determined only by the positions of surface
points relative to the head. Thus, when we say “on the
right” or “straight ahead,” we refer to the head-centered
azimuth of a line of sight from the Cyclopean eye and not
necessarily the azimuth of fixation.) For leftward azimuth
(γ > 0), the slants become increasingly negative and distance
increases; the texture weight in this situation should be
higher on the left than straight ahead.
If the disparity and texture weights change across a surface, the slant estimate should change when the disparity-
and texture-specified slants differ. This is illustrated in the
right panel of Figure 15. The thin red line represents the
slant estimate if the disparity and texture weights were
equal throughout. However, if the disparity weight increased with increasingly rightward azimuth, the slant estimate should approach the disparity-specified slant toward
the right and the texture-specified slant toward the left; this
is depicted by the thick red line segments. As a conse-
d = 19.1 cm
Slant Estimate (deg)
d = 19.1 cm
Figure 16. Change in local slant, local distance, and estimated slant with azimuth. Left panel: Local slant
(see Figure 15 for definition) as a function of azimuth γ. The lines from top to bottom show
for different slants S. Middle panel: Local distance
as a function of azimuth γ. The gray, magenta, blue, green, and orange curves show
for slants of 45, 22.5, 0, –22.5, and –45 deg, respectively. Right panel: Predicted local slant estimates from the weighted sum (Equation 1) if the cue weights are determined locally. Disparity-specified slant (
; blue) is –25 deg and texture-specified slant (
; gray) is –10 deg. Distance (d) is 19.1 cm. Using the cue
weights as a function of base slant at a distance of 19.1 cm for observer JMH, we calculated the estimated slant at each azimuth.
Those local slants (
) are represented by the red curve.
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
quence, this particular cue-conflict stimulus should appear
We calculated how the estimated local slant Sγ should
change with azimuth for observer JMH. The cue-conflict
stimulus in the calculation had a disparity-specified slant
of –25 deg and texture-specified slant
of –10 deg.
Distance d to the midpoint was 19.1 cm. If weights are determined locally for each azimuth γ, the observer must associate local disparity-defined slant
corresponding variance
texture-defined
with its variance
σ . The right panel of Figure 16 shows
the expected change in slant as a function of azimuth. With
leftward azimuth, the slant estimate approaches the texturespecified slant, and with rightward azimuth, it approaches
the disparity-specified slant. The result would be an apparently concave surface as schematized in the right panel of
Figure 15. If the disparity- and texture-specified surfaces
were swapped (
= –25 deg), the result would be
an apparently convex surface. If the disparity and texture
specified the same slant, as they would with most real surfaces, the result should be an apparently planar surface.
In doing these calculations, we assumed that the cue
weights were determined by the local disparity and texture
slants only and not by the distance (because the texturespecified distance is undefined). The predicted curvature
would have been somewhat greater if we had included the
changes in disparity-defined distance in the calculation.
Do people see the predicted curvature? To answer this,
we back-projected Voronoi patterns onto a large screen.
The texture gradient specified different slants relative to the
screen. The disparity-defined slant was equal to that of the
projection screen (and hence was consistent with other cues
such as blur and accommodation). Observers viewed the
display binocularly. Azimuth was manipulated by having
them stand at an oblique position relative to the screen
center. The situation in Figure 15 was recreated as follows.
Observers stood 25 deg to the right of center at a distance
of 19.1 cm and viewed a stimulus whose texture gradient
specified a slant of +15 deg relative to the screen. Thus,
deg. At this azimuth, the
field of view was ~70 deg wide. The stimulus was clipped by
an elliptical window to make the outline shape an unreliable cue to slant. The room was completely dark except for
the display so the screen’s frame could not be seen. If
weights are set locally, this cue-conflict stimulus should appear concave. We also created a viewing situation in which
the surface should appear convex—γ = –25,
= –40 deg—and another in which the surface should
appear planar—γ = –25,
= –25, and
= –25 deg. Seven
observers (five naïve) viewed the displays and reported
whether they appeared concave, planar, or convex. Five of
the seven (three naïve) reported that the stimuli predicted
to look concave and convex actually looked that way; the
other two said that the stimuli all appeared concave or planar but that the one predicted to look concave appeared
the most concave. We asked them to order the three stimuli according to the amount of perceived concavity, and all
seven ordered them in the predicted order.
We conclude that the weights assigned to disparity and
texture are estimated locally. As a consequence, large cueconflict stimuli in fact can appear curved. In the main experiments, observers did not notice such distortions in the
cue-conflict stimuli because the stimuli were small and the
conflicts were small.
Ideal observer models
We have based our modeling on an ideal Bayesian or
statistical observer assuming uncorrelated (or conditionally
independent) cues and a negligible effect of the prior distribution. Here, we consider the impact and validity of
these assumptions.
Oruç et al. developed an ideal observer that allowed for correlated noise associated with each cue. The
resulting cue-combination rule remains linear (a weighted
average), but the optimal weights do not satisfy Equation 2.
Rather, they must be “corrected” for the amount of cue
correlation. We observed excellent agreement between the
predicted and observed two-cue data, which indicates that
the correlation between the noises of the texture and disparity estimators is probably small. One might expect a
strong correlation between the noises associated with disparity- and texture-based slant estimators because the two
estimators must share some processing (e.g., noise in the
stimulus itself, eye movements, retinal-image formation,
and retinal processing). The fact that we observe the improvement in JNDs expected from combining two conditionally independent estimates implies that the dominant noises are independent.
Those noises probably arise in separate processes such as
comparing the two eyes’ images, normalizing for distance,
and correcting for azimuth.
In the modeling we assumed that the prior distribution
Equation 3) has a negligible effect. This assumption is usually justified by assuming that the variance of the prior is much greater than
the variances of the likelihoods. Is this the case in the estimation of surface slant? It is reasonable to assume that the
distribution of surface slants in the world is uniform, particularly for tilt = 0. But if that distribution is uniform, the
probability of observing slant S at the retina will be proportional to cos
because steeply slanted surfaces project to
smaller retinal images.
Equations 7-9 show how the observers’ judgments will be affected by the stimulus values and
weights. If we add the prior into those equations, Equation 9
The value of
depends on its inverse variance, or reliability, relative to the estimator reliabilities (
Equation 5).
As long as the prior’s variance is large relative to the estimators’ variances,
will be small and will have no discerniw
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
ble effect on the data. The prior distribution is proportional to cos
, which is defined from –90 to 90 deg. Such
a half cosine has a standard deviation of ~40 deg. The
standard deviations of the disparity and texture estimators
Figure 4) ranged from 1-20 deg. They were the highest
when distance = 171.9 cm and slant = 0 deg. Then the
standard deviations of the disparity and texture estimators
were 20.4 and 8.0 deg for JMH and 16.1 and 5.3 deg for
ACD. We can use Equation 5 to calculate the expected
for those conditions:
= 0.034 and 0.016 for JMH and
ACD, respectively. Those represent the largest possible influence of the prior distribution on the results and
still quite small. Further, the weights given to texture and
disparity generally sum to one (Figures 3S-5S), indicating
that the prior received little or no weight in all of our conditions. We conclude that the prior had no discernible influence on our results.
Decision noise
An important underlying assumption in our analysis is
that single-cue thresholds accurately reflect the observer’s
uncertainty about slant from the cue in question. In reality,
discrimination thresholds are affected by other sources of
uncertainty, such as high-level decision noise. Here we examine the consequences of decision noise on the predicted
and observed results. We assume that the decision noise is
additive, and has a mean of zero and standard deviation
σ . We also assume that
σ has the same value in the
single-cue and two-cue experiments.
First consider the PSE data (Figures 8-10). Let
represent the variances we measured in the disparity-
and texture-alone experiments:
We used those measured variances to generate predictions
for the weights given disparity and texture. Thus, Equation 2
represent the measured reliabilities from
the disparity-alone and texture-alone experiments (the
measured reliabilities include the effects of decision noise).
In the two-cue experiment, we measured the weight observers actually assigned to disparity and texture and those
weights were presumably affected only by the visual system’s
estimates of the uncertainties of the disparity and texture
estimators. In other words,
Equation 2 rather than
Equation 19 describes what the observed weights should
be. Decision noise should, therefore, affect the predicted
weights (Equation 19) and not the observed weights in the
two-cue experiment. To determine the consequences of
decision noise, we calculated the predicted and observed
weights for a variety of situations. We set the sum of estimator variances to one (
= 1) and varied
was set to 0, 0.1, 0.32, or 1. The left panel of
Figure 17 shows the results. The predicted texture weight
) is plotted as a function of the actual texture weight
). Naturally, the prediction (diagonal dashed line) is
perfect when
= 0 because Equations 2 and 19 are then
identical. For
> 0, the predicted weights deviate from
the observed. When
is greater than 0.5 (and hence
greater than
is less than
is less than
0.5, the opposite occurs. When
( w = ~0.5), the
effect of decision noise is negligible. Thus, if decision noise
were sufficiently large in our experiments, it should cause
error in the PSE data when
is either much larger or
much smaller than
. This circumstance occurred when
the viewing distance was 19.1 cm and the base slant was
0 deg and when the viewing distance was 171.9 cm
Figures 8 and 9). With the exception of distance = 171.9,
base slant = 0, the agreement between predicted and observed PSEs is excellent in these cases. This implies that
uncertainty due to decision noise (and other additive
noises) was small relative to the uncertainty of the underlying slant estimators.
Effects of Decision Noise
JND Ratio (measured/predicted)
Figure 17. Results of a simulation of the effects of decision noise
on PSEs and JNDs. Both graphs plot a measure of performance
against the actual value of the texture weight
. We added decision noise to the single-cue estimates (Equation 16). The decision noise was Gaussian with mean = 0 and variances
0.1, 0.32, and 1.0 where
. Left panel: The value of
we would predict from the single-cue measurements (corrupted by decision noise) is plotted as a function of the actual
. The different lines represent different amounts o
decision noise as indicated by the legend. Right panel: The JND
ratio—the JNDs we measure in the two-cue experiment divided
by the JNDs we predict from the single-cue experiments—plotted
as a function of the actual value of
. The different curves represent the results with different amounts of decision noise as
indicated by the legend in the left panel. See text for further explanation.
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
Knill and Saunders also considered the effects
of decision noise on observed and predicted weights. In
their simulation, they assumed that
was equal to the
variance of the combined estimate (Equation 6), so
varied with
; in particular, it had lower values when
w = ~0 or ~1. Thus, their simulations showed very little
effect of decision noise on predicted weights. Knill and
Saunders also modeled constant-variance noise like we did,
but they did not show the results of that analysis.
Now consider the JND data (Figure 11). Again
represent the variances we measured in the disparity-alone
texture-alone
experiments, respectively
(Equation 18). Using those measured values and Equation 6,
we generate a prediction for the two-cue JND (ignoring
division by
2 to convert from 2-IFC thresholds to σ’s):
Now we make the two-cue measurements in order to compare the observed and predicted JNDs. In the two-cue experiment, the visual system would weight the cues as in
Equations 1 and 2, and the decision noise would again affect the threshold measurement. Thus, the JND we measure in the two-cue experiment is
Equations 20 and 21 are equal to one another when
σ = 0, but when
σ > 0, the decision noise has different
effects on the predicted and observed two-cue JNDs. To
determine how additive decision noise could affect the interpretation of the JNDs, we calculated the ratio of observed JND (Equation 21) divided by the predicted JND
(Equation 20). In doing the calculations we again set the
sum of estimator variances to 1 and varied
from ~0 to
was again set to 0, 0.1, 0.32, or 1. The right panel
of Figure 17 shows the results. The JND ratio is plotted as a
function of the texture weight. The dashed horizontal line
represents the ratio when
increases from 0
to 1, the observed JND becomes larger than the predicted.
The ratio is largest at ~1.3 when
The JNDs we observed in the two-cue experiment were
generally quite close to the predicted values (Figure 11), so
this analysis suggests that we can rule out the presence of
decision noise whose variance is greater than approximately
half the sum of the estimator variances.
We conclude that uncertainty due to additive, highlevel decision noise was small in comparison to the
uncertainties of the underlying slants from the two cues.
Conclusion
We performed two quantitative tests of a maximumlikelihood estimator model for combining the slant cues of
texture and disparity. Our results indicate that the visual
system combines texture and disparity information in a
statistically optimal fashion, thereby reducing the variance
of slant estimates that could be achieved otherwise. To do
this, the relative reliabilities of each cue have to be determined dynamically, on a trial-by-trial basis, suggesting the
presence of well-developed circuits for combining depth-cue
information. The success of the MLE model in this and
other studies indicates that perceptual systems have gone to
some trouble to incorporate all available information into
the estimation process, and that they have done so in a
manner that maximizes the precision of perceptual estimates.
Appendix A: Dot number for
disparity-alone experiment
We wanted to make sure that we presented enough
dots in the display for disparity-based thresholds to be as
low as possible while still isolating the disparity estimator.
For this purpose, we measured slant-discrimination thresholds as a function of the number of dots. We ran three
conditions: (1) texture-specified slant = 0 deg and disparityspecified slant = 0 deg + δ (where δ is the increment or
decrement given to the base slant in order to obtain a
threshold), (2) texture slant = 0 and disparity-specified
slant = 45 + δ, and (3) texture slant = 45 and disparityspecified slant = 45 + δ. The results are plotted in
Figure A1, which shows the just-discriminable change in
slant as a function of dot number for the three conditions.
For observer JMH, discrimination thresholds decreased as
dot number was increased from 2 to 32 and then thresholds reached an asymptote by 32-64 dots. With 64 dots,
Number of Dots
Threshold (deg)
8 16 32 64
= 0+ , = 0
= 45+ , = 45
= 45+ , = 0
Figure A1. Slant discrimination thresholds for the disparity-alone
condition as a function of the number of dots on the surface
for the 57.3-cm viewing distance. Filled blue circles represent discrimination thresholds for a base slant of 0 deg
). Unfilled diamonds represent thresholds for
a base slant of 45 deg when the texture specifies a slant of 0 deg
). Filled diamonds represent thresholds for
a base slant of 45 deg when the texture specifies a fixed slant of
). Error bars are 95% confidence
intervals.
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
disparity-based thresholds were essentially as low as they
could be. The results were more complicated for observer
ACD. When the disparity-specified slant was 0 deg, her
data were quite similar to JMH’s. However, when the disparity slant was 45 deg, thresholds decreased from 4-64 dots
and then increased with more than 64 dots. One would
observe such an effect if the conflicting texture signal,
which was not informative for the discrimination task, was
given increasing weight with increasing dot number. Thus,
ACD may have given some weight to the uninformative
texture signal when shown the random-dot stimulus at base
slants different from 0 deg. We discuss this point in regard
to her two-cue data in Summary of results in Discussion.
Appendix B: Validity of singlecue measurements for two-cue
experiment
To combine two cues for slant, the cues must be promoted to the same units. Disparity signals alone do not
provide a slant estimate because they must be scaled or
normalized for distance . We were
concerned that observers might perform the slantdiscrimination task in the single-cue, disparity-alone case by
comparing only the disparity gradients in the two stimulus
intervals. Said another way, they could in principle perform
the task without normalizing the disparity signals into slant
estimates. To test the MLE model, we must acquire valid
measures of the reliabilities of single-cue slant estimates. In
the disparity-alone condition, this means our measure must
reflect the process of scaling the disparity signal into units
of slant. If the task in the disparity-alone condition were
done without normalizing the disparity signal, the psychometric data would not reflect errors introduced by the scaling process (which, within the framework of weighted-linear
cue combination, is essential for combining disparity and
texture signals), and we would underestimate the variance
of disparity-based slant estimates. For this reason, we looked
for evidence that observers scale the disparity signal for distance in a discrimination task with our disparity-alone
stimuli. We did so by having observers perform the slantdiscrimination task with the disparity-alone stimulus with
the comparison stimuli appearing at different distances
relative to the standard stimulus.
Five observers participated. Two were unaware of the
experimental hypotheses. All had normal stereopsis and did
not manifest eye misalignment in normal viewing situations.
A different apparatus was used than the one in the
main experiment. Stimuli were displayed on a CRT at a
distance of 57 cm. Dichoptic presentation of the left and
right eye’s images was achieved using CrystalEyesTM liquidcrystal shutter glasses. Left- and right-eye images were displayed on alternate frames so each eye’s image was drawn
only when the corresponding shutter was open. The monitor refresh rate was 100 Hz, so each eye’s image was redrawn at 50 Hz. The stimuli were drawn using the red
phosphor only because this minimized cross-talk through
the shutter glasses. The room was otherwise dark. Precise
reproduction of visual directions was achieved using the
same anti-aliasing and spatial calibration techniques as in
the main experiment. The same bite-bar set up was used to
position and stabilize the observer’s head.
The stimuli were virtual planes slanted about a vertical
axis. They were very similar to the stimuli used in the disparity-alone condition in the main experiment (Figure 1,
top): random-dot stereograms with the same dot density
and size as in the main experiment. Stimulus size for a
given presentation was drawn randomly from a uniform
distribution from 12.5-17.5 deg. The stimuli were generated taking each observer’s interpupillary distance into account. Changes in simulated distance were achieved by
shifting the two eyes’ images laterally on the CRT; this
technique produces the correct eye vergence and horizontal
gradient of vertical disparity for the simulated distance. The
size of the stimulus, dot density, and dot size were the same
in angular terms at each simulated distance.
As in the main experiment, two stimuli were presented
sequentially and observers indicated the one containing the
apparently greater slant. No feedback was provided. The
standard stimulus was always presented at a simulated distance of 57 cm, and the comparison stimulus was presented
at one of several simulated distances (selected randomly
before each trial). Thus, observers had to judge relative
slant even when the standard and comparison were presented at different simulated distances. There were three
comparison distances (45.2, 57.0, and 71.8 cm) and two
base slants (±30 deg). Each stimulus was presented for 1 s
with an interstimulus interval of 1.5 s. To facilitate fusion,
a fixation marker appeared 500 ms prior to each stimulus
presentation at the distance of the upcoming stimulus. Observers were all able to make a vergence eye movement and
fuse the fixation marker before the stimulus appeared.
1-down/2-up and 2-down/1-up staircases were used to vary
the slant of the comparison stimulus. For each baseslant/distance combination, both reversal rules were used
to sample points on the psychometric function either side
of the 50% point. At least four staircases were employed for
each psychometric function, corresponding to approximately 200 trials per function. We fit the resulting psychometric data with a cumulative Gaussian using a maximumlikelihood criterion.
In Figure B1, we plot the slants of the comparison
stimulus that had the same perceived slant on average as
the standard stimulus as a function of the simulated distance of the comparison. There were no significant differences between base slants of –30 and +30 deg, so we
pooled the data from the two slants. If observers performed
the task by comparing slants (as they were instructed), they
would have to take distance into account (Equation 11). If
they did so veridically, the PSEs would all have the same
slant as the standard stimulus (horizontal dashed line). If,
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
on the other hand, observers performed the task by comparing disparity gradients, they would not need to take distance into account. In this case, the PSEs would have the
same disparity gradients (HSRs), but different slants (diagonal dotted line).
The PSEs for four of the five observers were not consistent with the no-compensation predictions; thus, they did
take the change in stimulus distance into account. However, none exhibited complete compensation, which means
that the distance compensation was not veridical. The data
from JMH and ACD, the observers who participated in all
conditions in the main experiments, are represented by
filled symbols. The results of this control experiment show
that most observers (importantly including observers JMH
and ACD) do not perform the slant-discrimination task by
only comparing the disparity gradient in the two stimulus
intervals.
Appendix C: Scaling of disparity
signal for distance
To generate the PSE predictions in Figures 8-10, we assumed that slant estimates from texture and disparity are
unbiased. This assumption is invalid for disparity if the
distance estimates used to “scale” HSRs were biased. Other
reports and our control experiment (Appendix B) suggest that observers do not scale the disparity signal veridically for distance; that is, they tend to use a farther estimate
than the actual distance for near viewing and a near estimate than the actual distance for far viewing. As we
pointed out in the Discussion (Comparison to other studies), this result could be due to the influence of unmodeled
cues. Here we consider the possibility that the observed
changes in PSEs with distance resulted from mis-scaling of
the HSR signal rather than changes in cue weighting with
changes in distance.
We considered two models of distance scaling.
; one fixed distance is used to scale the HSR signal
at all distances. (2) ˆd
; distance estimates are a
linear function of distance. There were three main steps to
fitting the distance-scaling models: (1) calculate slant estimates from disparity,
, from the modeled distance estimate and HSRs for the cue-conflict and no-conflict PSE
stimuli; (2) calculate the cue-combined slant estimate (assuming
was unbiased) for the PSE and conflict stimuli
Equations 1 and 2 and the weights determined from
fits in Figure 6; (3) find the parameters for the distance
model that yield the smallest squared difference between
the cue-combined slant estimates for the cue-conflict and
PSE stimuli.
Figure B1. PSEs as a function of distance. The slant of the comparison stimulus that was on average perceived as the same
slant as a standard at ±30 deg slant and a distance of 57 cm is
plotted as a function of the distance of the comparison stimulus.
The dashed horizontal line represents the predicted PSEs if observers compensated for the change in distance veridically. The
dotted diagonal curve represents the predicted PSEs if observers
made their judgments from the disparity gradients of the two
stimuli only; that is, if they failed to compensate for distance. The
filled symbols are the data from the two observers whose data
are presented in the main experiment. The unfilled symbols are
the data from three who did not participate in the main experiment.
Here we work through an example of these calculations. Consider JMH’s PSE data for a standard slant of
30 deg (second row of Figure 10) and texture perturbed by
+10 deg (rightmost black diamonds in the three panels of
the second row;
deg). HSRs for
cue-conflict stimulus at 19.1, 57.3, and 171.9 cm were 1.22,
1.07, and 1.02, respectively. If a single distance estimate
were used to scale these HSRs, the slant estimates derived
from the disparity cue (which objectively specifies 30 deg at
the three distances) would be quite different. For example,
if a distance of 57.3 cm were used in all three cases (
the perceived slant from disparity
would be 60, 30, and
10.9 deg, respectively. To get the combined slant estimate,
Equation 1 with the weights determined from the
fits to the 57.3-cm data in Figure 6 (in other words, the
weights were determined only by HSR and the texture gradient and not by distance). The perceived slants for the cueconflict stimuli at these three distances would be
. The objective slants of the no-conflict stimuli
that appeared, on average, the same as the conflict stimuli
were 34.1, 37.8, and 40.6 deg; these correspond to HSRs of
1.26, 1.09, and 1.03. If these HSRs were scaled by the distance estimate of 57.3 cm,
, would be 63.8, 37.8, and
15.9 deg. The cue-combined slant estimate for these
no-conflict stimuli would be
error, minimized across all conditions simultaneously, was
Both models of distance scaling provided reasonable
fits to the PSE data. We can, however, rule out the d
model from three lines of evidence. (1) In the condition in
which texture was perturbed and disparity-specified slant
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
was 0 deg (black open diamonds in center row of panels in
Figures 10 and 11), the
model predicts that distance
should have no effect on PSEs. According to this model, a
single distance estimate is used to scale HSRs, so HSRs of
the PSEs should be the same at all three distances.
C1 plots HSR as a function of conflict for the S
, texture-perturbed condition. There is clearly a systematic effect
of distance on the HSRs of the PSEs, which indicates that
there was some compensation for distance. (2) For the distance that provided the best fit to the data, a stimulus that
had an objective slant of 30 deg would have appeared to
have a slant of 65 deg. This is inconsistent with the phenomenology. (3) In a control experiment (Appendix B), we
found that observers take distance into account when performing the slant-discrimination task.
Texture-specified Slant (deg)
ln(HSR) PSEs
Figure C1. HSRs for PSEs as a function of the texture-specified
slant. These data are from the condition in which S
texture was perturbed. Left panel: observer JMH. Right panel:
observer ACD.
Thus, two models provide a good fit to the data reported in these experiments: the optimal cue re-weighting
model (with veridical scaling for distance) and the incomplete-scaling model ( ˆ
β ). The former has no free
parameters and the latter has two free parameters (α and
β ). By Occam’s Razor, the optimal weighting model is preferred, but we hasten to point out that the latter cannot be
rejected without further experimentation.
Appendix D: Computing texture
slant from two eyes’ images
The texture gradient specifies different surface orientations at the two eyes and the differences depend on surface
tilt. Here we derive the differences in texture gradients at
the two eyes as a function of slant and tilt.
To express surface orientation, we need a coordinate
system. The convention in the stereo literature is to place
the origin at the Cyclopean eye, the point on the Vieth-
Müller Circle, half way between the eyes. The x-axis is parallel to the interocular axis. The z-axis lies in the plane of
fixation and is perpendicular to the interocular axis. The yaxis is perpendicular to the other two axes.
Consider a homogeneously textured frontoparallel
plane in front of the observer. The eyes are converged on
the plane at the midline and the vergence angle is µ. The
plane’s slant is
, and its tilt
is undefined. From
the viewpoint of the left eye (equivalent to placing the origin there),
From the right eye’s viewpoint,
or, equivalently,
Hence, the texture gradient specifies different surface
orientations at the two eyes. The disparity-specified slant is,
of course, 0 deg with the origin at the Cyclopean eye. The
texture-gradient signals must be converted into the same
Cyclopean coordinates as the disparity signal. The transformation required to convert the texture-gradient signals
from left- and right-eye coordinates into Cyclopean coordinates is a potential source of error. That error is presumably not measured in the single-cue, texture-alone condition
because monocular stimuli were used in that condition.
Here, in Figure D1, we examine the properties of the required transformation and show that they vary with tilt.
Texture-specified Cyclopean Slant (deg)
Eye-centered Slant/Tilt (deg)
Texture-specified Slant & Tilt at Left & Right Eyes
Figure D1. Monocular texture-specified slants and tilts as a function of Cyclopean slant for a 19-cm viewing distance and 6.5-cm
interpupillary distance. The left panel shows left and right eye
slants and tilts when the Cyclopean tilt is 0 (
). The right
panel shows left and right eye slants and tilts when the Cyclopean tilt is 90 deg (
When a frontoparallel plane is rotated about the vertical axis (
D ), the texture-specified slants
and tilts in the left and right eyes vary, but the tilts do not.
Technically, for rotations about a vertical axis, the tilt pa-
Journal of Vision 4, 967-992
Hillis, Watt, Landy, & Banks
rameter for eye-centered viewpoints flips between 0 and
180°. This corresponds to a sign change in slant. For simplicity, we used a sign change in slant, rather than changing
the tilt parameter, for vertical-axis rotations. The eyecentered slants specified by the texture gradients are
so they differ by µ. The eye-centered, texture-specified tilts
. The left panel of Figure A1 shows eyecentered slants and tilts as a function of Cyclopean slant
Now consider a frontoparallel plane rotated about the
horizontal axis (
). For simplicity, we
now use positive slants and let the tilt flip from 0 to 180°
when necessary. The texture-specified slants are equal in
the two eyes:
But the tilts differ:
The right panel of Figure A1 shows these eye-centered
slants and tilts.
When the Cyclopean tilt is between 0 and 90 deg, the
eye-centered slants and tilts will both differ.
In summary, the transformation required to convert
texture signals into Cyclopean coordinates depends on tilt.
This fact raises the interesting possibility that different errors occur in that transformation for one tilt as opposed to
another. Perhaps an explanation for slant anisotropy could
be derived from an understanding of these transformations.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institutes of
Health Research Grant EY12851 (MSB), Air Force Office
of Scientific Research Grant F49620-01-1-0417 (MSB), and
National Institutes of Health Research Grant EY08266
(MSL). We thank Alison Dilworth for spending many
hours as an observer. Part of this work was presented at the
European Conference on Visual Perception in 2002.
Commercial relationships: none.
Corresponding author: Martin S. Banks.
Email: .
Address: Vision Science Program, Department of Psychology, & Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.