HAL Id: hal-01369906
 
Submitted on 13 Mar 2017
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Convolutional Neural Networks for Large-Scale Remote
Sensing Image Classification
Emmanuel Maggiori, Yuliya Tarabalka, Guillaume Charpiat, Pierre Alliez
To cite this version:
Emmanuel Maggiori, Yuliya Tarabalka, Guillaume Charpiat, Pierre Alliez.
Convolutional Neural
Networks for Large-Scale Remote Sensing Image Classification. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, 2017, 55, pp.645-657. ￿10.1109/tgrs.2016.2612821￿. ￿hal-01369906￿
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
Convolutional Neural Networks for Large-Scale
Remote Sensing Image Classiﬁcation
Emmanuel Maggiori, Student member, IEEE, Yuliya Tarabalka, Member, IEEE,
Guillaume Charpiat, and Pierre Alliez
Abstract—We propose an end-to-end framework for the dense,
pixelwise classiﬁcation of satellite imagery with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). In our framework, CNNs are directly
trained to produce classiﬁcation maps out of the input images.
We ﬁrst devise a fully convolutional architecture and demonstrate
its relevance to the dense classiﬁcation problem. We then address
the issue of imperfect training data through a two-step training
approach: CNNs are ﬁrst initialized by using a large amount
of possibly inaccurate reference data, then reﬁned on a small
amount of accurately labeled data. To complete our framework
we design a multi-scale neuron module that alleviates the common
trade-off between recognition and precise localization. A series
of experiments show that our networks take into account a large
amount of context to provide ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation maps.
Index Terms—Classiﬁcation, satellite images, convolutional
neural networks, deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
paramount importance in many practical applications,
such as precision agriculture and urban planning. Recent
technological developments have signiﬁcantly increased the
amount of available satellite imagery. Notably, the constellation of Pl´eiades satellites produces high spatial resolution
images that cover the whole Earth in less than a day. The
large-scale nature of these datasets introduces new challenges
in image analysis. In this paper we address the problem of
pixelwise classiﬁcation of satellite imagery.
There is a vast literature on classiﬁcation approaches that
take into account the spectrum of every individual pixel to
assign it to a certain class. Alternatively, more advanced
techniques combine information from a few neighboring pixels
to enhance the classiﬁers’ performance, often referred to as
spectral-spatial classiﬁcation. These approaches rely on the
separability of the different classes based on the spectrum
of a single pixel or of some neighboring pixels. In a largescale setting, however, these approaches are not effective.
On the one hand, current large-scale satellite imagery does
not use high spectral resolution sensors, making it difﬁcult
to distinguish object classes solely by their spectrum. On
the other hand, due to the large spatial extent covered by
the datasets, classes have a considerable internal variability,
which further challenges the class separability when simply
E. Maggiori, Y. Tarabalka and P. Alliez are with Univerist´e Cˆote d’Azur,
TITANE team, Inria, 2004 Route des Lucioles, BP93 06902 Sophia Antipolis
Cedex, France. E-mail: .
G. Charpiat is with Tao team, Inria Saclay–ˆIle-de-France, LRI, Bˆat. 660,
Universit Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.
Manuscript received ...; revised ...
observing the spectral signatures of a restricted neighborhood.
We argue that a more thorough understanding of the context
such as, e.g., the shape of objects, is required to aid the
classiﬁcation process.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are therefore
gaining attention, due to their capability to automatically
discover relevant contextual features in image categorization
problems. CNNs consist of a stack of learned convolution
ﬁlters that extract hierarchical contextual image features, and
are a popular form of deep learning networks. They are already
outperforming other approaches in various domains such as
digit recognition and natural image categorization .
Our goal is to devise an end-to-end framework to classify satellite imagery with CNNs. The context of large-scale
satellite image classiﬁcation introduces certain challenges that
we must address in order to turn CNNs into a relevant
classiﬁcation tool. Notably, we must (1) design a speciﬁc
neural network architecture for our problem, (2) acquire largescale training data and handle its eventual inaccuracies, and
(3) generate high-resolution output classiﬁcation maps.
1) CNN architecture: CNNs are commonly used for image
categorization, i.e., for assigning the entire image to a class
(e.g., a digit or an object category ). In remote sensing,
the equivalent problem is to assign a category to an entire
image patch, such as ‘residential’ or ‘agricultural’ area. Our
context differs in that we wish to conduct a dense pixelwise
labeling. We must thus design a CNN that outputs a per-pixel
classiﬁcation and not just a category for the entire input.
2) Imperfect training data: A sensitive point regarding
CNNs is the amount of training data required to properly learn
the network parameters. A large source of free-access maps
is OpenStreetMap, a collaborative online mapping platform,
but the availability of data is highly variable between areas.
In some areas, the coverage is very limited or nonexistent,
and an irregular misregistration is prevalent throughout the
maps. As we focus on the large-scale application of CNNs for
classiﬁcation, we must explore the use of imperfect training
data in order to make our framework applicable to a wide
range of geographic areas.
3) High-resolution output: The power of CNNs to take a
large context to conduct predictions comes at the price of
losing resolution for the output. This is because some degree
of downsampling of the feature maps along the network is
required in order to increase the amount of context without
an excessive number of learnable parameters. Such coarse
resolution translates into a fuzzy aspect around object edges
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
and corners. One of our challenges is then to alleviate this
trade-off.
A. Related Work
We now review classiﬁcation methods and the use of CNNs
in remote sensing.
In the context of spectral classiﬁcation, decision trees ,
artiﬁcial neural networks , and support vector machines are some of the approaches that have been explored, both for multispectral and hyperspectral image analysis. Spectral-spatial methods use contextual information to
regularize the classiﬁcation maps. Different approaches have
been presented, for example, Liao et al. sequentially apply
morphological ﬁlters to model different kinds of structural
information and Tarabalka et al. model spatial interactions
with a graphical model. Neural networks have also been used
for spectral-spatial classiﬁcation. In this direction, Kurnaz
et al. use such network to classify the concatenated
spectrum of pixels inside a sliding window, in order to label
multispectral images. In a similar fashion, Lloyd et al. 
compute a textural feature which is concatenated to the pixel
spectrum vector, prior the a neural network classiﬁcation. Lu
and Weng provide a comprehensive survey on classiﬁcation methods.
In remote sensing, CNNs have been used to individually
classify the pixels of hyperspectral images. This was achieved
by performing convolutions in the 1D domain of the spectrum
of each pixel , , . Alternatively, a spectral-spatial
approach has been taken by convolving in the 1D ﬂattened
spectrum vector of a group of adjacent pixels , .
Note however that these approaches do not learn spatial
contextual features such as the typical shape of the objects
of a class. Recent works have incorporated convolutions on
the spatial domain after extracting the principal components
of the hyperspectral image , , , and the idea of
reasoning at multiple spatial scales has also been exploited,
notably for hyperspectral classiﬁcation , and image
segmentation . Let us remark that convolutional neural
networks have also been used for other remote sensing applications, such as road tracking , object detection and
land use classiﬁcation , .
Mnih proposed a speciﬁc architecture to learn largeextent spatial contextual features for aerial image labeling.
It is derived from common image categorization networks
by increasing the output size of the ﬁnal layer. Instead of
outputting a single value to indicate the category, the ﬁnal layer
produces an entire dense classiﬁcation patch. This network
successfully learns contextual spatial features to better distinguish the object classes. However, this patchwise procedure
has the disadvantage of introducing artifacts on the border of
the classiﬁed patches. Moreover, the last layer of the network
introduces an unnecessarily large number of parameters, hampering its efﬁciency.
B. Contributions
We now summarize our contributions to address the issues
presented before and provide then a framework for satellite
image classiﬁcation with CNNs.
1) Fully convolutional architecture: We ﬁrst analyze the
CNN architecture proposed by Mnih and the fact that it
has a fully connected layer, i.e., connected to all the outputs of
the previous layer, to produce the output classiﬁcation patches.
We point out that this architectural decision hampers both its
accuracy and efﬁciency.
We then propose a new network architecture that is fully
convolutional, i.e., that only involves a series of convolution
and deconvolution operations to produce the output classiﬁcation maps. This architecture solves the issues of the
previous patch-based approach by construction. While such a
fully convolutional architecture imposes further restrictions to
the neuronal connections than the fully connected approach,
these restrictions reduce the number of trainable parameters
without losing generality. It has been seen multiple times in
the literature that reducing the number of parameters under
sensible assumptions often implies a simpler error surface
and helps reaching better local minima. For example, convolutional networks have fewer connections than multi-layer
perceptrons but perform better in practice for visual tasks ,
and Mnih showed that adding too many layers to a
network resulted in poorer results.
We compare the fully convolutional vs fully connected
approaches on a dataset of publicly available aerial color
images over Massachusetts created with the speciﬁc
purpose of evaluating CNN architectures.
2) Two-step training approach: To deal with the imperfections in training data we propose a two-step approach.
First, we train our fully convolutional neural network on raw
OpenStreetMap data to discover the generalities of the dataset.
Second, we ﬁne-tune the resulting neural networks for a few
iterations under a small piece of manually labeled image. Our
hypothesis is that, once the network is pre-trained on large
amounts of imperfect data, we can boost its performance by
“showing” it a small amount of accurate labels. Our approach
is inspired by a common practice in deep learning: taking
pre-trained networks designed to solve one problem and ﬁnetuning them to another problem.
3) Multi-scale architecture: We design a speciﬁc neuron
module that processes its input at multiple scales, while
keeping a low number of parameters. This alleviates the
aforementioned trade-off between the amount of context taken
and the resolution of the classiﬁcation maps. Our overall
approach constitutes then an end-to-end framework for satellite
image labeling with CNNs. We evaluate it on a Pl´eiades image
dataset over France, where the associated OpenStreetMap data
is signiﬁcantly inaccurate.
C. Organization of the Paper
In the next section an introduction to convolutional neural
networks is presented. In Section III the fully convolutional
architecture is described and evaluated. Section IV presents
the two-step training approach and the multi-scale architecture, in order to use CNNs as an end-to-end framework for
satellite image classiﬁcation. Finally, conclusions are drawn
in Section V.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
II. CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS
In machine learning an artiﬁcial neural network is a system
of interconnected neurons that pass messages to each other.
Neural networks are used to model complex functions and, in
particular, as frameworks for classiﬁcation. In this work we
deal with the so-called feed-forward networks, whose graph
of message passing between neurons is acyclic .
An individual neuron takes a vector of inputs x = x1 . . . xn
and performs a simple operation to produce an output a. The
most common neuron is deﬁned as follows:
a = σ(wx + b),
where x denotes a weight vector, b a scalar known as bias and
σ an activation function. The weight vectors and the biases are
parameters that deﬁne the function computed by a network,
and the goal of training is to ﬁnd the optimal values for
these parameters. When using at least one layer of nonlinear
activation functions, one can prove that a sufﬁciently large
network can represent any function, suggesting the expressive power of neural networks. The most common activation
functions are sigmoids, hyperbolic tangents and rectiﬁed linear
units (ReLU) . ReLUs are known to offer some practical
advantages in the convergence of the training procedure.
Even though any function can be represented by a sufﬁciently large single layer of neurons, it is common to organize
them in a set of stacked layers that transform the outputs of the
previous layer and feed it to the next layer. This encourages
the networks to learn hierarchical features, doing low-level
reasoning in the ﬁrst layers and performing higher-level tasks
in the last layers. For this reason, the ﬁrst and last layers are
often referred to as lower and upper layers respectively.
In an image categorization problem, the input of our network is an image (or a set of features derived from an image),
and the goal is to predict the correct label associated with the
image. Finding the optimal neural network classiﬁer reduces
to ﬁnding the weights and biases that minimize a loss L
between the predicted values and the target values in a training
set. If there is a set L of possible classes, the labels are
typically encoded as a vector of length |L| with value ‘1’
at the position of the correct label and ‘0’ elsewhere. The
network has then as many output neurons as possible labels. A
softmax normalization is performed on top of the last layer to
guarantee that the output is a probability distribution, i.e., the
values for every label are between zero and one and add to
one. The multi-label problem is then seen as a regression on
the desired output label vectors.
The loss function L quantiﬁes the misclassiﬁcation by
comparing the target label vectors y(i) and the predicted label
vectors ˆy(i), for n training samples i = 1 . . . n. In this work
we use the common cross-entropy loss, deﬁned as:
k log ˆy(i)
The cross-entropy loss has fast convergence rates when training neural networks (compared with, for instance, the Euclidean distance between y and ˆy) and is numerically stable
when coupled with softmax normalization .
Note that in the special case of binary labeling we can
produce only one output (with targets ‘1’ for positive and
‘0’ for negative). In this case a sigmoid normalization and
cross-entropy loss are analogously used, albeit a multi-class
framework can also be used for two classes.
Once the loss function is deﬁned, the parameters (weights
and biases) that minimize the loss must be solved for. Solving
is achieved by gradient descent by computing the derivative
∂wi of the loss function with respect to every parameter wi,
and updating the parameters with a learning rate λ as follows:
wi ←wi + λ ∂L
The derivatives
∂wi are obtained by backpropagation, which
consists in explicitly computing the derivatives of the loss with
respect to the last layer’s parameters and using the chain rule
to recursively compute the rest of the derivatives. In practice,
learning is performed by stochastic gradient descent, i.e., by
estimating the loss (2) on a small subset of the training set,
referred to as a mini-batch.
Despite the fact that neural networks can represent very
complex functions, the epigraph of the loss function L can
be highly non-convex, making the optimization difﬁcult via a
gradient descent approach. To regularize this loss and improve
training, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a
special type of neural networks that impose restrictions that
make sense in the context of image processing. In these
networks, every neuron is associated to a spatial location (i, j)
with respect to the input image. The output aij associated with
location (i, j) is then computed as follows:
aij = σ((W ∗X)ij + b),
where W denotes a kernel with learned weights, X the input
to the layer and ‘∗’ the convolution operation. Note that this
is a special case of the neuron in Eq. 1 with the following
constraints:
• The connections only extend to a limited spatial neighborhood determined by the kernel size;
• The same ﬁlter is applied to each location, guaranteeing
translation invariance.
Typically multiple convolution kernels are learned in every
layer, interpreted as a set of spatial feature detectors. The
responses to every learned ﬁlter are therefore known as a
feature map.
Departing from the traditional fully connected layer, in
which every neuron is connected to all outputs of the previous
layer, a convolutional layer dramatically reduces the number
of parameters by enforcing the aforementioned constraints.
This results in a regularized loss function, easier to optimize,
without losing much generality.
Note that the convolution kernels are actually threedimensional because, in addition to their spatial extent, they go
through all the feature maps in the previous layers, or through
all the bands in the input image. Since the third dimension
can be inferred from the previous layer it is rarely speciﬁed
in architecture descriptions, only the two spatial dimensions
being usually mentioned.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
In addition to convolutional layers, state-of-the-art networks
such as Imagenet involve some degree of downsampling,
i.e., a reduction in the resolution of the feature maps. The
goal of downsampling is to increase the so-called receptive
ﬁeld of the neurons, which is the part of the input image
that neurons can “see”. For the predictions to take into
account a large spatial context, the upper layers should have
a large receptive ﬁeld. This is achieved either by increasing
the convolution kernel sizes or by downsampling feature
maps to a lower resolution. The ﬁrst alternative increases the
number of parameters and memory consumption, making the
training and inference processes prohibitive. State-of-the-art
CNNs tend then to keep the kernels small and add some
degree of downsampling instead. This can be accomplished
either by including pooling layers (e.g., taking the average or
maximum of adjacent locations) or by introducing a so-called
stride, which amounts to skip some convolutions through, e.g.,
applying the ﬁlter once every four locations.
Classiﬁcation networks typically contain a fully connected
layer on top of the convolutions/pooling. This layer is designed
to have as many outputs as labels, and produces the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation scores.
The overall success of CNNs lies mostly in the fact the
the networks are forced by construction to learn hierarchical
contextual translation-invariant features, which are particularly
useful for image categorization.
III. CNNS FOR DENSE CLASSIFICATION
In this work we address the problem of dense classiﬁcation, i.e., not just the categorization of an entire image,
but a full pixelwise labeling into the different categories. We
ﬁrst describe an existing approach, the patch-based network,
point out its limitations and propose a fully convolutional
architecture that addresses these limitations. We restrict our
experiments to the binary labeling problem for the building
vs not building classes, but our approach is extensible to
an arbitrary number of classes following the formulation
described in Section II.
A. Patch-based Network
To perform dense classiﬁcation of aerial imagery, Mnih
proposed a patch-based convolutional neural network .
Training and inference are performed patch-wise: the network
takes as input a patch of an aerial image, and generates
as output a classiﬁed patch. The output patch is smaller,
and centered in the input patch, to take into account the
surrounding context for more accurate predictions. The way to
create dense predictions is to increase the number of outputs of
the last fully connected classiﬁcation layer, in order to match
the size of the target patch.
Fig. 1(a) illustrates the patch-based architecture from .
The network takes 64 × 64 patches (on color images of 1m2
spatial resolution) and predicts 16×16 centered patches of the
same resolution. Three convolutional layers learn 64, 112 and
80 convolution kernels, of 12 × 12, 4 × 4 and 3 × 3 spatial
dimensions, respectively. The ﬁrst convolution is strided (one
(b) Patch-based
Fig. 2: The patch-based predictions exhibit artifacts on the
patch borders while the FCN prevents them by construction.
convolution every four pixels), which implies a downsampling
with factor 4.
After the three convolutional layers, a fully connected layer
transforms the high-level features of the last convolutional
layer into a classiﬁcation map of 256 elements, matching the
required 16 × 16 output patch.
Training is performed by selecting random patches from the
training set, and grouping them into mini-batches as required
by the stochastic gradient descent algorithm.
B. Limitations of the Patch-based Framework
We now point out some limitations of the patch-based
approach discussed above, which motivate the design of an
improved network architecture. Let us ﬁrst analyze the role
of the last fully connected layer that constructs the output
patches. In the architecture of Fig. 1(a), the size of the feature
maps in the last convolutional layer (before the last fully
connected one) is 9 × 9. The resolution of these ﬁlters is 1/4
of the resolution of the input image, due to the 4-stride in
the ﬁrst convolution. The output of the fully connected layer
is, however, a full-resolution 16 × 16 classiﬁcation map. This
means that the fully connected layer does not only compute
the classiﬁcation scores, but also learns how to upsample
them. Outputting a full-resolution patch is then the result of
upsampling and not of an intrinsic high-resolution processing.
We also observe that the fully connected layer allows outputs
at different locations to have different weights with respect
to the previous layer. For example, the weights associated
to an output pixel at the top-left corner of a patch can be
different to those of a pixel at the bottom right. In other
words, the network can learn priors on the position inside
a patch. This makes sense in some speciﬁc contexts such as
when labeling pictures of outdoor scenes: the system could
learn a prior for the sky to be at the top of the image. In
our context, however, the partition of an image into patches
is arbitrary, hence the “in-patch location” prior is irrelevant
since allowing different weights at different patch locations
may yield undesirable properties. For example, feeding two
image patches that are identical but rotated by 90 degrees
could yield different classiﬁcation maps.
When training the network of Fig. 1(a) we expect that, after
processing many training cases, the fully connected layer will
end up learning a location-invariant function. Figs. 2(a)-(b)
illustrate a fragment of an output score map by using such
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
(a) Patch-based
(b) Fully convolutional (16 × 16 output)
Fig. 1: Convolutional neural network architectures (e.g., “64@14 × 14” means 64 feature maps of size 14 × 14).
an architecture. Notice the discontinuities at the border of
the patches, which reveal that the network did not succeed
in learning to classify pixels independently of their location
inside the patch. While this issue is partly addressed in 
by smoothing the outputs with a conditional random ﬁeld, we
argue that avoiding such artifacts by construction is desirable.
In addition, generating similar results regardless of image
tiling is an important property for large-scale satellite image
processing, and an active research topic , . Another
concern with the fully connected layer is that the receptive ﬁeld
of every patch output is not centered in itself. For example, a
prediction near the center of the output patch can “see” about
32 pixels in every direction around it. However, the prediction
at the top-left corner of the output patch considers a larger
portion of the image to the bottom and to the right than to the
top and to the left. Considering that the division into patches
is arbitrary, this behavior is hard to justify.
A deeper understanding of the role played by every layer of
the network, as described in this section, motivates the design
of a more suitable architecture from a theoretical point of view,
with the additional goal of boosting the overall performance
of the approach.
C. Fully Convolutional Network
We propose a fully convolutional neural network architecture (FCN) to produce dense predictions. We explicitly restrict
the process to be location-independent, enforcing the outputs
to be the result of a series of convolutions only (see Fig. 1b).
A classiﬁcation network may be “convolutionalized” as
follows. We ﬁrst convert the fully connected layer that carries
out the classiﬁcation to a convolutional layer. The convolution
kernel is chosen so that its dimensions coincide with the
previous layer. Thus, its connections are equivalent to a fully
connected layer. The difference is that if we enlarge the input
image, the output size is also increased, but the number of
parameters remains constant. This may be seen as convolving
the whole original network around a larger image to evaluate
the output at different locations.
To increase the resolution of the output map, we then add a
so-called “deconvolutional” layer . The goal of this layer is
to upsample the feature maps from the previous layer, which is
achieved by performing an interpolation from a set of nearby
points. Such an interpolation is parametrized by a kernel
that expresses the extent and amount of contribution from a
pixel value to its neighboring positions, only based on their
locations. For an effective interpolation, the kernels must be
Fig. 3: “Deconvolution” layer for upsampling.
large enough to overlap in the output. The interpolation is then
performed by multiplying the values of the kernel by every
input and adding the overlapping responses in the output. This
process is illustrated by Fig. 3 for a 2x upsampling. Notice
that the scaling step is performed based on a constant 4 × 4
kernel. In our framework, and as in previous work , the
interpolation kernel is another set of learnable parameters of
the network instead of being determined a priori, e.g., setting
them to represent a bilinear interpolation. Note also that the
upsampled feature map has a central part computed by adding
the contribution of two neighboring kernels and an outer
border obtained solely by the contribution of one kernel (the
two leftmost and rightmost output columns in Fig. 3). The
outer border can be seen as an extrapolation of the input while
the inner part can be seen as an interpolation. The extrapolated
border can be cropped from the output to avoid artifacts.
As compared to a patch-based approach, we can expect our
fully convolutional network to exhibit the following advantages:
• Elimination of discontinuities due to patch borders;
• Improved accuracy due to a simpliﬁed learning process,
with a smaller number of parameters;
• Lower execution time at inference, due to the fast GPU
execution of convolution operations.
Our FCN network is constructed by convolutionalizing the
existing patch-based network depicted by Fig. 1(a). We choose
an existing framework to beneﬁt from a mature architecture
and to carry out a rigorous comparison. The architectural
decisions (i.e., the choice of the number of layers and ﬁlter
sizes) of the base network are described in .
Fig. 1(b) depicts the resulting FCN. First, we pretend that
the output patch of the original network is only of size
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
1 × 1, thus just focusing on a single output centered in its
receptive ﬁeld. Second, we rewrite the fully connected layer
as a convolutional layer with one feature map and the spatial
dimensions of the previous layer (9 × 9). Third, we add a
deconvolutional layer that upsamples its input by a factor of
4 (with a learnable kernel of size 8 × 8), in order to recover
the input resolution. Notice that the tasks of classiﬁcation and
upsampling are now separated.
This new network can take input images of different sizes,
with the output size varying accordingly. For example, during
the training stage we wish to output patches of size 16×16 in
order to emulate the learning process as was done in the patchbased network of Fig. 1(a). For this we require a patch input
of size 80 × 80, as in the architecture of Fig. 1(b). Notice
that the input is larger than the original 64 × 64 patches.
This is not because we are taking more context to carry
out the predictions, but instead because every output is now
centered in its context. At inference time we can take inputs
of arbitrary sizes and feed them to the network to construct
the classiﬁcation maps, and the number of network parameters
does not vary.
In the deconvolutional layer illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the
overlapping areas added to produce the output are depicted
in gray while the excluded extrapolation is in white.
D. Experiments on Fully Convolutional Networks
We implemented the CNNs using the Caffe deep learning
framework . In a ﬁrst experiment we apply our approach
to the Massachusetts Buildings Dataset . This dataset
consists of color images over the area of Boston with 1 m2
spatial resolution, covering an area of 340 km2 for training,
9 km2 for validation and 22.5 km2 for testing. The images are
labeled into two classes: building and not building. A portion
of an image and its corresponding reference are depicted in
Figs. 4(a-b).
We train the patch-based and fully convolutional networks
(Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) respectively) for 30,000 stochastic gradient descent iterations, until we observe barely no further
improvement on the validation set. The patches are sampled
uniformly from the whole training set, with mini-batches of
64 patches each and a learning rate of 0.0001. A momentum
and an L2 parameter penalty are introduced to regularize
the learning process and avoid overﬁtting. Momentum adds
a fraction of the previous gradient to the current one in order
to smooth the descent, while an L2 penalty on the learned
parameters discourages neurons to specialize too much on
particular training cases . The weights of these regularizers
are set to 0.9 and 0.0002 respectively. Further details on these
so-called hyperparameters and rationale for selecting them are
provided by Mnih .
To evaluate the accuracy of the classiﬁcation we use two
different measures: pixelwise accuracy (proportion of correctly
classiﬁed pixels, obtained through binary classiﬁcation of the
output probabilities with threshold 0.5) and area under the
receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve . The latter
quantiﬁes the relation between true and false positives at
different thresholds, and is appropriate to evaluate the overall
quality of the fuzzy maps.
Fig. 5(a) plots the evolution of the area under ROC curve
and pixelwise accuracy in the test set, across iterations.
The FCN consistently outperforms the patch-based network.
Fig. 5(b) shows ROC curves for the ﬁnal networks after
convergence, the FCN exhibiting the best relation between true
and false positive rates. Fig. 4(c-d) depicts some visual results.
To further illustrate the beneﬁts of neural networks over
other learning approaches we train a support vector machine
(SVM) with Gaussian kernel on 1,000 randomly selected
pixels of each class. We train on the individual pixel spectra without any feature selection. The SVM parameters are
selected by 5-fold cross-validation, as commonly performed
in remote sensing image classiﬁcation . As shown by
Fig. 4(e), the pixelwise SVM classiﬁcation often confuses
roads with buildings due to the fact that their colors are similar,
while neural networks better infer and separate the classes by
taking into account the geometry of the context. The accuracy
of the SVM on the Boston test dataset is 0.6229 and its area
under ROC curve is 0.5193, i.e., signiﬁcantly lower than with
CNNs, as shown in Fig. 5. If we wished to successfully use an
SVM for this task, we should design and select spatial features
(e.g., texture) and use them as the input to the classiﬁer instead.
The ampliﬁed fragment in Fig. 2 shows that the border
discontinuity artifacts present in the patch-based scheme are
absent in our fully convolutional setting. This behaves as
expected considering that the issues described in Section III-B
are addressed by construction in the new architecture. This
conﬁrms that imposing sensible restrictions to the connections
of a neural network has a positive impact in the performance.
In terms of efﬁciency the FCN also outperforms the patchbased CNN. At inference time, instead of carrying out the
prediction in a small patch basis, the input of the FCN is
simply increased to output larger predictions, better beneﬁting
from the GPU parallelization of convolutions. The execution
time required to classify the whole Boston 22.5 km2 test set
(performed on an Intel I7 CPU @ 2.7Ghz with a Quadro
K3100M GPU) is 82.21 s with the patch-based CNN against
8.47 s with the FCN. The speedup is about 10x, a relevant improvement considering the large-scale processing capabilities
required by new sensors.
IV. END-TO-END FRAMEWORK
In remote sensing image analysis it is a common practice to
train classiﬁers on the spectrum of a small number (a couple
of hundreds) of isolated sample pixels . Training relies
on the trustworthiness of the reference data and on the fact
that classes are reliably separable simply by observing the
spectral signature of the sampled pixels. While such training
approaches are popular, for example, in hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation, our goals differ as we wish to automatically
learn contextual features that can help better identify the
classes in satellite imagery. Our goal requires more training
data per se, as we must show the classiﬁer the many different
contexts in which a pixel class can be embedded, and not just
its spectral values. In addition, is it well-known that massive
data might be required to train neural networks, contrary to
a common feature selection and classiﬁcation approach. This
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
(a) Color image
(b) Reference data
(c) Patch-based fuzzy map
(d) FCN fuzzy map
(e) SVM fuzzy map
Fig. 4: Experimental results on a fragment of the Boston dataset.
Iterations
Area under ROC curve
Fully convolutional
Patch−based
Iterations
Pixel−wise accuracy
Fully convolutional
Patch−based
(a) Performance evolution
False Positive rate
True Positive rate
Patch−based
Fully convolutional
(b) ROC curves
Fig. 5: Evaluation of patch-based and fully convolutional neural networks on the Boston test set.
led us to analyze and address the dependency of the algorithm
on the availability and accuracy of the training data.
In the experiments described in Section III-D, the Massachusetts Buildings dataset is used for training and testing.
This dataset is a hand-corrected version of the OpenStreetMap
(OSM) vectorial map available over the area covered by
the images. Despite the existence of some inaccuracies in
the reference data, the coverage of OSM in that region is
satisfactory and the errors are minor.
In many other areas of Earth, however, the coverage of OSM
is limited. In the samples of Fig. 8 we observe large areas
with missing data and a general misregistration of the vectorial
maps with respect to the actual structures. In addition, the
misregistration is not uniform and neighboring buildings are
often shifted in different directions. Note that in the samples of
Fig. 8 the buildings have been delineated in OSM based on the
ofﬁcial French cadaster records. However, even the cadaster
records are not always accurate up to the meter resolution.
Furthermore, satellite images undergo a series of corrections
before being aligned to the maps. For example, the use of
inexact elevation models for orthorectiﬁcation might introduce
misregistrations throughout the images. As a result, the OSM
raw data is imperfect and thus not fully reliable.
The reference data obtained from OSM, as shown by Fig. 8,
provides a rough idea of the location of the buildings, but
rarely outlines them. In such a setting, convolutional neural
networks would hardly learn that building boundaries are
likely to fall on visible edges, since this is not what the reference data depicts. Under these circumstances, we expect the
predictions not to be very conﬁdent, especially on the border of
the objects. As we will illustrate in Section IV-C, this yields a
“blobby” and overly fuzzy aspect to predictions obtained with
the network of Section III-C on more challenging datasets.
Our ﬁrst contribution in this section is a novel approach for
tackling the issue of inaccurate labels for CNN training. For
this we propose a two-step approach: 1) the network is ﬁrst
trained on raw OSM data, 2) it is then ﬁne-tuned on a tiny
piece of manually labeled image.
This method provides us with a means to deal with the
inaccuracy of training data, by increasing the conﬁdence
and sharpness of the predictions. However, we still cannot
expect it to provide highly precise boundaries with the fully
convolutional architecture as described in Section III-C. This
is because such network includes a downsampling step, required to capture the long-range spatial dependencies that
help recognize the classes. However, downsampling makes
the whole system lose spatial precision, and the deconvolutional layer learns a way of naively upsampling the data
from a restricted number of neighbors, without reincorporating
higher-resolution information. What is lost in spatial precision
through the network, is not recovered. This is a consequence
of a well-known trade-off between the receptive ﬁeld (how
much context is taken to conduct predictions) and the output
resolution (how ﬁne is the prediction) if we wish to keep a
reasonable number of trainable parameters . Our second
contribution is then a new architecture that incorporates information at multiple scales in order to alleviate this trade-off.
Our architecture combines low-resolution long-range features
with high-resolution local features that conduct predictions
with a higher level of detail. This architecture, when combined
with our two-step training approach, provides a framework that
can be used end-to-end to classify satellite imagery.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
A. Fine-tuning
Fine-tuning is a very common procedure in the neural
network literature. The idea is to adapt an existing pretrained
model to a different domain by executing a few training iterations on a new dataset. The notion of ﬁne-tuning is based on
the intuition that low-level information/features can be reused
in different applications, without training from scratch. Even
when the ﬁnal classiﬁcation objective is different, it is also
a relevant approach for initializing the learnable parameters
close to good local minima, instead of initializing with random
weights. After proper ﬁne-tuning, low-level features tend to be
quite preserved from one dataset to another, while the higher
layers’ parameters are updated to adapt the network to the new
problem .
When ﬁne-tuning, the training set for the new domain is usually substantially smaller than the one used to train the original
network. This is because one assumes that some generalities
of both domains are well conveyed in the pretrained network
(e.g., edge detectors in different directions) and the ﬁne-tuning
phase is just needed to conduct the domain adaptation. When
the training set used for ﬁne-tuning is very small, additional
considerations to avoid overﬁtting are commonly taken, such
as early stopping (executing just a few iterations on the new
training dataset), ﬁxing the weights at the lower layers or
reducing the learning rate.
We now incorporate the idea of neural network ﬁne-tuning,
in order to perform training on imperfect data. Our approach
proceeds in two steps. In step one large amounts of training
data are used to train a fully convolutional neural network.
This raw training data is extracted directly from OSM, without
any hand correction. The goal of this step is to capture the
generalities of the dataset such as, e.g., the representative
spectrum of object classes.
In step two, we ﬁne-tune the network by using a small
part of carefully labeled image. This phase is designed to
compensate for the inaccuracy of labels obtained in step one,
by ﬁne-tuning the network on small yet consistent target
outputs. Assuming that most of the generalities have been
captured during the initial training step, the ﬁne-tuning step
should locally correct the network parameters to output more
accurate classiﬁcations. The efforts of ﬁne-tuning are thus
limited to manually labeling a small dataset, while the large
inaccurate dataset is automatically extracted from OSM.
B. Conducting Fine Predictions
The resolution at which the networks proposed in Section III
operate yields probability maps that, once upsampled, are
coarse in terms of spatial accuracy. A naive way to increase
the resolution of the network would be to use higher-resolution
ﬁlters, which requires to increase their dimensions if we
want to preserve the receptive ﬁeld. For example, instead of
applying a 5 × 5 ﬁlter at a fourth of the image resolution, one
could use a 20×20 ﬁlter at full resolution, hence covering the
same spatial extent. However, such an increase in ﬁlter sizes
is prohibitive, hampering the spatial and temporal efﬁciency
of the algorithm and producing less accurate results due to the
difﬁculty of optimizing so many parameters.
Nevertheless, we observed that we do not need fullresolution ﬁlters to conduct accurate predictions. One requires
a higher resolution only in the center of the convolution
ﬁlters (assuming that the pixel we wish to predict is in the
center of the context of interest). A large spatial extent is
indeed required to capture contextual information, but it is
not necessary to conduct this analysis at full resolution. For
example, the presence of two parallel bands of grass can help
identify a road (and distinguish it from, for instance, a building
with a gray rooftop), but a precise localization of the grass is
not necessary. On the contrary, at the center of the convolution
ﬁlter, a higher-resolution analysis is required to speciﬁcally
locate the boundary of the aforementioned road.
Fig. 6 illustrates this observation. In Fig. 6(a) we observe
the area around a pixel whose class we wish to predict, at full
resolution. A ﬁlter taking such an amount of context with that
resolution would be prohibitive in the number of parameters,
as well as unnecessary. Fig. 6(b) depicts the same context
at a quarter of the resolution. Notice that it is still possible
to visually infer that there is a road. However, identifying
the precise location of the boundaries of the road becomes
difﬁcult. Alternatively, Fig. 6(c) depicts a small patch but at
full resolution. We can now better locate the precise boundary
of the object, but with so little context it is difﬁcult to identify
that the object is indeed a road. Large ﬁlters at low resolution
- see Fig. 6(b) or small ﬁlters at high resolution - see Fig. 6(c),
which would both have a reasonable number of parameters,
are bad alternatives: the ﬁrst ﬁlter is too coarse and the second
ﬁlter is using too little context.
We propose convolutional ﬁlters that combine multiple
scales instead. In Fig. 6(d) the large-size low-resolution context of Fig. 6(b) is combined with the small high-resolution
context of 6(d). This provides us with a means to simultaneously infer the class by observing the surroundings at a coarse
scale, and determine the precise boundary location by using
a ﬁner context. This way, the amount of parameters are kept
small while the trade-off between recognition and localization
is alleviated.
Les us denote by S a set of levels of detail expressed as a
fraction of the original resolution. For example, S = {1, 1/2}
is a set comprising two-scales: full resolution and half of the
full resolution. We denote by xs a feature map x downsampled
to a certain level s ∈S. For example, x1/2 is a feature map
downsampled to half of the original resolution. Inspired in
Equation 1, we design a special type of neuron that adds the
responses to a set of ﬁlters applied at different scales of the
feature maps in the previous layer:
Notice that individual ﬁlters ws are learned for every scale
s. Such a ﬁlter is easily implemented by using a combination
of elementary convolutional, downsampling and upsampling
layers. Fig. 7 illustrates this process in the case of a twoscale (S = {1, 1/2}) module. In our implementation we
average neighboring elements in a window for downsampling
and perform bilinear interpolation for upsampling, but other
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
(a) Large context, high resolution
(b) Large context, low resolution
(c) Small context, high resolution
(d) Combined scales
Fig. 6: Different types of context to predict a pixel’s class. A multi-scale context such as in (d) alleviates the trade-off between
classiﬁcation accuracy and number of learnable parameters.
Fig. 7: Two-scale convolutional module that simultaneously
combines coarse large-range and ﬁne short-range reasoning.
Fig. 8: Fragments of the Forez training set (red: building).
approaches are also applicable. The kernel sizes of the convolutions at both scales are set to be equal (e.g., 3 × 3), yet
the amount of context taken varies from one path to the other
due to the different scales. The addition is an elementwise
operation, followed by the nonlinear activation function.
C. Experiments on the End-to-End Classiﬁcation Framework
We conduct our experiments on a Pl´eiades image over the
area of Forez, France. An orthorectiﬁed color pansharpened
version of the image is used, at a spatial resolution of 0.5
m2. Our training subset amounts to 22.5 km2. The criterion to
construct the training set was to choose ten 3000 × 3000 tiles
with at least some coverage of OpenStreetMap (OSM). The
shape ﬁles were rasterized with GDAL1 to create the binary
reference maps. Fig. 8 shows some fragments of the reference
data. Inconsistent misregistrations and considerable omissions
are observed all over.
1 
Fig. 9: Manually labeled tile for ﬁne-tuning (3000×3000).
Fig. 10: Fragment of the ﬁne-tuning tile. Red borders enclose
building areas.
We manually labeled a 2.25 km2 tile for FCN ﬁne-tuning,
and a different 2.25 km2 tile for testing. The manual labeling
takes about two hours for each of the tiles. The entire tuning
tile is depicted by Fig. 9 and a close-up is shown in Fig. 10.
The fully convolutional network (FCN) described in Section
III-C, which was used for the Massachusetts dataset, is now
trained with the Forez set, under a similar experimental setting.
Note that this FCN was designed for images which have a
1 m2 resolution, while Pl´eiades imagery features a 0.5 m2
resolution. In order for the architectural decisions of FCN to
be valid in our new dataset, one must preserve the receptive
ﬁeld size in terms of meters, not pixels. We thus downsample
Pl´eiades images prior to entering the ﬁrst layer of the FCN,
and bilinearly upsample the output classiﬁcation maps. Even
though a new network directly tailored to the Pl´eiades resolution could be designed, we favor this proven architecture to
conduct our experiments. The concepts described in this paper
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
FCN + Fine-tuning
Two-scale FCN
Two-scale FCN + Fine-tuning
TABLE I: Performance evaluation on the Pl´eiades test set.
are however general and can be used to design other networks.
After training on the raw OSM Forez dataset, we ﬁne-tune
the weights on the manually labeled tuning tile. The training
hyper-parameters are kept similar in the ﬁne-tuning step, but
an early stopping criterion interrupts it after 200 iterations.
To assess the performance of ﬁne-tuning we use as criteria
pixelwise accuracy and area under the ROC curve (AUC), as
described in Section III-D. Since there are many more nonbuilding pixels than building pixels in this dataset, these accuracy measures might seem overly high, a well-known issue of
pixelwise accuracy in imbalanced datsets . We add then
the intersection over union criterion (IoU), an object-based
overlap measure typically used for imbalanced datasets .
In our case it is deﬁned as the number of pixels labeled as
buildings both in the classiﬁed image and in the ground truth,
divided by the total amount of pixels labeled as such in either
of them. These criteria are evaluated on the manually labeled
test set, which is used neither for training nor for ﬁne-tuning.
The ﬁrst two rows of Table I show that ﬁne-tuning enhances
the quality of the predictions in terms of accuracy, AUC and
IoU. To conﬁrm the signiﬁcance of the accuracy, a McNemar’s
test proved that the improvement is not a result of mere
luck with a probability greater than 0.99999. Besides, the IoU
is improved by over a third with the ﬁne-tuned network.
Fig. 11(a-d) shows the impact of ﬁne-tuning on several
ampliﬁed fragments of the test set. A greater conﬁdence in
the ﬁne-tuned network predictions is observed. The objects
exhibit better alignment to the objects of the image, albeit the
boundaries could better line up to the underlying edges.
Fig. 12 illustrate the ﬁrst-layer convolutional ﬁlters learned
by the initial and ﬁne-tuned networks. We observe a combination of low- and high-frequency ﬁlters, a behavior typically
observed in CNNs. We also observe edge and color blob
detectors. These ﬁlter remain unchanged after ﬁne-tuning, even
though no constraints are introduced to enforce this. Finetuning corrects the weights in the high-level layers, which
suggests that the initial low-level features were useful indeed,
but the inaccuracy in the labels was introducing fuzziness in
the upper layers of the network.
We now evaluate the performance of a two-scale network.
The FCN architecture described in Section III-C is replaced
by three two-scale stacked modules, with scales S = {1, 1/4}.
We select S
= 1/4 as it corresponds to the degree of
downsampling of the original FCN network, and S = 1 is
added to reﬁne the predictions. The three modules learn 3 × 3
ﬁlters in both scales. The ﬁrst two modules generate 64 feature
maps and the last module generates a single map with the
building/non-building prediction.
The two-scale network is trained and ﬁne-tuned in a similar
setting as the FCN network. The results summarized in the
last two rows of Table I show that ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly
Fig. 12: First layer ﬁlters before and after ﬁne-tuning.
enhances the classiﬁcation performance, and that the ﬁnetuned two-scale network outperforms the single scale network.
Notably, IoU goes from 0.48 to 0.72, implying that objects
overlap with the ground truth 50% better by adding a scale
and performing ﬁne-tuning. Note that if a scale is added but
no ﬁne-tuning is done, there is actually a slight decrease in
performance. A possible explanation for this is that including a
ﬁner scale adds even more confusion to the training algorithm
if only noisy misregistered labels are provided.
Figs. 11(e-f) illustrate the results on visual fragments of
the test set. The two-scale network yields classiﬁcation maps
that better correspond to the actual image objects, and exhibit
sharper angles and straighter lines. The entire classiﬁed test tile
for the ﬁne-tuned two-scale network is depicted by Fig. 13c.
The time required to generate this result corresponds to three
hours for training on the OSM dataset, two hours to manually
label an image tile and about a minute for ﬁne-tuning. The
prediction of the 3000 × 3000 test tile using the hardware
described in Section III-D takes 3.2 seconds, and it grows
linearly in the size of the image. As in Section III-D, we ran
an SVM on the individual pixel values (see the classiﬁcation
map in Fig. 13b). Accuracy is 0.9487 and IoU 0.19, yielding
poorer results than the presented CNN-based approaches.
As validated by the experiments, the issue of not having
large amounts of high-quality reference data can be alleviated
by providing the network with a small amount of accurate
data in a ﬁne-tuning step. Our multi-scale neurons combine
reasoning at different resolutions to effectively produce ﬁne
predictions, while keeping a reasonable number of parameters.
Such a framework can be used end-to-end to perform the
classiﬁcation task directly from input imagery. More scales
can be easily be added and, besides the fact of being fully
convolutional, there are little constraints on the architecture
itself, admitting a different number of classes, input bands or
number of feature maps.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Convolutional neural networks have become a popular classiﬁer in the context of image analysis due to their potential
to automatically learn relevant contextual features. Initially
devised for the categorization of natural images, these networks must be revisited and adapted to tackle the problem of
pixelwise labeling in remote sensing imagery.
We proposed a fully convolutional network architecture by
analyzing a state-of-the-art model and solving its concerns by
construction. Despite their outstanding learning capability, the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
(a) Color image
(b) Reference
(d) FCN + Fine-tuning
(e) 2-scale FCN
Fine-tuning
Fig. 11: Classiﬁed fragments of the Pl´eiades test image. Fine-tuning increases the conﬁdence of the predictions, and the
two-scale network produces ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation maps.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
(a) Color pansharpened input
(b) SVM on individual pixels
(c) FCN (two scales + ﬁne-tuning)
Fig. 13: Binary classiﬁcation maps on the Forez test image.
lack of accurate training data might limit the applicability of
CNN models in realistic remote sensing contexts. We therefore
proposed a two-step training approach combining the use of
large amounts of raw OpenStreetMap data and a small sample
of manually labeled reference. The last ingredient we needed
to provide a usable end-to-end framework for remote sensing
image classiﬁcation was to produce ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
maps, since typical CNNs tend to hamper the ﬁneness of the
output as a side effect of taking large amounts of context. We
proposed a type of neuron module that simultaneously reasons
at different scales.
Experiments showed that our fully convolutional network
outperforms the previous model in multiple aspects: the accuracy of the results is improved, the visual artifacts are removed
and the inference time is reduced by a factor of ten. The use of
our architecture constitutes then a win-win situation in which
no aspect is compromised for the others. This was achieved
by analyzing the role played by every layer in the network in
order to propose a more appropriate architecture, showing that
a deep understanding of how CNNs work is important for their
success. Further experimentation showed that the two-step
training approach effectively combines imperfect training data
with manually labeled data to capture the dataset’s generalities
and its precise details. Moreover, the multi-scale modules
increase the level of detail of the classiﬁcation without making
the number of parameters explode, attenuating the trade-off
between detection and localization.
Our overall framework shows then that convolutional neural
networks can be used end-to-end to process large amounts of
satellite images and provide accurate pixelwise classiﬁcations.
As future work we plan to extend our experiments to
multiple object classes and study the possibility of directly
inputting non-pansharpened imagery, in order to avoid this
preprocessing step. We also plan to study the introduction of
shape priors in the learning process and the vectorization of
the classiﬁcation maps.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
All Pl´eiades images are c⃝CNES , distribution Airbus DS / SpotImage. The authors thank CNES for
initializing and funding the study, and providing Pl´eiades data.