1Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2Brazilian School of Public and Business Administration, Getulio Vargas Foundation,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 3, London, UK. ✉e-mail: 
he rapid spread of COVID-19 globally has been met with an
extraordinary range of government responses. These measures include school closings, travel restrictions, bans on
public gatherings, emergency investments in healthcare facilities,
new forms of social welfare provision, contact tracing and other
interventions to contain the spread of the virus, augment health
systems and manage the economic consequences of these actions.
The Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT)
provides a systematic set of cross-national, longitudinal measures
of government responses from 1 January 2020. The project tracks
national and, for some countries, subnational governments’ policies and interventions across a standardized series of indicators. It
further creates a suite of composite indices to measure the extent
of these responses. By providing open-access, near-real-time data
in an easily accessible, time-series format, the project offers a critical resource for policymakers and researchers to understand the
effect of policies on disease spread, socioeconomic welfare and
other outcomes of interest. Consequently, the data offer an objective
grounding for debate as policymakers and publics deliberate over
approaches to COVID-19.
While OxCGRT is continuously expanding, at present it includes
19 policy indicators covering closure and containment, health and
economic policies (Table 1). These data cover over 180 countries, as
well as subnational jurisdictions of the United States, Brazil, United
Kingdom and Canada, with subnational units of more countries
being added over time (Extended Data Fig. 1). A team of more than
400 volunteers around the world, affiliated with Oxford University
and its partners, have been working to collect and code the data in
real time. Members of this large and diverse team use their contextual knowledge and expertise in 88 languages to parse reporting and government announcements. Coder training, testing and
weekly meetings that generate rules of thumb for edge-case policies
ensure coding consistency, and every data point is reviewed by a
second coder.
OxCGRT’s design emphasizes comparability, legibility and transparency. The data are published in multiple time-series formats for
ease of use by non-experts and researchers alike, with legacy data
available for continuity as we add new indicators. Several features
underpin our approach. First, observations for most indicators are
reported on monotonic ordinal scales, with others coded on continuous scales, allowing for quantitative analysis of the degree of government response. Second, the indicators are aggregated in different
combinations into four composite indices (Table 2) that provide a
snapshot of the number and degree of policies in place in a given
area. Third, geographic scope is recorded for appropriate indicators. Fourth, source notes and archived links to original sources are
included to support detailed interpretation of specific policies.
OxCGRT has been used widely (see examples below) during the
pandemic, revealing that the global coverage, granularity of policy
detail and systematic structure of the data have been able to inform
diverse literatures1. For instance, the data have been used by health
policy experts and data scientists to calculate the levels of healthcare
resources that are associated with different levels of transmission2,
to estimate the impact of combinations of physical distancing measures on disease incidence3,4 and on the time-varying reproduction
number (Rt)5. Environmental scientists have drawn on the data to
examine whether COVID-19 response policies affect air pollution
levels6,7. Political scientists have considered whether policies vary by
regime type8,9, and assessed whether upcoming elections reduce the
strength of responses10. Economists have used the data to explore
how working from home has shifted countries’ sectoral structures11,
to link stay-at-home policies to increasing food prices12, and to
identify knock-on effects of large countries’ response policies on the
gross domestic product growth of smaller trade partners13.
A global panel database of pandemic policies
(Oxford COVID-19 Government Response
Thomas Hale   1 ✉, Noam Angrist   1, Rafael Goldszmidt2, Beatriz Kira1, Anna Petherick   1, Toby Phillips1,
Samuel Webster3, Emily Cameron-Blake   1, Laura Hallas1, Saptarshi Majumdar1 and Helen Tatlow   1
COVID-19 has prompted unprecedented government action around the world. We introduce the Oxford COVID-19 Government
Response Tracker (OxCGRT), a dataset that addresses the need for continuously updated, readily usable and comparable information on policy measures. From 1 January 2020, the data capture government policies related to closure and containment,
health and economic policy for more than 180 countries, plus several countries’ subnational jurisdictions. Policy responses are
recorded on ordinal or continuous scales for 19 policy areas, capturing variation in degree of response. We present two motivating applications of the data, highlighting patterns in the timing of policy adoption and subsequent policy easing and reimposition, and illustrating how the data can be combined with behavioural and epidemiological indicators. This database enables
researchers and policymakers to explore the empirical effects of policy responses on the spread of COVID-19 cases and deaths,
as well as on economic and social welfare.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Many of those using the data have benefited from the specific
features listed above. The ordinal indicator scales permit separate
assessment of policy recommendations, as well as permissive and
strict regulations14. While substantial attention has focused on
the closure and containment measures captured in the stringency
index, some studies have used all four15, or selected from among
the containment and health index (CHI), the more holistic government response index (GRI)16 and the economic support index
(ESI)17, which provides an overall measure of financial assistance
to households. Moreover, the coding of policies’ geographic scope
has enabled analysis of strictly national policies18, and comparison
between national and localized approaches. These examples illustrate the value of OxCGRT data and related datasets19 in helping
researchers—in addition to decision-makers and publics—to make
sense of the effects of governments’ responses to COVID-19 across
different populations and contexts, as well as what leads governments to adopt different policies.
In the following sections, we describe patterns of global COVID-
19 government responses with the OxCGRT data in order to demonstrate what kinds of questions the data can help researchers tackle.
We describe cross-national patterns in the timing of containment
and health policies, followed by a more detailed presentation of
policy sequencing. We then combine the data with mobile phone
mobility data to relate policies to human behaviour20 and review the
potential for bringing together OxCGRT data with additional data
sources in the Discussion. In the Methods, we describe the individual
indicators in more detail, along with the data collection process, data
coverage and how we calculate the indices. We also briefly compare
OxCGRT with related projects to highlight their complementarities.
To motivate applications of the data, we present general trends
and patterns in government responses in the first months of the
pandemic. We focus here on cross-national patterns, although
OxCGRT contains more granular data on subnational jurisdictions
as well. First, we document a surprising degree of commonality
across countries in the early months of the pandemic followed by
growing divergence. We also note patterns in policy reimposition
and geographical scope—topics that have, to date, been relatively
underexplored in the literature, yet they have important implications for how countries manage each wave of the pandemic. Second,
we consider associations between the OxCGRT indices and a key
outcome of interest, individual mobility, to illustrate the potential
for the data to be combined with other indicators to investigate economic, social and epidemiological questions of interest.
What government responses do we observe? The data reveal
a striking degree of commonality in government responses to
COVID-19 in the first months of the pandemic. We group the 19
indicators into themes of closure and containment, health and
economic support (Table 1), normalized to vary from 0–100 (for
a full description, see Table 2). The CHI measures the number and
Table 1 | OxCGRT Indicators
Containment and closure
School closing
Geographic
Workplace closing
Geographic
Cancel public events
Geographic
Restrictions on gathering size
Geographic
Close public transport
Geographic
Stay-at-home requirements
Geographic
Restrictions on internal movement
Geographic
Restrictions on international travel
Economic response
Income support
Debt/contract relief for households Ordinal
Fiscal measures
Giving international support
Health systems
Public information campaign
Geographic
Testing policy
Contact tracing
Emergency investment in health
Investment in COVID-19 vaccines
Facial coverings
Geographic
Vaccination policy
Miscellaneous
Other responses
For detailed descriptions and coding information, see the project website: 
uk/covidtracker.
Table 2 | OxCGRT index composition and values
Stringency
stringency
value (Nj)
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
2 (0, 1, 2)
4 (0, 1, 2,
2 (0, 1, 2)
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
2 (0, 1, 2)
4 (0, 1, 2,
2 (0, 1, 2)
2 (0, 1, 2)
2 (0, 1, 2)
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
2 (0, 1, 2)
4 (0, 1, 2,
5 (0, 1, 2, 3,
k is the number of component indicators in an index (see Methods); x indicates that an indicator
contributes to that index.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
intensity of closure and containment policies (for example, school
closings and stay-at-home measures) and policies towards disease surveillance (for example, testing and contact tracing). Only
a handful of countries had adopted strong containment (often
referred to as lockdown) and health policies in early March, as
Fig. 1 shows, yet within 1 month the world had changed and intensive policy responses had become a global phenomenon. In subsequent months, however, countries lifted policy restrictions, then, in
1 August 2020
1 December 2020
1 March 2020
1 April 2020
Fig. 1 | Containment and Health Index (CHI) by country on the first day of each month. The colour scale bar indicates the CHI score, from <20 (pale
yellow) to >80 (dark red).
Middle East and Africa
Europe and Central Asia
South and East Asia and the Pacific
Fig. 2 | Clustering of initial government responses compared with the spread of COVID-19. The graphs depict how 183 countries (each row), grouped
by world region, ramped up their response policies to scores of 50 (out of 100) on the CHI within approximately the same 2-week period in mid-March
2020 (as shown by the two vertical dash-dotted lines), despite the more scattered pattern of disease progression over time (as indicated by circles that
mark the date a country experienced its tenth death) and in contrast with the greater divergence in policies observed in later months. Although the disease
affected countries at different times, nearly all countries changed policy substantially in the same 2-week period. The x axis dates are all in the year 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
some cases, reimposed policies in a policy see-saw as the epidemic
waxed and waned.
During the initial, global rise in policy responses, the data reveal
a number of intriguing patterns. Most governments moved to a
high level of response within a 2-week period around the middle
of March, showing remarkable clustering. Figure 2 displays this initial policy convergence across 183 countries, which is not observed
in later policy decisions (such as rolling back measures). This initial clustering pattern in mid-March contrasts with what would be
expected if countries reacted according to the local epidemiological progression of the pandemic. For instance, in most countries,
the sudden ramping up of response policies happened before they
had experienced their tenth COVID-19-related death, while many
other countries’ responses preceded even their tenth recorded
case. Countries may have observed their neighbours or the global
response and reacted in concert. This clustering then seems to dissipate in later months as countries’ responses diverge. This pattern has
important implications for the coordination of responses to global
infectious diseases considering that the World Health Organization’s
policy guidance to governments is tailored to the local progression
of an infectious disease rather than potential herd behaviour.
Next, we examine specific policies, both during the initial process of policy adoption and in the months that followed as measures were either rolled back or maintained. The left panel of Fig.
3 captures the ramping up of policies, showing the proportion of
countries adopting a particular policy, with day zero representing
the first day of the COVID-19 policy response in each country.
The very limited crossing of the lines in this figure suggests that
policies adopted by the median country (in terms of the speed of
policy responses) occurred in approximately the same order as those
adopted by countries in the first and third quartiles. In other words,
the sequence of policy adoption is largely similar across countries.
Specifically, there is more than a 50% chance that a randomly drawn
country will have introduced public information campaigns, international travel controls and testing policies within 20 d of the first
government response of any policy type; there is a 40% chance of
this within 10 d and a >90% chance within 2 months. Economic
support policies have tended to be established later than closure or
containment and health policies, facial coverings aside.
A common pattern also characterizes policy reversal. The right
panel of Fig. 3 indicates the proportion of countries maintaining the
highest point they reach on the ordinal scale for each policy area.
The global rate of policy reduction is indicated by the slope of the
lines. There is crossing over among policies, but little among those
lines representing closure and containment policies, which have
roughly similar rates of rollback. During the initial 2 months of policy easing, while closure and containment policies were loosened,
economic support policies and health policies were maintained at
countries’ individual maximum strengths.
While we see similarities in the policies that were adopted and
relaxed, as well as when this occurred, there is interesting variation
across policies’ strength and geographic coverage and the extent to
which they were later reimposed. Figure 4 shows how frequently
countries imposed the strongest possible policies, what portion of
Percentage of countries adopting requirement policy
Days after first requirement policy
Percentage of countries mantaining their maximum policy level
Days after first policy level reduction
School closing
Workplace closing
Cancel public events
Restrictions on
gathering size
Close public transport
Stay-at-home
requirements
Restrictions on internal
Restrictions on
international travel
Public information
Contact tracing
Facial coverings
Income support
Debt relief
Fig. 3 | Sequencing of initial policy adoption (from first policy enacted) and reduction (from first policy eased). The graphs show the ramping up (left)
and rollback (right) of different government response policies. The number of days after the first policy reduction are counted from the first reduction
in the level of any policy for at least five consecutive days. A difference in the level of a policy line between the two panels—from 60 d into the ramp up
(the far right of the left-hand panel) and the starting position of a policy line during rollback (the far left of the right-hand panel)—indicates the minimum
percentage of countries that eased policies on the first day of policy reduction (if negative) or the percentage of countries adopting the policy after 60 d
following the first measure but before first policy reduction (if positive). For example, workplace closures have more commonly been eased at the initiation
of rollback than regulations prohibiting public events. Countries that have increased policy intensity after 5 d of reducing policy strength are counted as
countries that did not maintain their original maximum. The sample comprises 66,978 observations from 183 countries between 1 January 2020 and 31
December 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
observed policies applied nationally versus subnationally and which
policies were reduced and subsequently reimposed. Most closure
policies were adopted nationally at some point, and in approximately 20% of countries, stronger closure and containment policies
were reimposed by the end of December 2020. In the case of workplace policies, approximately 80% of countries had reduced their
restrictions by that point in the year, but 40% of all countries later
reversed course.
The clustering of policy responses during the process of adoption has a critical implication for researchers. Analysis of individual
policies is difficult because there is limited variation across and
within countries, resulting in collinear relationships. This has meant
that most analyses of government responses to date have had to
focus on aggregate indices. However, in later periods, we document
substantially more variation. This variation enables more credible
quasi-experimental analysis of individual policies, such as school
reopening, testing campaigns and income support. Understanding
the role of individual policies, in addition to aggregate government
response levels, is of central importance for further research and
policy action, which this database can enable.
Motivating applications of the data: how do government
responses relate to behaviour? A key application of the OxCGRT
data is to understand how policies relate to human behaviour. A
number of studies have used OxCGRT and similar data to try to
estimate the effect of policies on behaviour and the spread of the
disease. Here, we do not aim to establish new estimates of causal
effects, but rather seek only to demonstrate potential use cases
to motivate further research. Figure 5 summarizes the results of
linear panel regression models, comparing the strength of associations between the CHI, GRI and stringency index with changes in
citizen mobility over time, as recorded by mobile phone applications
(the full results are presented in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).
These models use standard techniques in the literature. We include
country and date fixed effects in order to isolate within-country
associations over time, accounting for seasonal and other calendar
effects. In the Supplementary Information, we include models that
also control for new daily deaths, to identify the association between
policies and mobility unconfounded by the relationship between
the severity of the epidemic and mobility.
The coefficients and confidence intervals in Fig. 5 show strong
associations between OxCGRT indices and measures of behaviour.
These associations are stronger the greater the number of policy
indicators that are included in an index. All three indices shown
contain eight indicators of closure and containment policies plus
at least one additional indicator. Increases in the GRI—our broadest index of government responses—are most strongly associated
with increases in the percentage of time spent in residences, as well
as with decreases in the frequency of visits to groceries and pharmacies, workplaces, transit stations, places for retail and recreation,
and parks. The CHI, which adds to closure and containment indicators all of our health policy indicators, shows only slightly weaker
associations. The stringency index, which brings together the containment and health indicators with just one additional indicator
(that is, public information campaigns) shows still less pronounced
relationships in the same directions.
These analyses highlight the potential of OxCGRT data,
combined with other datasets, to capture important changes in
Percentage of countries ever adopting
Restrictions
on gathering
Stay-athome
requirements
Restrictions
on internal
Restrictions on
international
information
Debt relief
Policy at any level
Policy at national level
Policy at maximum level
Policy reduction
Policy reduction reversal
Fig. 4 | Variation in the degree, geographic coverage and permanence of policies. The graph shows the proportion of countries that, for various indicators,
adopted any policies, adopted policies nationally (as opposed to geographically targeted policies) and adopted policies that correspond to the highest
point on the ordinal scale. It also shows the percentage of countries that at some point reduced and reimposed such policies. A policy reduction is defined
by a reduction in policy level sustained for at least 5 d. A policy reduction reversal is defined by an increase in policy level after a policy reduction that is
sustained for at least 5 d. Adoption rates of some policies at any level (for example, facial coverings, income support and debt relief) are much higher than
those depicted in the left panel of Fig. 3 because countries often continue to adopt these policies after the first policy reduction. The sample comprises
66,978 observations from 183 countries between 1 January 2020 and 31 December 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
behaviour in response to historic government action. While the
associations presented here are merely suggestive, researchers are
already using the data for more in-depth analyses2,3,5. Identifying
causal effects of government policies is not straightforward due
to many confounding factors and potential sources of endogeneity. Given these challenges, the rich nature of this database with
day-by-day policy changes across a global distribution of countries
and subnational jurisdictions enables rigorous quasi-experimental
analysis. This illustrative application is designed to motivate further
in-depth research and to demonstrate the potential for policymakers and researchers to answer important public policy and epidemiological questions using OxCGRT data.
Discussion
Alongside epidemiological and behavioural data, measures of government response help researchers and decision-makers to explore
how best to address COVID-19. However, measuring government
policies in a consistent and comparable way across jurisdictions
and across time raises a number of methodological considerations,
which can present difficult choices. In this section, we review these
trade-offs and outline strategies for addressing them.
First, while the OxCGRT ordinal scales distinguish, for example,
a ban on gatherings of over ten people from a ban on gatherings
of over 100 people, the limitation of an ordinal approach is that it
groups heterogeneous observations into pre-established categories.
For instance, both the United Kingdom and France had broadly
similar stay-at-home orders during spring 2020, and both were
categorized as the second-highest ordinal point on that indicator. However, French residents had to submit a form to authorities
to leave their house, while UK residents did not. To mitigate the
inevitable simplification that comes with codification, OxCGRT
includes detailed notes and archived links to source materials for all
observations in the dataset, helping researchers to draw on OxCGRT
data in a more detailed way should it be required.
Second, the coding scheme loses granularity when applied
to large jurisdictions with many heterogeneous subunits. As
described in the Methods, OxCGRT data include three types of
observation: those that describe all policies that apply to a given
jurisdiction; those that describe policies put in place by a given
level and lower levels of government; and those that describe
only those instigated at a given level of government. Policies that
apply only to a subunit of the given jurisdiction (for example, a
single state of a country being coded) are flagged as targeted, while
policies that apply to the whole jurisdiction are flagged as general.
When both general and targeted policies exist simultaneously,
OxCGRT always records the stricter policy. This choice may make
the data more useful for evaluating the effect of policies on the
spread of disease (since it records the stronger targeted measures
that probably exist where there is a local outbreak) while reducing
their ability to describe the overall state of policy across the country. For example, if a jurisdiction with many subunits has weak
general policies and strong policies targeted at a single subunit,
its overall coding will be high. In cases where this is frequently
an issue, such as Brazil and the United States, OxCGRT has also
comprehensively coded subunit jurisdictions (see Supplementary
Fig. 2). We encourage users to consider this granularity issue carefully when making cross-national comparisons, and to considering
using subnational information for large, heterogeneous jurisdictions where available.
Third, OxCGRT records policy interventions as a time series (the
unit of observation is a jurisdiction day), recording the intensity and
scope of policy in place for a given indicator at that place and time.
An alternative approach that has been pursued by comparable data
projects is to record the start and end dates of individual policies
Time in residences
Grocery and pharmacy visits
Workplace visits
Transit station visits
Retail and recreation visits
Visit to parks
Percentage change in mobility associated with a one-unit increase in three OxCGRT indices
Stringency index
Fig. 5 | Associations between different combinations of government responses and aggregate population behaviour. This graph plots coefficients with
95% confidence intervals of the GRI, CHI and stringency index, used as independent variables in separate panel regression models predicting changes
in Google mobility data. The models use standard errors clustered by country and include country and date fixed effects (Supplementary Fig. 1 plots the
coefficients of the same indices in models that control for daily deaths; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 report the full results). Note that change in the
duration of time spent at home, as a proportion of the day, shows less variation than the other dependent variables, which capture change in the frequency
of visits to different categories of location. These results were calculated for 15 February to 9 October 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
(see more detailed comparison in the Methods). While both options
have merit, the time-series structure allows researchers to more easily match policy indicators to other time-series data, such as to case
or death rates, mobile phone mobility data and panel surveys. It also
helps OxCGRT data collectors to capture government responses
that do not take the form of discrete, formal policy interventions,
but more ad hoc announcements, such as temporary limitations to
internal movement during public holidays or religious events.
Fourth, the data are published continuously. Data collection
occurs weekly, which enables OxCGRT to provide up-to-date information on government responses. Given that severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 can spread extremely quickly, this speed is
essential for effective use of the data. However, our volunteers are
not necessarily able to update every jurisdiction in every cycle; consequently, some data can be up to 7 d out of date. To minimize recent
gaps, we therefore publish our data in real time so that they can be
utilized as soon as they have been contributed. The trade-off to this
speed is that the most recent data are published in advance of their
final validation check (see Methods for further details) and may
therefore be corrected in the review process or through external feedback (although, in practice, large revisions are rare; see Methods).
Fifth, OxCGRT relies on human judgement and contextual expertise, rather than automated data collection or coding, to provide the
best possible degree of accuracy and consistency. The ordinal scales
require individual contributors to carefully interpret various policies within each domain, in order to assign a code that best fits each
indicator. For example, many countries have taken similar action
to close workplaces, yet the types of workplaces that are required
to close often differ from country to country. This means that each
data contributor needs to assess the policy announcements in a
country alongside detailed guidance material and apply judgement.
Volunteers go through a training process to instil a high level of consistency and attend weekly meetings to discuss coding queries and
standardize interpretations. Many of our contributors are specialists in the countries that they code, and understand the country’s
culture, language and legal system in such a way that allows them
to code with context and have access to local information to verify
policies. While this shoe-leather-science approach is very human
resource intensive, we have not found it possible to achieve comparable results with purely automated methods. Going forward, it may
be fruitful to explore how different technological approaches can be
combined with human coders.
Finally, and critically, the OxCGRT dataset records only the
number and degree of government policies. It does not have a way
to measure how well policies are implemented or enforced, nor does
it measure the degree of compliance with official policies. OxCGRT
data should therefore be considered one among several key elements in the broader puzzle of understanding governments’ policy
adoption and the links between government interventions, human
behaviour and the spread of COVID-19.
This section describes OxCGRT’s design and structure, as well as the processes
through which data are collected and confirmed. Because the project is continually
evolving, adding further indicators and jurisdictions over time, users should always
check the project website for the most current information. All OxCGRT data are
available on GitHub and via an application programming interface (API), and are
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution CC BY standard.
We hope that the methods outlined below will be of use not only to data
users (the primary audience) but also to researchers who may be contemplating
developing complementary measures or data collection projects for response to
COVID-19 or other issues. In line with OxCGRT’s open-source ethos, we invite
the scientific community to use and build on not just the data we collect but the
methods and system described below.
Indicators. OxCGRT reports publicly available information on 19 indicators (see
Table 1) of government response, as well as recording miscellaneous policies. The
indicators capture all government measures related to a specific domain, including
formally adopted laws, policies promulgated by executive or regulatory authorities,
and softer guidance or advice. OxCGRT has added new indicators and refined
old indicators as the pandemic has evolved. Future iterations may include further
indicators or more nuanced versions of existing indicators. The indicators are of
three types: ordinal, numerical and text.
Ordinal indicators measure policies on a simple scale of severity or intensity,
allowing us to describe the degree or strength of government response in
each category. For these indicators, the rank order of the different levels
is meaningful, but we make no claims regarding the scale of the intervals.
Instead, each level has a specific meaning, which allows the different values to
also be used as categorical variables. These indicators are reported for each day
a policy is in place (not the day it is announced). Many have a further flag to
note whether they are targeted (applying only to a subregion of a jurisdiction
or to a specific sector) or general (applying throughout that jurisdiction or
across the economy). For the newly added H7 (vaccination policy), the flag
indicates whether the vaccine is being funded by the government or at a cost
to individuals.
Numerical indicators measure a specific number, reporting fiscal values
in US dollars. These indicators are only reported once, on the day they are
announced.
Text is a free response indicator that records other information of interest.
All observations also have a notes cell that reports sources and comments to
justify and substantiate the designation.
Data collection and reliability. The initial set of data collectors in March 2020
were recruited largely from the postgraduate student body of the Blavatnik School
of Government at the University of Oxford. Since then, additional contributors
have been recruited through Oxford University departmental mailing lists, student
societies and alumni email lists, as well as referrals from existing contributors.
Subnational coders are mostly students or recent graduates from partner
institutions in the countries where we are collecting subnational data (for example,
the University of São Paulo, Fundação Getulio Vargas and the State University
of Pará in the case of Brazil). To date, approximately 400 data collectors have
contributed to OxCGRT, and are listed on the project website.
New members of the data collection team undergo a series of training steps.
First, they complete a self-directed tutorial of training slides and videos that explain
how to search for data, interpret policies and submit contributions through the
online interface. New contributors are then given a short test for comprehension
and understanding of the coding schema and collection process. After that, new
data collectors are expected to attend a weekly all-contributor meeting, at which
point they will start being included in the regular task allocation.
OxCGRT collects national data on a weekly schedule, during which new
task allocations are sent to the data collection team. This allocation is based on
a regular review of database coverage, prioritizing those countries that have not
been updated within the past week. Most contributors are assigned to a list of four
to six jurisdictions and will cycle through that list each allocation round, building
up expertise in a small set of jurisdictions. The data are published in real time as
contributors enter them into the system.
After data are entered, they are marked provisional, which flags them for the
review process. First, after each allocation round, a small team will perform quick
spot checks to ensure that the data have been entered and there are no gross errors
(for example, accidental deletion of a whole column can be noticed and fixed
during this quick review). The provisional data are then queued for attention by a
more thorough review team. This review team will examine the data entry and the
original source and either confirm its veracity or flag the data entry for escalation.
The review process suggests a high degree of accuracy in the initial data collection.
As of 31 December 2020, 84.79% of all data points have never been changed, and
since 1 June 2020, 87.45% of data points have not required revision. Note that
these revisions include both post-hoc alterations to the coding scheme and factual
errors. Meanwhile, just 0.41% of observations have been escalated by reviewers
for adjudication . Of the 1.2 million data points captured
between 1 June 2020 and 31 December 2020, 319,840 were reviewed or changed; of
these, 51% were confirmed without edits.
Data are collected from publicly available sources, such as government press
releases and briefings, international organization reports and trusted news articles.
OxCGRT records the original source material using archived links so that coding
can be checked and substantiated.
Coding different levels of government response. OxCGRT includes data at the
country level for nearly all countries in the world. It also includes subnational-level
data for selected countries—currently, Brazil (all states, the Federal District, state
capitals and the next largest cities that are not geographically connected to the
state capitals), the United States (all states plus Washington DC and a number
of territories), the United Kingdom (the four devolved nations) and Canada (all
provinces and territories).
OxCGRT data are typically used in three ways: (1) primarily, to describe all
government responses relevant to a given jurisdiction; (2) less commonly, to
describe policies put in place by a given level and lower levels of government; and
(3) to compare government responses across different levels of government.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
To distinguish between these uses, different published versions of OxCGRT
data are tagged in the database. The TOTAL label implies that all government
responses relevant to the people in a given jurisdiction are included in the coding,
regardless of whether those policies are set by national or subnational governments
(these may also be presented without any jurisdiction label in some of our data
products). The jurisdiction label WIDE refers to policies put in place by a given
level and lower levels of government. WIDE observations therefore do not
incorporate general policies from higher levels of government that may supersede
local policies. For example, if a country has an international travel restriction that
applies country wide, this would not be registered in a STATE_WIDE record. The
jurisdiction label GOV indicates that observations include only policies instigated
by a particular level of government; higher- or lower-level jurisdictions do not
inform this coding.
In the main OxCGRT dataset, we show the total set of policies that apply to
a given jurisdiction (the TOTAL policies described above). Specifically, in the
main dataset, this means that we replace subnational-level responses with relevant
national government (NAT_GOV) indicators when the following two conditions
The corresponding NAT_GOV indicator is general, not targeted, and is therefore applied across the whole country
The corresponding NAT_GOV indicator is equal to or greater than the
STATE_WIDE or STATE_GOV indicator on the ordinal scale for that
In this way, national and subnational measures in the core dataset are
comparable, in that they show the totality of policies in effect within a given
jurisdiction.
Note that STATE_WIDE observations at the subnational level also capture
policies that the national government may specifically target at a subnational
jurisdiction. This is the case, for example, if a national government orders events to
close in a particular city experiencing an outbreak. These kinds of policies are not
inferred from NAT_GOV.
On our GitHub repositories, these different types of data are available in three
groups, as summarized in Extended Data Fig. 1:
(1) A main repository (NAT_TOTAL for all countries and STATE_TOTAL for
Brazil, the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada
(2) A US repository (NAT_GOV and STATE_WIDE)
(3) A Brazil repository (NAT_TOTAL, NAT_GOV, STATE_WIDE, STATE_GOV,
CITY_TOTAL and CITY_WIDE)
For large, heterogeneous jurisdictions, users may wish to use a weighted
average of subnational jurisdiction observations (for example, STATE_WIDE)
instead of national observations (NAT_TOTAL). See Supplementary Fig. 2 for a
comparison.
Composite indices. To make it easier to describe government responses in
aggregate, OxCGRT calculates simple indices that combine individual indicators
to provide an overall measure of the intensity of government response across a
family of indicators. These indices are designed to provide a simple snapshot of
the number and degree of government responses in a particular domain. Because
we have not designed the indices for any specific analytic usage, we aim to make
them as simple and transparent as possible. Those using the data to study the effect
of government policies on outcomes of interest will therefore probably wish to
modify the indices to suit the exact research questions they are seeking to answer
(for example, selecting only the variables they believe to be relevant, or weighting
those they believe to be of greater importance). In other words, we offer the indices
as a convenient prix fixe menu option, but we urge users to tailor the data to their
specific needs by ordering a la carte.
As noted above, we stress that composite indices have strengths and weaknesses
as descriptive and analytic tools. Governments’ responses to COVID-19 exhibit
nuance and heterogeneity. These issues create substantial measurement difficulties
when seeking to compare national responses in a systematic way. Composite
measures, which combine different indicators into a general index, inevitably
abstract away from these nuances. It is hoped that cross-national measures allow
for systematic comparisons across countries. By measuring a range of indicators,
they mitigate the possibility that any one indicator may be over- or misinterpreted.
However, composite measures also leave out much important information
and make strong assumptions about what kinds of information count. If the
information left out is systematically correlated with the outcomes of interest,
or systematically under- or overvalued compared with other indicators, such
composite indices may introduce measurement bias.
Broadly, there are two common ways to create a composite index: a simple
additive or multiplicative index that aggregates the indicators, potentially
weighting some; or a latent variable approach, in which observed indicators
are used to predict an unobserved variable (that is, the index). While there are
several approaches to latent variable analysis, such as factor analysis or principal
component analysis, item response theory (IRT) models are particularly suitable
in this case due to the ordinal nature of most indicators. Each approach has
advantages and disadvantages for different research questions.
OxCGRT uses simple, additive, unweighted indices because this approach is
most transparent and easiest to interpret. Because the purpose of these indices
is to describe the number and degree of government responses, we weight each
indicator and each interval on the ordinal scale equally (within each indicator).
In other words, the difference between a 1 and a 2 in a given indicator contributes
as much to an index as the difference between a 2 and a 3. Again, this strong
assumption will not be appropriate for all uses, so we encourage users to carefully
consider which combinations and weightings of policies best capture the
dimensions they are seeking to measure.
Despite this caveat, we find significant internal consistency within the indices.
We used a latent variable approach—specifically, IRT—as a robustness check for
the stringency index (see Supplementary Table 3). IRT models have been used
extensively in education to estimate the ability of a student (latent variable) based
on the responses to individual test questions (observable indicators). In our case,
the individual policy levels (added to the geographic flag) are the observable
indicators and the policy index is the unobservable variable. The scores generated
by an IRT model were highly correlated to our linear index (r = 0.98), which
reinforces the validity of our approach.
OxCGRT publishes four indices that group different families of policy
indicators:
GRI (all categories)
Stringency index (containment and closure policies, sometimes referred to as
lockdown policies)
CHI (containment and closure and health policies)
ESI (economic support measures)
Each index is composed of a series of individual policy response indicators.
For each indicator, we create a score by taking the ordinal value and subtracting
half a point if the policy is targeted rather than general, if applicable. We then
rescale each of these by their maximum value to create a score between 0 and 100,
with a missing value contributing 0. These scores are then averaged to obtain the
composite indices. This calculation is described in equation (1) below, where k is
the number of component indicators in an index and Ij is the subindex score for an
individual indicator.
We use a conservative assumption to calculate the indices. Where a datum
for one of the component indicators is missing, it contributes 0 to the index. An
alternative assumption would be to not count missing indicators in the score,
essentially assuming they are equal to the mean of the indicators for which we
have data. Our conservative approach therefore punishes countries for which less
information is available, but also avoids the risk of over-generalizing from limited
information.
The different indices are comprised as described in Table 2.
To facilitate usage, two versions of each indicator are present in the database:
a regular version (which will return null values if there are not enough data to
calculate the index) and a display version (which will extrapolate to smooth over
the past 7 days of the index based on the most recent complete data).
Calculating subindex scores for each indicator. All of the indices use ordinal
indicators where policies are ranked on a simple numerical scale. The project also
records five non-ordinal indicators (E3, E4, H4, H5 and M1) but these are not used
in our index calculations.
Some indicators (C1–C7, E1, H1, H6 and H7) have an additional binary flag
variable that can be either 0 or 1. For C1–C7, H1 and H6, this corresponds to the
geographic scope of the policy. For E1, this flag variable corresponds to the sectoral
scope of income support. For H7, this flag variable corresponds to whether or not
the vaccine is government funded.
The codebook has details about each indicator and what the different values
represent.
Because different indicators (j) have different maximum values (Nj) in their
ordinal scales and only some have flag variables, each subindex score must be
calculated separately.
Each subindex score (I) for any given indicator (j) on any given day (t) is
calculated by the function described in equation (2) based on the following
parameters:
The maximum value of the indicator (Nj)
Whether that indicator has a flag (Fj = 1 if the indicator has a flag variable and
0 if the indicator does not have a flag variable)
The recorded policy value on the ordinal scale (vj,t)
The recorded binary flag for that indicator (fj,t)
This normalizes the different ordinal scales to produce a subindex score
between 0 and 100, where each full point on the ordinal scale is equally spaced.
For indicators that do have a flag variable, if this flag is recorded as 0 (that is, if the
policy is geographically targeted, or for E1 if the support only applies to informal
sector workers), this is treated as a half-step between ordinal values.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Note that the database only contains flag values if the indicator has a non-zero
value. If a government has no policy for a given indicator (that is, the indicator
equals zero), the corresponding flag is blank/null in the database. For the purpose
of calculating the index, this is equivalent to a subindex score of zero. In other
words, Ij,t = 0 if vj,t = 0.
Ij;t ¼ 100 vj;t
(if vj,t = 0, the function Fj − fj,t is also treated as 0; see paragraph above).
Data usage. The data are published in real time. Unless a country has been
updated in the past 24 h, there will be at least some gaps in coverage for the most
recent days. In addition, if data are exported in the middle of an update, there
can occasionally be missing data points in the time series. The dataset is also
published with numbers of reported COVID-19 cases and deaths, drawn from
open datasets at the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and
Johns Hopkins University. Occasionally, there have been missing days for some
countries in these sources (for example, if a country has not updated their case
data over a long weekend). For this reason, particularly when using the dataset for
descriptive analysis, we usually interpolate to cover any single missing days and use
a carryforward function to extend the latest value of a missing variable.
In addition, we caution users against overinterpreting small fluctuations of
single-digit changes in our index values. A small change in an index value may not
necessarily represent a substantive change in the country’s policy stance; it could,
for example, just as easily represent a marginally different geographic coverage.
Comparison with related datasets. A number of datasets have tracked
governments’ responses to COVID-19 since the start of the pandemic21. While it
is beyond the scope of this article to describe all of them in detail, here we report
similarities and differences compared with two sister projects: CoronaNet19 and
the Complexity Science Hub COVID-19 Control Strategies List (CCCSL)22.
While these projects overlap with OxCGRT to some extent, allowing for direct
comparisons, the three projects also offer complementary attributes, expanding the
knowledge and options available to the research community.
The three projects have constructed datasets with a number of similar features
but also points of difference.
Unit of analysis. Both CoronaNet and CCCSL record government policies or
measures as the unit of analysis; instead, OxCGRT uses the jurisdiction day. While
each approach can be converted into the other, the OxCGRT dataset is purpose
built as a panel. In contrast, CoronaNet and CCCSL are structured as unbalanced
panels, requiring additional steps to convert into a format that facilitates
conventional analysis.
Coverage of jurisdictions and dates. OxCGRT publishes data on 184 countries
and several subnational jurisdictions (50 states in the United States, 13 Canadian
provinces and territories, 27 Brazilian states and over 50 cities and four UK
devolved nations). CoronaNet publishes data on 195 countries and the following
subnational jurisdictions: Brazil, China, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy,
Japan, Nigeria, Russia, Spain, Switzerland and the United States. CCCSL publishes
data on 56 countries, 33 of them European. All three datasets aim to update
continuously, although at the time of writing only OxCGRT had up-to-date
information for all jurisdictions.
Coverage of government responses. All three datasets broadly cover what we have
termed closure and containment and health policies. In addition, OxCGRT and
CCCSL record economic support measures. OxCGRT uniquely covers public
transportation-related and vaccine policies. However, it does not include states
of emergency or enforcement measures (as CoronaNet does), nor does it include
receiving international help, measures to secure supply chains, crisis management
plans or port and ship restrictions (as CCCSL does).
Design of indicators. The 19 indicators of OxCGRT are either ordinal or numerical,
with an additional binary flag that records whether measures are general or
targeted. CoronaNet considers different elements, such as the directionality of
policies (for example, inbound or outbound flights), the mechanism of travel
(flights or trains), enforcement (mandatory or voluntary) and enforcers (national
government or military). While the CCCSL covers fewer countries, their indicators
are more granularly split into four levels, without an ordinal scale. This more
descriptive approach then needs further processing before it can be analysed.
While the detailed text descriptions enable rich qualitative analysis, they are less
suited for quantitative analysis.
Data collection methods. All three datasets rely on hand-coded data entered by a
large international pool of trained contributors into a central database. All three use
publicly available sources, including policy documents and media reports. A key
difference of the CoronaNet methodology is its use of a machine learning software
instrument to extract data from news articles to aid contributors in their data
collection. The CCCSL shares information sources in an open-source Zotero library.
From examination of the CoronaNet and CCCSL data and papers, it seems that
OxCGRT is the only dataset to include archived web links to all original sources.
Looking at the data reveals further complementarities and differences between
OxCGRT and related projects. OxCGRT most closely resembles CoronaNet, which
also has global coverage for over 180 countries and which produces a government
policy activity index that can be compared quantitatively to the OxCGRT indices.
Our database is highly correlated with CoronaNet within a given country.
Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the example of the United States, demonstrating
how both indices track each other over time. Supplementary Fig. 4 quantifies this
relationship for all countries, showing the average within-country correlation
between the CoronaNet and OxCGRT government response indices within a
given country. The average correlation (Pearson’s r) is high at 0.85. This suggests
robustness across the databases.
At the same time, the OxCGRT indices provide new information beyond the
CoronaNet index, as indicated by a positive but not perfect correlation within
countries (Pearson’s r = 0.85). This is even more the case across countries. Fig.
3 illustrates the cross-country relationship between the Oxford and CoronaNet
databases (Pearson’s r = 0.28). This lower cross-country correlation may be
partially associated with the difference in the methodology used by Coronanet
to calculate the index (ideal point model of item response theory). These results
reveal that the two databases are highly consistent within countries, enhancing
confidence in both, and that OxGRT indices provide substantial new information
especially for across country comparisons and analyses.
We note a few other distinctions. First, our absolute indices show more
variation. The CoronaNet index falls, by and large, within 10 points on a 100-point
scale with a standard deviation of 1.2. In contrast, countries in our database span
the entire 100-point range across countries and over time with a standard deviation
of 12. This granularity is particularly essential to capture important variation in
waxing and waning of policies over time, in addition to more sweeping lockdowns,
which can be captured with coarser measurement.
In summary, OxCGRT complements related efforts in a few dimensions. Our
database has global coverage, enables comparable within- and across-country
analysis, will be consistently updated and expanded, is publicly available, is built
with a team of coders with contextual expertise in the respective countries in which
they focus, and has a systematic panel data structure that has enabled merging with
other databases and quantitative analysis.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The most up-to-date OxCGRT data and documentation are available via the
project GitHub repository at 
Source data are provided with this paper.
Received: 28 October 2020; Accepted: 15 February 2021;
Published online: 8 March 2021