Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 57–60,
Brighton, September 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Snapshot of NLG Evaluation Practices 2005 - 2014
Dimitra Gkatzia
Department of Computer Science
Heriot-Watt University
EH14 4AS Edinburgh, UK
 
Saad Mahamood
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Scotland, United Kingdom
 
In this paper we present a snapshot of endto-end NLG system evaluations as presented in conference and journal papers1
over the last ten years in order to better understand the nature and type of evaluations
that have been undertaken. We ﬁnd that
researchers tend to favour speciﬁc evaluation methods, and that their evaluation approaches are also correlated with the publication venue. We further discuss what
factors may inﬂuence the types of evaluation used for a given NLG system.
Introduction
Evaluation plays a crucial role in helping to understand whether a given approach for a text generating Natural Language Generation (NLG) system
has expressed particular properties (such as quality, speed, etc.) or whether it has met a particular potential (domain utility). Past work within
the NLG community has looked at the issues of
evaluating NLG techniques and systems, the challenges unique to the NLG context in comparison
to Natural Language Analysis , and the comparisons between evaluation
approaches . Whilst there
has been a better understanding of the types of
evaluations that can be conducted for a given NLG
technique or system there
is little understanding on the frequency or types of
evaluation that is typically conducted for a given
system within the NLG community.
In this paper, we shed some light on the frequency of the types of evaluations conducted for
NLG systems. In particular, we have focused only
on end-to-end complete NLG system as opposed
to NLG components (referring expression generation, surface realisers, etc.) in our meta-analysis
1Dataset available from here:
 
Saad-Mahamood/ENLG2015
of published NLG systems from a variety of conferences, workshops, and journals for the last ten
years since 2005.
For the purpose of this research, we created a corpus consisting of these papers (Section 3). We then investigated three questions 4: (1) which is the most preferred evaluation
method; (2) how does the method use change over
time; and (3) whether the publication venue inﬂuences the evaluation type. In Section 5, we discuss the results of the meta analysis and ﬁnally in
Section 6 we conclude the paper and we discuss
directions for future work.
Background
NLG evaluation methodology has developed considerably over the last several years. Work by Dale
and Mellish initially focused on the role
that evaluation methods should play for a given
NLG system and how they are different from the
kind of evaluations undertaken by the natural language understanding community.
Traditional NLG evaluations have typically fell
into one of two types: intrinsic or extrinsic . Intrinsic evaluations of NLG
systems seek to evaluate properties of the system.
Past NLG systems have typically been evaluated
using human subjects .
Humans have been involved in either reading and
rating texts and comparing the ratings for NLG
generated texts against human written texts for
metrics such as quality, correctness, naturalness,
understandability, etc. Extrinsic evaluations, on
the other hand, have typically consisted of evaluating the impact of a given system such as its effectiveness for a given application . These can include measuring correctness of decisions made in a task based evaluation,
measuring the number of post-edits by experts, or
measuring usage/utility of a given system.
The intrinsic evaluation of text output quality
for NLG systems has seen different evaluation approaches. Recently, NLG systems have evaluated
this particular property using comparisons to corpus text through the use of automatic metrics . The use of automatic metrics, such as BLEU and ROUGE, have been shown
to correlate with human judgements for text quality and are an attractive way of performing evaluations for NLG applications due to being fast,
cheap, and repeatable .
Nevertheless, questions remain with regards to the
quality and representativeness of corpora used for these metrics and
whether these metrics are appropriate for measuring other factors such as content selection, information structure, appropriateness, etc. .
Whilst there is an understanding of the types
of evaluations that can be conducted, other unresolved issues remain. Issues such as having realistic input, having an objective criterion for assessing the quality of the NLG output, deciding on
what aspects to measure for a given NLG system,
what controls to use, acquiring adequate training
and test data, and ﬁnally, handling disagreements
between human judges .
These unresolved issues of evaluating NLG systems could be related to the fact that language is
inherently context dependant. What is relevant for
on NLG application task in a given domain may
not be relevant to another system in a different
domain . Thus, making direct
quantitative NLG system or component evaluation comparisons is difﬁcult outside of shared task
evaluations. Additionally, whilst there has been
speculation that evaluations based on human ratings and judgements are the most popular way of
evaluating NLG systems 
we are not aware of any quantitative measures that
supports this supposition.
Corpus Creation
To better understand the current nature of NLG
system evaluations we performed a meta-analysis.
We started by assembling a corpus consisting
of as many peer reviewed papers as they could
be retrieved which described end-to-end systems
published at a variety of NLG conferences and
workshops (ENLG, INLG, ACL, NAACL, EACL,
EMNLP and COLING) and some journals (e.g.
JAIR). We speciﬁcally chose a period of the last
10 years of publications to limit the scope of the
corpus collection. In total, a corpus of 79 papers
was assembled (consisting of: ENLG - 17, INLG - 12,
ACL - 20, NAACL - 5, EACL - 7, EMNLP - 10, COLING -
3, Journals - 5). Each paper within the collected corpus was annotated using the intrinsic and extrinsic
evaluation classiﬁcation categories of Hastie and
Belz . Hastie and Belz broke down intrinsic
and extrinsic evaluation methods into the following types:
Intrinsic Methods
1. Output Quality Measures: These assess the
similarity of the systems’ output to a reference model or assess quality criteria using
BLUE, NIST, ROUGE, etc.
2. User Like Measures: For this type of evaluation, users/participants are asked questions
such as “How useful did you ﬁnd the generated text?” and they usually use Likert or
rating scales.
Extrinsic Methods
1. User Task Success Metrics: A form of evaluation that measures anything that has to do
with what the user gains from the systems’
output, such as decision making, comprehension accuracy etc.
2. System Purpose Success Metrics: An evaluation type where a given system is evaluated
by measuring whether it can fulﬁl its initial
The collected 79 papers were annotated by two
annotators. To agree on the annotation procedure
a set of 5 papers was annotated by both annotators. Thereafter, each annotated 33 and 49 papers
including an overlapping set of 22 papers. From
this overlapping set the Cohen’s kappa agreement
score of κ = .824 (p < .001) was computed.
Meta-analysis
Using the collected corpus of papers we investigated whether there were signiﬁcant differences
between the evaluation methods used. In particular we focused on the following three qualitative
aspects: (1) proportionally of evaluation methods,
(2) method use over time, and (3) with regard to
the publication venue.
Proportions of Evaluation Methods
It was found that the majority of papers report
an intrinsic evaluation method (74.7%), whereas
a very small proportion of the papers report an
extrinsic (15.1%) or both types of evaluation
(10.1%), see also Table 1.
Regarding intrinsic evaluation, we further observed that papers report User like measures signiﬁcantly more often than Output Quality measures (see also Table 2). With regard to extrinsic
Table 1: High level descriptive statistics. * denotes signiﬁcance at p < .016, using Z-test (after Bonferroni correction).
evaluation, most papers report a User Task Success evaluation setup as opposed to System Purpose Success methods (Table 2).
System purpose
Table 2: Detailed descriptive statistics. * denotes signiﬁcance at p < .008, using Z-test (after Bonferroni correction).
We speculate that intrinsic methods are inherently easier, cheaper and quicker to be performed
than extrinsic evaluations ,
and therefore researchers opt for these signiﬁcantly more often than extrinsic methods. In addition, intrinsic methods can be domain-independent
which allows comparisons between methods. Finally, not all systems can be assessed for user
task or system purpose success, e.g. commercial
weather forecast systems.
Evaluation Trends over Time
Next, we investigated whether there was a change
in the selection of evaluation metrics between the
present and the past. For this analysis, the data was
separated into three groups. The ﬁrst group consisted of papers published between 2005 - 2008
(25 papers), the second group consists of publications between 2009 - 2011 (24 papers) and the last
one contains papers published from 2012 to 2015
(30 papers). We used only the ﬁrst and the last
group in order to identify whether there are differences in the application of evaluation methods.
We observed that papers published after 2012
are signiﬁcantly (p < 0.04) more likely to include
System Purpose evaluations. We can also observe
a trend towards intrinsic evaluations, as well as a
reduction in using User Task Success evaluations,
however the differences are not statistically significant (see also Table 3).
Output Quality
User Task Success
System Purpose
Table 3: Proportions of evaluation metrics in papers. Note
that some papers contain more than one type of evaluation.
* denotes signiﬁcance at p < .05, using T-test in pair-wise
comparisons.
We assume that this shift in evaluation metrics
is correlated with the system design - more speciﬁc systems with well deﬁned end users. In addition, more general purpose systems such as adult
humour generation systems 
have been recently developed which can be evaluated with a System Purpose metric in a straightforward way.
Correlations between Evaluation
Methods and Publication Venue
Finally, we looked into whether papers published
in speciﬁc venues “prefer” speciﬁc types of evaluation. We used Pearson’s χ2 to identify relations
between the publication venues and the evaluation
methods. Table 4 presents for each conference the
percentages of papers that use speciﬁc evaluation
Table 4: Proportions of papers that report speciﬁc evaluation
metrics. Note that some papers contain more than one type of
evaluation. * denotes signiﬁcance at p < .05, using Pearson’s
We found that more than half of the papers published at ACL, COLING, EMNLP and NAACL
contain an Output Quality study, whereas for
EACL, ENLG and INLG these percentages are below 50%. Most papers published at ACL, EACL,
NAACL, ENLG and INLG also contain a “User
Like” study. Extrinsic evaluation seems not to be
popular across all venues (see also Table 4).
We further investigated whether there was a
difference between ACL (including EACL, COL-
ING, NAACL and EMNLP) publications and
NLG publications (including ENLG and INLG).
Table 5 shows the results obtained. From this analysis, journal papers have been omitted due to their
low frequency.
Possible speculation for this signiﬁcant difference in the use of the Output Quality evaluation
type between the two sets of conference venues
could be related to the fact that the ACL venues are
patronised by a majority NLU audience. Therefore, NLG papers submitted to these conferences
would be more likely to use automatic metrics
Table 5: Proportions of ACL vs NLG papers that report
speciﬁc evaluation metrics. Note that some papers contain
more than one type of evaluation. * denotes signiﬁcance at
p < .05, using Pearson’s χ2 test.
(such as BLEU or ROUGE) as these measures are
widely used by the NLU community as well.
Discussion
Output quality evaluations using automatic metrics can be repeatable .
automatic evaluations require large
aligned corpora (input and output data), which are
not always available for NLG. In such cases, other
types of evaluations are preferred. In addition, Reiter and Sripada argue that the information
presented in aligned corpora might not be always
true, due to the fact that text from experts can be
erroneous. Output quality metrics are sensitive to
this, therefore, the research community often uses
automatic metrics paired with other types of evaluations (55%) in order to overcome this barrier.
User like metrics are straightforward and easily applicable, therefore it is not surprising that
these are the most popular measures among researchers.
These metrics can evaluate an NLG
system quickly and thus can be incorporated in
any stage of a system’s design. User likeness is
one indication of whether a system is going to be
used, as users will not use a system that they do
not like. However, success on user like metrics
does not equate with system purpose success and
user task success. Although there are studies discussing the relation between output quality metrics and user like metrics e.g. , to our knowledge there are not
any studies discussing the relation between user
like metrics and extrinsic metrics.
Finally, extrinsic metrics have been the least
popular among researchers, due to their timeconsuming nature and their complication to be
organised. In addition, extrinsic metrics can be
also expensive. For instance, the STOP evaluation cost £75,000 over 20 months; the SKILL-
SUM and BT45 evaluations cost about £20,000
over six months .
Conclusion
At present NLG evaluation does not include a
standardised approach for evaluating systems. Although papers tend to use automatic methods
to overcome this limitation (especially papers at
ACL conferences), extrinsic methods are more
thorough than intrinsic and they can provide useful
insights of the domains’ needs, and thus they provide better indications of the systems’ usefulness
and utility. However, quicker and less resource intensive means are needed to allow for more systems to be evaluated with extrinsic methods.
In future, we will expand the scope of the survey
by adding a greater number of journal papers for
analysis and secondly and by looking at the quantitative evaluation differences between NLG systems and components. In addition, we will look
into whether speciﬁc organisation and/or groups
of researchers have inﬂuenced the evaluation approaches. Finally, it would be interesting to investigate whether the inﬂuential papers (for instance
papers with high number of citations) have played
a role in the selection of the evaluation methods.