Learning Natural Language Inference using Bidirectional LSTM model and
Inner-Attention
Yang Liu, Chengjie Sun, Lei Lin and Xiaolong Wang
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, P.R.China
{yliu,cjsun,linl,wangxl}@insun.hit.edu.cn
this paper,
proposed a sentence
encoding-based model for recognizing text entailment.
In our approach, the encoding of
sentence is a two-stage process. Firstly, average pooling was used over word-level bidirectional LSTM (biLSTM) to generate a ﬁrststage sentence representation. Secondly, attention mechanism was employed to replace
average pooling on the same sentence for better representations.
Instead of using target
sentence to attend words in source sentence,
we utilized the sentence’s ﬁrst-stage representation to attend words appeared in itself, which
is called ”Inner-Attention” in our paper . Experiments conducted on Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) Corpus has proved
the effectiveness of ”Inner-Attention” mechanism. With less number of parameters, our
model outperformed the existing best sentence
encoding-based approach by a large margin.
Introduction
Given a pair of sentences, the goal of recognizing text entailment (RTE) is to determine whether
the hypothesis can reasonably be inferred from the
premises. There were three types of relation in RTE,
Entailment (inferred to be true), Contradiction (inferred to be false) and Neutral (truth unknown).A
few examples were given in Table 1.
Traditional methods to RTE has been the dominion of classiﬁers employing hand engineered features, which heavily relied on natural language processing pipelines and external resources.
reasoning methods
 were
The boy is running through a grassy area.
The boy is in his room.
A boy is running outside.
The boy is in a park.
Table 1: Examples of three types of label in RTE, where P
stands for Premises and H stands for Hypothesis
also explored by many researchers, but not been
widely used because of its complexity and domain
limitations.
Recently published Stanford Natural Language
Inference (SNLI1) corpus makes it possible to use
deep learning methods to solve RTE problems.
So far proposed deep learning approaches can be
roughly categorized into two groups:
encoding-based models and matching encodingbased models. As the name implies, the encoding of
sentence is the core of former methods, while the latter methods directly model the relation between two
sentences and didn’t generate sentence representations at all.
In view of universality, we focused our efforts on
sentence encoding-based model. Existing methods
of this kind including: LSTMs-based model, GRUsbased model, TBCNN-based model and SPINNbased model. Single directional LSTMs and GRUs
suffer a weakness of not utilizing the contextual
information from the future tokens and Convolutional Neural Networks didn’t make full use of information contained in word order.
Bidirectional
LSTM utilizes both the previous and future context
by processing the sequence on two directions which
helps to address the drawbacks mentioned above.
1 
Multiplication
Difference
Mean Pooling
Sentence Vec
Mean Pooling
Sentence Vec
Inter-Attention
immersed pleasant
photograph
conversation
discussion
Hypothesis
Figure 1: Architecture of Bidirectional LSTM model with Inner-Attention
 
A recent work by improved the performance by applying a neural attention model that didn’t yield sentence embeddings.
In this paper, we proposed a uniﬁed deep learning
framework for recognizing textual entailment which
dose not require any feature engineering, or external
resources. The basic model is based on building biL-
STM models on both premises and hypothesis. The
basic mean pooling encoder can roughly form a intuition about what this sentence is talking about. Obtained this representation, we extended this model
by utilize an Inner-Attention mechanism on both
sides. This mechanism helps generate more accurate
and focused sentence representations for classiﬁcation. In addition, we introduced a simple effective
input strategy that get ride of same words in hypothesis and premise, which further boosts our performance. Without parameter tuning, we improved the
art-of-the-state performance of sentence encodingbased model by nearly 2%.
Our approach
In our work, we treated RTE task as a supervised
three-way classiﬁcation problem. The overall architecture of our model is shown in Figure 1. The design of this model we follow the idea of Siamese
Network, that the two identical sentence encoders
share the same set of weights during training, and
the two sentence representations then combined together to generated a ”relation vector” for classiﬁcation. As we can see from the ﬁgure, the model
mainly consists of three parts. From top to bottom
were: (A). The sentence input module; (B). The sentence encoding module; (C). The sentence matching
module. We will explain the last two parts in detail
in the following subsection. And the sentence input
module will be introduced in Section 3.3.
Sentence Encoding Module
Sentence encoding module is the fundamental part
of this model.
To generate better sentence representations, we employed a two-step strategy to encode sentences. Firstly, average pooling layer was
built on top of word-level biLSTMs to produce sentence vector. This simple encoder combined with
the sentence matching module formed the basic architecture of our model. With much less parameters, this basic model alone can outperformed art-ofstate method by a small margin. (refer to Table 3).
Secondly, attention mechanism was employed on
the same sentence, instead of using target sentence
representation to attend words in source sentence,
we used the representation generated in previous
stage to attend words appeared in the sentence itself, which results in a similar distribution with other
attention mechanism weights. More attention was
given to important words.2
The idea of ”Inner-attention” was inspired by the
observation that when human read one sentence,
people usually can roughly form an intuition about
which part of the sentence is more important according past experience. And we implemented this idea
using attention mechanism in our model. The attention mechanism is formalized as follows:
M = tanh(W yY + W hRave ⊗eL)
α = softmax(wT M)
Ratt = Y αT
where Y is a matrix consisting of output vectors
of biLSTM, Rave is the output of mean pooling
layer, α denoted the attention vector and Ratt is the
attention-weighted sentence representation.
Sentence Matching Module
Once the sentence vectors are generated.
matching methods were applied to extract relations
between premise and hypothesis.
• Concatenation of the two representations
• Element-wise product
• Element-wise difference
This matching architecture
was ﬁrst used by
 . Finally, we used a SoftMax layer
over the output of a non-linear projection of the generated matching vector for classiﬁcation.
Experiments
performance
experiments
 .
At 570K pairs, SNLI
is two orders of magnitude larger than all other
resources of its type.
The dataset is constructed
by crowdsourced efforts, each sentence written
by humans.
The target labels comprise three
Entailment, Contradiction, and Neutral
2Recently, proposed a Hierarchical Attention model on the task of document classiﬁcation also used
for but the target representation in attention their mechanism is
randomly initialized.
(two irrelevant sentences). We applied the standard
train/validation/test split, containing 550k, 10k, and
10k samples, respectively.
Parameter Setting
The training objective of our model is cross-entropy
loss, and we use minibatch SGD with the Rmsprop
 for optimization. The
batch size is 128. A dropout layer was applied in the
output of the network with the dropout rate set to
0.25. In our model, we used pretrained 300D Glove
840B vectors to initialize
the word embedding. Out-of-vocabulary words in
the training set are randomly initialized by sampling
values uniformly from (0.05, 0.05). All of these embedding are not updated during training . We didn’t
tune representations of words for two reasons: 1. To
reduced the number of parameters needed to train.
2. Keep their representation stays close to unseen
similar words in inference time, which improved
the model’s generation ability. The model is implemented using open-source framework Keras.3
The Input Strategy
In this part, we investigated four strategies to modify
the input on our basic model which helps us increase
performance, the four strategies are:
• Inverting Premises 
• Doubling Premises 
• Doubling Hypothesis
• Differentiating Inputs (Removing same words
appeared in premises and hypothesis)
Experimental results were illustrated in Table 2.
As we can see from it, doubling hypothesis and
differentiating inputs both improved our model’s
performance.While the hypothesises usually much
shorter than premises, doubling hypothesis may absorb this difference and emphasize the meaning
twice via this strategy. Differentiating input strategy forces the model to focus on different part of
the two sentences which may help the classiﬁcation
for Neutral and Contradiction examples as we observed that our model tended to assign unconﬁdent
instances to Entailment. And the original input sentences appeared in Figure 1 are:
Premise: Two man in polo shirts and tan pants immersed in a pleasant conversation about photograph.
3 
Input Strategy
Original Sequences
Inverting Premises
Doubling Premises
Doubling Hypothesis
Differentiating Inputs
Table 2: Comparison of different input strategies
Hypothesis: Two man in polo shirts and tan pants involved in a heated discussion about Canon.
Label: Contradiction
While most of the words in this pair of sentences
are same or close in semantic, It is hard for model
to distinguish the difference between them, which
resulted in labeling it with Neutral or Entailment.
Through differentiating inputs strategy, this kind of
problems can be solved.
Comparison Methods
In this part, we compared our model against the following art-of-the-state baseline approaches:
• LSTM enc:
100D LSTM encoders + MLP.
 
• GRU enc: 1024D GRU encoders + skip-thoughts +
cat, -. 
• TBCNN enc: 300D Tree-based CNN encoders +
cat, ◦, -. 
• SPINN enc: 300D SPINN-NP encoders + cat, ◦, -.
 
• Static-Attention: 100D LSTM + static attention.
 
• WbW-Attention: 100D LSTM + word-by-word attention. 
The cat refers to concatenation, - and ◦denote
element-wise difference and product, respectively.
Much simpler and easy to understand.
Results and Qualitative Analysis
Although the classiﬁcation of RTE example is not
solely relying on representations obtained from attention, it is still instructive to analysis Inner-
Attention mechanism as we witnessed a large performance increase after employing it.
We handpicked several examples from the dataset to visualize. In order to make the weights more discriminated, we didn’t use a uniform colour atla cross sentences. That is, each sentence have its own color
atla, the lightest color and the darkest color denoted the smallest attention weight the biggest value
Sentence encoding-based models
Basic model
+ Inner-Attention
+ Diversing Input
Other neural network models
Static-Attention
WbW-Attention
Table 3: Performance comparison of different models on SNLI.
within the sentence, respectively. Visualizations of
Inner-Attention on these examples are depicted in
firefighter
Figure 2: Inner-Attention Visualizations.
We observed that more attention was given to
Nones, Verbs and Adjectives.
This conform to
our experience that these words are more semantic
richer than function words. While mean pooling regarded each word of equal importance, the attention
mechanism helps re-weight words according to their
importance. And more focused and accurate sentence representations were generated based on produced attention vectors.
Conclusion and Future work
In this paper, we proposed a bidirectional LSTMbased model with Inner-Attention to solve the RTE
We come up with an idea to utilize
attention mechanism within sentence which can
teach itself to attend words without the information
from another one. The Inner-Attention mechanism
helps produce more accurate sentence representations through attention vectors. In addition, the simple effective diversing input strategy introduced by
us further boosts our results. And this model can be
easily adapted to other sentence-matching models.
Our future work including:
1. Employ this architecture on other sentencematching tasks such as Question Answer, Paraphrase and Sentence Text Similarity etc.
2. Try more heuristics matching methods to make
full use of the sentence vectors.
Acknowledgments
We thank all anonymous reviewers for their hard