DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Integral Channel Features
Piotr Dollár1
 
Zhuowen Tu2
 
Pietro Perona1
 
Serge Belongie3
 
1 Dept. of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
2 Lab of Neuro Imaging
University of CA, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA
3 Dept. of Computer Science and Eng.
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
We study the performance of ‘integral channel features’ for image classiﬁcation tasks,
focusing in particular on pedestrian detection. The general idea behind integral channel features is that multiple registered image channels are computed using linear and
non-linear transformations of the input image, and then features such as local sums, histograms, and Haar features and their various generalizations are efﬁciently computed
using integral images. Such features have been used in recent literature for a variety of
tasks – indeed, variations appear to have been invented independently multiple times.
Although integral channel features have proven effective, little effort has been devoted to
analyzing or optimizing the features themselves. In this work we present a uniﬁed view
of the relevant work in this area and perform a detailed experimental evaluation. We
demonstrate that when designed properly, integral channel features not only outperform
other features including histogram of oriented gradient (HOG), they also (1) naturally
integrate heterogeneous sources of information, (2) have few parameters and are insensitive to exact parameter settings, (3) allow for more accurate spatial localization during
detection, and (4) result in fast detectors when coupled with cascade classiﬁers.
Introduction
The performance of object detection systems is determined by two key factors: the learning
algorithm and the feature representation. Considerable recent progress has been made both
on learning and features design . In this work we use a standard
boosting approach and instead focus our attention on the choice of features.
Our study is based on the following architecture: multiple registered image channels are
computed using linear and non-linear transformations of the input image ; next, features are extracted from each channel using sums over local rectangular regions. These local
sums, and features computed using multiple such sums including Haar-like wavelets ,
their various generalizations , and even local histograms are computed efﬁciently
c⃝2009. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Multiple registered image channels are computed using various transformations of the
input image; next, features such as local sums, histograms, and Haar wavelets are computed efﬁciently
using integral images. Such features, which we refer to as integral channel features, naturally integrate
heterogeneous sources of information, have few parameters, and result in fast, accurate detectors.
using integral images. We refer to such features as integral channel features, see Fig. 1. Integral channel features combine the richness and diversity of information from use of image
channels with the computational efﬁciency of the Viola and Jones detection framework .
A number of papers have utilized variants of integral channel features, applications have
included object recognition , pedestrian detection , edge detection , brain
anatomical structure segmentation and local region matching . A uniﬁed overview of
the feature representations in these works is given in Sec. 1.1.
Although integral channel features have proven effective, little effort has been devoted to
analyzing or optimizing the features themselves. In many of the above mentioned works the
focus was on the learning aspect or novel applications and it is difﬁcult to
decouple the performance gains due to the richer features from gains due to more powerful
learning methods. In the authors used integral channel features for computing
histograms of oriented gradients; although these methods achieved good performance; they
do not explore the full potential of the representation.
Furthermore, some of the integral channel features used in the literature have been computationally expensive, e.g. the channels in took over 30s to compute for a 640 × 480
image. In this work we show how to compute effective channels that take about .05-.2s per
640×480 image depending on the options selected. For 320×240 images, the channels can
be computed in real time at rates of 20-80 frames per second on a standard PC.
The INRIA pedestrian dataset serves as our primary testbed. Pedestrian detection has
generated signiﬁcant interest in the past few years ; moreover, the Histogram of Oriented
Gradient (HOG) descriptor was designed speciﬁcally for the INRIA dataset. HOG has
since been successfully adopted for numerous object detection tasks and is one of the most
common features used in the PASCAL object challenges . Therefore, not only is pedestrian detection interesting in and of itself, HOG’s success in other domains serves as strong
evidence that results obtained on pedestrians should generalize effectively.
Our detailed experimental exploration of integral channel features, along with a number
of performance optimizations and use of complementary channel types, leads to large gains
in performance. We show signiﬁcantly improved results over previous applications of similar features to pedestrian detection . In fact, full-image evaluation on the INRIA
pedestrian dataset shows that learning using standard boosting coupled with our optimized
integral channel features matches or outperforms all but one other method, including state of
the art approaches obtained using HOG features with more sophisticated learning techniques.
On the task of accurate localization in the INRIA dataset, the proposed method outperforms
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
state of the art by a large margin. Finally, we show results on the recently introduced Caltech
Pedestrian Dataset , achieving a detection rate of almost 60% at 1 false positive per image
compared to at most 50% detection rate for competing methods, including HOG.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin with a review of related
work below. In Sec. 2 we give a more detailed overview of integral channel features and we
discuss implementation details in Sec. 3. We perform a detailed experimental evaluation in
Sec. 4 and conclude in Sec. 5.
Related Work
The notion of channels can be traced back to the earliest days of computer vision. The
Roberts Cross Edge Detector employed two tiny (2x2) kernels representing orthogonal
spatial derivative operators. The response of those ﬁlters, combined nonlinearly to obtain a
rudimentary measure of edge strength and orientation, could be thought of as the ur-channels.
Another early work was Fukushima’s Neocognitron architecture which used layered channels of increasing discriminative power . In the following decades, numerous extensions
emerged. E.g., the texture discrimination approach of Malik & Perona employed dozens
of channels computed via nonlinear combination of the responses of a bank of bandpass
ﬁlters. Malik & Perona performed spatial integration via Gaussian smoothing; eventually
statistics were pooled using histogram based representations still popular today.
Soon thereafter Viola and Jones proposed a boosted object detection approach with a
front-end that eschewed computationally expensive bandpass kernels for efﬁcient Haar-like
wavelets implemented using integral images . Nevertheless, with computing power increasing rapidly, computing the responses of a bank of bandpass ﬁlters became less of a
bottleneck. The idea of using integral images on top of such channels to efﬁciently pool
statistics with different regions of support naturally followed, giving rise to the representation we refer to as integral channel features.
The ﬁrst application of integral images to multiple image channels that we are aware
of appears in Tu’s work on probabilistic boosting trees . Tu computed the response of
Gabor ﬁlters and Canny edges at multiple scales and used Haar-like features on top of
these channels in a boosted object detection framework. Later, Tu extended this approach to
3D MRI brain volume segmentation in , where each resulting channel and Haar feature
was 3D. Likewise, Dollár et al. used integral channel features to train a per-pixel edge
detector; state of the art results were obtained that matched the performance of methods using
more carefully tuned features. A large number of channels were used including gradients
at various scales, Gabor ﬁlter responses, difference of offset Gaussian ﬁlters, etc. Similar
channels were used for pedestrian detection and learning patch descriptors .
In a different line of work, integral channel features have been used to compute histograms of oriented gradients efﬁciently. As described in , rectangular histograms can
be computed efﬁciently by quantizing an image into multiple channels (details are given
in Sec. 2). This key idea has been exploited at least three separate times in the literature
 . Zhu et al. used integral histograms to approximate HOG features for use
in a cascade. Laptev likewise computed gradient histograms using integral images, resulting in effective object detectors. In later work, used a similar representation for cat
detection, except features were individual histogram bins as opposed to entire histograms as
in . Although details vary, none of these methods explored the richness of possible
channel types to seamlessly integrate heterogeneous sources of information.
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Examples of integral channel features: (a) A ﬁrst-order feature is the sum of pixels in a
rectangular region. (b) A Haar-like feature is a second-order feature approximating a local derivative
 . (c) Generalized Haar features include more complex combinations of weighted rectangles . (d)
Histograms can be computed by evaluating local sums on quantized images (see text for details).
Channel Types
Given an input image I, a corresponding channel is a registered map of the original image, where the output pixels are computed from corresponding patches of input pixels (thus
preserving overall image layout). A trivial channel is simply C = I for a grayscale image,
likewise for a color image each color channel can serve as a channel. Other channels can be
computed using linear or non-linear transformation of I, various choices are discussed below
(see also Fig. 1). We use Ωto denote a channel generation function and write C = Ω(I).
To allow for fast detection using sliding window detectors channels must be translationally
invariant, that is given I and I′ related by a translation, C = Ω(I) and C′ = Ω(I′) must be related by the same translation. This allows Ωto be evaluated once on the entire image rather
than separately for each overlapping detection window.
We deﬁne a ﬁrst-order channel feature f as a sum of pixels in a ﬁxed rectangular region
in a single channel, denoted by f(C). Using an integral image for each channel, f(C)
can be computed with three ﬂoating point operations, and as such ﬁrst-order features are
extremely fast to compute. We deﬁne higher-order channel features as any feature that can
be computed using multiple ﬁrst-order features (e.g., the difference of two simple features in
the same channel). See Fig. 2 for example channel features.
The above is a generalization of the features used in the detection framework of Viola and
Jones (VJ) . Speciﬁcally, VJ used C = I with features resembling Haar Basis functions
 . Using the terminology above, a Haar feature is a higher-order feature involving a sum
of 2-4 rectangles arranged in patterns that compute ﬁrst and second order image derivatives
at multiple scales. This description is a bit oversimpliﬁed, as VJ actually used a two channel
representation where C1(x,y) = I(x,y) and C2(x,y) = I(x,y)2. Together these 2 channels
were used for variance normalization of detection windows leading to partial invariance to
changing lighting conditions (see for details).
A number of channel types for an example image are shown in Fig. 1, panels a-h. Note
that all displayed channels are slightly smaller than the input image; it is of key importance to
discard channel boundaries to avoid introducing undesirable artifacts. Below we present an
overview of common channels used in the literature, all of which are translationally invariant.
Gray & Color: The simplest channel is simply a grayscale version of the image (panel
a). Color channels can also be used, in panel b we display the three CIE-LUV color channels.
Linear Filters: A straightforward approach for generating channels that capture different
aspects of an image is through use of linear ﬁlters. Panel c shows I convolved with 4 oriented
Gabor ﬁlters ; each channel contains edge information in I at a different orientation.
Convolving I with Difference of Gaussian (DoG) ﬁlters captures the ‘texturedness’ of the
image at different scales (panel d). Convolution with a large bank of ﬁlters can be slow;
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
nevertheless, linear ﬁlters are a simple and effective method for generating diverse channels.
Nonlinear Transformations: There are countless translationally invariant non-linear
image transformations, here we present a few illustrative cases. Gradient magnitude (panel e)
captures unoriented edge strength while Canny edges (panel f) more explicitly compute edge
information. Gradients for both can be computed at different scales by smoothing the input
image; moreover, for color images a common trick is to compute the gradient on the 3 color
channels separately and use the maximum response . Panel h shows channels obtained by
thresholding the input image with two different thresholds. Although this particular form of
foreground segmentation is not robust, more sophisticated algorithms can be used.
Pointwise Transformations: Each pixel in a channel can be transformed by an arbitrary function as a post processing step. This can be used to overcome the limitation that
a feature f must be a local sum. E.g., taking the log, we can obtain local products since
exp(∑i log(xi)) = ∏i xi. Likewise, raising each element to the p-th power can be used to
compute the generalized mean: ( 1
i )1/p. Setting p to a large value approximates the
maximum of xi, which can be useful for accumulating values as argued in .
Integral Histogram: Porikli presented an efﬁcient method for computing histograms using integral images. Let Q be a quantized version of I with values in {1...q},
and let Qi(x,y) = 1[Q(x,y) = i] for each i ≤q (1 is the indicator function). Counting the
elements in a region of Q equal to i can be computed by summing over Qi in the same region. Therefore, a histogram over a rectangular region can be efﬁciently computed given an
integral image for each ‘histogram’ channel Qi. Although histogram channels can be computed over any input , the most common use is a variant known as gradient histograms
 described below. Note that a related representation known as ‘value encoding’
has been studied extensively in the neuroscience literature, e.g. see .
Gradient Histogram: A gradient histogram is a weighted histogram where bin index is
determined by gradient angle and weight by gradient magnitude. In other words the channels
are given by Qθ(x,y) = G(x,y) · 1[Θ(x,y) = θ], where G(x,y) and Θ(x,y) are the gradient
magnitude and quantized gradient angle, respectively, at I(x,y). An example quantized to
4 orientations is shown in panel g. Gradients at different scales can again be obtained by
smoothing I and an additional channel storing gradient magnitude (panel e) can be used
to L1 normalize the resulting histogram, thus allowing gradient histograms to approximate
HOG features . Note also the similarity between the channels in panels c and g. Although
seemingly quite different, convolving I with oriented Gabor ﬁlters and quantizing gradient
magnitude by gradient angle yields channels capturing qualitatively similar information.
We brieﬂy discuss channel scale. We differentiate between pre-smoothing (smoothing
the input image) and post-smoothing (smoothing the created channels). In the terminology
of Gårding et al. , pre-smoothing determines the ‘local scale’ of the representation and
serves to suppress ﬁne scale structures as well as image noise. Pre-smoothing can have
a signiﬁcant impact on the information captured, e.g. pre-smoothing determines the scale
of subsequently computed gradients, affecting computed Canny edges (panel f) or gradient
histograms (panel g). Post-smoothing, on the other hand, helps determine the ‘integration
scale’ over which information is pooled. However, the integration scale is also determined by
the support of local sums computed over the channels, making post-smoothing less useful.
The channel representation has a number of appealing properties. Most channels deﬁned
above can be computed with a few lines of code given standard image processing tools;
furthermore, many of the channels can be computed very efﬁciently (we discuss optimization
techniques in Sec. 3). In Sec. 4 we show that most parameters used to compute the channels
are not crucial (assuming they’re consistent between training and testing).
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Implementation Details
We evaluated combinations of three types of channels: gradient histograms, color (including
grayscale, RGB, HSV and LUV), and gradient magnitude. These channels can be computed efﬁciently and capture diverse information. Below we discuss parameter settings, of
which there are very few, followed by a short discussion of optimization techniques. We also
discuss the boosting framework and full image detection.
Scale: Common parameters for the channels include local scale (pre-smoothing) and
integration scale (post-smoothing). For computational efﬁciency we smooth using an approximation of (discretized) Gaussian ﬁlters based on binomial coefﬁcients . The width
of the binomial ﬁlter is determined by a radius parameter r, which corresponds to a Gaussian
ﬁlter with σ ≈
(2r +1)/4. At least r pixels of padding must be used to avoid introducing
boundary effects. We use the same scale settings for each channel.
Parameters: In addition to scale, for gradient histograms the number of orientation bins
must be speciﬁed. Gradient magnitude and the color channels have no additional parameters.
Optimization: The above channels can be computed with a few lines of code given standard image processing tools. Nevertheless, a few optimization techniques can dramatically
decrease computation time. For LUV color channels, the bottleneck is cube root computation; we use a coarse approximation instead. A common trick for computing gradient
histograms, used e.g. in , is to approximate the angle of a 2D vector by ﬁnding the maximum value of its dot product with vectors spaced uniformly along a unit circle. This can be
done rapidly with binary search. We approximate gradient angle to 10 times the number of
orientations and use linear interpolation to place each pixel in the appropriate channel.
Computation Time: The number of frames per second (fps) at which selected channels
can be computed for 320×240 images, as tested on a standard PC, are: LUV color channels
at 135 fps, gradient magnitude at 140 fps, and gradient histograms (with 6 bins) at 60 fps.
Computing all 10 channel images can be performed at 40 fps, or 30-34 fps if pre-smoothing
with r ≤8 is used. Note that these rates do not include evaluation times for a classiﬁer
(although this is also quite fast).
Features: We generate a large pool of candidate features randomly rather than through
careful design. A ﬁrst-order feature is a sum over a rectangular region in a given channel; we
generate candidates by randomly choosing both the channel index and the rectangle (enforcing a minimum area of 25 pixels). Higher-order features are randomly generated weighted
sums of ﬁrst-order features, each can span multiple channels. The number of possible ﬁrstorder features in an n×n region is O(n4) and given higher-order feature this number grows
rapidly; nevertheless, random sampling of features typically produces good results .
Boosting: Boosting offers a convenient, fast approach to learning given a large number
of candidate features , and serves as the basis of the VJ object detection framework .
Here we use a variant known as a ‘soft cascade’ . Instead of having multiple distinct
cascade layers, a threshold is used after evaluation of every weak classiﬁer. A single boosted
classiﬁer is trained on the entire data set and post-training a simple heuristic can be used to
set the thresholds, resulting in a greatly simpliﬁed training procedure, see for details.
We test with three variants of boosting: AdaBoost, RealBoost and LogitBoost .
Depth two decision trees are used as the weak classiﬁer. Training a boosted classiﬁer with
1000 weak classiﬁers given 20,000 training windows and 5,000 features takes about 5-10
minutes on a parallelized quad core machine (compared with 2 weeks for the original VJ
classiﬁer). The key optimization is that feature values are quantized and cached at the start
of training so afterward training each weak classiﬁer is fast.
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Top: Example image and computed channels. Bottom: Rough visualization of spatial
support of trained classiﬁer for all channels jointly (left) and separately for each channel type, obtained
by averaging the rectangle masks of selected features. The orange rectangles highlight strong support
for orientations slightly off from vertical for the region near the shoulders, likewise, the yellow arrows
show support for orientations slightly off from horizontal for the side/top of the head. A surprising but
intuitive result is a peak in the support of the ‘U’ color channel at the location of the head/face (red
circle), apparently color is a strong, consistent cue for a person’s face/head.
Full Image Detection: We use a sliding window over multiple scales. We use a step
size of 4 pixels and a scale step of 21/10. Non-maximal suppression (NMS) is used to suppress multiple nearby detections. Mean-shift NMS is popular; however, it has multiple
parameter settings that depend on other aspects of the detector such as step-size. Instead we
use a simpliﬁed NMS procedure that suppresses the less conﬁdent of every pair of detections
that overlap sufﬁciently according to the PASCAL criteria . Although at worst the NMS
procedure is O(n2) in the number of detections, in practice it can be made quite fast. Our
NMS has a single parameter, the overlap threshold, which we set to .6. The overall system
has a runtime of about 2s for multiscale detection in a 640 × 480 image, the fastest of all
methods surveyed in .
Experiments
The majority of experiments are performed on the INRIA pedestrian dataset , we also
show results on the recently introduced Caltech Pedestrian Dataset . When comparing
parameter settings we use ROC curves computed using per-window performance evaluation,
thus avoiding NMS or other post processing. As is typical, we will frequently report detection rate at the reference point of 10−4 false positives per window (fppw). However, as
shown in , the per-window measure is ﬂawed and can fail to predict full image performance in certain cases. Therefore, we also evaluate our trained detectors on full images
using the PASCAL criteria in Sec. 4.2.
All parameters were kept constant except those explicitly being studied. By default, 8
channels were used, including gradient magnitude, grayscale, and 6 gradient histogram channels with no pre or post-smoothing. 5000 ﬁrst-order features were randomly generated (no
higher-order features were used by default). We trained AdaBoost on the resulting representation with 1000 depth-2 decision trees. Note that there are virtually no other parameters,
either for the feature representation or learning algorithm. Negative windows were generated
by training the default classiﬁer with 5000 random negative windows, bootstrapping 5000
hard negative windows, and repeating the entire process a second time. The resulting 15,000
negatives were used for training in all subsequent experiments reported here.
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
(a) channel combinations
(b) color channels
(c) # grad. orientation bins
(d) pre-smoothing
(e) post-smoothing
(f) feature order
(g) # candidate features
(h) # weak classiﬁers
(i) boosting algorithm
Figure 4: Evaluation of channel features, see text for details.
Channels and Features
Channels: In Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) we plot the performance of various channels types used
alone or in conjunction. Not surprisingly, the most informative channels are the gradient
histogram channels (Hist) achieving 87.2% detection performance at the reference point of
10−4 fppw. This is similar but slightly inferior to the 89% achieved by the HOG classiﬁer
with optimized parameter settings . The number of bins for the histogram has little effect
once at least 6 orientations were used (Fig. 4(c)). Combining Hist with gradient magnitude
(Grad) and grayscale information (Gray) increases performance to 89.4% (the default conﬁguration). However, Gray is not informative on its own, achieving only 30.7%. LUV stands
out among the color spaces, achieving 55.8% on its own and 91.9% when combined with
Grad and Hist. A visualization of the features used by LUV+Grad+Hist is shown in Fig. 3.
Scale: Pre-smoothing with a radius 1 binomial ﬁlter (σ ≈.87) improved performance
from 89.4% to 91.1%, using a larger radius resulted in marked decreases in performance
(Fig. 4(d)). Post-smoothing had little effect on performance (Fig. 4(e)).
Features: Using higher-order (randomly generated) features likewise had little effect
on performance, raising detection rates only .6% over ﬁrst-order features (Fig. 4(f)), so for
efﬁciency ﬁrst-order features are preferred. Using large numbers of candidate features can
signﬁcantly improve performance, with 30,000 features detection reaches 91.8% (Fig. 4(g)).
The drawback of using more features is that training time increases proportionally.
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Classiﬁer: Increasing the number of weak classiﬁers improves performance up to about
1000 (Fig. 4(h)), although evaluating the classiﬁer starts to take longer for larger values.
Depth-2 trees gave the best performance, stumps (depth-1 trees) achieved only 83.2% detection (results not shown). The choice of boosting algorithm (Fig. 4(i)) plays almost no role in
determining performance, demonstrating the stability of the overall framework.
Full Image Results
(a) INRIA Full Image Results
false positives per image
VJ−OpenCv (0.53)
HOG (0.23)
FtrMine (0.34)
Shapelet (0.50)
Shapelet−orig (0.90)
PoseInv (0.51)
PoseInvSvm (0.69)
MultiFtr (0.16)
HikSvm (0.24)
LatSvm−V1 (0.17)
LatSvm−V2 (0.09)
ChnFtrs (0.14)
(b) INRIA Localization Accuracy
false positives per image
VJ−OpenCv (0.67)
HOG (0.29)
FtrMine (0.67)
Shapelet (0.67)
Shapelet−orig (0.99)
PoseInv (0.75)
PoseInvSvm (0.86)
MultiFtr (0.31)
HikSvm (0.39)
LatSvm−V1 (0.36)
LatSvm−V2 (0.37)
ChnFtrs d=2 (0.21)
ChnFtrs d=4 (0.24)
ChnFtrs d=8 (0.25)
(c) Caltech Pedestrians
false positives per image
HOG (0.50)
FtrMine (0.59)
Shapelet (0.82)
PoseInv (0.65)
MultiFtr (0.57)
HikSvm (0.79)
LatSvm−V1 (0.67)
LatSvm−V2 (0.51)
ChnFtrs (0.42)
Figure 5: Full image results, see text for details.
For all subsequent experiments, we use a re-trained classiﬁer. We changed 4 parameters
from the default conﬁguration above in order to maximize performance. We used: (1) LUV
color channels, (2) pre-smoothing with r = 1, (3) 2000 weak classiﬁers, and (4) 30,000
candidate features for training. The resulting classiﬁer achieves about 93% detection rate at
10−4 fppw, and almost 90% at 10−5 fppw. We refer to the resulting method as ChnFtrs.
INRIA results: Although typically results on the INRIA dataset are reported on cropped
positives, the dataset also contains full images with the same pedestrians but within the original context. Dollár et al. evaluated 12 algorithms using these images and the PASCAL
criteria. A number of algorithms that reported excellent per-window results (topping 95%
detection) actually overﬁt to boundary effects and had fairly low per-image performance (see
 ). Per-image results of the 12 algorithms, along with the results of the proposed method
(ChnFtrs) are shown in Fig. 5(a). ChnFtrs acheives 86% detection rate at 1 false positive
per image (fppi), compared to a 77% detection rate for HOG. In fact, ChnFtrs matches or
outperforms all but one other method ( ) that has been evaluated on full images.
Localization Accuracy: One advantage of channel features is that a small step size d
can be used for detection, while HOG windows have to be spaced at least d ≥8 pixels
apart (or recomputed at different offsets). Intuitively, using smaller d should result in better
localization. To test this, we repeated the evaluation on the INRIA dataset, except we change
the threshold in the PASCAL criteria to count a detection as correct if the area of intersection
of the ground truth and detection is over 70% (instead of 50%). Results for ChnFtrs with d set
to 2, 4 and 8 are shown in Fig. 5(a), note that all other methods are limited to d ≥8. ChnFtrs
with d = 2 achieves 79% detection, outperforming the next closest method by almost 10%.
Caltech Pedestrians: We conclude by showing results on Caltech Pedestrian Dataset
 which contains almost half a million labeled bounding boxes and annotated occlusion
information. Results for 50-pixel or taller, unoccluded or partially occluded pedestrians are
shown in Fig. 5(c). Almost all classiﬁers shown were trained on the INRIA dataset, including
ours, therefore, the results are a useful measure of the generalization power of the various
methods. ChnFtrs signiﬁcantly outperforms all other methods, achieving a detection rate of
almost 60% at 1 fppi (compared to 50% for competing methods, including HOG).
DOLLÁR, et al.: INTEGRAL CHANNEL FEATURES
Conclusion
The combination of diverse, informative channels along with the integral image trick for
fast feature computation opened up the door to a much broader class of very effective features: the integral channel features examined closely in this work. As we have shown, integral channel features coupled with a standard boosting algorithm outperform existing features/methods for pedestrian detection. Eventually, we hope to extend these results to other
object classes (speciﬁcally to the PASCAL VOC challenge). We would also like to explore
additional families of channels.
Acknowledgments: S.B. work supported by NSF CAREER Grant #0448615 and ONR MURI Grant
#N00014-08-1-0638.