Measuring Tie Strength in Implicit Social Networks
Mangesh Gupte
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
 
Tina Eliassi-Rad
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
 
Given a set of people and a set of events they attend, we address the problem of measuring connectedness or tie strength
between each pair of persons given that attendance at mutual events gives an implicit social network between people.
We take an axiomatic approach to this problem. Starting
from a list of axioms that a measure of tie strength must
satisfy, we characterize functions that satisfy all the axioms
and show that there is a range of measures that satisfy this
characterization. A measure of tie strength induces a ranking on the edges (and on the set of neighbors for every person). We show that for applications where the ranking, and
not the absolute value of the tie strength, is the important
thing about the measure, the axioms are equivalent to a natural partial order. Also, to settle on a particular measure,
we must make a non-obvious decision about extending this
partial order to a total order, and that this decision is best
left to particular applications. We classify measures found
in prior literature according to the axioms that they satisfy. In our experiments, we measure tie strength and the
coverage of our axioms in several datasets. Also, for each
dataset, we bound the maximum Kendall’s Tau divergence
(which measures the number of pairwise disagreements between two lists) between all measures that satisfy the axioms
using the partial order. This informs us if particular datasets
are well behaved where we do not have to worry about which
measure to choose, or we have to be careful about the exact
choice of measure we make.
Social Networks, Tie Strength, Axiomatic Approach
INTRODUCTION
Explicitly declared friendship links suﬀer from a low signal
to noise ratio (e.g. Facebook friends or LinkedIn contacts).
Links are added for a variety of reasons like reciprocation,
∗Current aﬃliation: Google.
peer-pressure, etc. Detecting which of these links are important is a challenge.
Social structures are implied by various interactions between
users of a network.
We look at event information, where
users participate in mutual events. Our goal is to infer the
strength of ties between various users given this event information. Hence, these social networks are implicit.
There has been a surge of interest in implicit social networks. We can see anecdotal evidence for this in startups
like COLOR ( and new features in
products like Gmail. COLOR builds an implicit social network based on people’s proximity information while taking
photos.1 Gmail’s don’t forget bob Roth et al. feature
uses an implicit social network to suggest new people to add
to an email given a existing list.
People attend diﬀerent events with each other. In fact, an
event is deﬁned by the set of people that attend it.
event can represent the set of people who took a photo at
the same place and time, like COLOR, or a set of people
who are on an email, like in Gmail. Given the set of events,
we would like to infer how connected two people are, i.e. we
would like to measure the strength of the tie between people.
All that is known about each event is the list of people who
attended it. People attend events based on an implicit social
network with ties between pairs of people. We want to solve
the inference problem of ﬁnding this weighted social network
that gives rise to the set of events.
Given a bipartite graph, with people as one set of vertices
and events as the other set, we want to infer the tie-strength
between the set of people. Hence, in our problem, we do
not even have access to any directly declared social network
between people, in fact, the social network is implicit. We
want to infer the network based on the set of people who
interact together at diﬀerent points in time.
We start with a set of axioms and ﬁnd a characterization
of functions that could serve as a measure of tie strength,
just given the event information. We do not end up with a
single function that works best under all circumstances, and
in fact we show that there are non-obvious decisions that
need to be made to settle down on a single measure of tie
1 
 
Moreover, we examine the case where the absolute value of
the tie strength is not important, just the order is important
(see Section 4.2.1). We show that in this case the axioms are
equivalent to a natural partial order on the strength of ties.
We also show that choosing a particular tie strength function
is equivalent to choosing a particular linear extension of this
partial order.
Our contributions are:
• We present an axiomatic approach to the problem of
inferring implicit social networks by measuring tie strength.
• We characterize functions that satisfy all the axioms
and show a range of measures that satisfy this characterization.
• We show that in ranking applications, the axioms are
equivalent to a natural partial order; we demonstrate
that to settle on a particular measure, we must make
non-obvious decisions about extending this partial order to a total order which is best left to the particular
application.
• We classify measures found in prior literature according to the axioms that they satisfy.
• In our experiments, we show that by using Kendall’s
Tau divergence, we can judge whether a dataset is wellbehaved, where we do not have to worry about which
tie-strength measure to choose, or we have to be careful
about the exact choice of measure.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the related work.
Section 3 presents our
proposed model. Sections 4 and 5 describe the axioms and
measures of tie strength, respectively. Section 6 presents our
experiments. Section 7 concludes the paper.
RELATED WORK
[Granovetter, 1973] introduced the notion of strength of ties
in social networks and since then has aﬀected diﬀerent areas
of study. We split the related works into diﬀerent subsections that emphasize particular methods/applications.
Strength of Ties:
[Granovetter, 1973] showed that weak
ties are important for various aspects like spread of information in social networks. There have been various studies
on identifying the strength of ties given diﬀerent features of
a graph. [Gilbert and Karahalios, 2009] model tie strength
as a linear combination of node attributes like intensity, intimacy, etc to classify ties in a social network as strong or
weak. The weights on each attribute enable them to ﬁnd
attributes that are most useful in making these predictions.
[Kahanda and Neville, 2009] take a supervised learning approach to the problem by constructing a predictor that determines whether a link in a social network is a strong tie
or a weak tie. They report that network transactional features, which combine network structure with transactional
features like the number of wall posting, photos, etc like
|posts(i,j)|
Σk|posts(j,k)|, form the best predictors.
Link Prediction:
[Adamic and Adar, 2003] considers the
problem of predicting links between web-pages of individuals, using information such as membership of mailing lists
and use of common phrases on web pages. They deﬁne a
measure of similarity between users by creating a bipartite
graph of users on the left and features (e.g., phrases and
mailing-lists) on the right as w(u, v) = P
(i neighbor of u&v)
[Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg, 2003] formalizes the problem
of predicting which new interactions will occur in a social
network given a snapshot of the current state of the network. It uses many existing predictors of similarity between
nodes like [Adamic and Adar, 2003, Jeh and Widom, 2002,
Katz, 1953] and generates a ranking of pairs of nodes that
are currently not connected by an edge. It compares across
diﬀerent datasets to measure the eﬃcacy of these measures.
Its main ﬁnding is that there is enough information in the
network structure that all the predictors handily beat the
random predictor, but not enough that the absolute number of predictions is high.
[Allali, Magnien, and Latapy,
2011] addresses the problem of predicting links in a bipartite network. They deﬁne internal links as links between left
nodes that have a right node in common, i.e. they are at a
distance two from each other and the predictions that are
oﬀered are only for internal links.
Email networks:
Because of the ubiquitous nature of
email, there has been a lot of work on various aspects of
email networks. [Roth, Ben-David, Deutscher, Flysher, Horn,
Leichtberg, Leiser, Matias, and Merom, 2010] discusses a
way to suggest more recipients for an email given the sender
and the current set of recipients. This feature has been integrated in the Google’s popular Gmail service. [Kahanda and
Neville, 2009] constructs a regression model for classifying
edges in a social network as strong or weak. They achieve
high accuracy and ﬁnd that network-transactional features
like number of posts from u to v normalized by the total
number of posts by u achieve the largest gain in accuracy of
prediction.
Axiomatic approach to Similarity: [Altman and Tennenholtz, 2005] were one of the ﬁrst to axiomatize graph
measures. In particular, they studied axiomatizing PageRank. The closest in spirit to our work is the work by Lin [Lin,
1998] that deﬁnes an information theoretic measure of similarity. This measure depends on the existence of a probability distribution on the features that deﬁne objects. While
the measure of tie strength between people is similar to a
measure of similarity, there are important diﬀerences. We
do not have any probability distribution over events, just a
log of the ones that occurred. More importantly, [Lin, 1998]
deﬁnes items by the attributes or features they have. Hence,
items with the same features are identical. In our case, even
if two people attend all the same events, they are not the
same person, and in fact they might not even have very high
tie strength depending on how large the events were.
We model people and events as nodes and use a bipartite
graph G = (L ∪R, E) where the edges represent membership. The left vertices correspond to people while the right
vertices correspond to events. We ignore any information
other than the set of people who attended the events, like
the timing, location, importance of events. These are features that would be important to the overall goal of measuring tie strength between users, but in this work we focus on
the task of inferring tie strength using the graph structure
only. We shall denote users in L by small letters (u, v, . . .)
and events in R by capital letters(P, Q, . . .).
There is an
edge between u and P if and only if u attended event P.
Hence, our problem is to ﬁnd a function on bipartite graphs
that models tie strength between people, given this bipartite
graph representation of events.
(a,c), (a,d), (a,e), (b,e)
(b,c), (b,d), (c,e), (d,e)
Person × Event Bipartite Graph
Partial order of Tie Strength
Figure 1: Given a bipartite person × event graph,
we want to infer the induced partial order of tie
strength among the people.
We also introduce some notation. We shall denote the tie
strength of u and v due to a graph G as TSG(u, v) or as
TS(u, v) if G is obvious from context.
We shall also use
TS{E1,...,Ek}(u, v) to denote the tie strength between u and
v in the graph induced by events {E1, . . . , Ek} and users
that attend at least one of these events. For a single event
E, then TSE(u, v) denotes the tie strength between u and v
if E where the only event.
We denote the set of natural numbers by N.
A sequence
of k natural numbers is given by (a1, . . . , ak) and the set of
all such sequences is Nk. The set of all ﬁnite sequence of
natural numbers is represented as N∗= ∪kNk
AXIOMS OF TIE STRENGTH
We now discuss the axioms that measures of tie strength
between two users u and v must follow.
Axiom 1 (Isomorphism) Suppose we have two graphs G
and H and a mapping of vertices such that G and H
are isomorphic. Let vertex u of G map to vertex a of
H and vertex v to b. Then TSG(u, v) = TSH(a, b).
Hence, the tie strength between u and v does not depend on the labels of u and v, only on the link structure.
Axiom 2 (Baseline) If there are no events, then the tie
strength between each pair u and v is 0. TSφ(u, v) =
0. If there are only two people u and v and a single
party which they attend, then their tie strength is 1.
TS{u,v}(u, v) = 1.
Axiom 3 (Frequency: More events create stronger ties)
All other things being equal, the more events common
to u and v, the stronger the tie strength of u and v.
Given a graph G = (L ∪R, E) and two vertices u, v ∈
L. Consider the graph G′ = (L ∪(R ∪P), E ∪Pu,v,...),
where Pu,v,... is a new event which both u and v attend.
Then the TSG′(u, v) ≥TSG(u, v).
Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events create stronger ties)
All other things being equal, the fewer invitees there
are to any particular party attended by u and v, the
stronger the tie strength between u and v.
Given a graph G = (L ∪R, E) such that P ∈R and
(P, u), (P, v), (P, w) ∈E for some vertex w. Consider
the graph G′ = (L ∪R), E −(P, w)), where the edge
(P, w) is deleted. Then the TSG(u, v) ≥TSG′(u, v).
Axiom 5 (Larger events create more ties) Consider two
events P and Q. If the number of people attending P
is larger than the number of people attending Q, then
the total tie strength created by event P is more than
that created by event Q.
|P| ≥|Q| =⇒P
u,v∈P TSP (u, v) ≥P
u,v∈Q TSQ(u, v).
Axiom 6 (Conditional Independence of Vertices) The
tie strength of a vertex u to other vertices does not depend on events that u does not attend; it only depends
on events that u attends.
Axiom 7 (Conditional Independence of Events) The
increase in tie strength between u and v due to an event
P does not depend other events, just on the existing
tie strength between u and v.
TSG+P (u, v) = g(TSG(u, v), TSP (u, v)) for some ﬁxed
function monotonically increasing function g.
Axiom 8 (Submodularity) The marginal increase in tie
strength of u and v due to an event Q is at most the
tie strength between u and v if Q was their only event.
If G is a graph and Q is a single event, TSG(u, v) +
TSQ(u, v) ≥TSG+Q(u, v).
Discussion
These axioms give a measure of tie strength between nodes
that is positive but unbounded. Nodes that have a higher
value are closer to each other than nodes that have lower
We get a sense of the axioms by applying them to Figure 1.
Axiom 1 (Isomorphism) implies that TS(b, c) = TS(b, d) and
TS(c, e) = TS(d, e). Axiom 2 (Baseline), Axiom 6 (Conditional Independence of Vertices) and Axiom 7 (Conditional
Independence of Events) imply that TS(a, c) = TS(a, d) =
TS(a, e) = TS(b, e) = 0. Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events
create stronger ties) implies that TS(a, b) ≥TS(d, e). Axiom 3 (Frequency: More events create stronger ties) implies
that TS(c, d) ≥TS(d, e).
While each of the axioms above are fairly intuitive, they are
hardly trivial. In fact, we shall see that various measures
used in prior literature break some of these axioms. On the
other hand, it might seem that satisfying all the axioms is a
fairly strict condition. However, we shall see that even satisfying all the axioms are not suﬃcient to uniquely identify
a measure of tie strength. The axioms leave considerable
space for diﬀerent measures of tie strength.
One reason the axioms do not deﬁne a particular function
is that there is inherent tension between Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events create stronger ties)
and Axiom 3
(Frequency: More events create stronger ties). While both
state ways in which tie strength becomes stronger, the axioms do not resolve which one dominates the other or how
they interact with each other. This is a non-obvious decision
that we feel is best left to the application in question. In
Figure 1, we cannot tell using just Axioms (1-8) which of
TS(a, b) and TS(c, d) is larger. We discuss this more more
in Section 4.2.
Characterizing Tie Strength
In this section, we shall state and prove Theorem 6 that
gives a characterization of all functions that satisfy the axioms of tie strength. Axioms (1-8) do not uniquely deﬁne
a function, and in fact, one of the reasons that tie strength
is not uniquely deﬁned up to the given axioms is that we
do not have any notion for comparing the relative importance of number of events (frequency) versus the exclusivity
of events (intimacy). For example, in terms of the partial
order, it is not clear whether u and v having in common
two events with two people attending them is better than
or worse than u and v having three events in common with
three people attending them.
We shall use the following deﬁnition for deciding how much
total tie strength a single event generates, given the size of
the event.
Notation 1. If there is a single event, with k people, we
shall denote the total tie-strength generated as f(k).
Lemma 2 (Local Neighborhood). The tie strength of u and
v is aﬀected only by events that both u and v attend.
Proof. Given a graph G and users u and v in G, G−u is
obtained by deleting all events that u is not a part of. Similarly, G−u,v is obtained by deleting all events of G−u that
v is not a part of. By Axiom 6 (Conditional Independence
of Vertices), tie strength of u only depends on events that
u attends.
Hence, TSG(u, v) = TSG−u(u, v).
strength of v only depends on events that v attends. Hence,
TSG(u, v) = TSG−u(u, v) = TSG−u,v(u, v). This proves our
Lemma 3. The tie strength between any two people is always non-negative and is equal to zero if they have never
attended an event together.
Proof. If two people have never attended an event together,
then from Lemma 2 the tie strength remains unchanged if
we delete all the events not containing either which in this
case is all the events. Then Axiom 2 (Baseline) tells us that
TS(u, v) = 0.
Also, Axiom 3 (Frequency: More events create stronger ties)
implies that TSG(u, v) ≥TSφ(u, v) = 0.
Hence, the tie
strength is always non-negative.
Lemma 4. If there is a single party, with k people, the Tie
Strength of each tie is equal to f(k)
Proof. By Axiom 1 (Isomorphism), it follows that the tiestrength on each tie is the same. Since the sum of all the ties
is equal to f(k), and there are
edges, the tie-strength of
each edge is equal to f(k)
Lemma 5. The total tie strength created at an event E
with k people is a monotone function f(k) that is bounded
by 1 ≤f(k) ≤
Proof. By Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events create stronger
ties) , the tie strength of u and v due to E is less than that if
they were alone at the event. TSE(u, v) ≤TSu,v(u, v) = 1,
by the Baseline axiom.
Summing up over all ties gives
u,v TSE(u, v) ≤
Also, since larger events
generate more ties, f(k) ≥f(i) : ∀i < k.
In particular,
f(k) ≥f(1) = 1. This proves the result.
We are now ready to state the main theorem in this section.
Theorem 6. Given a graph G = (L∪R, E) and two vertices
u, v, if the tie-strength function TS follows Axioms (1-8),
then the function has to be of the form
TSG(u, v) = g(h(|P1|), h(|P2|), . . . , h(|Pk|))
where {Pi}1≤i≤k are the events common to both u and v,
h : N →R is a monotonically decreasing function bounded
by 1 ≥h(n) ≥
2) and g : N∗→R is a monotonically
increasing submodular function.
Proof. Given two users u and v we use Axioms (1-8) to
successively change the form of TSG(u, v). Let {Pi}1≤i≤k
be all the events common to u and v.
Axiom 7 (Conditional Independence of Events) implies that TSG(u, v) =
g(TSPi(u, v))1≤i≤k, where g is a monotonically increasing
submodular function. Given an event P, TSP (u, v) = h(|P|) =
2 ) . By Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events create stronger
ties) , h is a monotonically decreasing function. Also, by
Lemma 5, f is bounded by 1 ≤f(n) ≤
. Hence, h it
bounded by 1 ≥h(n) ≥
2). This completes the proof of
the theorem.
Theorem 6 gives us a way to explore the space of valid functions for representing tie strength and ﬁnd which work given
particular applications. In Section 5 we shall look at popular measure of tie strength and show that most of them
follow Axioms (1-8) and hence are of the form described by
Theorem 6.
We also describe the functions h and g that
characterize these common measures of tie strength . While
Theorem 6 gives a characterization of functions suitable for
describing tie strength, they leave open a wide variety of
functions.
In particular, it does not give the comfort of
having a single function that we could use. We discuss the
reasons for this and what we would need to do to settle upon
a particular function in the next section.
Tie Strength and Orderings
We begin this section with a deﬁnition of order in a set.
Deﬁnition 7 (Total Order). Given a set S and a binary
relation ≤O on S, O = (S, ≤O) is called a total order if
and only if it satisﬁes the following properties (i Total). for
every u, v ∈S, u ≤O v or v ≤O u (ii Anti-Symmetric).
u ≤O v and v ≤O u =⇒u = v (iii Transitive). u ≤O v
and v ≤O w =⇒u ≤O w
A total order is also called a linear order.
Consider a measure TS that assigns a measure of tie strength
to each pair of nodes u, v given the events that all nodes
attend in the form of a graph G. Since TS assigns a real
number to each edge and the set of reals is totally ordered,
TS gives a total order on all the edges. In fact, the function
TS actually gives a total ordering of N∗. In particular, if we
ﬁx a vertex u, then TS induces a total order on the set of
neighbors of u, given by the increasing values of TS on the
corresponding edges.
The Partial Order on N∗
Deﬁnition 8 (Partial Order). Given a set S and a binary
relation ≤P on S, P = (S, ≤P) is called a partial order if and
only if it satisﬁes the following properties (i Reﬂexive). for
every u ∈S, u ≤P u (ii Anti-Symmetric). u ≤P v and v ≤P
u = v (iii Transitive). u ≤P v and v ≤P w
The set S is called a partially ordered set or a poset.
Note the diﬀerence from a total order is that in a partial
order not every pair of elements is comparable. We shall
now look at a natural partial order N = (N∗, ≤N ) on the
set N∗of all ﬁnite sequences of natural numbers. Recall that
N∗= ∪kNk. We shall think of this sequence as the number
of common events that a pair of users attend.
Deﬁnition 9 (Partial order on N ∗). Let a, b ∈N∗where
a = (ai)1≤i≤A and b = (bi)1≤i≤B. We say that a ≥N b if
and only if A ≥B and ai ≤bi : 1 ≤i ≤B. This gives the
partial order N = (N∗, ≤N ).
The partial order N corresponds to the intuition that more
events and smaller events create stronger ties. In fact, we
claim that this is exactly the partial order implied by the
Axioms (1-8). Theorem 11 formalizes this intuition along
with giving the proof. What we would really like is a total
ordering. Can we go from the partial ordering given by the
Axioms (1-8) to a total order on N∗?
Theorem 11 also
suggest ways in which we can do this.
Partial Orderings and Linear Extensions
In this section, we connect the deﬁnitions of partial order
and the functions of tie strength that we are studying. First
we start with a deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 10 (Linear Extension). L = (S, ≤L) is called the
linear extension of a given partial order P = (S, ≤P) if and
only if L is a total order and L is consistent with the ordering
deﬁned by P, that is, for all u, v ∈S, u ≤P v =⇒u ≤L v.
We are now ready to state the main theorem which characterizes functions that satisfy Axioms (1-8) in terms of a
partial ordering on N∗. Fix nodes u and v and let P1, . . . , Pn
be all the events that both u and v attend. Consider the
sequence of numbers (|Pi|)1≤i≤k that give the number of
people in each of these events.
Without loss of generality assume that these are sorted in ascending order. Hence
|Pi| ≤|Pi+1|. We associate this sorted sequence of numbers
with the tie (u, v). The partial order N induces a partial
order on the set of pairs via this mapping.
We also call
this partial order N. Fixing any particular measure of tie
strength, gives a mapping of N∗to R and hence implies ﬁxing a particular linear extension of N, and ﬁxing a linear
extension of N involves making non-obvious decisions between elements of the partial order. We formalize this in
the next theorem.
Theorem 11. Let G = (L ∪R, E) be a bipartite graph of
users and events.
Given two users (u, v) ∈(L × L), let
(|Pi|)1≤i≤k ∈R be the set of events common to users (u, v).
Through this association, the partial order N = (N∗, ≤N ) on
ﬁnite sequences of numbers induces a partial order on L × L
which we also call N.
Let TS be a function that satisﬁes Axioms (1-8). Then TS
induces a total order on the edges that is a linear extension
of the partial order N on L × L.
Conversely, for every linear extension L of the partial order
N, we can ﬁnd a function TS that induces L on L × L and
that satisﬁes Axioms (1-8).
Proof. TS : L × L →R. Hence, it gives a total order on the
set of pairs of user. We want to show that if TS satisﬁes
Axioms (1-8), then the total order is a linear extension of
N. The characterization in Theorem 6 states that given a
pair of vertices (u, v) ∈(L × L), TS(u, v) is characterized
by the number of users in events common to u and v and
can be expressed as TSG(u, v) = g(h(|Pi|))1≤i≤k where g
is a monotone submodular function and h is a monotone
decreasing function. Since TS : L × L →R, it induces a
total order on all pairs of users. We now show that this is
a consistent with the partial order N. Consider two pairs
(u1, v1), (u2, v2) with party proﬁles a = (a1, . . . , aA) and b =
(b1, . . . , bB).
Suppose a ≥N b.
We want to show that TS(u1, v1) ≥
TS(u2, v2).
a ≥N b implies that A ≥B and that ai ≤
bi : ∀1 ≤i ≤B.
TS(u1, v1)
= g(h(a1), . . . , h(aA))
≥g(h(a1), . . . , h(aB)) (Since g is monotone and A ≥B)
≥g(h(b1), . . . , h(bB)) (Since g is monotone and
h(ai) ≥h(bi) since ai ≤bi)
= TS(u2, v2)
This proves the ﬁrst part of the theorem.
For the converse, we are given an total ordering L = (N∗, ≤L
) that is an extension of the partial order N. We want to
prove that there exists a tie strength function TS : L × L →
R that satisﬁes Axioms (1-6) and that induces L on L × L.
We shall prove this by constructing such a function.
shall deﬁne a function f : N∗→Q and deﬁne TSG(u, v) =
f(a1, . . . , ak), where ai = |Pi|, the number of users that
attend event Pi in G.
Deﬁne f(n) =
n−1 and f(φ) = 0.
Hence, TSφ(u, v) =
f(φ) = 0 and TS{u,v}(u, v) = f(2) =
shows that TS satisﬁes Axiom 2 (Baseline).
Also, deﬁne
f(1, 1, . . . , 1
) = n. Since N∗is countable, consider elements
in some order. If for the current element a under consideration, there exists an element b such that a =N b and we have
already deﬁned TS(b), then deﬁne TS(a) = TS(b). Else,
ﬁnd let aglb = argmaxe {TS(e) is deﬁned and a ≥N e} and
let alub = argmine {TS(e) is deﬁned and a ≤N e}.
at every point the sets over which we take the maximum of
minimum are ﬁnite, both aglb and alub are well deﬁned and
exist. Deﬁne TS(a) = 1
2 (TS(aglb) + TS(alub)).
In this abstract framework, an intuitively appealing linear
extension is the random linear extension of the partial order
under consideration. There are polynomial time algorithms
to calculate this [Karzanov and Khachiyan, 1991]. We leave
the analysis of the analytical properties and its viability as
a strength function in real world applications as an open
research question.
In the next section, we turn our attention to actual measures
of tie strength. We see some popular measures that have
been proposed before as well as some new ones.
MEASURES OF TIE STRENGTH
There have been plenty of tie-strength measures discussed
in previous literature. We review the most popular of them
here and classify them according to the axioms they satisfy.
In this section, for an event P, we denote by |P| the number
of people in the event P. The size of P’s neighborhood is
represented by |Γ(P)|.
Common Neighbors.
This is the simplest measure of tie
strength, given by the total number of common events
that both u and v attended.
TS(u, v) = |Γ(u) ∩Γ(v)|
Jaccard Index.
A more reﬁned measure of tie strength is
given by the Jaccard Index, which normalizes for how
“social” u and v are
TS(u, v) = |Γ(u) ∩Γ(v)|
|Γ(u) ∪Γ(v)|
Delta. Tie strength increases with the number of events.
TS(u, v) =
P ∈Γ(u)∩Γ(v)
Adamic and Adar. This measure was introduced in [Adamic
and Adar, 2003].
TS(u, v) =
P ∈Γ(u)∩Γ(v)
Linear. Tie strength increases with number of events.
TS(u, v) =
P ∈Γ(u)∩Γ(v)
Preferential attachment.
TS(u, v) = |Γ(u)| · |Γ(v)|
Katz Measure. This was introduced in [Katz, 1953].
counts the number of paths between u and v, where
each path is discounted exponentially by the length of
TS(u, v) =
q∈path between u,v
Random Walk with Restarts. This gives a non-symmetric
measure of tie strength. For a node u, we jump with
probability α to node u and with probability 1−α to a
neighbor of the current node. α is the restart probability. The tie strength between u and v is the stationary
probability that we end at node v under this process.
Simrank. This captures the similarity between two nodes u
and v by recursively computing the similarity of their
neighbors.
TS(u, v) =
b∈Γ(v) T S(a,b)
|Γ(u)|·|Γ(v)|
Now, we shall introduce three new measures of tie strength.
In a sense, g = P is at one extreme of the range of functions
allowed by Theorem 6 and that is the default function used.
g = max is at the other extreme of the range of functions.
Max. Tie strength does not increases with number of events
TS(u, v) =
P ∈Γ(u)∩Γ(v)
Proportional. Tie strength increases with number of events.
People spend time proportional to their TS in a party.
TS is the ﬁxed point of this set of equations:
TS(u, v) =
P ∈Γ(u)∩Γ(v)
|P| + (1 −ϵ)
w∈Γ(u) TS(u, w)
Temporal Proportional. This is similar to Proportional,
but with a temporal aspect. TS is not a ﬁxed point,
but starts with a default value and is changed according to the following equation, where the events are
ordered by time.
TS(u, v, t)
TS(u, v, t −1)
if u and v do not attend Pt
|Pt| + (1 −ϵ)
T S(u,v,t−1)
w∈Pt T S(u,w,t−1)
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
Measures of Tie Strength
Axiom 1 (Isomorphism)
Axiom 2 (Baseline)
Axiom 3 (Frequency: More events create stronger ties)
Axiom 4 (Intimacy: Smaller events create stronger ties)
Axiom 5 (Larger events create more ties)
Axiom 6 (Conditional Independence of Vertices)
Axiom 7 (Conditional Independence of Events)
Axiom 8 (Submodularity)
g(a1, . . . , ak) and h(|Pi|) = ai
(From the characterization in
Theorem 6)
Common Neighbors.
g(a1, . . . , ak) = Pk
Jaccard Index.
g(a1, . . . , ak) = Pk
Adamic and Adar.
g(a1, . . . , ak) = Pk
Katz Measure.
Preferential attachment.
Random Walk with Restarts.
g(a1, . . . , ak) = maxk
g(a1, . . . , ak) = Pk
Proportional.
Table 1: Measures of tie strength and the axioms they satisfy
Table 1 provides a classiﬁcation of all these tie-strength measures, according to which axioms they satisfy. If they satisfy
all the axioms, then we use Theorem 6 to ﬁnd the characterizing functions g and h. An interesting observation is that all
the “self-referential” measures (such as Katz Measure, Random Walk with Restart, Simrank, and Proportional) fail to
satisfy the axioms. Another interesting observation is in the
classiﬁcation of measures that satisfy the axioms. The majority use g = P to aggregate tie strength across events.
Per event, the majority compute tie strength as one over a
simple function of the size of the party.
EXPERIMENTS
This section presents our ﬁndings on ﬁve data sets: Shakespearean plays (Macbeth, Tempest, and A Comedy of Errors), Reality Mining, and Enron Emails.
Shakespearean Plays. We take three well-known plays by
Shakespeare (Macbeth, Tempest, and A Comedy of Errors)
and create bipartite person×event graphs. The person-nodes
are the characters in the play. Each event is a set of characters who are on the stage at the same time. We calculate the
strength of ties between each pair of nodes. Thus without
using any semantic information and even without analyzing any dialogue, we estimate how much characters interact
with one another.
The Reality Mining Project. This is the popular dataset
from the Reality Mining project at MIT [Eagle, Pentland,
and Lazer, 2009]. This study gave one hundred smart phones
to participants and logged information generated by these
A Comedy of Errors
Figure 2: Inferred weighted social networks between characters in Shakespearean plays. The thicker an edge,
the stronger the tie. Tie Strength was calculated using the tie-strength measure Linear.
smart phones for several months. We use the bluetooth proximity data generated as part of this project. The bluetooth
radio was switched on every ﬁve minutes and logged other
bluetooth devices in close proximity.
The people are the
participants in the study and events record the proximity
between people. This gives us a total of 326,248 events.
Enron Emails. This dataset consists of emails from 150
users from the Enron corporation, that were made public
during the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission investigation.
We look at all emails that occur between Enron
addresses. Each email is an event and all the people copied
on that email i.e. the sender (from), the receivers (to, cc
and bcc) are included in that event. This gives a total of
32,471 people and 371,321 events.
Measuring Coverage of the Axioms
In Section 4, we discussed axioms governing tie-strength and
characterized the axioms in terms of a partial order in Theorem 11. We shall now look at an experiment to determine
the“coverage”of the axioms, in terms of the number of pairs
of ties that are actually ordered by the partial order.
For diﬀerent datasets, we use Theorem 11 to generate a partial order between all ties. Table 2 shows the percentage of
all ties that are not resolved by the partial order – i.e., the
partial order cannot tells us if one tie is greater or if they
are equal. Each measure of tie-strength gives a total order
on the ties; and, hence resolves all the comparisons between
pairs of ties. The number of tie-pairs which are left incomparable in the partial order gives a notion of the how much
room the axioms leave open for diﬀerent tie-strength functions to diﬀer from each other. Table 2 shows that partial
order does resolve a very high percentage of the ties. Also,
we see that real-world datasets (e.g., Reality Mining) have
more unresolved ties than the cleaner Shakespearean plays
Next, we look at two tie-strength functions (Jaccard Index
and Temporal Proportional) which do not obey the axioms.
As previously shown, Theorem 11 implies that these functions do not obey the partial order.
So, there are some
tie-pairs in conﬂict with the partial order. Table 3 shows
Incomparable Pairs (%)
275 (1.89)
Comedy of Errors
726 (4.99)
584 (0.23)
Reality Mining
13,794,378
1,764,546 (12.79)
Table 2: Number of ties not resolved by the partial
order. The last column shows the percentage of tie
pairs on which diﬀerent tie-strength functions can
the number of tie-pairs that are actually in conﬂict. This
experiment gives us some intuition about how far away a
measure is from the axioms. We see that for these datasets,
Temporal Proportional agrees with the partial order more
than the Jaccard Index. We can also see that as the size of
the dataset increases, the percentage of conﬂicts decreases
drastically.
Jaccard (%)
Temporal(%)
488 (3.35)
261 (1.79)
1,114 (7.76)
381 (2.62)
2,638 (1.06)
978 (0.39)
13,794,378
290,934 (0.02)
112,546 (0.01)
Number of conﬂicts between the partial
order and the tie-strength functions: Jaccard Index
and Temporal Proportional. The second and third
columns show the percentage of tie-pairs in conﬂict
with the partial order.
Visualizing Networks
We obtain the tie strength between characters from Shakespearean plays using the linear function proposed by Linear.
Figure 2 shows the inferred weighted social networks. Note
that the inference is only based on people occupying the
same stage and not on any semantic analysis of the text.
The inferred weights (i.e. tie strengths) are consistent with
the stories. For example, the highest tie strengths are between Macbeth and Lady Macbeth in the play Macbeth, between Ariel and Prospero in Tempest, and between Dromio
of Syracuse and Antipholus of Syracuse in A Comedy of
Number of Events
Number of People in an Event
Reality Mining
Figure 3: Frequency distribution of number of people per event for the Reality Mining and Enron
datasets (in log-log scale)
Number of Events
Number of People in an Event
Comedy of Errors
Figure 4: Frequency distribution of number of people per event for the Shakespearean Plays
Measuring Correlation among Tie-Strength
Figures 3 and 4 show the frequency distributions of the number of people at an event. We see that these distributions
are very diﬀerent for the diﬀerent graphs (even among the
real-world communication networks, Enron and MIT Reality Mining). This suggests that diﬀerent applications might
need diﬀerent measures of tie strength.
Figure 4 shows Kendall’s τ coeﬃcient for the Shakespearean
plays, the Reality Mining data and Enron emails. Depending on the data set, diﬀerent measures of tie strength are correlated. For instance, in the “clean” world of Shakespearean
plays Common Neighbor is the least correlated measure;
while in the “messy” real world data from Reality Mining
and Enron emails, Max is the least correlated measure.
CONCLUSIONS
We presented an axiomatic approach to the problem of inferring implicit social networks by measuring tie strength from
bipartite person×event graphs. We characterized functions
that satisfy all axioms and demonstrated a range of measures that satisfy this characterization. We showed that in
ranking applications, the axioms are equivalent to a natural
partial order; and demonstrated that to settle on a particular measure, we must make a non-obvious decision about
extending this partial order to a total order which is best left
to the particular application. We classiﬁed measures found
in prior literature according to the axioms that they satisfy.
Finally, our experiments demonstrated the coverage of the
axioms and revealed through the use of Kendall’s Tau correlation whether a dataset is well-behaved, where we do not
have to worry about which tie-strength measure to choose,
or we have to be careful about the exact choice of measure.