Deep Extreme Cut: From Extreme Points to Object Segmentation
K.-K. Maninis*
S. Caelles∗
J. Pont-Tuset
L. Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
Figure 1. Example results of DEXTR: The user provides the extreme clicks for an object, and the CNN produces the segmented masks.
This paper explores the use of extreme points in an object
(left-most, right-most, top, bottom pixels) as input to obtain
precise object segmentation for images and videos. We do
so by adding an extra channel to the image in the input of
a convolutional neural network (CNN), which contains a
Gaussian centered in each of the extreme points. The CNN
learns to transform this information into a segmentation of
an object that matches those extreme points.
We demonstrate the usefulness of this approach for
guided segmentation (grabcut-style), interactive segmentation, video object segmentation, and dense segmentation
annotation. We show that we obtain the most precise results
to date, also with less user input, in an extensive and varied
selection of benchmarks and datasets. All our models and
code will be made publicly available.
1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have revolutionized the ﬁeld
of computer vision since their explosive appearance in the
ImageNet competition , where the task is to classify images into predeﬁned categories, that is, algorithms produce
one label for each input image. Image and video segmentation, on the other hand, generate dense predictions where
each pixel receives a (potentially different) output classiﬁcation. Deep learning algorithms, especially Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), were adapted to this scenario by
removing the ﬁnal fully connected layers to produce dense
predictions.
*First two authors contributed equally
Supervised techniques, those that train from manuallyannotated results, are currently the best performing in many
public benchmark and challenges . In the case of
image and video segmentation, the supervision is in the
form of dense annotations, i.e. each pixel has to be annotated in an expensive and cumbersome process. Weaklysupervised techniques, which train from incomplete but
easier-to-obtain annotations, are still signiﬁcantly behind
the state of the art. Semi-automatic techniques, which need
a human in the loop to produce results, are another way of
circumventing the expensive training annotations but need
interaction at test time, which usually comes in the form of
a bounding box or scribbles around the object of
interest. How to incorporate this information at test time
without introducing unacceptable lag, is also a challenge.
This paper tackles all these scenarios in a uniﬁed way
and shows state-of-the-art results in all of them in a variety
of benchmarks and setups. We present Deep Extreme Cut
(DEXTR), that obtains an object segmentation from its four
extreme points: the left-most, right-most, top, and bottom
pixels. Figure 1 shows an example result of our technique.
In the context of semi-automatic object segmentation, we
show that information from extreme clicking results in signiﬁcantly more accurate segmentations than the ones obtained from bounding-boxes (PASCAL, COCO, Grabcut)
in a Grabcut-like formulation. DEXTR outperforms other
methods using extreme points or object proposals (PAS-
CAL), and provides a better input to video object segmentation . DEXTR can also incorporate more points beyond the extreme ones, which further
reﬁnes the quality (PASCAL).
 
DEXTR can also be used to obtain dense annotations to
train supervised techniques. We show that we obtain very
accurate annotations with respect to the ground truth, but
more importantly, that algorithms trained on the annotations obtained by our algorithm perform as good as when
trained from the ground-truth ones. If we add the cost to obtain such annotations into the equation, then training using
DEXTR is signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than training from
the ground truth for a given target quality.
We perform an extensive and comprehensive set of experiments on COCO, PASCAL, Grabcut, and DAVIS, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
make all code, pre-trained models and annotation interfaces
used in this project publicly available.
2. Related Work
Weakly Supervised Signals for Segmentation:
Numerous alternatives to expensive pixel-level segmentation have
been proposed and used in the literature. Image-level labels , noisy web labels and scribble-level labels are some of the supervisory signal that have been
used to guide segmentation methods.
Closer to our approach, employs point-level supervision in the form of
a single click to train a CNN for semantic segmentation
and use central points of an imaginary bounding box to
weakly supervise object detection. Also related to our approach, train semantic segmentation methods from
box supervision. Recently, Papadopoulos et al. proposed a
novel method for annotating objects by extreme clicks .
They show that extreme clicks provide additional information to a bounding box, which they use to enhance GrabCutlike object segmentation from bounding boxes. Different
than these approaches, we use extreme clicking as a form
of guidance for deep architectures, and show how this additional information can be used to further boost accuracy of
segmentation networks, and help various applications.
Instance Segmentation:
Several works have tackled the
task of grouping pixels by object instances. Popular grouping methods provide instance segmentation in the form of
automatically segmented object proposals . Other
variants provide instance-level segmentation from a weak
guiding signal in the form of a bounding box . Accuracy for both groups of methods has increased by recent
approaches that employ deep architectures trained on large
dataset with strong supervisory signals, to learn how to produce class-agnostic masks from patches , or from
bounding boxes . Our approach relates to the second
group, since we utilize information from extreme clicks to
group pixels of the same instance, with higher accuracy.
Interactive Segmentation from points:
Interactive segmentation methods have been proposed in order to reduce
annotation time. In this context, the user is asked to gradually reﬁne a method by providing additional labels to the
data. Grabcut is one of the pioneering works for the
task, segmenting from bounding boxes by gradually updating an appearance model. Our method relates with interactive segmentation using points as the supervisory signal.
Click Carving interactively updates the result of video
object segmentation by user-deﬁned clicks. Recent methods use these ideas in the pipeline of deep architectures.
iFCN guides a CNN from positive and negative points,
automatically acquired from the ground-truth masks. RIS-
Net build on iFCN to improve the result by adding local
context. Our method signiﬁcantly improves the results by
using 4 points as the supervisory signal: the extreme points.
3.1. Extreme points
One of the most common ways to perform weakly supervised segmentation is drawing a bounding box around
the object of interest . However, in order to
draw the corners of a bounding box, the user has to click
points outside the object, drag the box diagonally, and adjust it several times to obtain a tight, accurate bounding box.
This process is cognitively demanding, with increased error
rates and labelling times .
Recently, Papadopoulos et al. have shown a much
more efﬁcient way of obtaining a bounding box using extreme clicks, spending on average 7.2 seconds instead of
34.5 seconds required for drawing a bounding box around
an object . They show that extreme clicking leads to
high quality bounding boxes that are on par with the ones
obtained by traditional methods. These extreme points belong to the top, bottom, left-most and right-most parts of the
object. Extreme-clicking annotations by deﬁnition provide
more information than a bounding box; they contain four
points that are on the boundary of the object, from which
one can easily obtain the bounding-box. We use extreme
points for object segmentation leveraging their two main
outcomes: the points and their inferred bounding box.
3.2. Segmentation from Extreme Points
The overview of our method is shown in Figure 2. The
annotated extreme points are given as a guiding signal to
the input of the network. To this end, we create a heatmap
with activations in the regions of extreme points. We center
a 2D Gaussian around each of the points, in order to create a single heatmap. The heatmap is concatenated with the
RGB channels of the input image, to form a 4-channel input
for the CNN. In order to focus on the object of interest, the
input is cropped by the bounding box, formed from the extreme point annotations. To include context on the resulting
crop, we relax the tight bounding box by several pixels.
Global Context
Instance Segmentation
Video Object Segmentation
Interactive Segmentation
Figure 2. Architecture of DEXTR: Both the RGB image and the labeled extreme points are processed by the CNN to produce the
segmented mask. The applicability of this method is illustrated for various tasks: Instance, Semantic, Video, and interactive segmentation.
After the pre-processing step that comes exclusively
from the extreme clicks, the input consists of an RGB crop
including an object, plus its extreme points.
We choose ResNet-101 as the backbone of our architecture, as it has been proven successful in a variety of
segmentation methods . We remove the fully convolutional layers as well as the max pooling layers in the
last two stages to preserve acceptable output resolution for
dense prediction, and we introduce atrous convolutions in
the two last stages to maintain the same receptive ﬁeld. After the last ResNet-101 stage, we introduce a pyramid scene
parsing module to aggregate global context to the ﬁnal
feature map. Initializing the weights of the network from
pre-training on ImageNet has been proven beneﬁcial for
various tasks . For most experiments, we use
the provided Deeplab-v2 model pre-trained on ImageNet,
and ﬁne-tuned on PASCAL for semantic segmentation.
The output of the CNN is a probability map representing
whether a pixel belongs to the object that we want to segment or not. The CNN is trained to minimize the standard
cross entropy loss, which takes into account that different
classes occur with different frequency in a dataset:
wyjC (yj, ˆyj),
j ∈1, ..., |Y |
where wyj depends on the label yj of pixel j. In our case
we deﬁne wyj with yj ∈{0, 1} as the inverse normalized
frequency of labels inside the minibatch. C(.) indicates the
standard cross-entropy loss between the label and the prediction ˆyj. The balanced loss has proven to perform very
well in boundary detection , where the majority of
the samples belong to the background class. We note that
our method is trained from strong mask-level supervision,
on publicly available datasets, using the extreme points as a
guiding signal to the network.
In order to segment an object, our method uses a objectcentered crop, therefore there is a much higher number of
samples belonging to the foreground than to the background
and the use of a balanced loss proves to be beneﬁcial.
Alternatives for each of the components used in our ﬁnal
model have been studied, and a detail comparison can be
found in Section 4.1.
3.3. Use cases for DEXTR
Class-agnostic Instance Segmentation:
One application
of DEXTR is class-agnostic instance segmentation. In this
task, we click on the extreme points of an object in an image, and we obtain a mask prediction for it. The selected
object can be of any class, as our method is class agnostic.
In Section 4.2, we compare our method with the state
of the art in two different datasets, PASCAL and Grabcut, where we improve current results. We also analyse
the generalization of our method to other datasets and to
unseen categories. We conclude positive results in both experiments, the performance drop for testing in a different
dataset than the one used for training is very small and the
result achieved is the same whether the class has been seen
during training or not.
Annotation:
The common annotation pipeline for segmentation can also be assisted by DEXTR. In this framework, instead of detailed polygon labels, the workload of
the annotator is reduced to only providing the extreme
points of an object, and DEXTR produces the desired segmentation. In this pipeline, the labelling cost is reduced by
a factor of 10 (from 79s needed for a mask, to 7.2 seconds
needed for the extreme clicks) .
In Section 4.3, the quality of the produced masks are validated for two tasks: instance segmentation, and semantic
segmentation. We show that our method produces very accurate masks, on par with the ground-truth annotation in
terms of quality, with much less effort.
Video Object Segmentation:
DEXTR can also improve
the pipeline of video object segmentation.
We focus on
the semi-supervised setting where methods use one or more
masks as inputs to produce the segmentation of the whole
video. Our aim is to replace the costly per pixel annotation masks by the masks produced by our algorithm after
the user has selected the extreme points of a certain object,
and re-train strongly supervised state-of-the-art video segmentation architectures.
In Section 4.4, we provide results on two different
dataset, DAVIS-2016 and DAVIS-2017. We conclude that
state-of-the-art results can be achieved reducing the annotation time by a factor of 5. Moreover, for almost any speciﬁc
annotation budget, better results can also be obtained using
a higher number of masks produced by our algorithm rather
than expensive per-pixel annotated masks.
Interactive User Input:
The pipeline of DEXTR can
also be used in the frame of interactive segmentation from
points . We work on the case where the user labels
the extreme points of an object, but is nevertheless not satisﬁed with the obtained results. The natural thing to do in
such case is to annotate an extra point (not extreme) in the
region that segmentation fails, and expect for a reﬁned result. Given the nature of extreme points, we expect that the
extra point also lies in the boundary of the object.
To simulate such behaviour, we ﬁrst train DEXTR on a
ﬁrst split of a training set of images, using the 4 extreme
points as input. For the extra point, we infer on an image of
the second split of the training set, and compute the accuracy of its segmentation. If the segmentation is accurate (eg.
IoU ≥0.8), the image is excluded from further processing.
In the opposite case (IoU < 0.8), we select a ﬁfth point in
the erroneous area. To simulate human behaviour, we perturbate its location and we train the network with 5 points
as input. Results presented in Section 4.5 indicate that it is
possible to recover performance on the difﬁcult examples,
by using such interactive user input.
3.4. Implementation Details
Automatic Generation of Extreme Points:
In , extreme points were obtained by crowd-sourcing.
we train our network by taking advantage of already existing segmentation datasets , by recovering the extreme points from the masks of already annotated objects.
In order to simulate human behaviour, the recovered points
are jittered by 10 pixels. Automatically obtained extreme
points provide us with sufﬁcient amount of data (∼25k and
∼600k objects for PASCAL and COCO, respectively). The
extreme points are provided as an extra channel to the input
of the CNN, in the form of Gaussians with standard deviation of 10 pixels. To focus on a particular object, we crop
the input from the extreme points, and relax by 50 pixels on
each side, for increasing context. In Section 4.1 we show
that DEXTR segments accurately with both manually and
automatically obtained extreme points.
Training and testing details:
DEXTR is trained on PAS-
CAL for 100 epochs. For several experiments where we
need to train on a different dataset, we train on COCO training set for 10 epochs. The learning rate is set to 0.0025,
with momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 5 ∗10−4. A
mini-batch of 5 objects is used for PASCAL, whereas for
COCO, due to the large size of the database we train on 4
GPUs with an effective batch size of 20. Training on PAS-
CAL takes approximately 20 hours on a Titan-X GPU, and
5 days on COCO. Testing the network is fast, requiring 80
ms for a forward pass.
4. Experimental Validation
Our method is extensively validated in ﬁve publicly
available databases: PASCAL , COCO , DAVIS-
2016 , DAVIS-2017 , and Grabcut , for various
experimental setups that show its applicability and generalization capabilities. We use DEXTR trained on PASCAL
(augmented by the labels of SBD following the common practice - 10582 images), unless indicated differently.
We perform an ablation study to separately validate all components of our method in Section 4.1. Class-agnostic instance segmentation experiments from extreme points are
presented in Section 4.2, whereas 4.3 and 4.4 are dedicated
to how DEXTR contributes to labelling and video object
segmentation pipelines, respectively. Section 4.5 presents
our method as an interactive segmenter from points.
4.1. Ablation Study
The following sections show a number of ablation experiments in the context of class agnostic instance segmentation to quantify the importance of each of the components
of our algorithm and to justify various design choices. Section 4.1 summarizes these results.
Architecture:
We use ResNet-101 as the backbone architecture, and compare two different alternatives.
ﬁrst one is a straightforward fully convolutional architecture
(Deeplab-v2 ) where the fully connected and the two last
max pooling layers are removed; and the last two stages are
substituted with dilated (or atrous) convolutions. This keeps
the size of the prediction in reasonable limits (8× lower than
the input). We also tested a region-based architecture, similar to Mask R-CNN , with a re-implementation of the
ResNet-101-C4 variant , which uses the ﬁfth stage (C5)
for regressing a mask from the Region of Interest (RoI), together with the re-implementation of the RoI-Align layer.
For more details please refer to . In the ﬁrst architecture,
the input is a patch around the object of interest, whereas in
the latter the input is the full image, and cropping is applied
at the RoI-Align stage. Deeplab-v2 performs +3.9% better.
We conclude that the output resolution of ResNet-101-C4
(28×28) is inadequate for the level of detail that we target.
Bounding boxes vs. extreme points:
We study the performance of Deeplab-v2 as a foreground-background classiﬁer given a bounding box compared to the extreme points.
In the ﬁrst case, the input of the network is the cropped image around the bounding box plus a margin of 50 pixels
to include some context. In the second case, the extreme
points are fed together in a fourth channel of the input to
guide the segmentation. Including extreme points to the input increases performance by +12.9%, which suggest that
they are a source of very valuable information that the network uses additionally to guide its output.
For the task of class-agnostic instance segmentation, we compare two binary losses, i.e. the standard crossentropy and a class-balanced version of it, where the loss
for each class in the batch is weighted by its inverse frequency. Class-balancing the loss gives more importance to
the less frequent classes, and has been successful in various
tasks . DEXTR also performs better when the loss is
balanced, leading to a performance boost of +3.3%.
Full image vs. crops:
Having the extreme points annotated allows for focusing on speciﬁc regions in an image,
cropped by the limits speciﬁed by them. In this experiment,
we compare how beneﬁcial it is to focus on the region of
interest, rather than processing the entire image. To this
end, we crop the region surrounded by the extreme points,
relaxing it by 50 pixel for increased context and compare
it against the full image case. We notice that cropping increases performance by +7.9%, and is especially beneﬁcial
for the small objects of the database. Similar ﬁndings have
been reported for video object segmentation by .
Atrous spatial pyramid (ASPP) vs. pyramid scene parsing (PSP) module:
Pyramid Scene Parsing Network 
steps on the Deeplab-v2 architecture to further improve
results on Semantic Segmentation. Their main contribution
was a global context module (PSP) that employs global features together with the local features for dense prediction.
We compare the two network heads, the original ASPP ,
and the recent PSP module for our task. The increased
results of the PSP module (+2.3%) indicate that the PSP
module builds a global context that is also useful in our case.
Manually vs. automatically generated extreme points:
The authors of perform a large-scale crowd sourcing
to obtain extreme point annotations. In our work, instead,
we obtain the extreme points automatically by adding some
random noise around the true extreme points obtained from
the ground truth. We analyse the differences, by comparing
our automatic sources of extreme points to the manual ones
provided by the authors of . Since annotated the
training set of PASCAL, we use DEXTR trained on COCO
and evaluate on the same labelled set of objects. Table 1
shows that the manual extreme points lead to -5% performance, which we interpret as them being less accurate with
respect to the ground-truth segmentation. To back up this
reasoning and put the numbers in context, the last column
shows the best result an oracle could get by segmenting
within the bounding box deﬁned by the manual extreme
Ours Manual
Ours Automatic
Oracle Manual
Table 1. Manually vs. automatically annotated extreme
points in PASCAL: IoU for manually and ground truth generated
extreme points.
Manual extreme points
Automatic extreme points
Table 2. Manually vs. automatically generated extreme points:
Comparison in all the frames of DAVIS-2016. Metrics are region
accuracy (J ), contour accuracy (F), and their mean.
points. The upper bound is -5.6% below the perfect result,
which aligns well with the drop DEXTR suffers.
In a second experiment in this direction, different annotators marked all video sequences of DAVIS-2016 
with extreme points. Annotation time (average of all 1376
frames of the validation set) was 7.5 seconds per frame, in
line with (7.2 s. per image). Table 2 shows the results of
DEXTR when tested on DAVIS-2016 from manual vs. automatic extreme points. DEXTR results in very high quality
results and no signiﬁcant differences are observed between
the two types of extreme points. Please note that no DAVIS
image was used for training the models.
Distance-map vs. ﬁxed points:
Recent works that focus on segmentation from (not-extreme) points
use the distance transform of positive and negative annotations as an input to the network, in order to guide the segmentation. We compare with their approach by substituting
the ﬁxed Gaussians to the distance transform of the extreme
points. We notice a performance drop of -1.3%, suggesting that using ﬁxed Gaussians centered on the points is a
better representation when coupled with extreme points. In
Section 4.2 we compare to such approaches, showing that
extreme points provide a much richer representation than
arbitrary points on the foreground and the background of an
Table 3 summarizes the main ablated results
that have been discussed above, analizing all components.
Table 4 illustrates the building blocks that lead to the best
performing variant for our method. All in all, we start by
a Deeplab-v2 base model working on bounding boxes. We
add the PSP module (+2.3%), the extreme points in the input of the network (+12.9%), and more annotated data from
SBD (+1%) to reach maximum accuracy. The improvement
comes mostly because of the guidance from extreme points,
which highlights their importance for the task.
Component #1
Component #2
Gain in IoU
Region-based
Deeplab-v2
Bounding Boxes
Extreme Points
Cross Entropy
Balanced BCE
Full Image
Crop on Object
Fixed Points
Distance Map
Table 3. Ablation study: Comparison between choices in various
components of our system. Mean IoU over all objets in PASCAL
VOC 2012 val set.
Deeplab-v2
+ Extreme Points
+ SBD data (Ours)
Table 4. Ablation study: Building performance in PASCAL VOC
2012 val set.
Sharpmask bounding box
Sharpmask upper bound
Extreme clicks 
Table 5. Comparison in PASCAL: IoU when using automatic and
manually generated extreme points against class-agnostic instance
segmentation methods.
4.2. Class-agnostic Instance Segmentation
Comparison to the State of the Art in PASCAL:
compare our method against state-of-the-art class-agnostic
instance segmentation methods in Table 5. When we compare to extreme clicks using thier manual extreme
points, DEXTR gets a boost of +6.5%. We then compare
to two other baselines using SharpMask , the state-ofthe-art object proposal technique. In the ﬁrst row, we evaluate the proposal (out of 1000) whose bounding box best
overlaps with the ground-truth bounding box, mimicking a
naive algorithm to segment boxes from proposals. The second row shows the upper bound of SharpMask, that is, the
best proposal against the ground truth, selected by an oracle. Both approaches are well below our result (-12.0% and
-7.1%). Figure 3 illustrates some results obtained by our
method on PASCAL.
Comparison to the State of the Art in Grabcut:
use our best PASCAL model and we test it in the Grabcut dataset. This dataset contains 50 images each one
with one annotated object from various categories, some of
them not belonging to any of the PASCAL ones (banana,
scissors, kangaroo, etc.). The evaluation metric is the error rate: the percentage of misclassiﬁed pixels within the
bounding boxes provided by . Our method achieves the
lowest error rate by 1.1% (32% relative improvement).
Error Rate (%)
GrabCut 
KernelCut 
OneCut 
Extreme clicks 
BoxPrior 
MILCut 
DeepGC 
Table 6. Comparison in Grabcut: Error rates compared to the
state of the art techniques.
COCO MVal w/o PASCAL classes
categories
COCO MVal only PASCAL classes
generalization
Table 7. Generalization to unseen classes and across datasets:
Intersection over union results of training in one setup and testing
on another one. MVal stands for mini-val.
Generalization to unseen categories and across datasets:
Table 7 shows our results when trained on a certain
dataset/categories (ﬁrst column) and tested in another one
(second column). In order to make a fair comparison, all
the models are pre-trained only on Imagenet for image
labeling and trained on the speciﬁed dataset for categoryagnostic instance segmentation. The ﬁrst two rows show
that our technique is indeed class agnostic, since the model
trained on PASCAL achieves roughly the same performance
in COCO mini-val regardless of the categories tested. The
remaining rows shows that DEXTR also generalizes very
well across datasets, since differences are around only 2%
of performance drop.
4.3. Annotation
As seen in the previous section, DEXTR is able to generate high-quality class-agnostic masks given only extreme
points as input. The resulting masks can in turn be used to
train other deep architectures for other tasks or datasets, that
is, we use extreme points as a way to annotate dataset with
object segmentations. In this experiment we use the resulting masks to train for two different tasks: (a) class-agnostic
instance segmentation, and (b) semantic segmentation. We
compare to the full ground-truth supervision given a certain
annotation budget or a certain number of annotated images.
We work on PASCAL, and since we need to generate masks
for the training set, we use DEXTR trained on COCO.
Class-agnostic
Segmentation:
DEXTR on COCO and infer the model on the objects
of PASCAL train set.
We train a different instance of
our method on either the generated annotations or on
Figure 3. Qualitative results by DEXTR on PASCAL: Each instance with the input extreme points and the resulting mask overlayed.
the original ground-truth masks.
Figure 4.3 compares
the performance on PASCAL validation as a function
of annotation budget (time to label the training data, i.e.
79s for segmentation masks and 7.2 seconds for extreme
points) (left), and the number of annotated objects instances
The results trained on our masks are signiﬁcantly better than training from the ground truth on the same budget
(e.g. 70% IoU with 9-minute annotation vs. 1h50, or 82%
IoU for 1 hour annotation vs. 62.5%). Surprisingly, the results trained from our masks are slightly better even when
training with the same number of images. We hypothesize
that the more intricate details of the ground-truth annotations, which are lost on our masks, might make the training
Annotation budget (hours)
Ground truth
Number of training images
Ground truth
Figure 4. Quality vs. annotation budget: IoU for instance segmentation trained on our masks or the ground truth, as a function
of annotation budget (left) and number of training images (right).
Semantic Segmentation:
In order to evaluate the usefulness of our produced masks for other tasks, we move to
semantic segmentation. We sort the results by annotation
budget and number of images used for training. We use
Deeplab with a ResNet-101 backbone, and the PSP 
head as the semantic segmentation network. To keep training time manageable, we do not use multi-scale training/testing. We report results on the PASCAL VOC 2012
val set, and measure performance by the standard mIoU
measure (IoU per-category and averaged over categories).
Figure 4.3 shows the results, with respect to annotation
budget and number of images as before. For completeness,
we also report the results of PSPNet ( ) by evaluating
the model provided by the authors (pre-trained on COCO,
with multi-scale training and testing). As before, DEXTR’s
annotations are signiﬁcantly more effective given a certain
budget, and reach practically the same performance than
ground truth when given the same number of annotations.
Annotation budget (hours)
Number of annotated images
Figure 5. Quality vs. annotation budget: mIoU for semantic segmentation trained on our masks or the input, as a function of annotation budget (left) and the number of annotated images (right).
4.4. Video Object Segmentation
We test DEXTR also for Video Object Segmentation
on the DAVIS datasets . We focus on the semisupervised setting i.e. the mask in one or more frames of
the object that we want to segment is given as input to the
algorithm, and as before we will compare the results obtained from the masks obtained by DEXTR or the ground
truth having a certain annotation budget. We assume that
the annotation time of the DAVIS masks is the same than
that of COCO (79 seconds per instance), despite the
former are signiﬁcantly more accurate.
We use OSVOS , as a state-of-the-art semi-supervised
video object segmentation technique, which heavily relies
on the appearance of the annotated frame, and their code is
publicly available. Figure 6 (left) shows the performance
of OSVOS in DAVIS-2016 trained on the ground truth
) or the masks generated by DEXTR from extreme points (
). We reach the same performance as
using one ground-truth annotated mask with an annotation
Trained on
4 points-all
5 points + OHEM
Table 8. Interactive Object Segmentation Evaluation: Average
IoU on difﬁcult cases of PASCAL VOC 2012 validation dataset.
budget 5 times smaller. Once we train with more than one
ground-truth annotated mask, however, even though we can
generate roughly ten times more masks, we cannot achieve
the same accuracy. We believe this is so because DAVIS-
2016 sequences have more than one semantic instance per
mask while we only annotate a global set of extreme points,
which confuses DEXTR.
To corroborate this intuition, we perform the same experiment in DAVIS-2017 , where every mask contains
only one semantic instance. Figure 6 (right) shows that the
performance gap with respect to using the full ground-truth
mask is much smaller than in DAVIS-2016. Overall, we
conclude that DEXTR is also very efﬁcient to reduce annotation time in video object segmentation.
Annotation budget (seconds)
Annotation budget (seconds)
Figure 6. Quality vs. annotation budget in Video Object Segmentation: OSVOS performance when trained from our masks
or the ground truth, on DAVIS-2016 (left) and on DAVIS-2017
4.5. Interactive Object Segmentation
DEXTR for Interactive Segmentation:
We experiment
on PASCAL VOC 2012 for interactive object segmentation.
We split the training dataset into two equal splits. Initially,
we train DEXTR on the ﬁrst split and test on the second.
We then focus on the objects with inaccurate segmentations,
i.e. IoU<0.8, to simulate the ones on which a human would
mark a ﬁfth point on the boundary with the highest error.
From the perspective of network training, this can be interpreted as Online Hard Example Mining (OHEM) ,
where one only needs to back-propagate gradients for the
training examples that lead to the highest losses. Results
are presented in Table 8.
We evaluate performance on PASCAL validation set.
We ﬁrst select the objects that lead to poor performance
(IoU<0.8) when applying the network trained on the ﬁrst
split. We report the average IoU on them (338 objects -
Using the network trained further on the hard examples,
with a ﬁfth boundary point, performance increases to 73.2%
(“5 points + OHEM”).
Since the increased performance is partially due to the
Number of Clicks
IoU @ 4 clicks
PASCAL @85%
Grabcut@90%
GraphCut 
Geodesic matting 
Random Walker 
RIS-Net 
Table 9. PASCAL and Grabcut evaluation: Comparison to interactive segmentation methods in terms of number of clicks to reach
a certain quality and in terms of quality at 4 click.
increased amount of training data (ﬁrst split + hard examples of the second split), we need to disentangle the two
sources of performance gain. To this end, we train DEXTR
on 4 points, by appending the hard examples of the second
split to the ﬁrst split of our training set (“4 points-all”).
Results suggest that DEXTR learns to handle more input information given interactively in the form of boundary
clicks, to improve results of poorly segmented difﬁcult examples (+4.2%).
Interestingly, OHEM is a crucial component for improving performance: without it the network does not focus on
the difﬁcult examples (only 11% of objects of the second
training split are hard examples), and fails to improve on
the erroneous region indicated by the ﬁfth boundary point
(“5 points”).
Comparison to the State of the Art:
To illustrate the
importance of features generated from extreme points, we
compare against the state-of-the-art methods for interactive
segmentation, by considering extreme points as 4 clicks.
Table 9 shows the number of clicks that each method needs
to reach the performance of DEXTR, as well as their performance when the input is 4 clicks, in PASCAL and Grabcut.
DEXTR reaches about 10% higher performance at 4 clicks
than the best competing method. This further demonstrates
the enhanced performance of the CNN, when guided by extreme points.
5. Conclusions
We have presented DEXTR, a CNN architecture for
semi-automatic segmentation that turns extreme clicking
annotations into accurate object masks. In an ablated study,
we show how information from extreme clicking is an crucial ingredient for accurate segmentation, and that we can
emply already existing datasets to automatically acquire extreme points. The applicability of our method is illustrated
from a series of experiments regarding semantic, instance,
video, and interactive segmentation in 5 different datasets.
DEXTR can also be used as an accurate and efﬁcient object mask annotation tool, reducing the labelling costs by a
factor of 10.
Acknowledgements:
Research funded by the EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon
2020 (Grant No.
645331, EurEyeCase), and the Swiss
Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI, Grant
No. 19015.1 PFES-ES, NeGeVA). We gratefully acknowledge support by armasuisse, thank NVidia Corporation
for donating the GPUs used in this project, and Dim P.
Papadopoulos for sharing the resources of with us.