5Growth: AI-driven 5G for
Automation in Vertical Industries
Chrysa Papagianni∗, Josep Mangues-Bafalluy†, Pedro Bermudez‡, Sokratis Barmpounakis§,
Danny De Vleeschauwer∗, Juan Brenes¶, Engin Zeydan†, Claudio Casetti∥, Carlos Guimar˜aes∗∗,
Pablo Murillo‡, Andres Garcia-Saavedra††, Daniel Corujo‡‡, Teresa Pepe
∗Nokia Bell Labs, †Centre Tecnol`ogic de Telecomunicacions de Catalunya, ‡Telcaria,
§National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, ¶Nextworks, ∥Politecnico di Torino, ∗∗Universidad Carlos III de Madrid,
††NEC Laboratories Europe, ‡‡Instituto de Telecomunicac¸˜oes e Universidade de Aveiro,
xEricsson Research
Abstract—Spurred by a growing demand for higher-quality
mobile services in vertical industries, 5G is integrating a rich
set of technologies, traditionally alien to the telco ecosystem,
such as machine learning or cloud computing. Despite the initial
steps taken in prior research projects in Europe and beyond,
additional innovations are needed to support vertical use cases.
This is the objective of the 5Growth project: automate vertical
support through (i) a portal connecting verticals to 5G platforms
(a.k.a. vertical slicer), a multi-domain service orchestrator and
a resource management layer, (ii) closed-loop machine-learningbased Service Level Agreement (SLA) control, and (iii) end-toend optimization. In this paper, we introduce a set of key 5Growth
innovations supporting radio slicing, enhanced monitoring and
analytics and integration of machine learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
In addition to performance and radio-related enhancements,
5G has also integrated mechanisms from other technological
domains such as cloud computing, machine learning (ML)
and service-based architectures. Such integration, targets addressing the highly heterogeneous requirements posed by the
vertical industries. 5G system integration becomes paramount
to operators, manufacturers and service providers, second
only to the need for validation and experimentation alongside the verticals themselves. Projects such as H2020 5G-
TRANSFORMER ( have provided
decisive ﬁrst steps towards that direction, exploiting technologies such as Network Function Virtualization (NFV),
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) and advances in service
orchestration, to partition the network in slices addressing different communication needs from disparate vertical industries.
Despite this important initial step, there is also the need to
assess the capability of such technologies to meet not only
key performance targets directly at verticals’ premises, but
also to support automation and optimisation of end-to-end
connectivity solutions. This is the objective of the 5Growth
project which, besides deploying such capabilities in advanced
ﬁeld trials alongside verticals, adds extensions and innovative capabilities to 5G platforms. In this paper, we present
design considerations and preliminary results for a key set of
such innovations and associated extensions, including network
monitoring and analytics, slicing at the radio access network,
machine-learning-based resource allocation and user proﬁling
supporting smart orchestration.
Fig. 1: 5Growth Baseline Architecture
II. BASELINE PLATFORM
The 5Growth architecture, depicted in Fig. 1, builds onto
the 5G-TRANSFORMER one, enhancing its usability,
ﬂexibility, automation, performance and security. It enables
automated deployment and uniform operation of slices, customized to support the requirements of the vertical industries
in the project, spanning from Industry 4.0 to Transportation
and Energy. The architecture is composed of three core
building blocks: 5Growth Vertical Slicer (5Gr-VS), 5Growth
Service Orchestrator (5Gr-SO) and 5Growth Resource Layer
(5Gr-RL), in addition to monitoring and decision automation
components supporting the former blocks.
A. 5Growth Vertical Slicer (5Gr-VS)
The 5Gr-VS, extending the 5G-TRANSFORMER Vertical Slicer, acts as a one-stop-shop entry point for verticals
requesting the provisioning and management of services,
through a simpliﬁed and vertical-oriented northbound interface
(NBI) with the vertical operations/business support system
(OSS/BSS).
Through this interface, verical service requests can be
submitted, by initially selecting a “template” from the catalog
of Vertical Service Blueprints (VSBs) to be used as the basis
for service deﬁnition. Then, verticals can complete service
speciﬁcation, by providing a number of service-oriented parameters that customize the desired service instance. The goal
is to enable the verticals to focus on the requirements, the highlevel components and the logic of their service applications
and their inter-relation. The actual deployment of all networkrelated components and underlying resource management is
handled by the lower layers of the 5Growth stack. The ﬁnal
speciﬁcation of the vertical service, provided by the vertical,
is formally expressed through a Vertical Service Descriptor
(VSD), which is composed of the VSB annotated with userdeﬁned parameters.
Afterwards, the 5Gr-VS handles the requests for vertical
services by internally managing the mapping and translation
between the requested vertical services (Vertical Service Instances - VSIs) and a number of network slices (Network Slice
Instances – NSIs). The slices are created on-demand by the
5Growth Service Orchestrator that provisions the underlying
NFV network services (NFV-NSs).
B. 5Growth Service Orchestrator (5Gr-SO)
The 5Gr-SO, inherited from the 5G-TRANSFORMER Service Orchestrator, provides both network service and resource
orchestration capabilities to support:
• End-to-end
orchestration
NFV-Network
(NFV-NS), by mapping them across a single or multiple
administrative domains based on service requirements
and availability of the services/resources offered by each
of the domains;
• Life-cycle management (including on-boarding, instantiation, update, scaling, termination, etc.).
In addition, the 5Gr-SO offers to the 5Gr-VS an integrated
view of the services, which may be running in the local or in
peer administrative domains.
The 5Gr-SO receives the service requirements from the 5Gr-
VS via its northbound interface in the form of Network Service
Descriptors (NSD), expressing a NFV-NS as chains of Virtual
Network Function (VNF) components and their individual
requirements. Additional components (e.g., monitoring jobs,
scaling rules) may be included in the request. Internally,
the 5Gr-SO decides (i) the optimal service (de)composition
for the whole NFV-NS based on service availability as well
as the capabilities exposed by the local and remote peering
domains, (ii) the optimal placement of VNFs and vertical
applications (VAs) along with the optimal deployment of
virtual links connecting VNFs, through mapping operations
over the topology exposed by the local 5Gr-RL. The 5Gr-SO
is responsible for requesting network services from federated
5Gr-SOs. The 5Gr-SO works on an abstract view of the
infrastructure provided by the 5Growth Resource Layer, where
the complexity of the transport and radio mobile networks is
lightened by exposing logical links connecting the data-centers
resources dedicated for vertical applications. Additionally,
as already mentioned, the 5Gr-SO performs the life-cycle
management of the whole NFV-NS, including nested NSs and
VNFs composing the NFV-NS. Finally, it performs monitoring
tasks and SLA management, to enable the triggering of
self-adaptation actions (e.g., healing and scaling operations),
thereby preventing service performance degradation or SLA
violations.
C. 5Growth Resource Layer (5Gr-RL)
The 5Growth Resource Layer (5Gr-RL), which is inherited
from 5G-TRANSFORMER Mobile Transport and computing
Platform (5GT-MTP), manages all the complexity of the
transport, mobile, storage and compute resources, providing,
besides a suitable abstraction, also the conﬁguration of such
resources. Moreover, the 5Gr-RL decouples the transport,
mobile and data center resources to assure that each of them
could be owned and managed by different business actors.
Such decoupling allows a single 5Gr-RL to integrate several
VIMs and WIMs from different technological domains and
exposes a uniﬁed view to the upper layers.
III. ARCHITECTURE INNOVATIONS
The main architectural innovations of 5Growth focus on
two main issues, namely RAN support (including the interface exposed to the vertical industries and implications for
other architectural blocks) and the addition of intelligence to
support decision making, including the required monitoring
framework.
A. Radio Access Network support in Vertical Slicer
A typical vertical service (VS) is transversal to the operator’s network since it needs to connect the end-users with the
service logic arbitrarily placed at any place of the network. For
this reason, end-to-end network slices supporting VSs typically
span from the RAN to the core. These two segments have
different characteristics and the way to model and allocate
resources is radically different. On the one side, the core segment of the network slice is usually deployed using a number
of NSs that deﬁne the Network Functions and the internal
connection among them. On the other side, a speciﬁc set of
network resources are needed at the access segment of the slice
that are tightly coupled to the mobile trafﬁc proﬁle of the VS.
The decomposition of network slices into network services
used in the core segment has already been addressed in the 5G-
TRANSFORMER project, but the modeling and conﬁguration
of the access segment were out of the scope of the project.
In 5Growth we propose extensions to enable network slices
encompassing core and access networks to support vertical
services with end-to-end QoS and SLA guarantees.
The cornerstone for all the required extensions is the inclusion of mobile trafﬁc proﬁles and access network information
as part of the Network Slice Template information model. This
approach is fully aligned with the 3GPP approach established
in . The idea is to include the parameters that characterize
the speciﬁc service type (i.e. eMBB, URLLC, MTC) and some
common parameters such as the coverage area, the required
latency, etc. In this model, network slices are also composed
by a set of Network Slice Subnets which are in turn composed
by Network Services. This core and access combined network
slicing approach renders the demarcation border between core
and access segment functionalities more ﬂexible, and even
allows to move the traditional 5G-Core network functions
towards the access for on-premises deployment.
Fig. 2: 5Growth AI/ML workﬂow
In order to proﬁt from this enhanced network slice templates, the 5G-TRANSFORMER’s VSB and VSD information
models have also been extended. On the one hand, the new
VSB shall include a parameter to establish the desired service
type and some high-level parameters to determine the default
range that shall be guaranteed by the network slice, e.g.,
service area dimension. On the other hand, the VSD shall also
be extended to allow to override the default values established
for each speciﬁc service type parameter such as, e.g., the
expected data rate. 5Gr-VS will translate these new VSBs
and VSDs into a network slice containing the access segment
resources and the network services required to support the
vertical service. From an architectural perspective, 5Gr-VS can
rely on the interface between 5GT-VS and the 5GT-SO for
life-cycle management of the network services, but extensions
are required in order to conﬁgure the radio access resources,
using the information available from the network slice. With
this regard, the interface between the 5Gr-RL and the 5Gr-SO
will be an evolution of 5G-TRANSFORMER’s 5GT-SO-MTP
interface since the 5Gr-RL should now expose an abstraction
of the RAN infrastructure and provide RAN control primitives.
B. AI/ML Platform (5Gr-AIMLP)
3GPP has acknowledged the signiﬁcance of data analytics
for future cellular systems. In particular, a new function, called
NetWork Data Analytics Function (NWDAF) has been introduced in . NWDAF is responsible for providing network
analysis information upon request from network functions,
e.g., assisting the Policy Control Function (PCF) in selecting
trafﬁc steering policies. 5Growth is generalizing this idea by
extending 5G-TRANSFORMER to integrate NWDAF concepts and provide an AI/ML platform for smarter control .
A workﬂow of the platform is depicted in Fig. 2, with
two main functional blocks assisting the 5Growth platform
(Fig. 1): the 5Gr-AIMLP—assisting in functions common to
many AI/ML schemes, such as neural network ﬁtting—and the
5Growth Vertical-Oriented Monitoring System (5Gr-VOMS,
see subsection §III-C). This ﬁgure explains how the typical
data engineering pipeline layers have been mapped to the
5Growth architecture and provides some examples of tools
for each layer. Each decision-making entity (agent, hereafter)
in the 5Growth management platform is ultimately the one
single entity that executes the model. For instance, 5Gr-SO
may need a composite of neural networks to approximate the
relationship between service and resource requirements or
to forecast demands . The basic workﬂow for both classiﬁcation/inference and reinforcement learning is the following:
0. The 5Gr-AIMLP exposes a catalog of models that can be
tuned and chained to compose more complex models.
1. The agent describes the model by selecting (a composite
of) preset models, their parameters for the problem at
hand, as well as information on how to maintain the
model and what monitoring probes are required.
2. The 5Gr-AIMLP requests 5Gr-VOMS orchestration of
monitoring probes.
3. In the case of reinforcement learning, the agent requests
5Gr-VOMS contextual information (e.g., the current number of users) and uses it as an input of the trained model.
In turn, the 5Gr-AIMLP uses such contextual information
for the optimization of the model parameters.
4. When the conditions for collecting data samples are met,
the 5Gr-AIMLP requests and feeds the data into its ﬁtting
function to optimize the model parameters.
5. The optimized model (i.e., its parameters) is passed
down to the agent for online execution by exploiting
performance metrics coming from 5Gr-VOMS.
In the case of reinforcement learning, the agent is also responsible for integrating on-policy (e.g., SARSA) or off-policy
(e.g., Q-learning) training methods. Two speciﬁc examples
leveraging on 5Gr-AIMPL are introduced in section §IV.
C. Vertical-oriented Monitoring System (5Gr-VoMS)
The Vertical-oriented Monitoring System (5Gr-VoMS) is
an extension of 5G-TRANSFORMER monitoring platform
(5GT-MP), designed with the objective of supporting an heterogeneous set of services and technological domains; and,
likewise, novel innovations devoted to enhancing end-to-end
reliability (via self-healing and auto-scaling), vertical controlloops stability, and analytical features, such as forecasting and
anomaly detection. To this end, 5GT-MP must be extended to
include additional functionalities such as log aggregation, a
scalable data distribution system and dynamic probe reconﬁguration . Elastic stack is included in the 5Gr-VoMS architecture to support log aggregation, Kafka distributed streaming
platform as scalable data distribution system and Elastic Beats
which will, together with Prometheus node exporter, assist to
the dynamic reconﬁguration of the monitoring probes.
Architecture: Fig. 3 describes the overall 5Gr-VoMS which includes four building blocks. The Virtual Machine (VM), where
the Monitoring Agent is installed, the Kafka Message Queues
(MQ), and the Monitoring Platform itself which includes most
of the components related to the monitoring.
5Gr-VoMS allows using two types of time series database
(TSDB) which are built speciﬁcally to handle metrics and
events or measurements with time stamps. It is up to the
verticals to choose which one to use, Prometheus or Elastic
Search stack. Graphana and Kibana are visualization tools that
allow the display and formatting of metric data obtained with
ElasticSearch (for Kibana) and Prometheus (for Graphana).
Fig. 3: 5Growth VoMS Architecture
The Monitoring Agent is responsible for collection, initial
analysis and subsequent delivery of the metrics and logs in
5Gr-RL, both network and computing resources, which could
be virtual or physical. There are several types of probes such as
Prometheus exporters, Beats monitoring probes, etc. In Fig. 3,
the Monitoring Agent collects the metrics and log data and
pushes them to the Kafka MQ. On the other side, Elastic
Search is reading the MQ using Logstash. The Prometheus MQ
agent acts as an intermediary between Kafka and Prometheus.
Logs and metrics are extracted and placed in the TSDB once
they appear in the MQ.
MQs are used as an interface for information exchange
between different technologies and components of the architecture. In this way, internal and external components (e.g.,
federated domains, etc.) can read/publish information in a
common way, avoiding the deﬁnition, creation, and implementation of new APIs. If needed, creating new MQs and add them
to the stack is straightforward and does not increase the complexity of the architecture. Fig. 3 shows the case of VMs. The
Conﬁg Manager conﬁgures the Monitoring Agent. Finally, for
integration purposes, Prometheus and Elastic Search have an
API to provide information to other modules such as Anomaly
Detection, Forecasting and Inference or Alert Manager.
Preliminary Results: This subsection describes a set of experiments that have been performed with the purpose of validating
5Gr-VoMS innovations. Speciﬁcally, they target the evaluation
of the scalability of the main component introduced to the
architecture, the Kafka MQ. The experiments are performed
instantiating the different components of the 5G-VoMS in a
Docker container. Furthermore, an external VM containing
the Berserker tool is connected to the VoMS through the
Kafka message queue. This tool allows generating monitoring
information messages at variable rates, which in this case is
used to emulate monitoring probes. The hardware equipment
is provided with 8 CPU cores, 8GB RAM and 100GB of disk.
The Kafka Java VM heap memory is 4GB.
Fig. 4 shows the number of events received from Kafka’s
MQ by Logstash, when the Berseker tool is conﬁgured to
generate monitoring load at a rate of 102 and 105 messages/s,
respectively. The graphs are obtained using the Kibana visualization tool from the VoMS. In Fig. 4a, it can be observed
that the Kafka component is able to maintain the rate of 100
messages processed per second. On the other hand, in Fig.
4b it can be appreciated that, when the number of messages
generated is 105 messages/s , the maximum number of mes-
(a) Load equal to 102 messages/s
(b) Load equal to 105 messages/s
Fig. 4: Number of Kafka MQ events as received by Logstash.
Fig. 5: Latency associated to each Logstash event.
sages that Kafka is able to process oscillates around 60000
messages/s. This result demonstrates the high scalability of
the Kafka message queue, given that this scenario would be
equivalent to a scenario where 60000 probes are publishing
monitoring information at a pace of one message per second.
Furthermore, Fig. 5 shows the latency of each event processed by Logstash when the load is equal to 105 messages/s,
which is approximately constant at around 0.18 ms. From
this result, it can be concluded that even though the Kafka
MQ has reached its performance saturation point, the rest
of components of the architecture that process the events
generated by Kafka (in this case, Logstash), do not experiment
performance degradation, validating the platform’s scalability.
IV. SMART ORCHESTRATION AND CONTROL
Deployment of the requested NFV-NS across a single or
multiple federated domains, is a two-step process in 5Growth.
Each step bases its decisions on a different abstract view of
the underlying infrastructure.
1) The 5Gr-SO, upon receiving the request from the 5Gr-VS,
decides upon the optimal NFV-NS decomposition based on
service availability as well as resource capabilities exposed at
the local and other administrative domains. Towards that end,
the 5Gr-SO builds up an abstract view (i.e. annotated topology)
of the federated infrastructure, by exchanging abstract views
(e.g., abstract topologies, computing and storage capabilities)
with other domains and consolidating them with the local view
exposed by the resource layer. The process amounts to NFV-
NS decomposition, as essentially different segments of the
initial NFV-NS graph are mapped to different domains.
2) The 5Gr-SOs of the selected domains within the federation
receive the aforementioned service segments from the 5Gr-SO
initiating the orchestration process, along with the parameters
needed to interconnect the segments of the composite endto-end NFV-NS. For each service segment the corresponding
5Gr-SO is responsible for the placement of its constituent
VNFs at the set of interconnected PoPs within the managed
domain and in-sequence routing through them as prescribed
by the service chain segment. To facilitate this process, each
5Gr-SO retrieves from the local 5Gr-RL a uniform abstraction
of the resources (compute, storage, transport, mobile radio
resources) in the managed domain, at a different level of
abstraction compared to the initial NFV-NS decomposition.
The resulting mappings of the virtual resources to the PoP
level topology are seamlessly pushed from the 5G-RL to
the corresponding controllers, responsible for addressing the
resource allocation problem known as VNF-Forwarding Graph
(VNF-FG) embedding . In the following, we will present
our initial attempt to address the corresponding problem using
ML in the context of 5Growth. Towards intelligent resource
allocation, a Dynamic Proﬁling Mechanism will be used to
extract resource demands for the underlying network components. The resource demands will be eventually used as
input for the 5Growth network optimization solutions (i.e.,
pertaining to resource allocation and scheduling).
A. VN-FG Embedding
The VNF-FG embedding problem is often formulated as
a Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP), tailored to the
speciﬁc objective that is pursued e.g., . The solution
determines the placement of the VNF-FG nodes on the servers
and the mapping of the directed VNF-FG edges on substrate
paths. Since the problem is NP-hard , sub-optimal (meta)
heuristics and approximation algorithms have been devised to
make it computationally tractable, considering that mapping
needs to be addressed in real-time (“online problem”).
Most approaches dealing with the online problem make
decisions based on a snapshot of the residual capacities in
the NFVI observed at request time, and it is usually assumed
that these capacities are known with high precision, while the
(future) evolution of the workloads for in-service (or expiring)
VNF-FGs over time is not considered. The former assumption
is unrealistic given the coarse granularity of the monitoring
information in time, e.g., to keep the corresponding network
overhead low. Moreover, making embedding decisions based
only on a snapshot of the remaining resources at request
time is not optimal over time, as it leads to fragmentation
of the physical resources. What is more, the maximum (or
average) of resources that a VNF-FG may require over its
lifetime is considered, which leads either to over-provisioning
of resources (hence under-utilizing the physical infrastructure
and rejecting incoming requests) or SLA violations.
In such an environment with uncertainty in resource demands and provisioning, reinforcement learning is suited to
tackle the VNF-FG embedding problem. The reinforcement
learning based approach gradually steers the decision-making
process in the right direction based on feedback it gets on how
good the embedding decisions were. Concretely, at the end of
each episode (of e.g., 500 requests), the 5Gr-AIMLP platform
will be called upon to adapt the policy based on the (state,
action, reward) triplets that were observed over that episode.
The approach can be used to address the online problem, supporting decision-making in real (polynomial) time. Each time
a VNF-FG arrives at the 5Gr-RL, the reinforcement learning
agent decides if (admission control) and how (mapping) to
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Fig. 6: Resource violation - request rejection.
embed the VNF-FG in the NFVI. All constraints imposed
by the problem at hand (related to capacity, QoS, etc.) are
translated into rewards (made up of bonuses and penalties);
by rewarding actions that accept the requested VNF-FG and
do not violate constraints while penalizing the ones that do,
the ML-based algorithm gradually learns the best policy.
Preliminary Results: We compare the efﬁciency of the reinforcement learning approach, denoted as ML, to the benchmark baseline MILP using simulations. The MILP uses
as trafﬁc envelope the maximum inbound trafﬁc demand
per service chain. We compare them on the basis of (i)
the VNF-FG request rejection ratio deﬁned as the ratio of
rejected requests divided by the total number of requests,
and (ii) the resource violation ratio deﬁned as the ratio of
the monitoring instances at which any of the resources is
violated to the total number of monitoring instances (thus
implicitly considering SLA violations). We use an event-based
simulator implemented in Java, including an SFC and DC
topology generator. The ND4J (see 
library has been adopted for tensor operations support. We use
CPLEX (branch-and-cut) for our MILP models.
Indicatively, two simulation scenarios are evaluated. For the
ﬁrst simulation scenario, we compare the efﬁciency of the
reinforcement learning approach. Fig. 6a depicts the evolution
of the two metrics for the different approaches. The MLbased approach converges after approximately 1500 requests.
In steady state there are still ﬂuctuations due to the stochastic
nature of the requests and the exploration capability of the RL
approach. MILP has no violations by design but exhibits the
highest rejection ratio as it takes into account the maximum
inbound trafﬁc demand per service chain. The ML-based
approach manages to keep the resource violation ratio low,
without considering capacity constraints for the embedding
problem and having limited information on the infrastructure
resources, as opposed to the MILP that is provided with the
remaining compute and transport capacity in full precision.
For the second scenario, we study the ability of the reinforcement learning-based approach to adapt fast to changing conditions such as a surge in workload/trafﬁc demands.
To assess this aspect, we increase the requested workload
halfway through the simulation; for the 5000 remaining VNF-
FG requests the corresponding inbound trafﬁc is increased
approximately by 30%. Fig. 6b shows that the proposed MLbased approach adapts to this new situation by rejecting more
requests keeping the violation ratio more or less constant
because the rewards were set such that violations are expensive
and rejections are rather cheap. Convergence to the new
“steady state” is fast. The MILP approach is not able to cope
with these changing conditions: it has much more violations
while it was designed to avoid those in the ﬁrst place. After
the load increase, the resource violations in the MILP case
could only be avoided by resetting the trafﬁc envelope for the
incoming requests at the second half of the simulation.
B. Dynamic Proﬁling Mechanism
Dynamic Proﬁling Mechanism (DPM) builds upon the 5Gr-
AIMLP introduced in subsection §III-B to extract network
behavior- and service usage-based UE proﬁles. The DPM,
which extends the functionality of the Context Extraction and
Proﬁling Engine (CEPE) , extracts a set of UE proﬁles,
based on past behavior in terms of UE capabilities, mobility
patterns and resource requirements and forwards them to the
resource allocation and smart orchestration layers of the NFV
Resource Orchestrator (NFV-RO) of 5Gr-SO and the 5Gr-RL.
The goal of DPM is to extract UE proﬁles based on
UE- (user and device), network-, service- and slice-oriented
contextual information, following a step-by-step methodology.
1) Data Management/Collection: Collection of data from
multiple sources based on 5Gr-AIMLP requests to 5Gr-
VOMS, cleaning, ﬁltering, and correlation of data;
2) Application of Divisive Hierarchical Clustering models
and ﬁne-tuning inside the 5Gr-AIMLP platform, in order
to construct classes with similar observations;
3) Application of a predeﬁned set of rules in conjunction with Decision Tree Learning Algorithm 5Gr-AIMLP
models in order to extract the necessary proﬁles; and
4) Extraction of proﬁles and forwarding towards the respective agents for RAN resource allocation, VNF autoscaling
and placement schemes in 5Gr-SO and 5Gr-RL.
The input data comprises diverse datasets collected from
different parts of the network and relating to user data, device
information, service levels and network resources.
We next present an initial evaluation on a RAN resource
allocation approach, where we focus on a single eMBB slice
for simplicity. Our approach extracts a ﬁrst set of proﬁles
based on the past behavior of UEs in terms of network
service type they consume. The evaluation is done with NS-
3 network simulator. In this initial simpliﬁed evaluation, ﬁve
different UE proﬁles were used, consuming different network
services with different UL/DL data rate requirements. Overall,
eight scenarios were executed involving 40 UEs with different
proﬁle distribution probabilities. The Proﬁling Mechanism
classiﬁed the UEs into service proﬁles correctly, which allows
us to proactively allocate the respective resources.
The results shown in Fig. 7 compare the predicted and actual
resources that were ﬁnally used during the UEs’ activity in the
uplink and the downlink. Although the prediction accuracy
in the UL case is clearly higher, in both cases the predicted
resources were equal or more than the ones ﬁnally used.
(a) Uplink
(b) Downlink
Fig. 7: Predicted vs. actual resource consumption during the UEs
activity in both uplink and downlink channels.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced some of the innovations proposed by
the H2020 5Growth project. Speciﬁcally, we have presented
initial work and results regarding (i) architectural innovations
to apply novel AI/ML schemes into management operations,
(ii) vertical control over radio resources, (iii) enhanced
monitoring service, and (iv) automated service orchestration
mechanisms. These initial results (among others that will be
integrated in the future) make evident how 5G paves the
way to innovative use cases in vertical industries and novel
service management procedures. The project is currently on its
ﬁrst year, with initial pilots under design, involving verticals
alongside the development of the identiﬁed innovations, with
ﬁrst ﬁeld trials projected to the end of 2020.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been partially supported by EC H2020
5GPPP 5Growth project (Grant 856709).