Vol.:(0123456789)
Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 29:2531–2561
 
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications:
A Systematic Review
Ahmed G. Gad1
Received: 11 November 2020 / Accepted: 21 April 2021 / Published online: 19 April 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Throughout the centuries, nature has been a source of inspiration, with much still to learn from and discover about. Among
many others, Swarm Intelligence (SI), a substantial branch of Artificial Intelligence, is built on the intelligent collective
behavior of social swarms in nature. One of the most popular SI paradigms, the Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm
(PSO), is presented in this work. Many changes have been made to PSO since its inception in the mid 1990s. Since their
learning about the technique, researchers and practitioners have developed new applications, derived new versions, and
published theoretical studies on the potential influence of various parameters and aspects of the algorithm. Various perspectives are surveyed in this paper on existing and ongoing research, including algorithm methods, diverse application domains,
open issues, and future perspectives, based on the Systematic Review (SR) process. More specifically, this paper analyzes
the existing research on methods and applications published between 2017 and 2019 in a technical taxonomy of the picked
content, including hybridization, improvement, and variants of PSO, as well as real-world applications of the algorithm
categorized into: health-care, environmental, industrial, commercial, smart city, and general aspects applications. Some
technical characteristics, including accuracy, evaluation environments, and proposed case study are involved to investigate
the effectiveness of different PSO methods and applications. Each addressed study has some valuable advantages and unavoidable drawbacks which are discussed and has accordingly yielded some hints presented for addressing the weaknesses
of those studies and highlighting the open issues and future research perspectives on the algorithm.
1  Introduction
It has been proven in the literature beyond any doubt that
meta-heuristic optimization algorithms perform well by
optimally handling several versatile real-world optimization
tasks, ranging from robotics , wireless networks , power systems , job shop scheduling , to classification and training of artificial neural
networks . While questing the global best (near-optimum) solution, numerous fitness evaluations are required by
the meta-heuristic algorithms. This typically poses a serious
barrier against the application of meta-heuristic algorithms
to high-computational optimization problems that extensively exist in computational fluid dynamic optimization
 and structural optimization , among many others.
For working out those problems, the performance of candidate solutions is usually evaluated with high-fidelity numerical analysis approaches (e.g., computational fluid dynamics
simulations or finite element analysis), which may deduct
CPU time from minutes to hours, or even days .
Therefore, within the paradigm of meta-heuristics, many
Swarm Intelligence (SI) techniques and variants were proposed to tackle complex/large-scale optimization problems.
SI, a substantial branch of optimization techniques, is the
characteristic of a system where agents interact locally with
their environment so that their collective behaviors render
the emergence of cohesive functional global patterns. Unlike
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), SI techniques are inspired
by agents’ plain behaviors and self-organizing interactions,
such as fish schooling, honey bees, bacterial growth, animal herding, bird flocking, ant colonies foraging, and so on.
Indeed, Beni was the first to use the SI term in cellular robotic systems, in which simple agents interact with
neighbors to organize themselves. SI was formally established in . The rife SI algorithms include Ant Colony
Optimization (ACO) and Particle Swarm Optimization
* Ahmed G. Gad
 
 
Faculty of Computers and Information, Kafrelsheikh
University, Kafrelsheikh, Egypt
(PSO) . Less widespread SI algorithms are Bacterial
Foraging Optimization (BFO) , Artificial Bee Colony
(ABC) , Firefly Algorithm (FA) , and many others.
SI algorithms were primarily developed for steady optimization problems. However, dynamic environments involve
several real-world optimization problems .
Typically, a swarm is defined as a vast number of simple,
homogeneous agents interacting locally with their environment, as well as themselves, with decentralized control to
authorize the emergence of a global important behavior.
Swarm-based techniques have recently arisen as a family
of swarm-based, nature-inspired algorithms that have the
ability to produce robust, fast, and low cost solutions to
numerous complex problems . Therefore, SI can
be figured out as a major category of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) that is utilized to model the collective behavior of natural social swarms, such as honey bees, bird flocks, and ant
colonies. These agents (swarm individuals or insects) are
relatively gullible with simple own capabilities. However,
they perform cooperatively tasks substantial for their survival through interacting together in particular behavioral
manners. Socially, swarm individuals can directly or indirectly interact among themselves . Direct interaction
can be through audio or visual contact (e.g., a waggle dance
of honey bees), while indirect interaction is evident when
the environment is changed by one individual and the other
individuals react to the new environment (e.g., pheromone
tracks of ants that look for food sources through depositing
on their way). This indirect pattern of interaction is known
as “stigmergy”, which denotes communication through the
environment . The research area presented in this thorough paper focuses on SI. More specifically, this review
strives to explore one of the most popular models of SI,
PSO, which is inspired by birds’ flocking behavior.
PSO is a swarm-based stochastic algorithm proposed
originally by Kennedy and Eberhart , which exploits
the concepts of the social behavior of animals like fish
schooling and bird flocking. In PSO, each potential solution
to a given problem is viewed as a particle with a certain
velocity flying through the space of the problem just like
a flock of birds. Each particle then combines – with some
random disturbances – some aspect of the record of its own
historical best location and current location with those of
one or more agents of the swarm to determine its next movement through the search space. After all particles have been
moved, the next iteration occurs. The swarm as a whole (e.g.,
a flock of birds collectively searching for food) is probably
to gradually approach the objective function optimum. PSO
has eventually gained prevalent vogue amongst researchers
and emerged to provide high performance in an assortment
of application areas, with the potential to hybridize and specialize and demonstrate some appealing emergent behaviors.
PSO has a main advantage of having fewer parameters to
tune. PSO obtains the best solution from particles’ interaction, but through high-dimensional search space, it converges at a very slow speed towards the global optimum.
Moreover, in regard to complex and large datasets, it shows
poor-quality results. If there is a large number of dimensions in the problem at hand, PSO usually fails to discover
the global optimum solution. This phenomenon is caused
not only by the presence of local optima trap, but also the
potential fluctuation of the velocities of particles such that
the successive range of trials is bounded within a sub-plain
of the whole search hyper-plain .
The local optima issue in PSO has been discussed and
diverse variants of PSO algorithm were developed to tackle
that issue. For example, some of these variants have been
developed by incorporating the capabilities of EAs (e.g., the
adaptation of PSO parameters, hybrid versions of PSO, etc.),
thereby producing adaptive PSO versions. Other researchers
have taken on incorporating evolutionary operators, such as
crossover, mutation, selection, as well as the Differential
Evolution algorithm (DE) itself, into PSO. Consequently,
hybrid versions of PSO have been tested and produced,
including the hybrid evolutionary PSO , Genetic Algorithm (GA) and PSO , genetic programming-based
adaptable evolutionary hybrid PSO , and many others
 . Such improvements perform well with PSO and have
the potential to avoid getting stuck at local optima. However, the problem of premature convergence in some highdimensional complex problems still exists, even if the local
optima obstacle is absent. Hence, PSO does not always work
properly for high-dimensional models .
To this point, the performance of PSO has generally been
improved by developing different variants of the algorithm.
However, few review papers and technical surveys have systematically addressed the PSO literature . Consequently, the primary objective of this work is to present a
systematic survey by reviewing the PSO algorithm and its
different methods, as well as a wide variety of indicative
application domains. Moreover, some of the addressed studies have highlighted the main approaches of PSO applications, including health-care, environmental, industrial, commercial, smart city, and general aspects. The key solicitude
of those PSO methods and applications is satisfying quality
standards: services arising from PSO methods and applications should support user’s requirements that cover the quality metrics of accuracy and efficiency, such as convergence
rate, computational cost, consistency, stability, diversity, etc.
In other words, this paper aims to present a timely, compendious, systematic and an in-depth overview of the PSO
algorithm between 2017 and 2019 and the opportunities and
challenges imposed during this period.
The structure of this study is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents the related works. A brief foundation
of the PSO is presented in Sect. 3. Section 4 exploits the
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
Systematic Review (SR) procedure to provide the proposed
research approach and motivation. Section 5 demonstrates
the various methods of PSO based on the SR method. Section 6 systematically outlines and categorizes the application approaches in PSO. Also, a technical classification and
differentiation of the approaches in the addressed papers is
presented in this section. Section 7 provides a discussion
on the PSO approaches that have not yet been thoroughly
analyzed. Finally, Sect. 9 concludes the paper along with
its limitations.
2  Related Work
A swift explanation is presented in this section for the general related studies in the PSO algorithm.
Poli et al. presented an overview of the great efforts
which have given impetus and direction to research in particle swarms, as well as some important new applications and
directions. An analysis of IEEE Xplore and Google Scholar
citations and publications from 1995 to 2006 were presented
in this work, illuminating the sense meant by Kennedy and
Eberhart . The strength of this study was to present comprehensive challenges and open issues in the PSO algorithm.
However, this study did not consider the compatibility of
PSO application with each presented approach.
Banks et al. offered, in two parts, a timely and
brief review of the field in general, alongside the opportunities and challenges emanating from the versatile application
of PSO. On the one hand, part I has considered the
history and background of PSO and its position within the
broader paradigm of natural computing. The review then
continued to discuss different improvements to the native
formulation of PSO both in discrete and continuous problems, swarm behavior analysis, and measures considered
to address stagnation. Furthermore, the review focused on
research regarding adaptations for parallel implementation,
algorithm configuration, and dynamic environments. The
achievement of this study was identifying two significant
areas of challenge for future further development: swarm
stagnation and dynamic environments. The shortcoming of
this part is the insufficiency of the explanation the related
work. On the other hand, part II has discussed recent
studies in some of the impressive areas of research: constrained and multi-objective optimization, combinatorial
problems, and hybridization. In that review, a number of
domains were briefly touched upon, including the optimization of neural fuzzy networks, artificial neural networks,
computational biology, image processing and medical imaging, optimization of electricity generation, network routing,
and financial forecasting. Nevertheless, the study has a
main defect of not analyzing the selected studies in terms of
evaluation parameters, such as convergence rate, diversity,
accuracy, and processing time, as quality factors in this area.
Kulkarni et al. outlined some issues regrading Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), introduced PSO, and discussed the suitability of the algorithm for WSN applications.
This study also presented a compendious survey of how PSO
is tailored to tackle the issues of node localization, node
deployment, data aggregation, and energy-aware clustering
as optimization problems. The strong point of this review is
to comprehensively present open issues in WSNs. However,
the compatibility of high-speed real-time applications with
each approach was not considered.
Kothari et al. reviewed the studies related to the
modifications of native PSO and its practical application
in real-world problems. The rapid modification of PSO has
been emerged in different examples, including the two-step
PSO and the PSO-Support Vector Machine (PSO-SVM).
The integration of the PSO and the practical implementation of PSO with the industry standard algorithm have also
generated stunning results. The advantage of this survey was
to present recent diverse variations in PSO and analyze the
accuracy of PSO in different domains. The main deficiency
of this study is the lack of statistical information about the
discussed standard PSO and its application in various specified contexts.
Imran et al. discussed diverse variants of PSO in
regards to swarm initialization, mutation operators, and
inertia weight. The main advantage of this overview was to
highlight the importance of introducing the different mutation operators and inertia weight parameter to improve the
performance of PSO. However, other promising variants of
PSO were not considered.
Alam et al. surveyed systematically the evolution of
clustering techniques based on PSO and presented the results
of rapidly increasing trends in the literature of SI, PSO paradigm, and PSO-based data clustering approaches, proving
that there is a tremendous increase in the popularity of such
approaches. This research affirmed that the approaches are
novel and simple to implement and builds on communication
and collaboration. This study outlined different application
domains of PSO relevant to clustering. However, applications to more complex problems are absent. Furthermore,
variants of PSO for clustering high-dimensional data were
surveyed by Esmin et al. . The main advantage of this
survey was to present the attempts of different publications in reducing data dimensions. The weakness is still the
absence of discussing more clustering-related applications.
Marini and Walczak described comprehensively the
PSO algorithm to show its ability to solve different kinds
of optimization problems in chemometrics. The importance
of the appropriate choice of PSO meta-parameters has
been highlighted in this work by means of selecting practical examples in the subject areas of variable selection,
estimating robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
solutions, and signal warping. This tutorial contributed to
presenting works subject to chemometrics impressively.
However, it lacked splashing other state-of-the-art fields.
Zhang et al. investigated comprehensively the PSO
algorithm. They provided advances in PSO, including its
theoretical analysis (convergence analysis, parameter tuning,
etc.), hybridization (with GA, DE, ABC, ACO, biogeography-based optimization, harmonic search, Tabu Search (TS),
Artificial Immune System (AIS), and Simulated Annealing
(SA)), modifications (including fuzzy PSO, chaotic PSO,
bare-bones PSO, quantum-behaved PSO), population topologies (including star, ring, random, von Neumann, fully connected, etc.), extensions (to binary, discrete, constrained, and
multi-objective optimization), and parallel implementation
(in cloud computing, multiprocessor, multicore, and GPU
forms). Moreover, they introduced a survey on the applications of PSO to the following eight fields: biology, chemistry, medicine, electrical and electronic engineering, fuel and
energy, mechanical engineering, operation research, communication theory, and automation control systems. Despite
all that, the publication analysis demonstrated in this survey
lacks the presentation of the annual exponential fluctuation
of publications for each variant and application field.
Wang et al. presented the inception and background
of the PSO algorithm, and carried out a theoretical analysis
of the algorithm. Then, they analyzed its current situation of
application and investigation in algorithm structure, topology structure, parameter selection, multi-objective optimization, discrete and parallel PSO algorithm, and engineering
applications. This overview is characterized by suggesting
distinctive future research directions. However, no analytic
discussion is introduced in this work.
Summarizing, Table 1 outlines the recent review studies
on PSO with respect to the general survey and review studies
discussed in this section. This table lists the key topics, publication year, and covered years (if available) for each study.
The deficiencies in the existing review papers propose that
a comprehensive and systematic literature review should be
provided to address some of such common weaknesses as:
• In existing studies, the methods and applications of PSO
are not organized in a clear taxonomy, and do not have
analytical assessment from which one can learn something beneficial.
• Important assessment factors are not involved in the
methods and applications of PSO in some current studies.
• The systematic arrangement is typically absent in the
structure of literature studies, and the paper selection
criterion is vague as well.
3  Particle Swarm Optimization: PSO
3.1  Self‑Organization Features
SI system has a major feature, namely, self-organization,
in which the components of an initially disordered system
interact locally to produce a coordination or global order.
This process is characterized by spontaneousness; that is,
no agent inside or outside of the system dominates the interaction. The self-organization in swarms was interpreted
by Bonabeau et al. through three key components as
• Robust dynamical non-linearity (always comprising
positive and negative feedback) convenient structures
are promotionally being created with the help of positive
feedback, while this positive feedback is counterbalanced
and the collective pattern is stabilized with the help of
negative feedback.
• Trade-off between exploration and exploitation A valuable mean creativity artificial approach is provided
through a suitable balance that is identified by SI.
• Multiple interactions Information coming from neighbor agents in the swarm are used by individual agents,
allowing information to be disseminated throughout the
Table 1   Relevant studies in PSO
Main context
Publication year
Covered years
Poli et al. 
PSO algorithm, new directions, and applications
Banks et al. 
PSO field, challenges, and opportunities
2007 & 2008
Kulkarni et al. 
PSO suitability for WSN applications
Imran et al. 
PSO variants
Alam et al. 
PSO-based data clustering
Marini and Walczak 
PSO in chemometrics fields
Zhang et al. 
PSO advances and applications
Wang et al. 
PSO theory and application
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
3.2  SI Features
Millonas proposed that SI must satisfy five basic principles: adaptability, diverse response, stability, quality, and
proximity. Table 2 lists their meanings.
3.3  Standard PSO Algorithmic Structure
A swarm of particles updates their relative positions from
iteration to another, boosting the PSO algorithm to duly
perform the search process. To get the optimum solution,
each particle moves towards its prior personal best position
( 퐩best ) and the global best position ( 퐠best ) in the swarm .
Assuming a minimization problem, one have
where i ∈{1, 2, … , N} , and
where i denotes particle’s index, t is the current iteration’s
number, f is the objective function to be optimized (minimized), 퐱 is the position vector (or a potential solution), and
N is the total number of particles in the swarm. The following equations update, at each current iteration t + 1 , the
velocity 퐯 and position 퐱 of of each particle i as:
besti = 퐱∗
i = 1, 2, … , N
k = 1, 2, … , t
where 퐯 represents the velocity vector, 휔 is the inertia weight
utilized to balance the local exploitation and global exploration, 퐫ퟏ and 퐫ퟐ are random vectors uniformly distributed
within the range D (D being the search space dimensionality or the size of the problem at hand), and c1 and c2 ,
called “acceleration coefficients”, are positive constants.
An upper bound is commonly set for the velocity vector.
As a means to prevent particles from shaving off the search
space and forcing them to take a proper step size to comb the
entire search domain, the “velocity clamping” method was
used . The “constriction coefficient” strategy is another
method, proposed by Clerc and Kennedy , in which the
velocities can be also constricted by theoretically observing
and analyzing the swarm dynamics.
By scrutinizing Eq. (3), we can interpret that the first part,
known as “inertia component”, represents the prior velocity,
which provides the particles with appropriate momentum
to rove across the search space. The second part, the “cognitive component”, denotes the own positiveness for every
particle. It motivates the particles to move towards their own
best positions found so far over subsequent iterations. The
third part, known as the “social component”, indicates the
collective effect of the particles to reach the global optimum
solution .
3.4  PSO Pseudocode
Let f ∶퐑N →퐑 be an objective function which needs to be
simplified. Then, the function takes a vector of N real numbers denoting an N candidate solutions and outputs a real
number that indicates the value of the objective function.
The f gradient is either hard to calculate or often unknown.
Then, the global minimum
is pursued as exhibited in
Algorithm 1.
Table 2   SI basic principles
Definition
Adaptability
Swarm should have the potential to change its search behavior when the computational cost is high
Diverse response
Swarm should not perform its activities along extremely narrow channels
Swarm should not change its search behavior in response to the environment changes
Swarm should should have the potential to respond to performance measures in the environment
Swarm should should have the potential to smoothly perform time- and space-consuming computations
Algorithm 1 PSO pseudocode
N – Swarm size
D – Problem dimensionality
T – Maximum number of iterations
LB – Lower bound of the search space
UB – Upper bound of the search space
best – the best position (solution) found so far
Initialize the swarm randomly;
for i = 1 to N do
Iterate through the swarm
i ←a random vector within [LB, UB]D;
Initialize particles’ velocity using a uniform distribution
i ←a random vector within [LB, UB]D;
Initialize particles’ positions using a uniform distribution
Initialize pbest to its initial position
Apply Eq. (2) to ﬁnd g0
Initialize gbest to position with the minimum ﬁtness value
Initialize ﬁrst iteration number
while t ≤T do
for i = 1 to N do
Iterate through the swarm
r1, r2 ←two independent vectors randomly generated from 
Apply Eq. (3);
Update particle’s velocity
Apply Eq. (4);
Update particle’s position
If new solution is better than current personal best
Update the best known position of the particle
Apply Eq. (2) to ﬁnd gt
Update the swarm’s overall best known position
Maximum iteration number is reached or termination criterion is satisﬁed
Elsevier, Springer, IEEE, ACM, MDPI, Taylor & Francis,
Wiley, Inderscience, MDPI, etc.
In relation to the objectives of this SR paper, comprehensive answers are provided to the following four Analytical
Questions (AQs) :
• AQ1: Into which domains can PSO methods and applications be classified?
• AQ2: Which main contexts can be considered for PSO
methods and applications?
• AQ3: What assessment environments are used for evaluating the PSO methods and applications?
• AQ4: What are generally the PSO open perspectives and
future research directions that can be drawn from the
work presented in the paper?
After outlining the AQs, the ultimate research selection
was conducted by applying the inclusion/exclusion criteria.
With respect to the number of published research papers,
only conference papers and journal articles indexed in Web
of Science (WoS) or Scopus proceedings are selected and
analyzed as peer-reviewed publications for the methods and
applications of PSO. Finally, I selected 2,140 peer-reviewed
3.5  PSO Flowchart
The flowchart to demonstrate the flux of PSO is depicted
in Fig. 1.
4  Proposed Research Approach
This section depends on the SR method to present, in a taxonomy, a review of the research studies related to the methods and applications of PSO . Other
synonyms and alternatives of the key essential components
are also considered to commit the final exploration string
as :
• (“Methods” OR “Variants” OR “Hybrid” OR “Improved”
OR “Software” OR “Application” OR “Application layer”
OR “Application-based” OR “App”) AND (“PSO”) OR
(“Particle Swarm Optimization”)
Figure 2 demonstrates the distribution 
of research studies published by the most popular venues regarding the review methods and articles, including
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
papers. Due to the length limitation of the paper, I addressed
curtly only 84 state-of-the-art research papers from reputed
journals to address the four AQs in detail in Sects. 5 and
6. Figure 3 demonstrates the selection criteria and evaluation method for the literature studies. The exclusion phase
was carried out by omitting white papers, short papers,
book chapters, non-peer-reviewed studies, and low-quality
researches (published in rapacious journals) that did not provide any technical information or scientific discussion. The
ultimately selected studies are recognized by considering the
inclusion criteria as follows:
• Papers published online from 2017 to 2019.
• Papers on PSO topics, including methods and applications.
• Papers prepared in a technical quality method in PSO
methods and applications.
• Papers that follow the quality standards.
The ultimately selected studies are recognized by considering the exclusion criteria as follows:
• Papers that present survey and review studies.
• Papers indexed in neither WoS nor Scopus.
• Papers written in a language other than English.
• Papers not subject to peer-review.
5  Methods of PSO
In fact, the literature is rich in many PSO techniques. To
organize them, a proper classification criterion is suggested,
and various PSO methods are classified as per Fig. 4.
5.1  Hybridization
Hybridization is a generic model of two or more algorithms,
which exploits their advantages while decreasing their
impediments. The combination of techniques does well for
tacking a specified problem, given that the obtained results
can be improved by these combined techniques on their own.
The exploitation and exploration of an algorithm can completely be enhanced through hybridization of algorithms . For example, an algorithm can cater for the lack
of its preciseness and refine the results through synergy with
a local search method. The hybrid approach in the field of
optimization is growing in popularity and utilizes the purport of hybridizing the components from leading optimization techniques to improve the performance of traditional
optimization algorithms.
5.1.1  Meta‑heuristic Algorithms
Many nature-inspired hybrid approaches have been developed by numerous researchers/scholars for achieving significant performance in the exploitation and exploration of
existing algorithms. To optimally design a Labyrinth Spillway (LS) having quarter-round or half-round crest shape, an
evolutionary Hybrid Algorithm (HA) combining the PSO
Initialize a swarm of
N particles randomly
Evaluate the current
personal ﬁtness value
for each particle i
better than
previous f
Recognize pt
besti as the
personal best position for i
Keep the previous pt−1
Assign the best position’s ﬁtness value pt
best∗to gt
Maximum epochs, or
optimum reached?
Update the velocity of
Update the position of
each particle using Eq. (3)
each particle using Eq. (4)
Fig. 1   The flowchart of PSO
Fig. 2   Distribution of research papers by publisher
algorithm with the Bat Algorithm (BA) was developed by
Ferdowsi et al. . This way, the best outcomes of one
algorithm substitute the worst ones from the other. Moreover, the proposed algorithm has a high convergence rate
regarding the optimal absolute outcome and does not get
stuck into the local minima. Responses and computational
time of this HA proved that LS with quarter-round crest
requires more concrete, compared to the half-round one.
In another work, Melton examined a strategy for
hybridizing two heuristic algorithms, PSO and DE, to better
address the stagnation problem when solving slew-maneuver
time-optimal problems having constraints in solution path.
The stagnation was handled very well by the combined PSO-
DE method, with a reduction of 40% in the computational
time compared to just applying DE. In , a Dynamic
Multi-Swarm Differential Learning Particle Swarm Optimizer (DMSDL-PSO) was proposed. In this study, the DE
operators were incorporated into each one of the DMSDL-
PSO’s sub-swarms to form a novel method. DMSDL-PSO
has a good capability of exploitation and exploration by
employing a local searcher like Quasi-Newton method to
enhance the exploitation capability, making, at the same
time, use of the capability of exploration existing in the differential mutation. On the other hand, the optimization performance of DE was improved by developing a novel selfadaptive mutation DE algorithm based on PSO (DEPSO)
 . DEPSO can significantly utilize the fast convergence
capability of PSO and the strong global exploration capability of an improved DE mutation strategy. As a result, the
diversity of the swarm was managed well throughout the
evolution, resulting in a higher convergence speed.
In , Aydilek proposed a Hybrid algorithm combining both FA and PSO (HFPSO). HFPSO checks the global
historically best fitness values in order to properly determine the proper start of the local search. The high accuracy
of convergence and runtime was statistically approved by
evaluating the method using expensive benchmarks from
the high-dimensional CEC’15 and CEC’17 functions.
Typically, a strong classifier can be created based on the
strengths of penalization and, say, SVM, proving the effectiveness of Penalized Support Vector Machine (PSVM). In
 , Al-Thanoon et al. proposed a new hybrid PSO and FA
to find the tuned parameters of PSVM, showing a high ability to escape from being trapped into the local optima trap.
In , a hybrid method of PSO and GA was proposed
by Zhu et al. to optimize an antenna array deployment for
locating the sources of Partial Discharge (PD) in an entire
substation. First, an algorithm called Direction-of-Arrival
(DOA) estimation was presented for testing its applicability to arbitrary array configurations. In order to minimize
the objective functions, the hybrid PSO-GA algorithm was
applied to optimize the array deployments for the localization of both DOA and coordinates.
Genetic Learning PSO (GL-PSO) breeds eminent exemplars to steer the motion of particles for the purpose of
improving the performance of PSO. However, the performance of GL-PSO is not satisfactory on complex optimization problems, in which a global topology is depicted
for exemplary generation and efficient diversity cannot be
retained to boost exploration. For the betterment of the
adaptability and performance of GL-PSO, Lin et al. 
modified two versions of the basic GL-PSO algorithm. In
Fig. 3   The selection principles and evaluation of research papers
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
exemplar generation, a ring topology is depicted to boost
diversity and so exploration, while the algorithm’s adaptability is improved by adopting a Global Learning Component
(GLC) with control parameters which are linearly adjusted.
Nenavath et al. proposed a novel hybrid algorithm
of Sine Cosine Algorithm (SCA) and PSO (SCA-PSO) to
overcome the SCA premature convergence at local minima
for the two major goals of object tracking and solving optimization problems. Two parameters of PSO, 퐩best and 퐠best ,
were embedded into the conventional SCA to lead the process of pursuing the possible candidate solutions, so that the
퐩best in SCA is then used to initialize PSO swarm to further
exploit the feasible search spaces.
PSO usually experiences premature convergence, so it
is easily to be caught into a local optimum solution. Also,
it is ineffective in balancing exploration and exploitation,
especially in complex multipeak search functions. To overcome these shortcomings, a Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimizer with Sine Cosine Acceleration Coefficients (H-PSO-
SCAC) was proposed . First, Sine Cosine Acceleration
Coefficients (SCAC) were presented to efficiently control the
convergence to the global optimum solution by guiding the
local search. Second, the swarm is initialized by adopting
opposition-based learning method. Additionally, the inertia
weight is adjusted by utilizing a sine chaotic map. Finally, a
modified formula for updating position was proposed.
The SCA is mainly stigmatized by its limitation to exploit
only emerging regions, depending on the parameter settings.
However, the SCA is well capable of exploration. Taking
advantage of the PSO capability of strong exploitation, Issa
et al. developed a new enhanced version of the SCA
by hybridizing it with PSO. Two layers have formed the
resulting technique: In the bottom layer, the search agents
of SCA explore the search space, and in the top layer, the
region around the best result found by the layer at bottom
is exploited. Hence, there is a balance between exploitation
and exploration in the proposed technique, which maintains
fast convergence and improves the solution quality.
In another research, Sanchez et al. used a column
generation framework to solve the Binary Cutting Stock
(BCS) problem by developing a benchmark of different
approaches. Master- and sub-problem are the main components of this framework. Classical integer linear programming was used to solve the master problem, while metaheuristic algorithms (PSO, SA, and GA) were used to solve
the sub-problem. The aim of this benchmark analysis was
to compare the results of the hybrid meta-heuristics with an
exact approach.
In , Huang et al. presented a methodology to utilize
various loading-unloading curves to extract the mechanical properties of its bulk materials using an Instrumented
Indentation Test (IIT). Simulated Annealing PSO (SAPSO)
coupled with finite iterative element simulation were used
to obtain the mechanical properties, including strain-hardening rate (K) and strain-hardening exponent (n), from the
Ibrahim et  al. proposed a hybrid optimization
approach for solving the feature selection problem. The Salp
Swarm Algorithm (SSA) was combined with the PSO as
SSAPSO, in which the performance of the exploitation and
exploration stages in PSO was significantly amended. Based
on 15 benchmark functions alongside different UCI datasets,
the original datasets were refined by removing the confusing or redundant features while yielding or keeping a better
Fig. 4   Categorization of diverse PSO methods
efficiency, demonstrating the improvement in the SSAPSO
with respect to the prediction accuracy without affecting the
computational cost.
Laskar et al. proposed a new hybrid algorithm named
as the Hybrid Whale PSO (HWPSO) algorithm. Since
Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) is known for its very
good capability of exploration, it is hybridized with PSO in
a novel way to overwhelm the limitations related to a PSO
phase (i.e., stagnation impact). The HWPSO has employed
two novel techniques during hybridization: “Forced” whale
in the exploration phase so that the WOA can guide PSO
to better avoid getting stuck into local optima, and “Capping” phenomenon in the exploitation phase for restricting
the search mechanism of WOA in order to converge to the
global optimum value more fast.
A new form of multi-swarm BBPSO, in which its updating distributions are reoriented by adaptively learning the
optimal alignments, is presented by Vafashoar and Meybodi . The idea is that, along appropriate directions,
the prospect of generating new particles is maximized. Due
to the lack of a priori knowledge of these alignment directions, the proposed method adaptively learns suitable alignments by employing a learning mechanism. Cellular learning
automata were adopted to build this learning mechanism.
For each particle in the presented method, multiple alignment strategies are developed. Moreover, these strategies are
adjusted so that, during the search process, the particles are
attracted toward the most promising regions based on the
cellular learning automata.
Durán-Rosal et  al. proposed novel approaches
based on time series segmentation. The proposed methods
include the PSO algorithm adaptation to this problem, as
well as more advanced variants of PSO (e.g., BBPSO and its
exploitation variant (BBePSO)). Furthermore, a new algorithm, called Dynamic exploitation BBPSO (DBBePSO),
was derived, in which the importance of the cognitive and
social components are updated throughout the successive
generations. A final local search step is considered to further
improve the solutions obtained from these algorithms based
on the incorporation of two popular traditional segmentation
algorithms (Top-Down and Bottom-Up).
In , Nagra et al. proposed an enhanced Self-Inertia
Weight Adaptive PSO algorithm with a gradient-based Local
Search strategy (SIW-APSO-LS) to solve the problem of
premature convergence in PSO. This proposed algorithm
takes the advantages of the exploration ability of the adaptive PSO with enhanced inertia weight, and the exploitation
of the gradient-based local search strategy.
In , Cao et al. proposed a Comprehensive Learning Particle Swarm Optimizer (CLPSO) embedded with
a local search utilizing the CLPSO’s capability of global
search and the fast convergence capability of local search to
achieve higher optimization performance. This work takes
advantage of the introduced so called quasi-entropy index
for addressing its main issue (specifically, when to start the
local search) by developing an adaptive local search starting scheme.
In most of the above-discussed studies, PSO was implemented without coherence with other meta-heuristics. For
instance, a good initial solution can be produced by utilizing
DE or GA as a starting point, and the PSO can take care of
the rest of the search. In some cases, an initial solution can
be produced by using PSO as a starting point, and the search
can be conducted by others. Furthermore, the PSO, as a supplementary tool, may be hybridized with the deterministic
local search to boost the exploitation capability and produce
high-quality solutions. Additionally, the search speed may
be elevated by the PSO.
5.1.2  Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) can be, in a word, summarized as learning via training . To achieve that, a
series of input and output vectors is adopted to handle a
set of data that needs to be trained. At the training time,
the ANN is applied to the training data iterative, so that
the desired input-output mapping emerges by balancing
weights of the network several times in a while. After the
training stage completes, a foreseeing model is ready and
the corresponding output vector can be then created from
input ones unrelated to the training pairs. An appropriate
set of weights and transferring functions should be carefully
chosen (via, say, meta-heuristic optimization) to ensure that
the ANNs can present a quantifiable smooth function that
would properly link future input and output vectors. Various components, including prediction and system control
and modelling, are inferred to express the broadly connected
neural systems.
In this regard, Moayedi et al. introduced a PSOoptimized ANN model to solve the prediction problem of
Landslide Susceptibility Mapping (LSM). The focus of this
study was the prediction of landslide hazardous susceptibility mapping by applying a hybrid model of PSO and ANN
(PSO-ANN). Two statistical performance metrics, Root
Mean-Squared Error (RMSE) and coefficient of determination ( R2 ), were used to assess the predicted results from
both the original ANN and the PSO-ANN. Comparing the
two models, the PSO-ANN model was observed to be more
reliable in LSM estimation than the ANN.
In another work, Junior and Yen proposed a novel
algorithm based on PSO and Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN), namely, PSO-CNN. In comparison with other evolutionary approaches, the proposed algorithm is capable of
fast convergence. In an application to image classification, it
was able to automatically find deep meaningful CNN architectures. To allow the use of PSO optimization with CNN,
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
a novel strategy for direct encoding, as well as a velocity
operator were built.
5.1.3  Support Vector Machine (SVM)
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is an intelligence algorithm lying under supervised machine learning . In this
algorithm, the data is analyzed and particular visible or hidden patterns are quested with the major aim to perform two
main tasks of classification and regression. SVM is known
for its potential to perform non-linear classification and
linear separation of the data, to build another dimensional
space from existing training datasets by investigating the
respective categories. The separation process is working by
increasing the chasm between too close points of various
categories (i.e., support vectors) to better explore the optimal
separating hyper plane. It should also point out that SVM
can perform other tasks like linear classification .
In this framework, Hoang et al. proposed a novel
Differential PSO-based SVM (DPSO-SVM) classifier to
monitor the conditions of a surge arrester. In the proposed
method, the parameters of SVM classifiers were optimized
by investigating the DPSO-SVM technique configuration
that gives the best results. Input vectors composed of three
extracted features are used to assess five arrester conditions,
including degradation (D), tracking (T), pre-fault (A), normal (N), and abnormal (U). Meanwhile, a DPSO-based
ANN classifier was also involved, to carry out a comparative study on fault diagnosis.
In another work, Tharwat and Hassanien optimized
the SVM parameters by employing quantum-behaved PSO
(QPSO) for reducing the classification error. The proposed
model, called QPSO-SVM, was evaluated by adopting 7
traditional classification datasets from the UCI data repository. The experimental results revealed the capability of the
proposed model to obtain the best values of the parameters
of SVM. Moreover, the results showed lower classification
error rates than those obtained by the standard versions of
PSO and GA.
5.1.4  Quantum
40 years ago, quantum computer was invented, and
in the late 1980s, the quantum computer formal definition
was given. Due to the potential of the quantum computer in
various special problems , this field has witnessed many
great efforts. Various popular algorithms are developed, and
the most well-known one of them is Shor’s quantum factoring algorithm . In 2004, Sun et al. firstly introduced the Quantum-behaved PSO (QPSO) for improving the
convergence rate of the native PSO. In quantum space, particles often have the guarantee to reach the real global optimum via searching throughout the full solution space. Later
in recent decades, QPSO has drawn great attention from
many scholars. In what follows, some of them are presented.
In , Jmal et al. proposed a QPSO method for solving
the K-Traveling Repairman Problem (K-TRP). The proposed
approach incorporates a K-TRP-specific repair operator to
ensure that a feasible solution space will be always there to
guide the search process and that the quality of solutions is
significantly improved as much as possible.
In , an optimal path planning was proposed for freefloating two-wheel pendulum robot system based on its selfbalance. First, the corner trajectory of this pendulum robot is
parametrized by QPSO. The native attitude and the control
precision of the robot’s terminal attitude and position are
utilized to formulate the objective function. The addressed
problem of optimal path planning was considered as a nonlinear optimization problem that is solved using the QPSO
algorithm to achieve the demanded goal.
Motivated by the characteristics of PSO and quantum theory, Xu et al. proposed a new method, namely, QPSO.
The QPSO used fractional calculus to enhance its global
search ability. The discrete expression of the Grünwald-
Letnikov definition, one of the most popular differential
fractional definitions, was incorporated for better updating
of the particles’ positions in QPSO.
5.1.5  Rough Set
The theory of rough set is an approach devised to deal
with uncertainty and ambiguity. The philosophy of this
approach was built on the fact that every object in the universe has its own characteristics. The rough set theory is a
mathematical tool utilized to extract knowledge from information obtained from uncertain data . In feature selection, rough set analysis is utilized because it only requires
the supplied basic data without the need for any supplementary information. Also, it is characterized by the suitability
for exploring the qualitative and quantitative properties of
Fan et al. proposed an algorithm called RoughPSO
for solving the convergence to a local optimum in PSO,
depending on the rough set theory. The RoughPSO uses
upper- and lower-approximation rough sets to get the membership values. Then, these values were employed to refine
the velocity and position for each particle.
In another work, Bhattacharya et al. proposed a
technique of Feature Selection based on an impromptu PSO
algorithm and Rough Set (PSORS-FS), to select the most
relevant features for detecting permission-based Android
malwares. This work mainly contributed to the recommendation of a new method of random key encoding that converts the conventional PSO algorithm in discrete space. It
also reduced the issues related to the sigmoid function in
binary PSO, as well as the particles’ maximum velocity.
5.2  Improved PSO
This section is competent of the improvements in PSO based
on some third-party methods as learning strategy, fuzzy
logic, mutation, Lévy flight, opposition-based learning, and
surrogate.
5.2.1  Learning Strategy
In reality, increasing complexity in many optimization
problems calls for further research on the exploration and
improvement of diverse optimization algorithms. It has been
proved that the PSO algorithm is an efficient tool to solve
different types of optimization tasks. However, for the base
PSO, the main aim of the updating strategy is to learn the
global optimum, and it always experiences too fast convergence in addition to poor performance on various complex
optimization tasks, principally for multimodal problems.
The mechanism of learning in classical PSO is simple and
easy to develop, but some likely issues, such as the phenomena of “two steps forward, one step back” and “oscillation”,
may disrupt it. Therefore, PSO researchers have managed to
design new efficacious learning strategies for avoiding the
two phenomena and improving the overall search performance. Xu et al. presented a Dimensional Learning
Strategy (DLS) following the best personal experience of
each particle to eventually discover and integrate the propitious information extracted from the optimal solution of
swarm. Thereafter, different learning strategies are used to
provide a Two-Swarm Learning PSO algorithm (TSLPSO).
One of the two sub-swarms used the DLS to create learning
exemplars for guiding the particles’ local search, while the
other sub-swarm used the comprehensive learning strategy
to create learning exemplars for managing the global search
of particles.
Wang and Liu proposed a Heterogeneous Comprehensive Learning PSO (HCLPSO) algorithm to attain
3D spatial trajectory tracking to realize a new saturated
approach to control a quadrotor. First, the quadrotor model
was divided into: an inner position control loop, inside cascaded control structure, and an outer attitude control loop.
Second, the saturated control is applied to limit the quadrotor’s thrust force in the outer attitude control loop. Next,
the parameter adjustment difficulty for the quadrotor was
alleviated by employing the HCLPSO algorithm to optimize
the control parameters.
5.2.2  Fuzzy Logic (FL)
Since the performance of PSO is strongly dependent on
the selection of its settings (i.e., minimum and maximum
velocity, social and cognitive factors, and inertia weight),
Fuzzy Logic (FL) can be first exploited to determine the
best values of these parameters. So far, the PSO implementations based on FL aim at calculating distinct settings for the
swarm as a whole. Nobile et al. proposed a new algorithm called Fuzzy Self-Tuning PSO (FST-PSO) which, for
every particle, independently calculates the minimum and
maximum velocity, social and cognitive factors, and inertia
by exploiting FL, thereby creating a completely setting-free
variant of PSO. The strength and novelty of FST-PSO was
derived from the fact that there is no experience required to
formulate PSO, since the optimization process automatically
adaptively adjusts the behavior of each particle.
In , López et al. proposed a Fuzzy Logic Controller
(FLC) modified by PSO, namely, Fuzzy-PSO to increment
the lifetime of power electronics with a faster response of
drive’s speed in a brushless DC electric motor. Furthermore,
the reference temperature and the desired speed are proposed
as parameters to formulate an objective function.
5.2.3  Mutation
Salajegheh and Salajegheh combined PSO with gradient directions of first and second order, thereby achieving a
great increasing in the approach robustness. The literature
was thoroughly searched to choose an appropriate set of
design problems, and the results of the standard PSO and the
counterparts are compared with each other. In the proposed
approach, the overall optimization cost was trivial as a result
of decreasing the number of initial particles.
A modified variant, namely, Repository and Mutation
based PSO (RMPSO) was proposed in . In RMPSO,
global and personal best solutions with the same fitness values are stored in two maintained extra repositories. And,
another proposed Enhanced Leader PSO (ELPSO) indicated
that the swarm optimum could be improved by applying five
successive mutation strategies.
5.2.4  Lévy Flight (LF)
Lévy Flight (LF) is a particular category of random walk in
which a heavy power tails law is applied for the distribution
of step lengths. A global search is done or conducted by an
algorithm with the occasional aid of larger steps. A better
trade-off between the two capabilities of exploration and
exploitation in an algorithm could be gained by applying
the LF trajectory , and the ability to avoid local optima
gives plus points.
In , Zhang et al. established an optimization model
for the task scheduling model in the Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) radar, and proposed a hybrid Discrete
PSO (DPSO) algorithm with LF for solving the problem.
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
The internal structure of tasks, the features of the MIMO
radar task scheduling, and the three main principles of task
scheduling were all considered in the optimization model.
In another work, Tang et al. employed the signal level
of Automatic Identification System (AIS) to build a new
method for estimating the atmospheric profile refractivity,
specifically the parameters of surface-based duct in the maritime environment. Due to the complexity and non-linearity
of this optimization problem, LF with QPSO algorithm (LF-
QPSO) was proposed to find the optimal solution.
In , Li et al. developed a novel Unsupervised LF
with PSO method (ULPSO) for image classification, giving
a good exploration-exploitation balance. ULPSO depends on
a new searching mechanism that targets the worst particle in
the swarm at each iteration to update its position with LF.
5.2.5  Opposition‑Based Learning (OBL)
Tizhoosh originally introduced the basic idea of
Opposition-Based Learning (OBL). Based on the concept of
OBL, typically, the fitness values of current agents and their
opposites are evaluated . Then, the suggested algorithm
selects N agents with the highest/lowest fitness values.
In , Kang et al. proposed a hybrid PSO algorithm to
improve the PSO performance by maximizing PSO diversity introduced by OBL. Probabilistic OBL was adapted for
a swarm by the proposed hybrid algorithms. Unlike other
fusions of PSO and OBL, the fitness of the entire swarm was
improved by selecting the fittest particles from the current
swarm and its opposite one.
In , Wang et al. addressed the learning strategy
impact on a scheduling problem with two-stage assembly
flow shop. Three different machines were used to, in turn,
process several different workpieces. The total completion
time was minimized by developing a branch-and-bound
technique combined with a lower bound procedure and
several developed dominance rules to obtain the optimal
scheduling solution. Besides, high-quality feasible solutions
were obtained by devising a new Dominance Rule-based
Opposition-based PSO algorithm (DR-OPSO).
5.2.6  Surrogate
Surrogate-assisted optimization was established to handle
expensive and complex problems in real-world applications.
The methodology of this type of optimization depends on
the maximal exhaustion of the available information for
minimizing the number of expensive evaluations required
for a given objective function, thereby reducing the related
costs, resources, and time .
Related to this, Yu et al. proposed a hierarchical
surrogate-assisted particle swarm optimizer comprising a
Social Learning-based PSO algorithm (SL-PSO) and the
standard PSO algorithm itself with the goal of solving highdimensional problems. The cooperation between SL-PSO
and standard PSO was proposed so that the search space
can be thoroughly exploited and explored, and the surrogate
model global and local search performance is simultaneously improved.
In , Yang et al. proposed an Improved Surrogate-
Assisted PSO (ISAPSO) algorithm, in which global and
local surrogates are integrated into a hybrid PSO. The global
surrogate uses an efficient global optimization algorithm to
work as a global searcher for speeding up the PSO global
search process, and reduces the computational burden by
predicting the fitness values. Meanwhile, the local surrogate
explores the expected optimum solution so that it can later
locally search through the neighborhood of this solution.
5.3  Variants of PSO
Different variants of the PSO algorithm are addressed in
this section.
5.3.1  Binary
Continuous meta-heuristics cannot handle a variety of optimization problems. Therefore, combinatorial optimization
has emerged, which includes a type of optimization called
binary optimization. The {0, 1} set elements are distinct
decision variables in binary optimization problems. Thus,
the binary optimization problem can have 0 and 1 as potential values for each decision variable. In other words, the
decision variables can be digitally expressed as 0 or 1 with
respect to the binary optimization problem at hand.
Sameer et al. proposed a new Modified Binary PSO
with a Kernel Fuzzy Clustering Method (MBPSO-KFCM)
for selecting relevant features and determining the number
of clusters in fuzzy data clustering. To enhance the quality
of cluster analysis, Gustafson-Kessel (GK) algorithm was
established and improved. The datasets Taiwanese, German,
and Australian credit were used to test the performance of
the three proposed algorithms. The results showed that fuzzy
partition (classification) is robust based on the fuzzy Rand
validity metrics, which provides an opportunity to reduce
the risk associated with loans.
In , Karbassi Yazdi et al. proposed a Binary PSO variant (BPSO) for optimally solving the problem of ship routing
and scheduling in Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) extraction,
transportation, and regasification.
5.3.2  Chaotic
Generally, chaotic, adapted from the term “chaos”, formally
refers to such a property that describes the unpredictable
behavior of a complicated system. In chaotic systems, a
function is used to “map” or associate algorithm chaotic
behavior with some parameters, using two typical chaotic
maps: logistic and sine. Chaos has distinctive properties of
non-repeatability and periodicity. So, it has the ability to do
general searches at higher speeds compared to the probabilistic stochastic searches .
In , Xu et al. proposed a new Chaotic Search PSO
algorithm (CS-PSO) which enhances the PSO algorithm
with the CS method for solving combinatorial optimization
problems. In the initialization phase, the particles were positioned depending on the advance knowledge of the combinatorial optimization problems. Furthermore, in the chaos
perturbing phase, the positions and velocities of particles are
perturbed by introducing a brand-new range of rules for satisfying the adaptability and the capability of the ideal global
search with the major aim to effectively avoid the fruitless
early convergence that haunts the standard PSO algorithm.
In another work, Wang et al. presented an efficient
multi-objective optimization approach that combines an
adaptive chaotic PSO and the IsoGeometric Analysis (IGA)
to optimize the Ceramic Volume Fraction (CVF) distribution under eigenfrequencies in Functionally Graded Plates
(FGPs). And, the B-spline basis function was used to represent the CVF distribution.
In , Yue et al. proposed a hybrid PSO algorithm
based on the chaos theory for solving the mobile location estimation problem. In the proposed location estimation approach, it was crucial to consider the influence of
measurement error arising from the nonlinear optimization
problem and Angle Of Arrival (AOA)/Time Difference Of
Arrival (TDOA) hybrid location method. The proposed
algorithm recognized the AOA/TDOA hybrid location algorithm to track the object to significantly enhance the locating
accuracy and the performance of the estimation process in
5.3.3  Multi‑objective
Multi-Objective Problems (MOPs) is to be introduced
in this section. Minimizing or maximizing multiple conflicting objective functions are two main tasks often considered
in MOPs . Unlike single objective optimization
ones, MOPs involve multiple contradictory objective functions. It is not easy to simultaneously optimize many functions. Hence, for obtaining an optimal solution set, there
should be balance between the objective functions. Some
constraints and at least two objectives must be included in a
multi-objective optimization problem. In a solution space,
the objectives and constraints are satisfied through finding
mutually acceptable solutions.
In , Zhang et al. proposed a multi-objective particle swarm optimizer based on a competitive mechanism,
in which the current swarm performs, at each iteration,
pairwise competitions which in turn are used to update the
position particles. On the other hand, a bi-objective problem was formulated for the hand posture estimation problem
 . To solve this problem, the concepts of Evolutionary
Population Dynamics (EPD) were employed for developing
an improved version of MOPSO. This problem has different
types of parameters. Therefore, some of the parameters were
significantly calibrated by the MOPSO algorithm.
In , Zheng et al. presented an adaptive neighborhood function for developing a Multi-Objective Cellular
PSO (MOCPSO). Three objective functions were taken for
drilling a wellbore trajectory less costly, more quickly, and
safely, compared to other potential trajectories. Then, a set of
Pareto optimal solutions is gained by applying the MOCPSO
algorithm to the three objective functions for designing a
cheaper and safer wellbore trajectory.
Adhikari and Srirama developed a new Containerbased Energy-Efficient Scheduling method (CEES) that
responds effectively to different types of fast submitted
Internet of Things (IoT) and non-IoT tasks. A Multi-Objective Accelerated PSO (MOAPSO) technique was used in
the proposed method to ensure a minimum delay by finding
the most appropriate container for executing each task. To
better utilize cloud resources, cloud environment involves
other important missions of resource scheduling, which can
be explored in .
6  PSO Applications
In accordance with the SR process adopted in this study, this
section is to provide a technical review of the designated
PSO applications in the actual literature. Figure 5 demonstrates a comprehensive taxonomy of the PSO applications
in different domains, including health-care, environmental,
industrial, commercial, smart city, and general aspects. Each
category of PSO applications is likely to face some issues
that should be highlighted to come up with thriving solutions, enabling further efficient and viable PSO implementation in future real-world applications. Consequently, studies
focusing on some pivotal issues are reviewed to prop PSO
applications in a particular context associated with these
issues. For example, in environmental applications, the main
contexts, such as economic emission dispatch, parameter
identification of PhotoVoltaics (PV), pollution forecasting,
segmentation and classification of plants, flood control and
routing, water quality monitoring, and many other issues, are
floated in different aspects of environmental PSO applications. Thus, this paper presents a taxonomy based on diverse
categories of PSO applications in selected research studies
in which special subjunctives are addressed and discussed.
Considering the concerns and challenges in various types
of PSO applications, I firstly addressed different categories
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
in the PSO applications and then reported the main subjects
which have been paid special attention in each category.
PSO applications have some general concerns, so a division
in the taxonomy, namely “general aspects”, was adopted to
refer to the studies that introduced a proposal to cope with a
particular challenge in any general type of PSO applications.
In other words, a new conceptual approach is introduced
based on the studies shown as being of general aspects, thus
promoting the development of any type of PSO application.
The upcoming subsections present diverse approaches in
PSO applications. In addition, various researches will be
compared from several sides, such as key subject, case studies, strengths, shortcomings, and special outputs.
6.1  Health‑Care Applications
Table 3 illustrates a summary of some seminal researches
and important information to assess health-care approaches
in PSO applications. Some of the major contexts in the
health-care domain are based on intelligent diagnosis, disease detection by medical robots, medical image segmentation, and disease classification.
6.2  Environmental Applications
Table 4 illustrates a summary of the recent researches
and important information to assess the environmental
approaches in PSO applications. The approaches include
case studies, such as wild vegetation environmental monitoring, agriculture environmental monitoring, flood control
and routing, water quality monitoring, and pollutant concentration monitoring systems.
6.3  Industrial Applications
Table 5 illustrates a summary of the recent researches and
important information to assess the industrial approaches in
PSO applications. Some of the major contexts in the industrial domain include economic dispatch problem in power
systems, optimizing Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs)
placement, allocating daily electrical loads, deploying
WSNs, predicting the defection of products, and optimizing
the design and operation of microgrids.
6.4  Commercial Applications
Table 6 illustrates a summary of some seminal researches
and important information to assess the commercial
approaches in PSO applications. Some of the major contexts
in the commercial domain include prediction of cost and
price, risk assessment, and profit calculation.
6.5  Smart City Applications
Table 7 illustrates a summary of some seminal researches
and important information to assess the smart city
approaches in PSO applications. The approaches include
case studies, such as smart city, smart home, appliance
scheduling, and vehicular monitoring systems.
6.6  General Aspects of PSO Applications
Table 8 describes a summary of some seminal researches
and important information to assess the general approaches
in PSO applications. Some of the major contexts in the
Fig. 5   The taxonomy of PSO applications
Table 3   Summary of some seminal researches in health-care applications
Main subject
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Pashae et al. 
Disease diagnostic system by identifying
the most beneficial genes for classification
• Identifying biologically and statistically significant genes from the clinical
• A better performance of the fusion of
Binary Black Hole Algorithm (BBHA)
and BPSO (4-2)
• Not considering computational time
• Hybrid meta-heuristic approach
Zeng et al. 
Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease
• Outperforming several SVM models and
two other state-of-the-art deep learning
• Experimenting with only one dataset,
• Framework
Jain et al. 
Cancer diagnosis and classification using
DNA microarray technology
• Providing a serious solution to the inherent local optimum problem in traditional
• Ensuring faster and more reliable gene
selection in classification
• Not considering computational time
• Two-phase hybrid model
Li et al. 
Medical image segmentation
• Getting better exploited contextual
information
• Improving the performance of dynamic
context cooperative QPSO
• Limited variation of image segmentation
• Algorithm
Raj and Ray 
ECG signal analysis
• Positive predictivity
• High sensitivity
• High overall accuracy
• Not performing real-time analysis
• Not incorporating many classes of
arrhythmia signals for analysis
• High computational time
• Hybrid algorithm
Srisukkham et al. 
Intelligent Leukaemia diagnosis
• Escaping from the local optima trap
• Accelerated chaotic search
• Not considering the velocity, as well as,
only updating the particles’ positions
• Two modified BBPSO algorithms
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
Table 4   Summary of some seminal researches in environmental applications
Main subject
Case study
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Kumar et al. 
Short-term temperature prediction using ambient sensors
Environmental monitoring
• Improving the generalization
performance
• Improving the accuracy
• Not testing in a real environment
• Hybrid model
Zarei et al. 
Multi-purpose water reservoir
Shahid Dam Reservoir in Fars,
southern Iran
• Low computational time
• High mean water release
• High reliability
• Not evaluating monetary cost
• Hybrid evolutionary algorithm
Chen et al. 
Forecasting short-term atmospheric pollutant concentration
based on PSO-SVM
Temple of Heaven, Beijing
• High forecasting accuracy
• Low runtime
• Considering temporary
emergencies (such as major
holidays) as influential factors
• Hybrid forecasting model
Rahgoshay et al. Predicting daily suspended
sediment load
Royan and Veynakeh earth
dams in Semnan, Iran
• Increasing accuracy
• Reducing the computational
time and RMSE
• Structure is so simple and
does not have complex
parameters
• Support vector method
Kour and Arora 
Segmentation and classification
of plants based on leaf images
using hybrid PSO-SVM
Agriculture environment
• High accuracy
• Low computational time
• Not considering plants with
medicinal and scientific
significance
• Automatic vision-based
Cao et al. 
Remote sensing to monitor
water quality based on HJ-1A
HSI imagery
Inland waters in Weishan Lake,
• High prediction
• High stability
• Fast convergence
• Using hyperspectral sensors
with low spectral resolution
• Not testing on diverse lakes
• Catastrophe strategy-modified
Ali Ghorbani et al. 
Forecasting daily pan evaporation based on hybrid ANN-
QPSO embedded into a multilayer perceptron method
Talesh meteorological station in
Northern Iran
• High level of accuracy
• Not addressing non-stationarity in the climate datasets
• Uncertainty in the forecasted
evaporation data
• Forecasting & decision-support
Ehteram et al. 
Improving the Muskingum
flood routing method
Wilson, Karahan, and Viessman and Lewis floods in the
USA and UK
• Increasing significance in
Obtaining the best solutions
• Decreasing the computational
• Building the Muskingum
models with little parameters
• Hybrid BA and PSO algorithm
Camci et al. 
Quality inspection for rice
farms by employing quadcopters
Rice farms in Longsheng,
• High performance in handling noise and uncertainties
in the system
• Ineffective quadcopter control
in natural landscapes
• Control structure
general domain include service allocation, image segmentation, scheduling, prediction, and security management.
7  Discussion and Comparisons
Similar to many other meta-heuristic algorithms, PSO has
distinctive advantages, as well as some unavoidable shortcomings. Although there is no evidence of convergence for
this algorithm, the results presented in this study indicate its
competitiveness over, for example, EAs in terms of convergence rates and accuracy in many cases. Table 9 lists some
of the impacting strengths and weaknesses of PSO.
Previous sections discussed the review process of the
selected studies regarding PSO methods and applications.
In turn, this section statistically analyzes those methods and
application areas. Furthermore, the proposed AQs proposed
in Sect. 4 are called to present some analytical reports as
Table 5   Summary of some seminal researches in industrial applications
Main subject
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Maiyar and Thakkar 
Food grain transportation
• Reducing food grain
• Economic and environmental results
• Not considering perishable food grain products
• Algorithm
• Decision support tool
Alnaqi et al. 
Prediction of energetic
performance of a building
integrated photovoltaic/
thermal system
• High performance
• High reliability
• Not considering scalability
• Neural network model
• Hybrid algorithm
Mohebbi et al. 
Optimal design of a
mechatronic quadrotor
• Integrated concurrent
• Not evaluating on a
multi-agent platform
• Algorithm
Wang et al. 
Recognizing and diagnosing potential faults for
nuclear power plants
• Improving the classification accuracy
• Reducing the training
• Reducing noise
• Not evaluating actual
• Hybrid fault diagnosis
• Hybrid algorithm
Liu et al. 
Multi-objective optimization design of the
airborne electro-optical
• Reducing mass
• Improving stability
• Reducing mechanical
• Only three targets were
considered in the multiobjective optimization
• Hybrid algorithm
Ghorbani et al. 
Optimal sizing of an
off-grid house with PV
panels, Wind Turbines
(WTs), and battery
• Increased reliability
• Minimizing the total
monetary cost
• Not presenting the total
accuracy evaluation
• Hybrid PV-WT generating unit
• Hybrid algorithm
Jiang et al. 
Generating association
rules for supporting
effective design based on
online customer reviews
• Low time-consuming
• Low monetary cost
• Inability to detect spamming reviews
• Affected by sentimental
• Algorithm
• Decision support system
Song et al. 
Positioning a 3D wind
turbine with multiple hub
heights on flat terrain
• High power production
• Low monetary cost
• Lack of assessment on
complicated and realistic
wind farm optimization
• Hybrid algorithm
Qi et al. 
Predicting the unconfined
compressive strength of
cemented paste backfill
• Low cost
• Low response time
• High accuracy
• Not foreseeing the longterm strength
• Omission of some influencing variables
• Algorithm
Lopes et al. 
Distribution of electrical
loads throughout the day
in an industrial environment
• Minimizing the cost of
industry production
• Better-quality solutions
• Not evaluating computational time
• Testing on small datasets
• Hybrid algorithm
Rahman and Zobaa 
Optimizing PMUs placement
• Reducing the computational cost
• Reducing the number of
PMUs needed for IEEE
300-bus system
• Not considering scalability
• Algorithm
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
• AQ1: Into which domains can PSO methods and applications be classified?
According to the taxonomy exhibited in Sect. 5, Fig. 6
depicts a comparison of the percentages of PSO methods as
of the date of this study. I considered three PSO methods that
span hybridization, improvement, and variants. As shown in
Fig. 7, PSO variants have the largest share of PSO methods
in the literature at 42%. Of course, hybridization techniques
have 32%, and improved PSO approaches have 26% usage
of the PSO methods.
Similarly, according to the taxonomy exhibited in Sect. 6,
Fig. 8 depicts a comparison of the portions of PSO applications as of the date of this study. Six PSO application
domains, including health-care, environmental, industrial,
commercial, smart city, and general aspects applications,
are considered. If we look closely, the general approach has
the largest percentage of application areas in the literature
with a usage ratio of 27%. Of course, industrial applications
have 20%, environmental applications have 17%, smart city
applications have 16%, health-care applications have 11%,
and commercial applications have 9% usage out of the overall PSO applications domain.
• AQ2: Which main contexts can be considered for PSO
methods and applications?
Within the framework of this study, the main contexts of
PSO methods and applications are shown in Fig. 9. It has
been observed that the electrical engineering field received
the most attention from scholars and practitioners with 13
studies, while prediction, image processing, and mechanical
engineering approaches were 6 studies.
• AQ3: What assessment environments are used for evaluating the PSO methods and applications?
According to Fig. 10, it has been observed that 47% of the
research studies apply simulation tools to evaluate the presented case studies in the PSO community. In addition, it has
been observed that 33% of the research papers have implemented approaches to develop PSO methods and applications. Moreover, 11% of the researches have not presented
any simulation or implementation for the indicated methods
and application domain. Finally, 9% of the existing studies
use datasets to apply analysis approaches (e.g., testing and
prediction) for assessing the involved case studies.
8  Challenges and Future Opportunities
While PSO has been effectively applied in versatile domains,
challenges are required to be addressed and drawn as future
research directions. In the past few years, PSO has gained an
increasing interest from researchers and has been utilized in
different areas of applications. However, critical problems
and issues remain. Thus, more research efforts should be
done by scholars and researchers to conquer the challenges
and problems that may hinder the future application of PSO.
Moreover, further inspirations and more effective techniques
should be pursued to develop novel PSO approaches. For
example, the research community needs to address new
methodologies for complex problems. Based on the literature review, I discuss below different open issues and related
topics for potential future research.
I should point out that the assortment of PSO methods
and applications mentioned in this study applied the SR process so that the challenges discussed in the following two
subsections are presented as the AQ4:
Table 6   Summary of some seminal researches in commercial applications
Main subject
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Jiao et al. 
Optimal location for an
electric business centre
• Social benefits
• Low cost
• High transportation
convenience
• Not including the multiobjective concept
• Location estimation
• Hybrid algorithm
Tang et al. 
Forecasting building materials’ prices
• High scalability
• Fast convergence rate
• High prediction precision
• Not evaluating computational time
• Price prediction model
• Hybrid algorithm
Shen and Han 
Profit calculation module
of financial accounting
information system
• Getting real-time financial processing results
• Not considering computational cost
• Accounting information
Yi et al. 
Cost prediction of transmission line project
• Strong practical significance
• Improving the accuracy
• Not evaluating scalability • Intelligent cost prediction
Pradeepkumar and Ravi
Forecasting volatility from
financial time series
• Yielding statistically
significant results
• Not evaluating the overall
computational time
• Neural network model
Table 7   Summary of some seminal researches in smart city applications
Main subject
Case study
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Abid et al. 
Managing energy in smart homes
Residential area of ten homes • Low cost
• Low power consumption
• Not comparing the presented
method with other existing ones
• Not evaluating accuracy
• Energy management
• Algorithm
Zhang et al. 
GIS-based placement of charging
stations for electric vehicles
Changping, Beijing, China
• High revenue
• High coverage
• Low cost
• Considering only two scenarios
• Algorithm
• Placement model
Li et al. 
Forecasting Day-ahead traffic flow
• High stability
• High accuracy
• High time-consuming
• The dataset is for a small fraction
of a highway
• Hybrid model
• Algorithm
Jordehi 
Scheduling shiftable appliances
Smart home
• Reducing consumers’ daily
electricity bill without affecting
their comfort
• Not considering scalability
• Hybrid algorithm
Le et al. 
Estimating and controlling the
heating load of buildings
Smart city
• Robust technique
• High reliability
• Not evaluating cost
• Low accuracy of some proposed
• Hybrid algorithm
Ma et al. 
Appliance scheduling
Residential unit
• Obtaining profits from selling
electricity to the power grid
• Good convergence performance
• Uncertainty of renewable generation
• Appliance scheduling
Hu et al. 
Scheduling urban traffic light
An area centering Xudong,
Wuhan, China
• Elaborating traffic congestion
• Controlling vehicle movements
• Not considering the case of selforganized cities
• Not considering scalability
Not evaluating cost
• Hybrid algorithm
Sato et al. 
Multifaceted optimization of power
Smart city
• Improving the solution quality
• Not evaluating monetary cost
• Low scalability
• Not verifying the robustness
• Hybrid algorithm
Ramya et al. Retrieval of deprived riot video
Smart city
• Can be used with other signal
and image processing techniques
• Identifying the previous criminal
records in a particular region of
the smart city
• Low accuracy when processing
large databases
• Algorithm
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
Table 8   Summary of some seminal researches in general aspects of PSO applications
Main subject
Shortcomings
New finding(s)
Bhattacharya et al. 
Permission based detection of
Android malwares
• High scalability
• High classification performance
• Considering only the permissions set
• Not handling float datasets
• Hybrid algorithm
Sivaranjani et al. 
Speckle noise removal in
SAR images
• Considering reference and
no-reference metrics in
experiments
• Optimizing threshold values
• Not considering scalability
• Algorithm
• Framework
Zarrouk et al. 
Job shop scheduling problem
• Low CPU time
• High-quality solutions
• Not considering the cost
• Algorithm
Mansouri et al. 
Task scheduling in cloud
• Low resource usage
• Low execution time
• Not trying in a real cloud
environment
• Not combining fault tolerance parameters in cloud
• Not considering the precedence of tasks and load
• Algorithm
Lin et al. 
Set-union knapsack problem
• High-quality solutions
• High computational cost
Hybrid algorithm
Zhong et al. 
Travelling salesman problem
• High balance between
intensification and diversification
• Not comparing with a substantial number of previous
optimization techniques
• Algorithm
Mokhtari and Noroozi 
Flow shop scheduling
• No job earliness or tardiness
• Considering only commercial optimization of
problem instances with
small size
• Algorithm
Sun et al. 
Locating attacks’ position in
• Low energy consumption
Low task processing time
• Not locating the attack
source nodes
• Algorithm
Thabit and Mohades 
Path planning of multi-robots
• Short, safe, and smooth
• Not implementing realworld case studies
• Algorithm
Nouiri et al. 
Job shop scheduling problem
• Decentralizing decisions
• Effectiveness in directing
real production
• High energy consumption
• Not all entities participate
in the final solution
• Architecture
Alswaitti et al. 
Data clustering
• High cluster compactness
• High classification accuracy
• Lack of assessment on realworld applications
• Algorithm
Suresh and Lal 
Segmentation of satellite
images based on multilevel
thresholding
• Robust and fast algorithm
• High Stability
• Low quality metric values
• High computational time
• Algorithm
Sheikholeslami and Navimipour 
Service allocation in cloud
• High revenue for cloud
users and providers
• Fast resource provisioning
• High resource utilization
• No sensitivity analysis
for different weighting
parameters
• Not implementing in realistic cloud environment
• Not evaluating customer
satisfaction
• Algorithm
Table 9   Advantages and disadvantages of PSO
Advantages
Disadvantages
• Simple implementation
• Relatively few parameters to tuned
• Ability to run parallel computations
• Robustness
• Higher efficiency and probability to find the global optima
• Fast convergence
• No overlapping or mutation
• Low computational time
• Ability to build accurate mathematical models for solving complex
• Difficulty to initialize control parameters
• Inability to work out the problem of swarm scattering
• Premature convergence and trapping into the local minima especially
on solving high-dimensional problems
• AQ4: What are generally the PSO open perspectives and
future research directions that can be drawn from the
work presented in the paper?
8.1  Open Issues
Premature convergence When applying the traditional PSO
algorithm, if the search gets closer to the local optimal solution through random initial conditions, the optimal solution
for a single particle (individual particle optimum) and the
optimal solution for all particles (the group/global optimum)
would both converge towards the local optimal solution, and
a deceptive optimization result will therefore be obtained.
Thus, it is not possible to guarantee the capability of finding
the global optimal solution. As a result, the fast convergence
capability will be ineffective. Over the past few years, the
issue of stagnation (premature convergence) has been a subject of research in the PSO community . A roadmap for future research in this regard can be created based
on some topics, including particles’ stability analysis ,
redistributing mechanism , and random sampling of
control parameters .
Convergence speed controller Despite the typical fast
convergence of PSO, it may be trapped into a local optimum
due to premature converge. Therefore, a convergence speed
controller was devised for the ultimate goal of solving this
Learning Strategy
Fuzzy Logic
Lévy Flight
Opposi on-Based
Fig. 6   Percentage of the presented PSO methods
Fig. 7   Total percentage of the presented PSO methods
Fig. 8   Percentage of the presented PSO applications
Fig. 9   Percentage of the main
contexts for PSO methods and
applications
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
problem. Two adaptive approaches were proposed to adjust
the convergence speed. First, when the particle prematurely
converges, the convergence speed is slowed down. Second,
when the particle cannot update its best solution in the present time, the convergence speed of PSO is accelerated.
Thus, a key residual challenge is developing an effective
convergence speed controller . In the same context, for
improving the convergence speed of PSO-based algorithms,
the social and cognitive components of the velocity update
formula are modified based on the fitness of each particle
 . In addition, the convergence speed is adaptively controlled to empower the PSO algorithm for solving large-scale
numerical optimization problems . Hence, designing
an appropriate convergence speed controller framework for
PSO has become a major challenge in this topic.
High-dimensional search space Because of the curse of
dimensionality problem, the effectiveness of PSO application to classification of high-dimensional data has recently
gained a major concern . In a recent study, the effectiveness of PSO approach for feature selection has been
demonstrated. However, due to the large search space, the
challenge sill exists to apply PSO-based feature selection to
high-dimensional datasets with tens of thousands of features
 . In addition, the PSO algorithm can be adapted for
the problem of high-dimensional feature selection, providing
thereby an efficient technique for achieving similar or even
better classification accuracy by not using all features but
instead selecting only a small set of relevant features from
a wide range of features . The key challenges in this
area include novel approaches like Monte Carlo methods
 that simultaneously minimize the number of chosen
features and maximize the classification accuracy in PSO
applications.
Memory requirement All living systems have memory
as an essential feature. According to the evolutionism perspective, it is worthwhile examining the potential helpful
role of historical memory in the process of EAs. That is
mainly because the explicit or implicit historical memory in
PSO improves the search process by storing promising solutions and reusing them in later stages . Furthermore,
a new inertia weight can be generated by using historical
memory through a parameter adaptation mechanism. Therefore, improving PSO using historical memory is a pressing
challenge . And how to set the memory size adaptively can be also considered as an interesting topic to be
addressed in the future .
Parameter & topology selection In PSO-based algorithms, the best performance can be achieved by elaborately
determining the control parameters. However, choosing
these parameters cannot be adequately guided. To address
the job of parameter selection, future efforts in this topic
should include choosing the best parameters based on simulations , parametric analysis in a computational environment with limited resources , and hyper-parameter
selection based on heuristics . On the other hand, the
performance of PSO in engineering applications is significantly affected by topology selection, and each problem has
its appropriate optimal topology. However, this issue still
lacks much study. As a future direction, topology selection
for PSO can be better guided by taking into account factors
affecting the optimality of algorithmic parameters (i.e., the
topological degree and the number of particles) with the aim
of selecting a proper class of deterministic regular topologies . Other challenges including, studying and evaluating the performance of tree topology and suggesting
different topologies for the PSO optimizer in order to reach,
for example, an optimal Proportional-Integral-Derivative
(PID) controller design , are also pressing issues which
calls for further research and audit.
8.2  Future Perspectives
PSO was practically applied for the first time to the domain
of neural network training, which was indicated by the
algorithm itself . Many more areas of PSO methods
and application have been explored ever since, including
signal processing, power systems, combinatorial optimization, design, data mining, control, telecommunications, and
many others. To date, applications of PSO algorithms are
reported in hundreds of publications . Although the
main use of PSO is to solve unconstrained, single-objective
optimization problems, a development has been made to
PSO algorithms for solving constrained problems, multiobjective optimization problems, problems with dynamically
changing landscapes, discrete problems, and for finding multiple solutions as well . However, several PSO methods
and applications can be sophisticated in some areas as future
research directions in this topic as follows:
Nuero Fuzzy Network (NFN) Nuero Fuzzy Network
(NFN) is an intelligent method for system identification,
Fig. 10   Percentage of the PSO assessment environments offered in
the literature
modelling, prediction, and control. In NFN, gradient-based
algorithms are generally used for training. However, these
algorithms have some disadvantages concerning, for example, getting stuck at local minima, which needs for complex
gradient computations to be conquered. Accordingly, Karakuzu et al. used improved PSO to introduce the first
embedded high-speed, low-cost implementation of NFN
hardware through online training. It has been observed that
that the effectiveness of the proposed NFN implementation
is similar to other approaches in the literature, thereby generating a novel idea for future research. In a different approach
to NFNs, Vijay and Jena utilized the PSO to minimize
the quadratic performance indices for obtaining optimal sliding control parameters and PID parameters. In this study,
Lyapunov stability theorem was used to improve the stability of the system by integrating sliding mode control into
artificial neuro fuzzy inference system. Thus, it can be concluded that NFN can be applied to the robot manipulator for
real-time control, where good control performance can be
obtained by adaptively changing sliding control parameters
under different input disturbances.
Color image processing In this regard, Gaussian PSO
(GPSO) was used to develop a color image quantization
algorithm . In the proposed algorithm, each particle in
the swarm is randomly initialized with k centroids (i.e. color
triplets). The cluster with the closest centroid to a pixel in
the image is recognized to assign this pixel to that cluster.
The centroids obtained by K-means clustering are refined
by applying the GPSO. Experimentation showed that using
GPSO method for the color image quantization gives significantly better image quality than conventional PSO-based
approaches. In anther work, a multi-level color image thresholding algorithm was developed on the bases of GLLA histogram and Tsallis-Havrda-Charvát entropy of degree 훼 .
Compared with the existing models, the proposed model
achieved better performance results by applying the PSO
algorithm. However, so far only a limited number of studies
reported how to apply together the quantization and multilevel thresholding techniques to a color image.
Image registration Image registration is defined as taking several 2D images from various sources, such as Computer Assisted Tomography (CAT) and Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) scans, and combining them into a 3D image.
Recently, a hybrid approach for registering medical images
has been developed by employing a PSO method and
an adjusted mutual information as a similarity index, or
general meta-heuristics . However, there are still trend
applications for future research, including registering the
images of a printed circuit board placed on a conveyor belt
using an improved scale invariant feature transform, feature
extraction technique combined with PSO . Also, using
PSO algorithm for remote sensing images registration less
affected by the correction rate is another major trend
for future research.
Computational biology A long DNA chain first needs
to be divided into subset fragments for determining its
sequence. Therefore, combinatorial optimization researchers
used the DNA Fragment Assembly method (DFA) to solve
the NP-hard problem of reassembling the fragment. The
DFA problem is solved by applying the overlap-layout-consensus model to maximize the overlapping score measurement using a memetic PSO algorithm based on two initialization operators, as well as the local search operator .
On 19 DNA fragment datasets, the results revealed that the
PSO algorithm combining SA-based variable neighborhood
local search and TS achieves the best overlap scores. Future
works could address interesting issues, such as reducing
the computational time by using DNA sequence compression, improving the initialization method of the algorithm,
using an alternative search approach, and so on. In a similar biological application, some variants of the PSO algorithm have been utilized to extensively tackle the molecular
docking problem and the problem of conformational search
in protein-ligands . Ultimately, the literature has
reported significant results. Thus, it is natural to solve biological problems by applying the PSO algorithm.
Recommender systems PSO was utilized as a tuning
mechanism in a further area in which software tools are created to develop recommendations to entrepreneurs or even
end users. Explicit feedback data (i.e., votes or ratings) are
usually used to build most of the existing recommender
models. However, real-life scenarios do not always contain
explicit feedback data. For example, a hybrid music recommender system was suggested based on implicit feedback
data by utilizing graph-based algorithms for making songs
recommendations based on the user-s preferences and behavior . Furthermore, PSO-based web-page recommendation system was developed on health-care multimedia data
to track user navigation behavior by utilizing semantic web
mining . In the future work, these systems can be further extended to include other E-health care application, and/
or social networking sites like twitter and Facebook.
9  Conclusions and Recommendations
In this literature, the exploration query on 3,632 papers published between 2017 and 2019 was executed to fulfill the
proposed SR process. 2,140 papers related to PSO methods
and applications were selected. Amongst them, I briefly
discussed and analyzed only 84 papers to retain the proper
length of the paper. According to AQ1, on the one hand, the
PSO variants have the most percentage of the PSO methods
in the literature by 42% of quota. Of course, hybridization
techniques have 32%, and improved PSO techniques have
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm and Its Applications: A Systematic Review﻿
26% of portions of PSO methods. On the other hand, the
general approach has the most percentage of the application domains in the literature by 27% of quota, emphasizing the broad application of PSO in diverse subject areas.
Also, industrial applications, environmental applications,
smart city applications, health-care applications, commercial applications have 20%, 17%, 16%, 11%, and 9% portions of all existing PSO applications, respectively. It has
also been observed that electrical engineering approaches
have the highest percentage, with 13 studies, and prediction,
image processing, and mechanical engineering approaches
are with 6 studies, based on AQ2. According to AQ3, 47%
of the research studies applied simulation tools to evaluate
the case studies presented in the PSO environment.
According to the adopted SR process, I must acknowledge
that not all present studies may have been analyzed; nonpeer reviewed, non-English book chapters, survey articles,
and editorial papers were omitted. In this study, the findings
of more than 120 authors and diverse studies were considered to perform a comprehensive research of the methods
and application approaches in PSO. However, as the research
ended in November 2019, it is not possible to guarantee that
all relevant seminal works are covered herein, especially
with the increasing number of studies in this field.
Finally, the SR method presented in this review focused
primarily on PSO methods and applications. Through this
study, the PSO methods and applications were comprehensively understood. In addition, open issues and future perspectives were considered. However, the PSO algorithm still
needs further research in the following areas:
• Studying the effects of heterogeneity in PSO algorithms.
• Hybridizing PSO with novel optimization techniques,
such as Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) , Whale
Optimization Algorithm (WOA) , Lion Optimization Algorithm (LOA) , Elephant Herding Optimization (EHO) , and Jaya Algorithm (JA) .
• Implementation of innovated smart city applications,
such as smart metering, smart farming, smart logistics,
and smart buildings.
• Further applications for addressing different issues in
cloud computing.
• Addressing more complex/large-scale real-world problems, NP-hard problems, and discrete optimization problems to discover new limitations of PSO.
Funding  Open access funding provided by The Science, Technology &
Innovation Funding Authority (STDF) in cooperation with The Egyptian Knowledge Bank (EKB).
Declaration
Conflict of interest  The single/corresonding author declares no conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit