The VLDB Journal 10: 334–350 / Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) 10.1007/s007780100057
A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Erhard Rahm1, Philip A. Bernstein2
1 Universit¨at Leipzig, Institut f¨ur Informatik, 04109 Leipzig, Germany; (e-mail: )
2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052-6399, USA; (e-mail: )
Edited by P. Scheuermann. Received: 5 February 2001 / Accepted: 6 September 2001
Published online: 21 November 2001 – c⃝Springer-Verlag 2001
Abstract. Schema matching is a basic problem in many
database application domains, such as data integration, Ebusiness, data warehousing, and semantic query processing.
In current implementations, schema matching is typically performed manually, which has signiﬁcant limitations. On the
other hand, previous research papers have proposed many
techniques to achieve a partial automation of the match operation for speciﬁc application domains. We present a taxonomy that covers many of these existing approaches, and we
describe the approaches in some detail. In particular, we distinguish between schema-level and instance-level, element-level
and structure-level, and language-based and constraint-based
matchers. Based on our classiﬁcation we review some previous match implementations thereby indicating which part
of the solution space they cover. We intend our taxonomy and
review of past work to be useful when comparing different approaches to schema matching, when developing a new match
algorithm, and when implementing a schema matching component.
Keywords: Schema matching – Schema integration – Graph
matching – Model management – Machine learning
1. Introduction
A fundamental operation in the manipulation of schema information is Match, which takes two schemas as input and
produces a mapping between elements of the two schemas
that correspond semantically to each other [LC94, MIR94,
MZ98, PSU98, MWJ99, DDL00]. Match plays a central role
in numerous applications, such as web-oriented data integration, electronic commerce, schema integration, schema evolution and migration, application evolution, data warehousing, database design, web site creation and management, and
component-based development.
Currently, schema matching is typically performed manually, perhaps supported by a graphical user interface. Obviously, manually specifying schema matches is a tedious, timeconsuming, error-prone, and therefore expensive process.This
is a growing problem given the rapidly increasing number of
web data sources and E-businesses to integrate. Moreover, as
systems become able to handle more complex databases and
applications, their schemas become larger, further increasing
the number of matches to be performed. The level of effort
is at least linear in the number of matches to be performed,
maybe worse than linear if one needs to evaluate each match in
the context of other possible matches of the same elements. A
faster and less labor-intensive integration approach is needed.
This requires automated support for schema matching.
To provide this automated support, we would like to see
a generic, customizable implementation of Match that is usable across application areas. This would make it easier to
build application-speciﬁc tools that include automatic schema
match. Such a generic implementation can also be a key component within a more comprehensive model management approach, such as the one proposed in [BHP00, Be00, BR00],
where the mapping returned by a match operation may be
used as input to operations to merge schemas and compose
Fortunately, there is a lot of previous work on schema
matching developed in the context of schema translation and
integration, knowledge representation, machine learning, and
information retrieval. The main goals of this paper are to survey these past approaches and to present a taxonomy that explains their common features.We expect the survey to be helpful both to designers of new approaches and to users who need
to select from a library of approaches.
In the next section, we summarize some example applications of schema matching. Section 3 deﬁnes the match operator, and Section 4 describes a high-level architecture for implementing it. Section 5 provides a classiﬁcation of different
ways to perform Match automatically. This section illustrates
both the complexity of the problem and (at least part of) the
solution space. We use the classiﬁcation in Sects. 6 through
8 to organize our presentation of previously proposed techniques and to explain how they may be applied in the overall
architecture. Section 9 is a literature review, which describes
some integrated solutions and how they ﬁt in our classiﬁcation.
Section 10 is the conclusion.
2. Application domains
To motivate the importance of schema matching, we summarize its use in several database application domains.
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
2.1. Schema integration
Most work on schema match has been motivated by schema
integration, a problem that has been investigated since the
early 1980s: Given a set of independently developed schemas,
construct a global view [BLN86, EP90, SL90, PS98]. In an
artiﬁcial intelligence setting, this is the problem of integrating
independently developed ontologies into a single ontology.
Since the schemas are independently developed, they often
have different structure and terminology. This can obviously
occur when the schemas are from different domains, such as
a real estate schema and property tax schema. However, it
also occurs even if they model the same real world domain,
just because they were developed by different people in different real-world contexts. Thus, a ﬁrst step in integrating the
schemas is to identify and characterize these interschema relationships. This is a process of schema matching. Once they
are identiﬁed, matching elements can be uniﬁed under a coherent, integrated schema or view. During this integration, or
sometimes as a separate step, programs or queries are created
that permit translation of data from the original schemas into
the integrated representation.
A variation of the schema integration problem is to integrate an independently developed schema with a given conceptual schema. Again, this requires reconciling the structure
and terminology of the two schemas, which involves schema
2.2. Data warehouses
A variation of the schema integration problem that became
popular in the 1990s is that of integrating data sources into
a data warehouse. A data warehouse is a decision support
database that is extracted from a set of data sources. The extraction process requires transforming data from the source
format into the warehouse format. As shown in [BR00], the
match operation is useful for designing transformations. Given
a data source, one approach to creating appropriate transformations is to start by ﬁnding those elements of the source that
are also present in the warehouse. This is a match operation.
After an initial mapping is created, the data warehouse designer needs to examine the detailed semantics of each source
element and create transformations that reconcile those semantics with those of the target.
Another approach to integrating a new data source S′ is to
reuse an existing source-to-warehouse transformation S⇒W.
First, the common elements of S′ and S are found (a match
operation) and then S⇒W is reused for those common elements.
2.3. E-commerce
In the current decade, E-commerce has led to a new motivation
for schema matching: message translation. Trading partners
frequently exchange messages that describe business transactions. Usually, each trading partner uses its own message
format. Message formats may differ in their syntax, such as
EDI (electronic data interchange) structures, XML, or custom
data structures. They may also use different message schemas.
To enable systems to exchange messages, application developers need to convert messages between the formats required
by different trading partners.
Part of the message translation problem is translating between different message schemas. Message schemas may use
different names, somewhat different data types, and different
ranges of allowable values. Fields are grouped into structures
that also may differ between the two formats. For example,
one may be a ﬂat structure that simply lists ﬁelds while another may group related ﬁelds. Or both formats may use nested
structures but may group ﬁelds in different combinations.
Translating between different message schemas is, in part,
a schema matching problem. Today, application designers
need to specify manually how message formats are related. A
match operation would reduce the amount of manual work by
generating a draft mapping between the two message schemas,
which an application designer can subsequently validate and
modify as needed.
Schema match may also be helpful to applications being
considered for the semantic web [BHL01], such as mapping
messages between autonomous agents or matching declarative
mediator deﬁnitions.
2.4. Semantic query processing
Schema integration, data warehousing, and E-commerce are
all similar in that they involve the design-time analysis of
schemas to produce mappings and, possibly an integrated
schema.A somewhat different scenario is semantic query processing – a run-time scenario where a user speciﬁes the output
of a query (e.g., the SELECT clause in SQL), and the system
ﬁgures out how to produce that output (e.g., by determining
the FROM and WHERE clauses in SQL). The user’s speci-
ﬁcation is stated in terms of concepts familiar to her, which
may not be the same as the names of elements speciﬁed in the
database schema. Therefore, in the ﬁrst phase of processing
the query, the system must map the user-speciﬁed concepts
in the query output to schema elements. This too is a natural
application of the match operation.
After mapping the query output to the schema elements,
the system must derive a qualiﬁcation (e.g., a WHERE clause)
that gives the semantics of the mapping. Techniques for deriving this qualiﬁcation have been developed over the past 20
years [MRSS82, KKFG84, WS90, RYAC00]. We expect that
these techniques can be generalized to specify the semantics
of a mapping produced by the match operation. However, an
investigation of this hypothesis is beyond the scope of this
3. The match operator
To deﬁne the match operator, Match, we need to choose a
representation for its input schemas and output mapping. We
want to explore many approaches to Match. These approaches
depend a lot on the kinds of schema information they use and
how they interpret it. However, they depend hardly at all on
that information’s internal representation, except to the extent
that it is expressive enough to represent the information of
interest. Therefore, for the purposes of this paper, we deﬁne
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Table 1. Sample input schemas
S1 elements
S2 elements
a schema to be simply a set of elements connected by some
structure.
In practice, a particular representation must be chosen,
such as an entity-relationship (ER) model, an object-oriented
(OO) model, XML, or directed graphs. In each case, there is
a natural correspondence between the building blocks of the
representation and the notions of elements and structure: entities and relationships in ER models; objects and relationships
in OO models; elements, subelements, and IDREFs in XML;
and nodes and edges in graphs.
We deﬁne a mapping to be a set of mapping elements,
each of which indicates that certain elements of schema S1
are mapped to certain elements in S2. Furthermore, each mapping element can have a mapping expression which speciﬁes
how the S1 and S2 elements are related. The mapping expression may be directional, for example, a certain function
from the S1 elements referenced by the mapping element to
the S2 elements referenced by the mapping element, or it may
be non-directional, that is, a relation between a combination
of elements of S1 and S2. It may use simple relations over
scalars (e.g., =, ≤), functions (e.g., addition or concatenation), ER-style relationships (e.g., is-a, part-of), set-oriented
relationships (e.g., overlaps, contains [LNE89]), or any other
terms that are deﬁned in the expression language being used.
For example, Table 1 shows two schemas S1 and S2
representing customer information. A mapping between S1
and S2 could contain a mapping element relating Cust.C#
to Customer.CustID with the mapping expression “Cust.C#
= Customer.CustID”. A mapping element with the expression “Concatenate(Cust.FirstName, Cust.LastName) = Customer.Contact”describesamappingbetweentwoS1elements
and one S2 element.
We deﬁne the match operation to be a function that takes
two schemas S1 and S2 as input and returns a mapping between those two schemas as output, called the match result.
Eachmappingelementofthematchresultspeciﬁesthatcertain
elements of schema S1 logically correspond to, i.e., match,
certain elements of S2, where the semantics of this correspondence is expressed by the mapping element’s mapping
expression.
Unfortunately, the criteria used to match elements of S1
and S2 are based on heuristics that are not easily captured in a
precise mathematical way that can guide us in the implementation of Match. Thus, we are left with the practical, though
mathematicallyunsatisfying,goalofproducingamappingthat
is consistent with heuristics that approximate our understanding of what users consider to be a good match.
Similar to previous work we focus mostly on match algorithms that return a mapping that does not include mapping
expressions.We therefore often represent a mapping as a similarity relation, ∼=, over the powersets of S1 and S2, where each
pair in ∼= represents one mapping element of the mapping. For
example, the result of calling Match on the schemas of Table
1 could be “Cust.C# ∼= Customer.CustID”, “Cust.CName ∼=
Customer.Company”,and“{Cust.FirstName,Cust.LastName}
∼= Customer.Contact”. A complete speciﬁcation of the result
of the invocation of Match would also include the mapping expressionofeachelement,thatis“Cust.C#=Customer.CustID”,
“Cust.CName = Customer. Company”, and “Concatenate
(Cust.FirstName, Cust.LastName) = Customer.Contact”. In
what follows, when mapping expressions are involved, we
will explicitly mention them. Otherwise, we will simply use
As we will see, some implementations of Match are similar
to join processing in relational databases, in that both Match
and Join are binary operations that determine pairs of corresponding elements from their input operands. There are many
differences, of course. Match operates on metadata (schema
elements) and Join on data (rows of tables). Moreover, Match
is more complex than Join. Each element in the Join result
combines only one element of the ﬁrst with one matching element of the second input, while an element in a match result
can relate multiple elements from both inputs. Furthermore,
Join semantics is speciﬁed by a single comparison expression
(e.g., an equality condition for natural join) that must hold
for all matching input elements. By contrast, each element
in a match result may have a different mapping expression.
Hence, the semantics of Match is less restricted than that of
Join and is more difﬁcult to capture in a consistent way.
The similarity of Match and Join extends to OuterMatch
operations, which are useful counterparts to Match in much
the same way that OuterJoin is a counterpart to Join. A right
(or left) OuterMatch ensures that every element of S2 (or S1)
is referenced by the mapping.A full OuterMatch ensures every
element of both S1 and S2 are referenced by the mapping. By
ensuring that every element of a schema S is referenced in the
mapping returned by Match, the mapping can be more easily
composed with other mappings that refer to S. Examples of
such compositions appear in [BR00], which introduced the
OuterMatch operation. Although the usage of OuterMatch involves some subtlety, its implementation is a straightforward
extension of Match: given an algorithm for the match operation, OuterMatch can easily be computed by adding elements
to the match result that reference the otherwise non-referenced
elements of S1 or S2. We therefore do not consider Outer-
Match further in this paper.
4. Architecture for generic match
When reviewing and comparing approaches to Match, it helps
to have an implementation architecture in mind. We therefore
describe a high-level architecture for a generic, customizable
implementation of Match.
Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture. The clients are
schema-related applications and tools from different domains,
such as E-business, portals, and data warehousing. Each client
uses the generic implementation of Match to automatically
determine matches between two input schemas. XML schema
editors, portal development kits, database modeling tools and
the like may access libraries to select existing schemas, shown
in the lower left of Fig.1. The implementation of Match may
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Global libraries
(dictionaries, schemas
Generic Match
implementation
(Portal schemas)
(E-business schemas)
Tool 3 (Data
warehousing schemas)
Schema import/ export
Tool 4 (Database
design schemas)
Internal schema
representation
Global libraries
(dictionaries, schemas
Generic Match
implementation
(Portal schemas)
(Portal schemas)
(E-business schemas)
(E-business schemas)
Tool 3 (Data
warehousing schemas)
Tool 3 (Data
warehousing schemas)
Schema import/ export
Tool 4 (Database
design schemas)
Tool 4 (Database
design schemas)
Internal schema
representation
Fig. 1. High-level architecture of generic Match
Table 2. Full vs partial structural match (example)
S1 elements
S2 elements
CustomerAddress
PostalCode
full structural match of
Address and CustomerAddress
AccountOwner
partial structural match ofAccountOwner and
also use the libraries and other auxiliary information, such as
dictionaries and thesauri, to help ﬁnd matches.
We assume that the generic implementation of Match represents the schemas to be matched in a uniform internal representation. This uniform representation signiﬁcantly reduces
the complexity of Match by not having to deal with the large
number of different (heterogeneous) representations of
schemas. Tools that are tightly integrated with the framework
can work directly on the internal representation. Other tools
need import/export programs to translate between their native schema representation (such as XML, SQL, or UML) and
the internal representation. A semantics-preserving importer
translates input schemas from their native representation into
the internal representation. Similarly, an exporter translates
mappings produced by the generic implementation of Match
from the internal representation into the representation required by each tool. This allows the generic implementation
of Match to operate exclusively on the internal representation.
In general, it is not possible to determine fully automatically all matches between two schemas, primarily because
most schemas have some semantics that affects the matching criteria but is not formally expressed or often even documented. The implementation of Match should therefore only
determine match candidates, which the user can accept, reject
or change. Furthermore, the user should be able to specify
matches for elements for which the system was unable to ﬁnd
satisfactory match candidates.
5. Classiﬁcation of schema matching approaches
In this section we classify the major approaches to schema
matching. Fig.2 shows part of our classiﬁcation scheme together with some sample approaches.
An implementation of Match may use multiple match algorithms or matchers. This allows us to select the matchers
depending on the application domain and schema types. Given
that we want to use multiple matchers we distinguish two subproblems. First, there is the realization of individual matchers,
each of which computes a mapping based on a single matching criterion. Second, there is the combination of individual matchers, either by using multiple matching criteria (e.g.,
name and type equality) within an integrated hybrid matcher
or by combining multiple match results produced by different
match algorithms within a composite matcher. For individual
matchers, we consider the following largely-orthogonal classiﬁcation criteria:
• Instance vs schema: matching approaches can consider
instance data (i.e., data contents) or only schema-level information.
• Element vs structure matching: match can be performed
for individual schema elements, such as attributes, or for
combinations of elements, such as complex schema structures.
• Language vs constraint: a matcher can use a linguisticbased approach (e.g., based on names and textual descriptions of schema elements) or a constraint-based approach
(e.g., based on keys and relationships).
• Matching cardinality: the overall match result may relate
one or more elements of one schema to one or more elements of the other, yielding four cases: 1:1, 1:n, n:1, n:m.
In addition, each mapping element may interrelate one
or more elements of the two schemas. Furthermore, there
may be different match cardinalities at the instance level.
• Auxiliary information: most matchers rely not only on the
input schemas S1 and S2 but also on auxiliary information, such as dictionaries, global schemas, previous matching decisions, and user input.
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
composition
Composite matchers
Schema Matching Approaches
Individual matcher approaches
Combining matchers
composition
Schema-only based
Instance/contents-based
Further criteria:
- Match cardinality
- Auxiliary information used …
Linguistic
Constraintbased
Structure-level
Element-level
• Type similarity
• Key properties
• Value pattern and
Constraintbased
Linguistic
• IR techniques
(word frequencies,
key terms)
Sample approaches
Element-level
Hybrid matchers
Constraintbased
• Name similarity
• Description
similarity
namespaces
composition
Composite matchers
Schema Matching Approaches
Individual matcher approaches
Combining matchers
composition
Schema-only based
Instance/contents-based
Further criteria:
- Match cardinality
- Auxiliary information used …
Linguistic
Constraintbased
Structure-level
Element-level
• Type similarity
• Key properties
• Value pattern and
Constraintbased
Linguistic
• IR techniques
(word frequencies,
key terms)
Sample approaches
Element-level
Hybrid matchers
Constraintbased
• Name similarity
• Description
similarity
namespaces
Fig. 2. Classiﬁcation of schema matching approaches
Note that our classiﬁcation does not distinguish between different types of schemas (relational, XML, object-oriented,
etc.) and their internal representation, because algorithms depend mostly on the kind of information they exploit, not on
its representation.
In the following three sections, we discuss the main alternatives according to the above classiﬁcation criteria. We discussschema-levelmatchinginSect.6,instance-levelmatching
in Sect.7, and combinations of multiple matchers in Sect.8.
6. Schema-level matchers
Schema-level matchers only consider schema information, not
instance data. The available information includes the usual
properties of schema elements, such as name, description,
data type, relationship types (part-of, is-a, etc.), constraints,
and schema structure. In general, a matcher will ﬁnd multiple
match candidates. For each candidate, it is customary to estimate the degree of similarity by a normalized numeric value
in the range 0–1, in order to identify the best match candidates
(as in [PSU98, BCV99, DDL00, CDD01]).
We ﬁrst discuss the main alternatives for match granularity
andmatchcardinality.Thenwecoverlinguisticandconstraintbased matchers. Finally, we outline approaches based on the
reuse of auxiliary data, such as previously deﬁned schemas
and previous match results.
6.1. Granularity of match (element-level vs structure-level)
We distinguish two main alternatives for the granularity of
Match, element-level and structure-level matching. For each
element of the ﬁrst schema, element-level matching determines the matching elements in the second input schema. In
the simplest case, only elements at the ﬁnest level of granularity are considered, which we call the atomic level, such as attributes in an XML schema or columns in a relational schema.
For the schema fragments shown in Table 2, a sample atomiclevel match is “Address.ZIP ∼= CustomerAddress.PostalCode”
(recall that “∼=” means “matches”).
Structure-level matching, on the other hand, refers to
matching combinations of elements that appear together in a
structure.A range of cases is possible, depending on how complete and precise a match of the structure is required. In the
ideal case, all components of the structures in the two schemas
fully match. Alternatively, only some of the components may
be required to match (i.e., a partial structural match). Examples of the two cases are shown in Table 2. The need for partial
matchessometimesarisesbecausesubschemasofdifferentdomains are being compared. For example, in the second row of
Table 2, AccountOwner may come from a ﬁnance database
while Customer comes from a sales database.
For more complex cases, the effectiveness of structure
matching can be enhanced by considering known equivalence
patterns, which may be kept in a library. One simple pattern
is shown in Fig.3 relating two structures in an is-a hierarchy
to a single structure. The subclass of the ﬁrst schema is represented by a Boolean attribute in the second schema. Another
well-known pattern consists of two structures interconnected
by a referential relationship being equivalent to a single structure (essentially, the join of the two). We will see an example
of this in Sect.6.4.
Element-levelmatchingisnotrestrictedtotheatomiclevel,
butmayalsobeappliedtocoarsergrained,higher(non-atomic)
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Fig. 3. Equivalence pattern
level elements. Sample higher-level granularities include ﬁle
records, entities, classes, relational tables, and XML elements.
In contrast to a structure-level matcher, such an element-level
approach considers the higher-level element in isolation, ignoring its substructure and components. For instance, the fact
that the elements “Address” and “CustomerAddress” in Table 2 are likely to match can be derived by a name-based
element-level matching without considering their underlying
components.
Element-levelmatchingcanbeimplementedbyalgorithms
similartorelationaljoinprocessing.Dependingonthematcher
type, the match comparison can be based on such properties as
name, description, or data type of schema element. For each
element of a schema S1, all elements of the other schema S2
with the same or similar value for the match property have
to be identiﬁed. A general implementation, similar to nestedloop join processing, compares each S1 element with each S2
element and determines a similarity metric per pair. Only the
combinations with a similarity value above a certain threshold
are considered as match candidates. For special cases, more
efﬁcient implementations are possible. For example, as for
equi-joins, checking for equality of properties can be done
using hashing or sort-merge. The join-like implementation is
also feasible for hybrid matchers where we consider multiple
properties at a time (e.g., name + data type).
6.2. Match cardinality
An S1 (or S2) element can participate in zero, one or many
mapping elements of the match result between the two input
schemas S1 and S2. Moreover, within an individual mapping element, one or more S1 elements can match one or
more S2 elements. Thus, we have the usual relationship cardinalities, namely 1:1 and the set-oriented cases 1:n, n:1, and
n:m, between matching elements both with respect to different mapping elements (global cardinality) and with respect to
an individual mapping element (local cardinality). Elementlevel matching is typically restricted to local cardinalities of
1:1, n:1, and 1:n. Obtaining n:m mapping elements usually
Table 3. Match cardinalities (Examples)
Local match cardinalities
S1 element(s)
S2 element(s)
Matching expression
1:1, element level
Amount = Price
n:1, element-level
Price, Tax
Cost = Price*(1+Tax/100)
1:n, element-level
FirstName,
FirstName, LastName =
Extract (Name, . . . )
n:1 structure-level
(n:m element-level)
A.Publisher
A.Book, A.Publisher =
Select B.Title, P.Name
Where B.PuNo=P.PuNo
requires considering the structural embedding of the schema
elements and thus requires structure-level matching.
Table 3 shows examples of the four local cardinality cases
for individual mapping elements. In row 1, the match is 1:1.
Previous work has mostly concentrated on such 1:1 matches
becauseofthedifﬁcultyofautomaticallydeterminingthemapping expressions in the other cases. When matching multiple
S1 (or S2) elements at a time, we see that expressions are
used to specify how these elements are related. For example,
row 3 explains how FirstName and LastName are extracted
from Name. Another example is row 4, which uses a SQL expression combining attributes from two tables. It corresponds
to an n:m relationship at the attribute level (four S1 attributes
match two S2 attributes) and an n:1 relationship at the structure level (two tables, B and P, in S1 match one table, A, in
S2).The structure-level match ensures that the twoA elements
are derived together in order to obtain correct book-publisher
combinations.
The global cardinality cases with respect to all mapping
elements are largely orthogonal to the cases for individual
mapping elements. For instance in the example of row 1, we
have a global 1:1 match if no other S1 elements matchAmount
and no other S2 elements match Price. On the other hand, if
Price in S1 also matches other S2 elements (e.g., Cost as in
row 2) we obtain a global 1:n match in combination with local
1:1 or 1:n matches.
Note that in addition to the match cardinalities at the
schema level, there may be different match cardinalities at the
instance level. For the ﬁrst three examples in Table 3, one S1
instance is matched with one S2 instance (1:1 instance-level
match). The example in row 4 corresponds to an n:1 instancelevel match, which combines two instances, one of B and one
of P, into one of A. An example of n:m instance-level matching is the association of individual sale instances of S1 with
different aggregate sale instances (per month, quarter, etc.) of
Mostexistingapproachesmapeachelementofoneschema
to the element of the other schema with highest similarity.This
results in local 1:1 matches and global 1:1 or 1:n mappings.
More work is needed to explore more sophisticated criteria for
generating local and global n:1 and n:m mappings, which are
currently hardly treated at all.
6.3. Linguistic approaches
Language-based or linguistic matchers use names and text
(i.e., words or sentences) to ﬁnd semantically similar schema
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
elements. We discuss two schema-level approaches, name
matching and description matching.
Name matching
Name-based matching matches schema elements with equal
or similar names. Similarity of names can be deﬁned and measured in various ways, including:
• Equality of names.
An important subcase is the equality of names from the
same XML namespace, since this ensures that the same
names indeed bear the same semantics.
• Equality of canonical name representations after stemming and other preprocessing.
This is important to deal with special preﬁx/sufﬁx symbols (e.g., CName →customer name, and EmpNO →
employee number)
• Equality of synonyms.
(E.g., car ∼= automobile and make ∼= brand)
• Equality of hypernyms.1
(E.g., book is-a publication and article is-a publication
imply book ∼= publication, article ∼= publication, and book
∼= article)
• Similarity of names based on common substrings, edit
distance, pronunciation, soundex (an encoding of names
based on how they sound rather than how they are spelled),
etc. [BS01].
(E.g., representedBy ∼= representative, ShipTo ∼= Ship2)
• User-provided name matches.
(E.g., reportsTo ∼= manager, issue ∼= bug)
Exploiting synonyms and hypernyms requires the use of thesauri or dictionaries. General natural language dictionaries
may be useful, perhaps even multi-language dictionaries (e.g.,
English-German) to deal with input schemas of different languages. In addition, name matching can use domain- or enterprise-speciﬁcdictionariesandis-ataxonomiescontainingcommon names, synonyms and descriptions of schema elements,
abbreviations, etc. These speciﬁc dictionaries require a substantial effort to be built up in a consistent way. The effort is
well worth the investment, especially for schemas with relatively ﬂat structure where dictionaries provide the most valuable matching hints. Furthermore, tools are needed to enable
names to be accessed and (re-)used, such as within a schema
editor when deﬁning new schemas.
Homonyms are equal or similar names that refer to different elements. Clearly, homonyms can mislead a matching
algorithm. Homonyms may be part of natural language, such
as “stud” meaning a fastener or male horse, or may be speciﬁc to a domain, such as “line” meaning a line of business
or a line item (i.e., row) of an order. A name matcher can
reduce the number of wrong match candidates by exploiting
mismatch information supplied by users or dictionaries. At
least, the matcher can offer a warning of the potential ambiguity due to multiple meanings of the name. A more automated
use of mismatch information may be possible by using context information, for example, to distinguish Order.Line from
1 X is a hypernym ofY ifY is a kind of X. For instance, hypernyms
of “oak” include “tree” and “plant”.
Business.Line. Such a technique blurs the distinction between
linguistic-based and structure-based techniques.
Name-based matching is possible for elements at different
levels of granularity. Furthermore, it can be applied across
levels, e.g., for a lower-level schema element to also consider
the names of the schema elements it belongs to (e.g., to ﬁnd
that author.name ∼= AuthorName). This is similar to contextbased disambiguation of homonyms.
Name-basedmatchingisnotlimitedtoﬁnding1:1matches.
That is, it can identify multiple relevant matches for a given
schema element. For example, it can match “phone” with both
“home phone” and “ofﬁce phone”.
Name matching can be driven by element-level matching,
introduced in Sect. 6.1. In the case of synonyms and hypernyms, the join-like processing involves a dictionary D as a
further input. If we think of a relation-like representation with
S1 (name, ...)
// one row per S1 schema element
S2 (name, ...)
// one row per S2 schema element
D (name1, name2,
similarity)
// similarity score for
[name1, name2] between 0..1
then a list of all match candidates can be generated by the
following three-way join operation
Select S1.name, S2.name, D.similarity
From S1, S2, D
Where (S1.name = D.name1) and
(D.name2 = S2.name) and
(D.similarity > threshold)
This assumes that D contains all relevant pairs of the transitive closure over similar names. For instance, if A-B-0.9 and
B-C-0.8 are in D, then we would expect D also to contain B-
A-0.9, C-B-0.8, and possibly A-C-σ, C-A-σ. Intuitively, we
would expect the similarity value σ to be .9 × .8 = .72, but this
depends on the type of similarity, the use of homonyms, and
perhaps other factors. For example, we might have delivership-.9 and ship-boat-.9, but not deliver-boat-σ for any similarity value σ. One approach to assigning different weights
to different types of similarity relationships is discussed in
Description matching
Often, schemas contain comments in natural language to express the intended semantics of schema elements. These comments can also be evaluated linguistically to determine the
similarity between schema elements. For instance, this would
help ﬁnd that the following elements match, by a linguistic
analysis of the comments associated with each schema element:
S1: empn // employee name
S2: name // name of employee
This linguistic analysis could be as simple as extracting keywords from the description which are used for synonym comparison, much like names. Or it could be as sophisticated as
using natural language understanding technology to look for
semantically equivalent expressions.
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Table 4. Constraint-based matching (example)
S1 elements
S2 elements
EmpNo – int, primary key
Pno - int, unique
EmpName – varchar (50)
Pname – string
DeptNo – int, references Department
Dept - string
Salary - dec (15,2)
Born - date
Birthdate – date
Department
DeptNo – int, primary key
DeptName – varchar (40)
6.4. Constraint-based approaches
Schemas often contain constraints to deﬁne data types and
value ranges, uniqueness, optionality, relationship types and
cardinalities, etc. If both input schemas contain such information, it can be used by a matcher to determine the similarity
of schema elements [LNE89]. For example, similarity can be
based on the equivalence of data types and domains, of key
characteristics (e.g., unique, primary, foreign), of relationship
cardinality (e.g., 1:1 relationships), or of is-a relationships.
The implementation can often be performed as described
in Sect.6.1 with a join-like element-level matching, now using the data types, structures, and constraints in the comparisons. Equivalent data types and constraint names (e.g., string
∼= varchar, primary key ∼= unique) can be provided by a special
synonym table.
In the example in Table 4, the type and key information
suggest that Born matches Birthdate and Pno matches either EmpNo or DeptNo. The remaining S2 elements Pname
and Dept are strings and thus likely match EmpName or
As the example illustrates, the use of constraint information alone often leads to imperfect n:m matches (match
clusters), as there may be several elements in a schema with
comparable constraints. Still, the approach helps to limit the
number of match candidates and may be combined with other
matchers (e.g., name matchers).
Certain structural information can be interpreted as constraints, such as intra-schema references (e.g., foreign keys)
andadjacency-relatedinformation(e.g.,part-ofrelationships).
Such information tells us which elements belong to the same
higher-level schema element, transitively through multi-level
structures. Such constraints can be interpreted as structures
andthereforebeexploitedusingstructurematchingapproaches.
Such a matching can consider the topology of structures as
well as different element types (e.g., for attributes, tables /
elements, or domains) and possibly different types of structural connections (e.g., part-of or usage relationships).
Many schema structures are hierarchical, based on some
form of containment relationship. When performing a match
based on hierarchical structures, an algorithm can traverse the
structure either top-down or bottom-up.A top-down algorithm
is usually less expensive than bottom-up, because matches at
a high level of the schema structure restrict the choices for
matching ﬁner grained structure only to those combinations
with matching ancestors. However, a top-down algorithm can
bemislediftop-levelschemastructuresareverydifferent,even
if ﬁner grained elements match well. By contrast, a bottom-up
algorithm compares all combinations of ﬁne grained elements,
and therefore ﬁnds matches at this level even if intermediate
and higher level structures differ considerably.
Referring back toTable 4, the previously identiﬁed atomiclevel matches are not sufﬁcient to correctly match S1 to S2 because we actually need to join S1.Employee and
S1.Department to obtain S2.Personnel. This can be
detected automatically by observing that components of
S2.PersonnelmatchcomponentsofbothS1.Employee
and S1.Department and that S1.Employee
S1.DepartmentareinterconnectedbyforeignkeyDeptNo
in Employee referencing Department. This allows us to
determine the correct n:m SQL-like match mapping
S2.Personnel (Pno, Pname, Dept, born)
Select S1.Employee.EmpNo,
S1.Employee.EmpName,
S1.Department.DeptName,
S1.Employee.Birthdate
From S1.Employee, S1.Department
Where (S1.Employee.DeptNo
= S1.Department.DeptNo)
Some inferencing was needed to know that the join should be
added. This inferencing can be done by mapping the problem
into one of determining the required joins in the universal
relation model [KKFG84].
6.5. Reusing schema and mapping information
We have already discussed the use of auxiliary information in
addition to the input schemas, such as dictionaries, thesauri,
and user-provided match or mismatch information. Another
way to use auxiliary information to improve the effectiveness of Match is to support and exploit the reuse of common schema components and previously determined mappings. Reuse-oriented approaches are promising, since we expect that many schemas need to be matched and that schemas
often are very similar to each other and to previously matched
schemas. For example, in E-commerce, substructures often
repeat within different message formats (e.g., address ﬁelds
and name ﬁelds).
The use of names from XML namespaces or speciﬁc dictionaries is already reuse-oriented.A more general approach is
to reuse not only globally deﬁned names but also entire schema
fragments, including such features as data types, keys, and
constraints. This is especially rewarding for frequently used
entities, such as address, customer, employee, purchase order, and invoice, which should be deﬁned and maintained in a
schema library.While it is unlikely that the whole world agrees
on such schemas, they can be speciﬁed for an enterprise, its
trading partners, relevant standards bodies, or similar organizations to reduce the degree of variability. Schema editors
should access these libraries to encourage the reuse of predeﬁned schema fragments and deﬁned terms, perhaps with a
wizard that observes when a new schema deﬁnition is similar
but not identical to one in a library. The elements reused in this
way should contain the ID of their originating library, e.g., via
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Fig. 4. Scenario for reuse of an existing mapping
XML namespaces, so the implementation of Match can easily
identify and match schema fragments and names that come
from the same library.
A further generic approach is to reuse existing mappings.
We want to reuse previously determined element-level
matches, which may simply be added to the thesaurus.We also
want to reuse entire structures, which is useful when matching
different but similar schemas to the same destination schema,
as may occur when integrating new sources into a data warehouse or digital library. For instance, this is useful if a schema
S1 has to be mapped to a schema S2 to which another schema
S has already been mapped. If S1 is more similar to S than to
S2, this can simplify the automatic generation of match candidates by reusing matches from the existing result of Match(S,
S2), although some care is needed since matches are sometimes not transitive. Among other things, this allows the reuse
of manually speciﬁed matches.
An example for such a re-use is shown in Fig.4 for purchase order schemas. We already have the match result between S and S2, illustrated by the arrows. The new purchase
order schema S1 is very similar to S. Thus, for every element
or structure of S1 that has a corresponding element or fully
matching structure in S, we can use the existing mapping between S and S2. In this (ideal) case, we can reuse all matches;
since S2 is fully covered, no additional match work has to be
Such a reuse of previous matches may only be possible for
some part of a new schema. Hence a major problem is to determine which part of a new schema is similar to some part of a
previously matched one – a match problem in itself. Moreover,
similarity values determined for a previous match task may
depend on the application domain so that their reuse should
be restricted to related applications. For example, Salary and
Income may be considered identical in a payroll application
but not in a tax reporting application. To our knowledge these
reuse issues have not yet been addressed but deserve further
7. Instance-level approaches
Instance-level data can give important insight into the contents
and meaning of schema elements. This is especially true when
useful schema information is limited, as is often the case for
semistructured data. In the extreme case, no schema is given,
but a schema can be constructed from instance data either
manually or automatically (e.g., a “data guide” [GW97] or
an approximate schema graph [WYW00] may be constructed
automatically from XML documents). Even when substantial schema information is available, the use of instance-level
matching can be valuable to uncover incorrect interpretations
of schema information. For example, it can help disambiguate
between equally plausible schema-level matches by choosing
to match the elements whose instances are more similar.
Most of the approaches discussed previously for schemalevel matching can be applied to instance-level matching.
However, some are especially applicable here. For example:
• For text elements a linguistic characterization based on information retrieval techniques is the preferred approach,
e.g., by extracting keywords and themes based on the relative frequencies of words and combinations of words,
etc. For example, in Table 4, looking at the Dept,
DeptName andEmpName instances we may conclude
that DeptName is a better match candidate for Dept than
• For more structured data, such as numerical and string
elements, we can apply a constraint-based characterization, such as numerical value ranges and averages or character patterns. For instance, this may allow recognizing
phone numbers, zip codes, geographical names, addresses,
ISBNs, SSNs, date entries, or money-related entries (e.g.,
based on currency symbols). In Table 4, instance informationmayhelptomakeEmpNotheprimarymatchcandidate
for Pno, e.g., based on similar value ranges as opposed to
the value range for DeptNo.
The main beneﬁt of evaluating instances is a precise characterization of the actual contents of schema elements. This
characterization can be employed in at least two ways. One approach is to use the characterization to enhance schema-level
matchers. For instance, a constraint-based matcher can then
more accurately determine corresponding data types based,
for example, on the discovered value ranges and character
pattern, thereby improving the effectiveness of Match. This
requires characterizing the content of both input schemas and
then matching the schemas with each other.
A second approach is to perform instance-level matching
on its own. First, the instances of S1 are evaluated to characterize the content of S1 elements. Then, the S2 instances
are matched one-by-one against the characterizations of S1
elements. The per-instance match results need to be merged
and abstracted to the schema level, to generate a ranked list
of match candidates in S1 for each (schema-level) element in
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
S2. Various approaches have been proposed to perform such
an instance matching or classiﬁcation, such as rules, neural
networks, and machine learning techniques [BM01, DDL00,
DDH01, LC94, LC00, LCL00].
Instance-level matching can also be performed by utilizing
auxiliary information, e.g., previous mappings obtained from
matching different schemas. This approach is especially helpful for matching text elements by providing match candidates
for individual keywords. For instance, a previous analysis may
have revealed that the keyword “Microsoft” frequently occurs
for schema elements “CompanyName”, “Manufacturer”, etc.
For a new match task, if an S2 schema element X frequently
contains the term “Microsoft” this can be used to generate
“CompanyName” in S1 as a match candidate for X, even if
“Microsoft” does not often occur in the instances of S1.
The above approaches for instance-level matching primarily work for ﬁnding element-level matches. Finding matches
for sets of schema elements or structures would require characterizing the content of these sets. Obviously, the main problem is the explosion of the number of possible combinations
of schema elements for which the instances would have to be
evaluated.
8. Combining different matchers
We have reviewed several types of matchers and many different variations. Each utilizes different information and has
thus different applicability and value for a given match task.
Therefore, a matcher that uses just one approach is unlikely
to achieve as many good match candidates as one that combines several approaches. This can be done in two ways: a
hybrid matcher that integrates multiple matching criteria and
composite matchers that combine the results of independently
executed matchers. Combining multiple matching approaches
also opens the possibility to evaluate them simultaneously or
in a speciﬁc order.
Hybrid matchers directly combine several matching approaches to determine match candidates based on multiple
criteria or information sources (e.g., by using name matching with namespaces and thesauri combined with data type
compatibility). They should provide better match candidates
plusbetterperformancethantheseparateexecutionofmultiple
matchers. Effectiveness may be improved because poor match
candidates matching only one of several criteria can be ﬁltered
out early, and because complex matches requiring the joint
consideration of multiple criteria can be solved (e.g., the use of
keys, data types and names in Table 4). Structure-level matching also beneﬁts from being combined with other approaches
such as name matching. One way to combine structure- with
element-level matching is to use one algorithm to generate a
partial mapping and the other to complete the mapping.
A hybrid matcher can offer better performance than the execution of multiple matchers by reducing the number of passes
over the schema. For instance, with element-level matching
hybrid matchers can test multiple criteria at a time on each S2
element before continuing with the next S2 element.
On the other hand, one can use a composite matcher that
combines the results of several independently executed matchers, including hybrid matchers. This ability to combine matchers is more ﬂexible than hybrid matchers. A hybrid matcher
typically uses a hard-wired combination of particular matching techniques that are executed simultaneously or in a ﬁxed
order. By contrast, a composite matcher allows us to select from a repertoire of modular matchers based, for example, on application domain or schema languages (e.g., different approaches can be used for structured vs semi-structured
schemas). For example, one could use machine learning to
combine independent matchers, as in [DDH01] for instancelevel matchers and in [EJX01] for a combination of instancelevel and schema-level matchers. Moreover, a composite
matcher should allow a ﬂexible ordering of matchers so that
they are either executed simultaneously or sequentially. In the
latter case, the match result of a ﬁrst matcher is consumed and
extended by a second matcher to achieve an iterative improvement of the match result.
Selection of matchers, and determining their execution order and the combination of independently determined match
results can be done either automatically by the implementation of Match itself or its clients (e.g., tools), or manually by a
human user. An automatic approach can reduce the number of
user interactions, but it is difﬁcult to achieve a generic solution
that is adaptable to different application domains (although the
approach could be controlled by tuning parameters). Alternatively, a user can directly select the matchers to be executed,
their execution order and how to combine their results. Such
a manual approach is easier to implement and leaves more
control to the user. As discussed in Sect.4, user interaction is
necessary in any case because the implementation of Match
can only determine match candidates which a user can accept,
reject or change.
To deal with complex match tasks, the implementation of
Match should support an iterative development of match results with multiple user interactions. With a composite match
approach supporting the sequential execution of matchers,
user-supplied matches can be considered as a special matcher
that provides input for automatic matchers. Still, the matchers
should be aware of user-provided match input and not change
it but focus on the unmatched parts of the input schemas.
9. Sample approaches from the literature
9.1. Prototype schema matchers
In Table 5 we show how seven published prototype implementations ﬁt the classiﬁcation criteria introduced in Sect.5. The
table thus indicates which part of the solution space is covered by which implementations, thereby supporting a comparison of the approaches. It also speciﬁes the supported schema
types, the internal metadata representation format, the tasks to
be performed manually, and the application domain. We thus
indicate the suitability of the approaches with respect to key
requirements, in particular degree of automation (dependence
on manual input) and genericity with respect to the different
application domains and schema languages. The achievable
matching accuracy is related to the degree to which the solution spectrum is covered.
The table shows that all systems support multiple matching criteria, six in the form of a hybrid matcher and only one,
LSD, by a composite match approach. A ﬂexible ordering of
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Table 5. Characteristics of proposed schema match approaches
[PSU98a,b,
Schema types
relational,
relational, OO,
relational
Metadata representation
unspeciﬁed
(attributebased)
XML schema
graph-based
labeled graph
relational / OO
data model
extended ER
Match granularity
elementlevel:
attributes
(attribute
element and
structurelevel
structurelevel:
attributes /
element-level
structurelevel:
entities /
relationships /
attributes
structurelevel:
entities /
relationships /
attributes
structurelevel
Match cardinality
1:1 and n:1
1:1 and n:1
Schemalevel
Name-based
equality /
name equality;
name equality;
hypernyms,
abbreviations
Constraintbased
criteria: data
type, length,
key info, . . .
(inclusion);
relationship
cardinalities
(inclusion);
relationship
cardinalities
compatibility
compatibility.
uses keys,
foreign keys,
aggregation
data type and
compatibility,
referential
constraints
Structure matching
classiﬁer for
similarity
similarity
matching of
neighborhood
matching of
neighborhood
Instancelevel
Text-oriented
Constraintoriented
character /
data pattern,
distribution,
list of valid
Reuse / auxiliary information used
comparison
with training
lookup for
valid domain
provision of
synonyms +
inclusions
with similarity
probabilities
glossaries
Combination of matchers
matcher with
combination
of matcher
ﬁxed order of
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
Table 5. (continued)
LSD [DDL00,
[PSU98a,b,
Manual work / user input
selection of
match criteria
(optional);
selection of
attributes
from attribute
user-supplied
matches for
training sources;
user can specify
parameters and
constraints to
guide selection
candidates
adding new
structural
(preprocessing)
weights in
calculations
user can adjust threshold
Application area
integration
data integration
with pre-deﬁned
global schema
composition
integration /
interoperability
translation
integration
integration
translation, but intended to be
networks; C
implementation
“algorithms”
implicitly
represented
implemented
algorithms to
calculate new
similarity
embedded in
extensions
differentmatchers,asdiscussedinSect. 8,isnotyetsupported.
Most systems provide both structure-level and element-level
matching, in particular name and constraint-based matching.
However, only two of the seven systems consider instance
data and all systems focus on (local) 1:1 matches (two systems support global n:1 matches). Most prototypes have been
developed with a speciﬁc application domain in mind, mostly
data and schema integration, while Cupid strives for general
applicability. Most systems support multiple schema types,
while LSD is limited to XML and DIKE to ER sources. All
systems allow the user to validate generated match results (not
shown in the table) and require additional manual work to instrument the system, e.g., by providing prior match knowledge
or tuning parameters such as similarity thresholds. The main
forms of auxiliary information and reuse support is the provision of thesauri and glossaries and speciﬁcation of speciﬁc
match knowledge. Reuse of previous match results is not yet
supported.
In this section, we discuss some speciﬁc features of the
seven approaches. In Sect.9.2, we brieﬂy highlight some additional schemes. Most of them offer less support with respect
to automatic matching and have thus not been included in Table 5.
SemInt (Northwestern Univ.)
The SemInt match prototype [LC94, LC00, LCL00] creates a
mapping between individual attributes of two schemas (i.e., its
match cardinality is 1:1). It exploits up to 15 constraint-based
and 5 content-based matching criteria. The schema-level constraintsusetheinformationavailablefromthecatalogofarelationalDBMS.Instancedataisusedtoenhancethisinformation
by providing actual value distributions, numerical averages,
etc. For each criterion, the system uses a function to map each
possible value onto the interval [0..1]. Using these functions,
SemInt determines a match signature for each attribute consisting of a value in the interval [0..1] for N matching criteria
(either all or a selected subset of the supported criteria). Since
signatures correspond to points in the N-dimensional space,
the Euclidian distance between signatures can be used as a
measure of the degree of similarity and thus for determining
an ordered list of match candidates.
In its main approach, SemInt uses neural networks to determine match candidates. This approach requires similar attributes of the ﬁrst input schema (e.g., foreign and primary
keys) to be clustered together. Clustering is automatic by assigning all attributes with a distance below a threshold value
to the same cluster. The neural network is trained with the
signatures of the cluster centers. The signatures of attributes
from the second schema are then fed into the neural network
to determine the best matching attribute cluster from the ﬁrst
schema. Based on their experiments the authors found that
the straightforward match approach based on Euclidian distance does well on ﬁnding almost identical attributes, while the
neural network is better at identifying less similar attributes
that match2. However, the neural network approach has sub-
2 To evaluate the effectiveness of a match approach, the authors use
the IR metrics recall and precision. Recall indicates which percentage
of all matches in the schemas are correctly determined. Precision
indicates the fraction of all determined matches that are correct.
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
stantial performance problems for larger schemas according
to [CHR97]. To improve efﬁciency, the approach identiﬁes a
match only to attribute clusters leaving it to the user to select
the matching attributes from the cluster.
SemInt represents a powerful and ﬂexible approach to
hybrid matching, since multiple match criteria can be selected and evaluated together. This is in contrast to other
hybrid matchers using several criteria in a hard-wired fashion3. SemInt does not support name-based matching or graph
matching for which it may be difﬁcult to determine a useful
mapping to the [0..1] interval.
LSD (Univ. of Washington)
The LSD (Learning Source Descriptions) system uses
machine-learning techniques to match a new data source
against a previously determined global schema, producing a
1:1 atomic-level mapping [DDL00, DDH01]. It represents a
composite match scheme with an automatic combination of
match results. In addition to a name matcher they use several
instance-level matchers (learners) that are trained during a preprocessing step. Given a user-supplied mapping from a data
source to the global schema, the preprocessing step looks at
instances from that data source to train the learner, thereby discovering characteristic instance patterns and matching rules.
These patterns and rules can then be applied to match other
data sources to the global schema. Given a new data source,
each matcher determines a list of match candidates.
A global matcher that uses the same machine-learning
technology is used to merge the lists into a combined list of
match candidates for each schema element. It too is trained on
schemas for which a user-supplied mapping is known, thereby
learning how much weight to give to each component matcher.
New component matchers can be added to improve the global
matcher’s accuracy.
Although the approach is primarily instance-oriented, it
can exploit schema information too. A learner can take selfdescribing input, such as XML, and make its matching decisions by focusing on the schema tags while ignoring the data
instance values. LSD has also been extended to consider usersupplied domain constraints on the global schema to eliminate
some of the previously determined match candidates for improving match accuracy [DDH01].
SKAT (Stanford Univ.)
The SKAT (Semantic KnowledgeArticulationTool) prototype
follows a rule-based approach to semi-automatically determine matches between two ontologies (schemas) [MWJ99].
Rules are formulated in ﬁrst-order logic to express match and
mismatch relationships and methods are deﬁned to derive new
matches. The user has to initially provide application-speciﬁc
match and mismatch relationships and then approve or reject
generated matches. The description in [MWJ99] deals with
name matching and simple structural matches based on is-a
3 According to our characterization in Sect.8, SemInt is not a composite matcher since it does not combine independently calculated
match results.
hierarchies, but leaves open the details of what has been implemented.
SKAT is used within the ONION architecture for ontology
integration [MWK00]. In ONION, ontologies are transformed
into a graph-based object-oriented database model. Matching
rules between ontologies are used to construct an “articulation
ontology” which covers the “intersection” of source ontologies. Matching is based heavily on is-a relationships between
the articulation ontology and source ontologies. The articulation ontology is to be used for queries and for adding more
TransScm (Tel Aviv Univ.)
The TranScm prototype [MZ98] uses schema matching to derive an automatic data translation between schema instances.
Input schemas are transformed into labeled graphs, which
is the internal schema representation. Edges in the schema
graphs represent component relationships. All other schema
information (name, optionality, #children, etc.) is represented
as properties of the nodes. The matching is performed node
by node (element-level, 1:1) starting at the top and presumes
a high degree of similarity between the schemas. There are
several matchers which are checked in a ﬁxed order. Each
matcher is a “rule” implemented in Java. They require that the
match is determined by exactly one matcher per node pair. If
no match is found or if a matcher determines multiple match
candidates, user intervention is required, e.g., to provide a new
rule (matcher) or to select a match candidate. The matchers
typically consider multiple criteria and can thus represent hybrid approaches. For example, one of the matchers tests the
name properties and the number of children. Node matching
can be made dependent on a partial or full match of the nodes’
descendents.
DIKE (Univ. of Reggio Calabria, Univ. of Calabria)
In [PSU98a, PSTU99], Palopoli et al. propose algorithms
to automatically determine synonym and inclusion (is-a, hypernym) relationships between objects of different entityrelationship schemas. The algorithms are based on a set of
user-speciﬁed synonym, homonym, and inclusion properties
that include a numerical “plausibility factor” (between 0 and
1) about the certainty that the relationship is expected to
hold. In order to (probabilistically) derive new synonyms and
homonyms and the associated plausibility factors, the authors
perform a pairwise comparison of objects in the input schemas
by considering the similarity properties of their “related objects” (i.e., their attributes and the is-a and other relationships
the objects participate in).
In [PSU98b], the focus is to ﬁnd pairs of objects in two
schemas that are similar, in the sense that they have the same
attributes and relationships, but are of different “types,” where
type ∈{entity, attribute, relationship}. The similarity of two
objects is a value in the range . If the similarity exceeds
a given threshold, they regard the objects as matching, and
therefore regard a type conﬂict as signiﬁcant. Thus, schema
matching is the main step of their algorithm. For a given pair
of objects o1 and o2 being compared, objects related to o1 and
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
o2 contribute to the degree of similarity of o1 and o2 with a
weight that is inversely proportional to their distance from o1
and o2, where distance is the minimum number of many-tomany relationships on any path from o1 to o2. Thus, objects
that are closely related to o1 and o2 (e.g., their attributes and
objects they directly reference) count more heavily than those
that are reachable only via paths of relationships.
The above algorithms are embodied in the DIKE system,
described in [PTU00, Ur99]. Related algorithms by the same
authors are in [TU00, RTU01].
ARTEMIS (Univ. of Milano, Univ. of Brescia) & MOMIS
(Univ. of Modena and Reggio Emilia)
ARTEMISisaschemaintegrationtool[CDD01,CD99].Itﬁrst
computes “afﬁnities” in the range 0 to 1 between attributes,
which is a match-like step. It then completes the schema integration by clustering attributes based on those afﬁnities and
then constructing views based on the clusters.
The algorithm operates on a hybrid relational-OO model
that includes the name, data types, and cardinalities of attributes and target object types of attributes that refer to other
objects. It computes matches by a weighted sum of name and
data type afﬁnity and structural afﬁnity. Name afﬁnity is based
on generic and domain-speciﬁc thesauri, where each association of two names is a synonym, hypernym, or general relationship, with a ﬁxed afﬁnity for each type of association.
Data type afﬁnity is based on a generic table of data type compatibilities. Structural afﬁnity of two entities is based on the
similarity of relationships emanating from those entities.
ARTEMIS is used as a component of a heterogeneous
database mediator, called MOMIS (Mediator envirOment for
Multiple Information Sources) [BCV99, BCC*00, BCVB01].
MOMIS integrates independently developed schemas into a
virtual global schema on the basis of a reference objectbased data model, which it uses to represent relational, objectoriented and semi-structured source schemas. MOMIS relies on ARTEMIS, the lexical system WordNet, and the
description-logic-based inference tool ODB-Tools to produce
an integrated virtual schema. It also offers a query processor
(with optimization) to query the heterogeneous data sources.
Cupid (Microsoft Research)
Cupid is a hybrid matcher based on both element- and
structure-level matching [MBR01]. It is intended to be generic
across data models and has been applied to XML and relational examples. It uses auxiliary information sources for synonyms, abbreviations, and acronyms. Like DIKE, each entry
in these auxiliary sources include a plausibility factor in the
 range. Unlike DIKE, Cupid can exploit entries that are
ordinary words (e.g., Invoice is a synonym of Bill), without
requiring them to exactly match compound names of elements
(e.g., InvoiceTo or bill address).
The algorithm has three phases. The ﬁrst phase does
linguistic element-level matching and categorizes elements
based on names, data types, and domains (making Cupid hybrid). It parses compound element names into tokens based
on delimiters (e.g., Product ID becomes {Product, ID}), categorizes them based on their data types and linguistic content,
and then calculates a linguistic similarity coefﬁcient between
data-type- and linguistic-content-compatible pairs of names
basedonsubstringmatchingandauxiliarysources.Thesecond
phase transforms the original schema into a tree and then does
a bottom-up structure matching, resulting in a structural similarity between pairs of element. This transformation encodes
referential constraints into structures that can be matched just
like other structures (making Cupid constraint-based). The
similarity of two elements at the root of structures is based
on their linguistic similarity and the similarity of their leaf
sets. If the similarity exceeds a threshold, then their leaf set
similarity is incremented. The focus on leaf sets is based on
the assumption that much of the information content is represented in leaves and that leaves have less variation between
schemas than internal structure. Phase two concludes by calculating a weighted mean of linguistic and structural similarity
of pairs of elements. The third phase uses that weighted mean
to decide on a mapping. This phase is regarded as application
dependent and not emphasized in the algorithm.
Experiments were run to compare Cupid to DIKE and
MOMIS on several schema examples. Cupid performed somewhat better overall. However, the more interesting results were
in the value of particular features of each algorithm on particular aspects of the examples, which are too detailed to summarize here.
9.2. Related prototypes
This section describes ﬁve other prototypes that offer functionality that is related to the schema matching approaches
discussed in this paper.
Clio (IBM Almaden and Univ. of Toronto)
The Clio tool under development at IBM Research in Almaden aims at a semi-automatic (user-assisted) creation of
match mappings between a given target schema and a new
data source schema. It consists of a set of Schema Readers,
which read a schema and translate it into an internal representation; a Correspondence Engine (CE), which is used to identify matching parts of the schemas or databases; and a Mapping Generator, which generates view deﬁnitions to map data
in the source schema into data in the target schema [HMNT99,
Mi01]. The correspondence engine makes use of n:m elementlevel matches obtained from a knowledge-base or entered by
a user through a graphical user interface. In [MHH00], Miller
et al. present an algorithm for deriving a mapping between
the target and source, given a set of element and substructure matches and match expressions. It selects enough of the
matchestocoveramaximalsetofcolumnsofthetargetschema
and uses constraint reasoning to suggest join clauses to tie togethercomponentsofthesourceschema.[YMHF01]proposes
the use of sample data instances for the input schemas to interactively guide the construction of a mapping query and to
verify its correctness.
Similarity ﬂooding (Stanford Univ. and Univ. of Leipzig)
In [MGR02], Melnik et al. present a graph matching algorithm called Similarity Flooding (SF) and explore its usability
E. Rahm, P.A. Bernstein: A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching
for schema matching. The approach converts schemas into directed labeled graphs and uses ﬁxpoint computation to determine the matches between corresponding nodes of the graphs.
It produces a 1:1 local, m:n global mapping between schema
elements. The SF algorithm is implemented as one of the operators in a prototype of a generic schema manipulation tool. In
addition to the structural SF matcher the tool supports operators such as a name matcher, schema converters, and ﬁlters that
can be combined within scripts. A typical match script starts
with converting the two input schemas into the internal graph
representation. Then a name matcher is used to suggest an initial element-level mapping which is fed to the structural SF
matcher. In the last step, various ﬁlters are applied to select
relevant subsets of match results produced by the structural
matcher. The tool accepts several input formats, in particular
SQL DDL, XML, and RDF.
Delta (MITRE)
Delta represents a simple approach for determining attribute
correspondences utilizing attribute descriptions [BHFW95,
CHR97]. All available metadata about an attribute (e.g., text
description, attribute name, and type information) is grouped
and converted into a simple text string, which is presented as
a document to a full-text information retrieval tool. The IR
tool can interpret such a document as a query. Documents of
another schema with matching attributes are determined and
ranked. Selection of the matches from the result list is left
to the user. The approach is easy to implement but depends
on the availability and expressiveness of text descriptions for
attributes. [CHR97] compares experimental match results obtained with Delta with those obtained with the SemInt tool and
proposes to combine the two approaches, which would result
in a composite matcher.
Tess (Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst)
Tess is a system for helping to cope with schema evolution
[Le00]. A schema is a set of types. Tess takes a deﬁnition of
the old and new type and produces a program to transform
data that conforms to the old type into data that conforms to
the new type. To accomplish this, it automatically creates a
mapping from the old to the new type, using a schema-level
matching algorithm. Like TransScm, it presumes a high degree of similarity between the schemas. It identiﬁes pairs of
types as match candidates, and then recursively tries to match
their substructure in a top-down fashion. Two elements are
match candidates if they have the same name, if they have a
pair of subelements that match (i.e., that are of the same type),
or if they use the same type constructor (in order of preference, where name matching is most preferred). The recursion
bottoms out with scalar subelements. As the recursive calls
percolate back up, matching decisions on coarser-grained elements are made based on the results of their ﬁner-grained
subelements. In this sense, Tess performs both structure-level
and element-level matching.
Tree matching (NYU)
Zhang and Shasha developed an algorithm to ﬁnd a mapping
between two labeled trees [ZS89, ZSW92, ZS97], which they
later implemented in a system for approximate tree matching
[WZJS94]. This is a purely structural match, with no notion
of synonym or hypernym. However, it can cope with name
mismatches by treating “rename” as one of the transformations that can map one tree into the other. Implementations
are available at [ZSW00].
There is, of course, a large literature on graph isomorphism
which could be useful. An investigation of its relevance to the
morespeciﬁcproblemofschemamatchingisbeyondthescope
of this paper.
10. Conclusion
Schema matching is a basic problem in many database application domains, such as heterogeneous database integration,
E-commerce, data warehousing, and semantic query processing. In this paper, we proposed a taxonomy that covers many of
the existing approaches and we described these approaches in
some detail. In particular, we distinguished between schemaandinstance-level,element-andstructure-level,andlanguageand constraint-based matchers and discussed the combination
of multiple matchers. We used the taxonomy to characterize
and compare a variety of previous match implementations.
We hope that the taxonomy will be useful to programmers
who need to implement a match algorithm and to researchers
looking to develop more effective and comprehensive schema
matching algorithms. For instance, more attention should be
given to the utilization of instance-level information and reuse
opportunities to perform Match.
Past work on schema matching has mostly been done in the
context of a particular application domain. Since the problem
is so fundamental, we believe the ﬁeld would beneﬁt from
treating it as an independent problem, as we have begun doing
here. In the future, we would like to see quantitative work on
the relative performance and accuracy of different approaches.
Such results could tell us which of the existing approaches
dominate the others and could help identify weaknesses in
the existing approaches that suggest opportunities for future
Acknowledgements. We are grateful for many helpful suggestions
from Sonia Bergamaschi, Silvana Castano, Chris Clifton, Hai Hong
Do, An Hai Doan, Alon Halevy, Jayant Madhavan, Sergey Melnik,
Ren´ee Miller, Rachel Pottinger,Arnie Rosenthal, Dennis Shasha, and
the anonymous referees.