Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 15–20
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution:
Evaluation and Debiasing Methods
Jieyu Zhao§
Tianlu Wang†
Mark Yatskar‡
Vicente Ordonez†
Kai-Wei Chang§
§University of California, Los Angeles
{jyzhao, kwchang}@cs.ucla.edu
† University of Virginia
{tw8bc, vicente}@virginia.edu
‡Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
 
We introduce a new benchmark, WinoBias, for
coreference resolution focused on gender bias.
Our corpus contains Winograd-schema style
sentences with entities corresponding to people referred by their occupation (e.g. the nurse,
the doctor, the carpenter).
We demonstrate
that a rule-based, a feature-rich, and a neural coreference system all link gendered pronouns to pro-stereotypical entities with higher
accuracy than anti-stereotypical entities, by
an average difference of 21.1 in F1 score.
Finally, we demonstrate a data-augmentation
approach that, in combination with existing word-embedding debiasing techniques, removes the bias demonstrated by these systems in WinoBias without signiﬁcantly affecting their performance on existing coreference
benchmark datasets. Our dataset and code are
available at 
Introduction
Coreference resolution is a task aimed at identifying phrases (mentions) referring to the same entity.
Various approaches, including rule-based , feature-based , and neuralnetwork based
 have been proposed. While signiﬁcant advances have been made, systems carry the
risk of relying on societal stereotypes present in
training data that could signiﬁcantly impact their
performance for some demographic groups.
In this work, we test the hypothesis that coreference systems exhibit gender bias by creating
a new challenge corpus, WinoBias.This dataset
follows the winograd format , and contains references to people using a vocabulary of
40 occupations.
It contains two types of challenge sentences that require linking gendered pro-
The physician called the secretary and told her the cancel the appointment.
The secretary called the physician and told him about a new patient.
The secretary called the physician and told her about a new patient.
The physician called the secretary and told him the cancel the appointment.
The physician hired the secretary because she was highly recommended.
The physician hired the secretary because he was highly recommended.
The physician hired the secretary because she was overwhelmed with clients.
The physician hired the secretary because he was overwhelmed with clients.
Figure 1: Pairs of gender balanced co-reference tests
in the WinoBias dataset.
Male and female entities
are marked in solid blue and dashed orange, respectively. For each example, the gender of the pronominal reference is irrelevant for the co-reference decision.
Systems must be able to make correct linking predictions in pro-stereotypical scenarios (solid purple lines)
and anti-stereotypical scenarios (dashed purple lines)
equally well to pass the test. Importantly, stereotypical
occupations are considered based on US Department of
Labor statistics.
nouns to either male or female stereotypical occupations (see the illustrative examples in Figure 1).
None of the examples can be disambiguated by
the gender of the pronoun but this cue can potentially distract the model. We consider a system
to be gender biased if it links pronouns to occupations dominated by the gender of the pronoun
(pro-stereotyped condition) more accurately than
occupations not dominated by the gender of the
pronoun (anti-stereotyped condition). The corpus
can be used to certify a system has gender bias.1
We use three different systems as prototypi-
1Note that the counter argument (i.e., systems are gender
bias free) may not hold.
cal examples: the Stanford Deterministic Coreference System , the
Berkeley Coreference Resolution System and the current best published
system: the UW End-to-end Neural Coreference
Resolution System .
qualitatively different approaches, all systems exhibit gender bias, showing an average difference in
performance between pro-stereotypical and antistereotyped conditions of 21.1 in F1 score. Finally
we show that given sufﬁciently strong alternative
cues, systems can ignore their bias.
In order to study the source of this bias, we
analyze the training corpus used by these systems, Ontonotes 5.0 .2
Our analysis shows that female entities are significantly underrepresented in this corpus. To reduce
the impact of such dataset bias, we propose to generate an auxiliary dataset where all male entities
are replaced by female entities, and vice versa, using a rule-based approach. Methods can then be
trained on the union of the original and auxiliary
dataset. In combination with methods that remove
bias from ﬁxed resources such as word embeddings , our data augmentation approach completely eliminates bias when
evaluating on WinoBias , without signiﬁcantly affecting overall coreference accuracy.
To better identify gender bias in coreference resolution systems, we build a new dataset centered on
people entities referred by their occupations from
a vocabulary of 40 occupations gathered from the
US Department of Labor, shown in Table 1.3 We
use the associated occupation statistics to determine what constitutes gender stereotypical roles
(e.g. 90% of nurses are women in this survey). Entities referred by different occupations are paired
and used to construct test case scenarios.
Sentences are duplicated using male and female pronouns, and contain equal numbers of correct coreference decisions for all occupations. In total,
the dataset contains 3,160 sentences, split equally
for development and test, created by researchers
familiar with the project.
Sentences were created to follow two prototypical templates but annotators were encouraged to come up with scenar-
2The corpus is used in CoNLL-2011 and CoNLL-2012
shared tasks, 
3Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey, 2017. 
Occupation
Occupation
mechanician
construction worker
accountant
counselors
housekeeper
receptionist
supervisor
hairdressers
salesperson
Occupations statistics used in WinoBias
dataset, organized by the percent of people in the occupation who are reported as female. When woman
dominate profession, we call linking the noun phrase
referring to the job with female and male pronoun
as ‘pro-stereotypical’, and ‘anti-stereotypical’, respectively.
Similarly, if the occupation is male dominated, linking the noun phrase with the male and female pronoun is called, ‘pro-stereotypical’ and ‘antisteretypical’, respectively.
ios where entities could be interacting in plausible
ways. Templates were selected to be challenging
and designed to cover cases requiring semantics
and syntax separately.4
Type 1: [entity1] [interacts with] [entity2]
[conjunction]
[circumstances].
Prototypical WinoCoRef style sentences, where
co-reference decisions must be made using world
knowledge about given circumstances (Figure 1;
Type 1). Such examples are challenging because
they contain no syntactic cues.
Type 2: [entity1] [interacts with] [entity2]
and then [interacts with] [pronoun] for [circumstances].
These tests can be resolved using syntactic information and understanding of the
pronoun (Figure 1; Type 2). We expect systems to
do well on such cases because both semantic and
syntactic cues help disambiguation.
Evaluation
To evaluate models, we split the
data in two sections:
one where correct coreference decisions require linking a gendered
4We do not claim this set of templates is complete, but that
they provide representative examples that, pratically, show
bias in existing systems.
pronoun to an occupation stereotypically associated with the gender of the pronoun and one that
requires linking to the anti-stereotypical occupation. We say that a model passes the WinoBias
test if for both Type 1 and Type 2 examples, prostereotyped and anti-stereotyped co-reference decisions are made with the same accuracy.
Gender Bias in Co-reference
In this section, we highlight two sources of gender
bias in co-reference systems that can cause them
to fail WinoBias: training data and auxiliary resources and propose strategies to mitigate them.
Training Data Bias
Bias in OntoNotes 5.0
Resources supporting
the training of co-reference systems have severe
gender imbalance. In general, entities that have a
mention headed by gendered pronouns (e.g.“he”,
“she”) are over 80% male.5 Furthermore, the way
in which such entities are referred to, varies signiﬁcantly. Male gendered mentions are more than
twice as likely to contain a job title as female mentions.6 Moreover, these trends hold across genres.
Gender Swapping
To remove such bias, we
construct an additional training corpus where all
male entities are swapped for female entities and
vice-versa. Methods can then be trained on both
original and swapped corpora.
This approach
maintains non-gender-revealing correlations while
eliminating correlations between gender and coreference cues.
We adopt a simple rule based approach for gender swapping. First, we anonymize named entities
using an automatic named entity ﬁnder .
Named entities are replaced consistently within document (i.e. “Barak Obama ...
Obama was re-elected.”
would be annoymized
to “E1 E2 ... E2 was re-elected.” ). Then we
build a dictionary of gendered terms and their realization as the opposite gender by asking workers on Amazon Mechnical Turk to annotate all
unique spans in the OntoNotes development set.7
5To exclude mentions such as “his mother”, we use
Collins head ﬁnder to identify the head word
of each mention, and only consider the mentions whose head
word is gender pronoun.
6We pick more than 900 job titles from a gazetteer.
7Five turkers were presented with anonymized spans and
asked to mark if it indicated male, female, or neither, and if
male or female, rewrite it so it refers to the other gender.
Rules were then mined by computing the word difference between initial and edited spans. Common rules included “she →he”, “Mr.” →“Mrs.”,
“mother” →“father.” Sometimes the same initial word was edited to multiple different phrases:
these were resolved by taking the most frequent
phrase, with the exception of “her →him” and
“her →his” which were resolved using part-ofspeech. Rules were applied to all matching tokens
in the OntoNotes. We maintain anonymization so
that cases like “John went to his house” can be accurately swapped to “E1 went to her house.”
Resource Bias
Embeddings
embeddings
widely used in NLP applications however recent
work has shown that they are severely biased:
“man” tends to be closer to “programmer” than
“woman” . Current state-of-art co-reference systems
build on word embeddings and risk inheriting
their bias.
To reduce bias from this resource,
we replace GloVe embeddings with debiased
vectors .
Gender Lists
While current neural approaches
rely heavily on pre-trained word embeddings, previous feature rich and rule-based approaches rely
on corpus based gender statistics mined from external resources . Such
lists were generated from large unlabeled corpora using heuristic data mining methods. These
resources provide counts for how often a noun
phrase is observed in a male, female, neutral, and
plural context. To reduce this bias, we balance
male and female counts for all noun phrases.
In this section we evaluate of three representative
systems: rule based, Rule, , feature-rich, Feature, , and end-to-end neural (the current state-ofthe-art), E2E, . The following
sections show that performance on WinoBias reveals gender bias in all systems, that our methods
remove such bias, and that systems are less biased
on OntoNotes data.
WinoBias Reveals Gender Bias
Table 2 summarizes development set evaluations using all
three systems. Systems were evaluated on both
types of sentences in WinoBias (T1 and T2), sepa-
Table 2: F1 on OntoNotes and WinoBias development set. WinoBias results are split between Type-1 and Type-
2 and in pro/anti-stereotypical conditions. * indicates the difference between pro/anti stereotypical conditions
is signiﬁcant (p < .05) under an approximate randomized test . Our methods eliminate
the difference between pro-stereotypical and anti-stereotypical conditions (Diff), with little loss in performance
(OntoNotes and Avg).
Table 3: F1 on OntoNotes and Winobias test sets. Methods were run once, supporting development set conclusions.
Gender-reversed
Table 4: Performance on the original and the genderreversed developments dataset (anonymized).
rately in pro-stereotyped and anti-stereotyped conditions ( T1-p vs.
T1-a, T2-p vs T2-a).
evaluate the effect of named-entity anonymization (Anon.), debiasing supporting resources8 (Resour.) and using data-augmentation through gender swapping (Aug.).
E2E and Feature were
retrained in each condition using default hyperparameters while Rule was not debiased because
it is untrainable.
We evaluate using the coreference scorer v8.01 and
compute the average (Avg) and absolute difference (Diff) between pro-stereotyped and antistereotyped conditions in WinoBias.
All initial systems demonstrate severe disparity between pro-stereotyped and anti-stereotyped
conditions.
Overall, the rule based system is
most biased, followed by the neural approach
and feature rich approach. Across all conditions,
anonymization impacts E2E the most, while all
other debiasing methods result in insigniﬁcant loss
8Word embeddings for E2E and gender lists for Feature
in performance on the OntoNotes dataset.
Removing biased resources and data-augmentation
reduce bias independently and more so in combination, allowing both E2E and Feature to pass
WinoBias without signiﬁcantly impacting performance on either OntoNotes or WinoBias . Qualitatively, the neural system is easiest to de-bias and
our approaches could be applied to future end-toend systems. Systems were evaluated once on test
sets, Table 3, supporting our conclusions.
Systems Demonstrate Less Bias on OntoNotes
While we have demonstrated co-reference systems
have severe bias as measured in WinoBias , this
is an out-of-domain test for systems trained on
OntoNotes. Evaluating directly within OntoNotes
is challenging because sub-sampling documents
with more female entities would leave very few
evaluation data points. Instead, we apply our gender swapping system (Section 3), to the OntoNotes
development set and compare system performance
between swapped and unswapped data.9 If a system shows signiﬁcant difference between original and gender-reversed conditions, then we would
consider it gender biased on OntoNotes data.
Table 4 summarizes our results. The E2E sys-
9This test provides a lower bound on OntoNotes bias because some mistakes can result from errors introduce by the
gender swapping system.
tem does not demonstrate signiﬁcant degradation
in performance, while Feature loses roughly 1.0-
F1.10 This demonstrates that given sufﬁcient alternative signal, systems often do ignore gender biased cues. On the other hand, WinoBias provides
an analysis of system bias in an adversarial setup,
showing, when examples are challenging, systems
are likely to make gender biased predictions.
Related Work
Machine learning methods are designed to generalize from observation but if algorithms inadvertently learn to make predictions based on stereotyped associations they risk amplifying existing
social problems.
Several problematic instances
have been demonstrated, for example, word embeddings can encode sexist stereotypes . Similar observations have been made in vision and language
models , online news , web search and
advertisements . In our work, we
add a unique focus on co-reference, and propose
simple general purpose methods for reducing bias.
Implicit human bias can come from imbalanced datasets. When making decisions on such
datasets, it is usual that under-represented samples in the data are neglected since they do not
inﬂuence the overall accuracy as much. For binary classiﬁcation Kamishima et al. 
add a regularization term to their objective that
penalizes biased predictions.
Various other approaches have been proposed to produce “fair”
classiﬁers . For structured prediction, the work of Zhao et al. reduces bias
by using corpus level constraints, but is only practical for models with specialized structure. Kusner
et al. propose the method based on causal
inference to achieve the model fairness where they
do the data augmentation under speciﬁc cases,
however, to the best of our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to propose data augmentation based on gender
swapping in order to reduce gender bias.
Concurrent work also
studied gender bias in coreference resolution
systems, and created a similar job title based,
winograd-style, co-reference dataset to demon-
10We do not evaluate the Rule system as it cannot be train
for anonymized input.
strate bias 11. Their work corroborates our ﬁndings
of bias and expands the set of systems shown to be
biased while we add a focus on debiasing methods. Future work can evaluate on both datasets.
Conclusion
Bias in NLP systems has the potential to not only
mimic but also amplify stereotypes in society. For
a prototypical problem, coreference, we provide
a method for detecting such bias and show that
three systems are signiﬁcantly gender biased. We
also provide evidence that systems, given sufﬁcient cues, can ignore their bias.
Finally, we
present general purpose methods for making coreference models more robust to spurious, genderbiased cues while not incurring signiﬁcant penalties on their performance on benchmark datasets.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant IIS-1760523, two NVIDIA
GPU Grants, and a Google Faculty Research
Award. We would like to thank Luke Zettlemoyer,
Eunsol Choi, and Mohit Iyyer for helpful discussion and feedback.