Adversarial Machine Learning - Industry
Perspectives
Ram Shankar Siva Kumar∗, Magnus Nystr¨om†, John Lambert‡, Andrew Marshall§, Mario Goertzel¶
, Andi Comissoneru∥, Matt Swann∗∗and Sharon Xia††
Redmond,USA
Email: ∗ , † , ‡ , § 
¶ , ∥ , ∗∗ ,
†† 
Abstract—Based on interviews with 28 organizations, we found
that industry practitioners are not equipped with tactical and
strategic tools to protect, detect and respond to attacks on their
Machine Learning (ML) systems. We leverage the insights from
the interviews and enumerate the gaps in securing machine learning systems when viewed in the context of traditional software
security development. We write this paper from the perspective
of two personas: developers/ML engineers and security incident
responders. The goal of this paper is to layout the research agenda
to amend the Security Development Lifecycle for industrial-grade
software in the adversarial ML era.
Index Terms—adversarial machine learning, software security,
engineering
I. INTRODUCTION
Adversarial Machine Learning is now having a moment in
the software industry - For instance, Google , Microsoft 
and IBM have signaled, separate from their commitment to
securing their traditional software systems, initiatives to secure
ML systems. In Feb 2019, Gartner, the leading industry market
research ﬁrm, published its ﬁrst report on adversarial machine
learning advising that “Application leaders must anticipate
and prepare to mitigate potential risks of data corruption,
model theft, and adversarial samples.” The motivation for this
paper is to understand the extent to which organizations across
different industries are protecting their ML systems from
attacks, detecting adversarial manipulation and to responding
to attacks on their ML systems.
There are many reasons why organizations may already be
ahead of the curve in systematically securing their ML assets.
Firstly, in the last three years, companies heavily investing in
machine learning themselves - Google , Amazon , Microsoft
, Tesla – faced some degree of adversarial attacks – ;
a bellwether of the rise of adversarial machine learning.
Secondly, standards organizations like ISO are forming
certiﬁcation rubrics to assess security of ML systems and
whose endorsements have been historically sought after in
the industry . Also, governments are showing signs that
industry will have to build ML systems securely, with the
European Union even releasing a complete checklist to assess
trustworthiness of ML systems Finally, ML is rapidly
becoming core to organizations’ value proposition and it is only natural that organizations invest in protecting their “crown jewels”.
We make two contributions in this paper:
1) Despite the compelling reasons to secure ML systems,
over a survey spanning 28 different organizations, we
found that most industry practitioners are yet to come
to terms with adversarial machine learning. 25 out of
the 28 organizations indicated that they don’t have the
right tools in place to secure their ML systems and are
explicitly looking for guidance.
2) We enumerate the security engineering aspects of building ML systems using Security development Lifecycle
(SDL) frame work, the de facto software building process in industry.
This paper is a compendium of pain points and gaps in
securing machine learning systems as encountered by typical
software organizations. We hope to appeal to the research
community to help solve the problem faced by two personas
- software developers/ML engineers and security incident
responders - when securing machine learning systems. The
goal of this paper is to engage ML researchers to revise and
amend Security Development Lifecycle for industrial-grade
software in the adversarial ML era.
The paper is organized thus: the ﬁrst part outlines the survey
methodology and ﬁndings. The second part comprises gaps in
securing machine learning in three phases: when ML systems
are designed and developed; when the said system is prepped
for deployment and it is under attack.
II. INDUSTRY SURVEY ABOUT ADVERSARIAL ML
We interviewed 28 organizations spanning Fortune 500,
small-and-medium businesses, non-proﬁts, and government
organizations to understand how they secure their machine
learning systems from adversarial attacks (See Table I and
Table II).
22 out of the 28, were in “security sensitive” ﬁelds such
as ﬁnance, consulting, cybersecurity, healthcare, government.
The other 6 organizations represented social media analytics,
publishing, agriculture, urban planning, food processing and
translation services (See Table II for distribution).
2020 Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW)
© 2020, Ram Shankar Siva Kumar. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SPW50608.2020.00028
ORGANIZATION SIZE
Organization size
Large Organizations (> 1000 employees)
Small-and-Medium Size Businesses
ORGANIZATION TYPES
Organization
Cybersecurity
Healthcare
Government
Consulting
Social Media Analytics
Publishing
Agriculture
Urban Planning
Food Processing
Translation
At each organization, we interviewed two personas: the
developer in charge of building machine models in the organization, and the security personnel who was on point for
securing the organization’s infrastructure. Depending on the
size of the organization, these two personas were either in
different teams, the same team or even the same person. All
organizations we spoke to were familiar with the Security
Development Lifecycle as pertaining to traditional software
engineering, though the degree to which they executed varied
– larger corporations that had a more formal, documented
process than small and medium sized corporations. We also
limited to organizations had relatively mature machine learning investments, with a few of them centering their business
around “AI”.
These organizations executed on their ML strategy in a
variety of ways: most of them used ML toolkits such a
Keras, TensorFlow or PyTorch to build ML models; 10 organizations relied on Machine Learning as a Service such as
Microsoft’s Cognitive API , Amazon AI Services ,
Google CloudAI ; Only 2 organizations built ML systems
from scratch and not relying on either existing toolkits/ML
platforms (See Table III)
ML STRATEGY
How do you build ML Systems
Using ML Frameworks
Using ML as a Service
Building ML Systems from scratch
Limitations of Study: Our sample size of 28 may not
represent the entire population industries employing machine
learning. For instance, the study does not include startups and
has a pre-ponderance of security-sensitive organizations. We
also do not account for geographic distribution – most of
the organizations operate and head quartered in the United
States or Europe. We limited ourselves to failures that are
caused by a malicious attacker in the system and did not
investigate broader safety failures such as common corruption
 , reward hacking , distributional shifts or naturally
occurring adversarial examples .
A. Findings:
1) Though, all 28 organizations indicated that security of
AI system is important to their business productivity, the
emphasis is still on traditional security. As one security
analyst put it, “Our top threat vector is spearphishing
and malware on the box. This [adversarial ML] looks
futuristic”. While there is great interest in adversarial
machine learning, only 6 organizations (all of whom are
large organizations or government) are ready to assign
head-count to solve the problem
2) Lack of adversarial ML know-how: Organizations seem
lack the tactical knowledge to secure machine learning
systems in production. As one of them put it, “Traditional software attacks are a known unknown. Attacks on
our ML models are unknown unknown”. 22 out of the 25
(3 government organizations abstained from answering
this question satisfactorily) organizations said that they
don’t have the right tools in place to secure their ML
systems and are explicitly looking for guidance. Also,
security engineers mostly do not have the ability to
detect and respond to attacks on ML systems (See Table
STATE OF ADVERSARIAL ML
Do you secure your ML systems today
3) We walked through the list of attacks as outlined in 
and asked them to pick the top attack that would affect
their businesses(See Table V). Note: respondents were
allowed to pick only one threat as opposed to stack rank
them all. The result were as follows:
TOP ATTACK
Which attack would affect your org the most?
Distribution
Poisoning (e.g: )
Model Stealing (e.g: )
Model Inversion (e.g: )
Backdoored ML (e.g: )
Membership Inference (e.g: )
Adversarial Examples (e.g: )
Reprogramming ML System (e.g: )
Adversarial Example in Physical Domain (e.g: )
Malicious ML provider recovering training data (e.g: )
Attacking the ML supply chain (e.g: )
Exploit Software Dependencies (e.g: )
• Data poisoning has caught the attention of enterprises, perhaps because of the cultural signiﬁcance
of Tay. A medium sized ﬁnancial tech put it thus,
“We use ML systems to suggest tips and ﬁnancial
products for our users. The integrity of our ML
system matters a lot. Worried about inappropriate
recommendation like attack on Tay”
• Organizations care most about attacks that can lead
to potential breach of privacy. As one of the banks
put it, “Want to protect client info, employee info
used in ML models but we don’t know have a plan
• Model Stealing that can lead to loss of Intellectual
property is another concern. A large retail organization said, “We run a proprietary algorithm to solve
our problem and it would be worrisome if someone
can reverse engineer it”
• Adversarial Examples in the physical domain, resonated with the respondents, but did not rank high
on the list. One reason may be that the organizations
we spoke to did not have physical component like
cars or drones.
4) For security analysts, there is a mismatch between expectations and reality when it comes to adversarial ML.
Many security analysts expect that algorithms available
in platforms such as Keras, TensorFlow or PyTorch
are inherently secure against adversarial manipulations
and have already been battle tested against adversarial
ML attacks. This is perhaps, because security analysts
who have mostly been exposed to traditional software,
assume that libraries put out by large organizations
such as Facebook or Google would have been already
been security stress tested. Similarly, organizations seem
to push the security responsibility upstream to service
providers as one of the respondents said, “We use
Machine Learning as a Service and expect them to
provide these robust algorithms and platforms”
5) Finally, security analysts and developers do not know
what to expect when systems get attacked. As one of
the ML engineers put it, “I don’t expect any system to
be immune from spooﬁng, but I need to know conﬁdence
levels and expected performance; as well as potential
failure modes. If system is spoofed, what is the worst
possible outcome?”
In the following sections of the paper, summarized in Fig.1
, we elaborate the gaps in current SDL process when building
ML systems, as they are prepped for deployment and when the
ML system is under attack. For each gap, we outline existing
methods in traditional software development and sketch future
research agenda.
III. ABOUT SDL
In July 2001, Microsoft was affected by CodeRed, a computer worm that affected Internet Information Server (IIS) 4.0
and 5.0 . This happened because of a single line error in
code running by default in IIS4 and IIS5 systems, enabling a
buffer overﬂow attack. In Jan 2002, Microsoft halted developing any new software for 2 months to ﬁx all known security
bugs in its system, pairing security experts with developers.
Out of this close interaction, a systematic process of providing
security guidance evolved, helping engineers look for software
defects and implementation ﬂaws. This set of practices has
now come to be called the Secure Development Lifecycle
(SDL). While SDL does not eliminate all software bugs, they
do help to catch software vulnerabilities that could later be
exploited, before it reaches the hands of a customer. For
instance, after SDL was introduced in Microsoft, the number
of reported vulnerabilities between Windows XP and Windows
Vista, reduced by 45%, and number of vulnerabilities between
SQL Server 2000 and SQL Server 2005, reduced by 91% .
Currently SDL, in some form, is a de-facto process in industrygrade software development adopted by 122 organizations
 , including Google , IBM , Facebook and
Netﬂix .
The primary inquiry is amending and revising the SDL
process used in securing traditional software, to secure ML
systems against adversarial attacks.
IV. GAPS DURING DEVELOPMENT OF ML SOLUTION
A. Curated repository of attacks
In traditional software security, attacks are decomposed
into shareable “tactics and procedures” and are collectively
organized in the MITRE ATT&CK framework . This
provides a search-able attack repository comprising, attacks
by researchers as well as nation state attackers. For every
attack, there is a description of the technique, which advanced
persistent threat is known to use it, detection ideas as well as
reference to publications with further context.
In adversarial ML, the scholarship is booming but the
awareness is low among developers and security analysts –
only 5 out of 28 organizations stated that they had working
knowledge of adversarial ML. We propose that a similar curated repository of attacks be created, preferably by extending
the widely used existing MITRE Framework. For instance,
when adversarial ML researchers publish a new type of attack,
we ask them to register their attacks in the MITRE framework,
so that security analysts have a uniﬁed view of traditional and
adversarial ML attacks.
B. Adversarial ML speciﬁc secure coding practices:
In traditional software setting, secure coding practice enables engineers to reduce exploitable vulnerabilities in their
programs and enables auditing of source code by other engineers. For instance Python , Java, C and C++ 
have well deﬁned secure coding practice against traditional
software bugs like memory corruption. In machine learning
setting, adversarial ML speciﬁc security guidance is sparse.
Most toolkits provide best practices (TensorFlow , Pytorch
 , Keras ) but TensorFlow is the only framework that
provides consolidated guidance around traditional software
attacks and links to tools for testing against adversarial
attacks .
Fig. 1. Security Engineering aspects of Machine Learning
We think future work in adversarial ML should focus
on providing best practices to eliminate undeﬁned program
behaviors and exploitable vulnerabilities. We acknowledge it
is difﬁcult to provide concrete guidance because the ﬁeld is
protean . Perhaps one direction, would be to enumerate guidance based on “security consequence”. Viewing the
world through SDL allows for imperfect solutions to exist.
For instance, in traditional software security, the outdated
cryptgenradnom function should not be used to generate
random seeds for secret sharing protocols which are of higher
security consequence), but can be used to generate process
IDs in an operating system (which is of lower security
consequence). Instead of thinking of secure coding practice as
underwriting a strong security guarantee, a good start would be
to provide examples of security-compliant and non-compliant
code examples.
C. Static Analysis and Dynamic Analysis of ML Systems
In traditional software security, static analysis tools help
detect potential bugs in the code without the need for execution
and to detect violations in coding practices. The source code
is generally converted into an abstract syntax tree, which is
then used to create a control ﬂow graph. Coding practices
and checks, which are turned into logic, are searched over the
control ﬂow graph, and are raised as errors when inconsitent
with logic. In traditional software for instance, in Python tools
like Pyt detect traditional software security vulnerabilities.
Dynamic analysis, on the other hand, involves searching for
vulnerabilities on executing a certain code path.
On the ML front, tools like cleverhans , secml ,
and the adversarial robustness toolkit providing a certain
degree of white-box style and blackbox style dynamic testing.
A future area of research is how to extend the analysis to
model stealing, model inversion and membership inference
style attacks. Out of the box static analysis for adversarial
ML is less explored. One promising angle is work like
Code2graph that generates call graphs in ML platform
and in conjunction with symbolic execution may provide the
ﬁrst step towards a static analysis tool. We hope that the static
analysis tools ultimately integrate with IDE (integrated development environment) to provide analytical insight into the
syntax, semantics, so as to prevent the introduction of security
vulnerabilities before the application code is committed to the
code repository.
D. Auditing and Logging in ML Systems
To use a traditional software example, important security
events in the operating system like process creation are logged
in the host, which is then forwarded to Security Information
and Event Management (SIEM) systems. This later enables,
security responders to run anomaly detection , to
detect if an anomalous process (which is an indication of
malware) was executed on the machine.
Auditing in ML systems was initially pointed by Papernot
 with solution sketches to instrument ML environments
to capture telemetry. As done in traditional software security,
we recommend that developers of ML systems, identify “high
impact activities” in their system. We recommend executing
the list of attacks that are considered harmful to the organization and ensuring that the events manifesting in the telemetry
can be traced back to the attack. Finally, these events must
be exportable to traditional Security Information and Event
Management systems, so that analysts can keep an audit trail
for future investigations.
E. Detection and Monitoring of ML systems
Currently, ML environments are illegible to security analysts
as they have no operational insights. There has been insightful
working pointing to the brittleness of current adversarial detection mechanisms and how to make them better . In
addition, we propose that detection methods are written so that
they are easily shared among security analysts. For instance,
in traditional software security, detection logic is written in
a common format, the most popular of which is Sigma .
Where MITRE ATT&CK provides a great repository of insight
in techniques used by adversaries, Sigma can turn one analyst’s
insights into defensive action for many, by providing a way
to self-documented concrete logic for detecting an attacker’s
techniques.
V. GAPS WHEN PREPARING FOR DEPLOYMENT OF ML
A. Automating Tools in Deployment Pipeline
In a typical traditional software setting, after a developer
as the developer completes small chunks of the assigned
task, the following sequence of steps generally follow: ﬁrst,
the code is committed to source control and Continuous
Integration triggers application build and unit tests; once these
are passed, Continuous Deployment triggers an automated
deployment into testing and then production wherein it reaches
the customer. At each step of the “build”, security tools are
integrated.
We hope that dynamic analysis tools built for adversarial
ML are integrated into the continuous integration / continuous
delivery pipeline. Automating the adversarial ML testing,
will help ﬁx issues and without overloading engineers with
too many tools or alien processes outside of their everyday
engineering experience.
B. Red Teaming ML Systems
Informally, the risk of an attack to an organization depends
on two factors: the impact it has on the business and the
likelihood of the attack occurring. Threat modeling of ML
Systems , performed by the ML developers, address the
impact factor. Red teaming, the deliberate process of exploiting
the system through any means possible conducted by an independent security team, helps to assess the likelihood factor. For
critical security applications, red teaming is industry standard
and a requirement for providing software to US governments
 . With Facebook being the ﬁrst industry to start an AI Red
Team and is unexplored area in the adversarial ML ﬁeld
for others.
C. Transparency Centers
In traditional security, large organizations such as Kaspersky
 , Huawei have provided “transparency centers” where
participants visit a secure facility to conduct deep levels
of source code inspection and analysis. Participants would
have access to source code and an environment for in-depth
inspection with diagnostic tools to verify the security aspects
of different products such as SSL and TCP/IP implementation
or pseudorandom number generators.
In adversarial ML context, future transparency centers may
need to attest over 3 modalities: that the ML platform is
implemented in a secure fashion; that the MLaaS is implemented meeting basic security objectives and ﬁnally, that the
ML model embedded in an edge device (such as models on
mobile phones, for instance) meets basic security objectives.
An interesting direction for future research is to providing
tools/test harnesses to advance security assurance of products
building on top of formal veriﬁcation such as , to
extend to large scale ML models used in industry.
VI. GAPS WHEN AN ML SYSTEM IS UNDER ATTACK
A. Tracking and Scoring ML Vulnerabilities
In traditional software security, when a researcher ﬁnds a
vulnerability in a system, it is ﬁrst assigned a unique identi-
ﬁcation number and registered in a database called Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposure . Accompanying these vulnerabilities are severity ratings calculated by using Common
Vulnerability Scoring System . For instance, in the recent
zero day found against Internet Explorer that allowed for
remote code execution the vulnerability was referred to
as ”CVE-2020-0674” and had assigned a base CVSS score 7.5
out of 10 , roughly indicating the seriousness of the bug.
This enables the entire industry to refer to the problem using
the same tongue.
In an ML context, we ask the adversarial ML research community to register vulnerabilities (especially affecting large
groups of consumers) in a trackable system like CVE to ensure
that industry manufacturers are alerted. It is not clear how
ML vulnerabilities should be scored accounting for risk and
impact. Finally, When a security analyst sees news about an
attack, the bottom line is mostly “Is my organization affected
by the attack?” and today, organizations lack the ability to
scan an ML environment for known adversarial ML speciﬁc
vulnerabilities.
B. Incident Response
When a security engineer receives a notiﬁcation that an ML
system is under attack, and triages that the attack is relevant
to the business, there are two important steps – ascertaining
blast radius and preparing for containment. For instance, in
the case of ransomware, a traditional software attack, the blast
radius would be to determine other machines connected to the
infected machine, and containment would be to remove the
machines from the network for forensic analysis.
Both steps are difﬁcult, because ML systems are highly
integrated in a production setting where a failure of one can
lead to unintended consequences . One interesting line of
research is to identify whether, if it is possible to “containerize” ML systems so as to quarantine uncompromised ML
systems from the impact of a compromised ML system, just
as anti virus systems would quarantine an infected ﬁle.
C. Forensics
In traditional software security, once the machine is contained, it is prepared for forensics to ascertain root cause.
There are a lot of open questions in this area so as to
meaningfully interrogate ML systems under attack to ascertain
the root cause of failure:
1) What are the artifacts that should be analyzed for every
ML attack? Model ﬁle? The queries that were scored?
Training data? Architecture? Telemetry? Hardware? All
the software applications running on the attacked system? How can we leverage work data provenance and
model provenance for forensics?
2) How should these artifacts be collected? For instance, for
ML models developed on the end point or Internet of
Things vs. organizations using ML as a Service, the artifacts available for analysis and acquisition methodology
will be different. We posit that ML forensics methodology is dependent on ML frameworks (like PyTorch
vs. TensorFlow), ML paradigms (e.g: reinforcement
learning vs. supervised learning) and ML environment
(running on host vs cloud vs edge).
3) An orthogonal step that may be carried out is cyberthreat
attribution, wherein the security analyst is able to determine the actor responsible for the attack. In traditional
software, this is done by analyzing the forensic evidence
such as infrastructure used to mount the attack, threat
intelligence and ascertaining the attacker’s tools, tactics
and procedures using established rubrics called analytic
trade craft . It is unclear how this would be amended
in the adversarial ML age.
D. Remediation
In traditional software security. Tuesday is often synonymous with “Patch Tuesday”. This is when companies like
Microsoft, SAS, and Adobe release patches for vulnerabilities in their software, which are then installed based on an
organization’s patching policy.
In an ML context, when Tay was compromised because of
poisoning attack, it was suspended by Microsoft. This may not
be possible for all ML systems, especially those that have been
deployed on the edge. It is not clear what the guidelines are for
patching a system, that is vulnerable to model . On the same
lines, it is not clear how one would validate if the “patched”
ML model will perform as well as the previous one, but not
be subject to the same vulnerabilities based on Papernot et.
al’s transferability result.
VII. CONCLUSION
In a keynote in 2019, Nicholas Carlini likened the
adversarial ML ﬁeld to “crypto pre-Shannon” based on the
ease with which defenses are broken. We extend Carlini’s
metaphor beyond just attacks and defenses: through interviews
spanning 28 organizations, we found that most ML engineers
and incident responders are unequipped to secure industrygrade ML systems against adversarial attacks. We also enumerate how researchers can contribute to Security Development
Lifecyle (SDL), the de facto process for building reliable
software, in the era of adversarial ML. We conclude that if
ML is Software 2.0 , it also needs to follow fundamental
security rigor from traditional “software 1.0” development
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank the following Microsoft engineers
for their support: Hyrum Anderson, Steve Dispensa, Avi Ben-
Menahem, Seetharaman Harikrishnan, Anil Thomas, Eﬁm
Hudis, Jarek Stanley, Jeffrey Snover, Cristin Goodwin, Kevin
Scott, Kymberlee Price, Mark Russinovich, Faraz Fadavi,
Walner Dort, Steve Mott, Krishna Sagar B V and members of
the AETHER Security Engineering group. We also would like
to thank Nicolas Papernot (Google Brain) and Justin Gilmer
(Google Brain), Miles Brundage (OpenAI), Ivan Evtimov
(University of Washington), Frank Nagle (Harvard University);
Kendra Albert (Harvard Law), Jonathon W. Penney (Citizen
Lab) and Bruce Schneier (Harvard Kennedy School), Steve
Lipner (SAFECode.org), Gary McGraw (BIML), Fernando
Montenegro and members of AI Safety and Security Working
Group at Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society for
the fruitful discussions. We would also like to thank ML
engineers and security analysts from 28 organizations for their
time and insights.