Theory and Practice
of Online Learning
V I E W I N G O P T I O N S
View as a single page
View as continuous facing pages
Open bookmarks
This book and the individual
chapters are copyright by Athabasca
University. However, to maximize
the distribution and application of
the knowledge contained within, the
complete book and the individual
chapters are licensed under the
Creative Commons License.
In brief, this license allows you to
read, print and share freely the
contents in whole or in part, with
the provisions listed below.
Attribution. You must give the
original author credit.
Non-commercial. You may not
use this work for commercial
purposes. Use for educational
purposes by public or non-profit
educational institutions is
permitted.
No derivative works. You may
not alter, transform, or build upon
this work.
The formal, human-readable deed
that outlines the license is available
at 
licenses/by-nd-nc/1.0
The license in more formal legal
language is available at
 
by-nd-nc/1.0/legalcode
Athabasca University may be
interested in expanding licensing
provisions beyond the limitations
above, but permission to do
so must be negotiated by contacting
the editors, Terry Anderson,
 , or Fathi
Elloumi, .
Editors: Terry Anderson &
Fathi Elloumi
Managing editor: Gilda Sanders
Copy editor: David Evans
Visual designer: Ian Grivois
Web site: Ian Grivois &
Audrey Krawec
Printed at Athabasca
University, 2004
Athabasca University
1 University Drive
Athabasca, AB T9S 3A3
Enquiries:
Toll free in Canada/U.S.
1-800-788-9041
 
www.athabascau.ca
Text: Sabon
Numerals: Hoefler Text
Headings: Monotype Lydian
Paper (text): Becket Concept,
24 lb. writing, glacier
Paper (flysheet): Via Vellum,
80 lb. text, sunflower
Paper (cover): Productolith Dull,
80 lb. cover
ISBN: 0-919737-59-5
Terry Anderson &
Fathi Elloumi
cde.athabascau.ca/online_book
Athabasca University
Theory and Practice
of Online Learning
C O N T E N T S
Contributing Authors / i
Foreword / ix
Dominique Abrioux
Introduction / xiii
Terry Anderson & Fathi Elloumi
Foundations of Educational Theory
for Online Learning / 3
Mohamed Ally
Toward a Theory of Online Learning / 33
Terry Anderson
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic
Approach to Online Learning / 61
Fathi Elloumi
Developing an Infrastructure
for Online Learning / 97
Alan Davis
Technologies of Online Learning
(e-Learning) / 115
Rory McGreal & Michael Elliott
Media Characteristics and
Online Learning Technology / 137
Patrick J. Fahy
Part 1 – Role and
Function of Theory in
Online Education
Development and
Part 2 – Infrastructure
and Support for Content
Development
The Development of Online Courses / 175
Dean Caplan
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing
Team Projects Online / 195
Deborah C. Hurst & Janice Thomas
Copyright Issues in Online Courses:
A Moment in Time / 241
Lori-Ann Claerhout
Value Added—The Editor in Design and
Development of Online Courses / 259
Jan Thiessen & Vince Ambrock
Teaching in an Online Learning
Context / 271
Terry Anderson
Call Centers in Distance Education / 295
Andrew Woudstra, Colleen Huber,
& Kerri Michalczuk
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions
among Online Learners / 319
Joram Ngwenya, David Annand
& Eric Wang
Library Support for Online
Learners: e-Resources, e-Services,
and the Human Factors / 349
Kay Johnson, Houda Trabelsi, & Tony Tin
Supporting the Online Learner / 367
Judith A. Hughes
The Quality Dilemma in Online
Education / 385
Nancy K. Parker
Part 4 – Delivery,
Quality Control, and
Student Support of
Online Courses
Part 3 – Design and
Development of Online
C O N T R I B U T I N G A U T H O R S
Mohamed Ally, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor in the Centre for
Distance Education at Athabasca University. He teaches courses in
distance education and is involved with research on improving
design, development, delivery, and support in distance education.
Vincent Ambrock works as a Multimedia Instructional Design
Editor in the Athabasca University School of Business. He holds a
Bachelor of Arts (Honours) degree from the University of Alberta
and has worked extensively as an editor and writer on an array of
electronic and print-based publishing projects.
Terry Anderson, Ph.D. ( ), is a professor and
Canada Research Chair in Distance Education at Athabasca
University, Canada’s Open University. He has published widely in the
area of distance education and educational technology and has
recently co-authored two new books: Anderson and Kanuka, ,
eResearch: Methods, Issues and Strategies; and Garrison and
Anderson, , Online Learning in the 21st Century: A Framework for Research and Practice.
David Annand, Ed.D., M.B.A., C.A., is the Director of the School
of Business at Athabasca University. His research interests include
the educational applications of computer-based instruction and
computer-mediated communications to distance learning, and the
effects of online learning on the organization of distance-based
universities.
Dean Caplan is an instructional designer at Bow Valley College in
Calgary, Alberta, with a special interest in the design, development,
usability, and usage of multimedia in computer-mediated communications. He was, until 2002, employed as an instructional designer
at Athabasca University. Mr. Caplan recently designed and oversaw
development of a Web-based course helping older adults learn to
use the Internet.
Lori-Ann Claerhout ( .), is Copyright
Officer in Educational Media Development at Athabasca University.
She holds a Bachelor of Arts (English) degree from the University of
Calgary, and is currently working toward a Master of Arts
(Humanities Computing and English) degree from the University of
Alberta. Lori-Ann has been active in organizing other copyright
professionals from western and central Canada.
Alan Davis, Ph.D., was Vice-President, Academic, at Athabasca
University from 1996 to 2003, and before that he directed programs
at the BC Open University. His original discipline was Chemistry,
and he received his doctorate from Simon Fraser University in 1980.
He has special interests learning assessment and accreditation, the
management of e-learning, and virtual university consortia. Dr.
Davis is now Vice-President, Academic, at Niagra College.
Fathi Elloumi, Ph.D. ( ), is an associate
professor of Managerial Accounting at Athabasca University. His
research focuses on corporate governance, and covers all aspects of
effective governance practices. He is also interested in the strategic
and managerial aspects of online learning research from two
perspectives. The first perspective deals with the strategic decisions
of online learning, trying to use the value chain, balanced scorecard,
and performance dashboard frameworks to optimize online
learning decision initiatives and tie them to organizational vision.
The second perspective deals with the operational aspects of online
learning and mainly focuses on the internal processes of the online
learning institution. Subjects such as strategic costing, value chain
analysis, process re-engineering, activity-based management,
continuous improvement, value engineering, and quality control are
the focus of his research program related to online learning.
Patrick J. Fahy, Ph.D. ( ), is an associate
professor in the Centre for Distance Education (CDE), Athabasca
University. His career has included high school and adult education
teaching, and research from basic literacy to graduate levels, private
sector management and training experience, and private consulting.
Currently, in addition to developing and teaching educational
technology courses in the Master of Distance Education (MDE)
program, Pat coordinates the MDE’s Advanced Graduate Diploma
in Distance Education (Technology) program and the CDE’s annual
Distance Education Technology Symposium. He is Past-President of
the Alberta Distance Education and Training Association (ADETA).
His current research interests include measures of efficiency in
online and technology-based training, and interaction analysis in
online conferencing.
Colleen Huber has worked at Athabasca University since 1994,
when she was the first facilitator in the Call Centre. Since then, she
has moved to the position of Learning Systems Manager where she
is responsible for the systems used to deliver courses and manage
information within the School of Business at Athabasca University.
Now that these systems are available, Colleen spends a great deal of
time presenting them to the Athabasca University community and
running workshops to train staff on their use, as well as presenting
papers and workshops to other educational communities.
Dr. Judith Hughes, Ph.D. ( ), Vice-President,
Academic, first came to Athabasca University in 1985, when the
University was moved from Edmonton, Alberta, to the town of
Athabasca, 120 km north of Edmonton. Judith’s history is rooted
in adult education, in teaching and research, as well as
administrative positions. She has lived in a variety of places in
Canada, having completed her bachelor’s degree at Carleton
University (Ottawa), her master’s degree at Queen’s University
(Kingston), and her Ph.D. at University of Alberta (Emonton).
At Athabasca University, Dr. Hughes oversees all graduate and
undergraduate academic units within the University, including
academic centres, library, educational media development,
counseling and advising, and other student support units. She
previously served as Vice-President, Students Services, at Athabasca
University for seven years, overseeing the development of student
support resources on the Web.
Dr. Hughes also served as Vice-President, External Relations for
a brief period, when she was responsible for executive communications outside the University, international collaborations,
university development, fundraising, corporate partnerships, etc.
Dr. Hughes’s research interests include the school-to-work nexus,
in which she conducted research at Queen’s University in the 1980s;
access to university education, in which she first undertook research
at the University of Alberta, and in which she continues to work at
Athabasca University; intellectual honesty as institutional culture, in
which she is now working at Athabasca University; and the use of
technology in addressing equality of access to university education,
in which she is conducting research with partners from institutions
such as Indira Gandhi University and the University of the Arctic.
Deborah C. Hurst, Ph.D. ( ), is an
Associate Professor with the Centre for Innovative Management,
Athabasca University in Alberta, Canada. Her area of specialization
is the study of cultural organization change, with an interest in
knowledge work and development of intellectual capital through
on-going competency development and virtual learning. Her work
is a balance of applied and academic research that draws from a
diverse background in her pursuit of this specialization. Her current
research program is concerned the experiences of contingent
knowledge workers, the development, retention and valuation of
intellectual capital, the use of virtual learning environments to
enhance intellectual capital, transmission and alignment of cultural
values, and the de-institutionalization of the psychological
employment contract. For more information regarding Deborah’s
work or background check the Athabasca University Centre for
Innovative Management Web site.
Kay Johnson ( ), is Head, Reference and
Circulation Services at the Athabasca University Library. Kay
received her Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in History from University
of Ottawa and her Master of Library and Information Studies from
McGill University. In addition to providing reference and
instructional services to Athabasca University learners, she has
been actively involved in the development of the digital library at
Athabasca University, and serves as a consultant for the Digital
Reading Room project.
Kerri Michalczuk has been with Athabasca University since 1984.
For the last five years, as Course Production and Delivery Manager,
she has managed the day-to-day operation of the School of Business
tutorial Call Centre—the first point of contact for students registered
in business courses. Kerri also manages the production processes for
developing online and print-based materials, including coordinating
the work of production staff, such as editors, instructional designers,
typesetters, and copyright personnel. Kerri has extensive knowledge
of Athabasca University’s administrative and production systems,
and she sits on many committees that review, plan, and implement
University systems.
Joram Ngwenya, Ph.D., is an assistant professor of Management
Information Systems as Athabasca University. His research interests
include e-learning systems, e-government systems, and group
decision support systems.
Nancy Parker, Ph.D. ( ), is the Director of
Institutional Studies at Athabasca University and is actively engaged
in a wide range of quality assurance and accreditation activities,
including serving on Alberta Learning’s Performance Measurement
and Management Information Committee, and as Athabasca’s institutional liaison officer to the Middles States Commission on Higher
Education. She has published in the fields of criminal justice history
and institutional research.
Jan Thiessen is a Multimedia Instructional Design Editor in
Athabasca University's School of Business. She received a Bachelor
of Education degree (English) from the University of Alberta, and
Master of Distance Education from Athabasca University. Her
research on faculty attitudes towards interaction in distance
education helps inform her work with course authors and teams,
developing quality distance learning materials and experiences.
Janice Thomas, Ph.D. ( ), is an Associate
Professor and Program Director for the Executive MBA in Project
Management at the Centre for Innovative Management, Athabasca
University in Alberta, Canada. She is also an adjunct professor in
the University of Calgary joint Engineering and Management
Project Management Specialization, and a visiting professor with
the University of Technology, Sydney, where she supervises Master
and Ph.D. research students. Prior to becoming an academic, Janice
spent ten years as a project manager in the fields of Information
Technology and Organizational Change. Janice is now an active
researcher presenting and publishing her research to academic and
practitioner audiences at various sites around the world. Janice's
research interests include organizational change, project management, team building and leadership, complexity theory in relation
to organizations, the professionalization of knowledge workers,
and the impact of codification of knowledge on performance.
Ultimately all of her research is aimed at improving the practice of
project management in organizations. For more information
regarding Janice’s work or background check the Athabasca
University, Centre for Innovative Management Web site.
Tony Tin ( ) is the Electronic Resources
Librarian at Athabasca University Library. Tony holds a B.A. and
M.A. in History from McGill University and a B.Ed. and M.L.S.
from the University of Alberta. He maintains the Athabasca
University Library’s Web site and online resources, and is the
Digital Reading Room project leader.
Houda Trabelsi ( ) is an e-Commerce course
coordinator at Athabasca University. She received a M.Sc. in
business administration from Sherbrooke University and a M.Sc. in
information technology from Moncton University. Her research
interests include electronic commerce, business models, e-learning
strategy, customer relationships management, trust and privacy in
electronic commerce, World Wide Web navigation, and interface
Zengxiang (Eric) Wang, Ph.D., is an assistant professor of finance
at Athabasca University. His research interests are option pricing,
executive compensation, corporate tax planning, and online
financial education.
Andrew Woudstra, Ph.D., Professor, Management Accounting is a
member of the School of Business at Athabasca University where he
has worked for the past 22 years. In addition to his teaching duties,
he has also served the University in various administrative capacities including Centre Chair, Associate Dean, Acting Dean and
Acting Vice President, Finance and Administration. Andrew has
been involved in a number of innovative process changes in the
School of Business, including the development of e-learning and the
School of Business Call Centre, and has published in a variety of
distance education journals and books.
F O R E W O R D
Dominique Abrioux
During the last ten years, the Internet and the Wide World Web have
fundamentally altered the practice of distance teaching and learning.
Nowhere is this fact more evident than in the transformation
undergone by single-mode distance universities as they seek to apply
the benefits of emerging information communication technology
(ICT) infrastructure to their core business, with a view to improving
the quality and cost-effectiveness of the learning experience afforded
their students.
By the mid 1990s, Canada’s Open University®, Athabasca
University, was ripe for change.1 Not only was the technological
world that had hitherto enabled distance education undergoing
radical and rapid change, but so too was the University’s political
environment, as debt reduction and elimination became the rallying
cries of provincial public policy. Moreover, Athabasca University,
Alberta’s fourth public university, had under-performed during the
ten previous years, as evidenced by the fact that in 1994-1995 it
suffered from the highest government grant per full-load-equivalent
student, the highest tuition fee level amongst the province’s public
universities, and a dismally low graduation rate. Concerned with
this state of affairs, the Government of Alberta announced that it
would reduce Athabasca University’s base budget by 31 per cent
over three years (ten per cent more than the reduction applied to
the other universities), and that it expected significant increases in
enrolment and cost effectiveness.
Today, this institution has risen to the challenge and serves some
30,000 students per year , has more
than tripled its graduation rate, commands the lowest tuition fees
and per full-load-equivalent student base grant in the province,
and, most importantly, enjoys the highest ratings among sister
institutions in the biannual, provincially administered learner satisfaction surveys of university graduates.
Several complementary factors have combined to bring about
this dramatic change in Athabasca University’s institutional
performance, but none is more important than the move towards
the online delivery of its programs and courses. The direction had
been prepared for in the early 1990s as Athabasca University
1 A complete case study
of Athabasca University is
available at the Web site
below. Retrieved January
19, 2004, from http://
www.unesco.org/iiep/vir
tualuniversity/index.html
developed and then launched its first two Masters level
programs (Master of Business Administration and Master of
Distance Education), both online degrees and global innovations.
The Strategic University Plan of 1996-1999 assigned primary
importance to embracing the electronic environment through:
• the transition from predominantly print-based curricula
presented in electronic format, print format or both,
depending on the appropriateness of the medium
• the dramatic expansion of computer-mediated
communication systems to facilitate the electronic
distribution of course materials produced in-house
• e-mail correspondence between students and staff (including
mailing of assignments)
• computer-conferencing among students and between
students and academic staff
• the provision of library, registry, and other student support
• access to electronic data bases
• electronic formative and summative evaluation
• the exploitation of distributed learning systems (e.g., the
World Wide Web)
• the provision of assistance to students learning to use
This book, authored principally by current and past staff
members integral to the implementation of this strategic vision,
presents individual practitioners’ views of the principal pedagogical
and course management opportunities and challenges raised by the
move to an online environment. Although grounded in a discussion
of online learning theory (itself presented and developed by
academics who are engaged daily in developing and delivering
electronic courses), it does not seek to be either a complete guide to
online course development and delivery, or an all-inclusive account
of how they are practiced at Athabasca University. Rather, each
chapter synthesizes, from a practitioner view, one component piece
of a complex system.
One of the main advantages of digital content is the ease with
which it can be adapted and customized. Nowhere is this more true
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
2 . Strategic
University Plan (pp. 5-6).
Retrieved January 19,
2004, from 
.athabascau.ca/html/info/
sup/sup.htm
than in its application to online education in general, and at
Athabasca University in particular, where three complementary
values characterize the organization’s different approaches to how
work is organized and how learning paths for students are
facilitated: customization, openness, and flexibility.
Consequently, and notwithstanding the inevitable standardization around such key issues as quality control, copyright,
materials production, library, and non-academic support services
(all of which are discussed in this book), considerable variation in
operational and educational course development and delivery
models is evident across the University’s different academic centers.
Just as the University supports several learning management systems
(see Chapter 4), so too are there various, recognized approaches
within Athabasca University to the management and administration
of teaching and learning processes. As such, the models and cases
presented in this study should be considered as examples of what
has worked well given one organization’s particular culture, not as
prescriptive descriptions of the only way of engaging in effective
online education.
There is, however, one common trait that both defines Athabasca
University’s flexible undergraduate learning model and informs
most of this book’s content. At the undergraduate level, all five
hundred plus courses are delivered in individualized distance
learning mode: students start on the first day of any month, progress
at their own pace, and submit assignments and sit examinations at
times determined by themselves. This flexibility presents tremendous advantages to adult learners who generally also face the
demands of both employment and family responsibilities, but it
poses particular challenges when administering, designing, or
delivering distance education courses. While most of the online
advances outlined in this book will often have parallel applications
in cohort-based e-classes, the distinction between individualized and
group-based distance education is one that the reader is advised to
keep in mind.
In keeping with its mission as an open university, Athabasca
University is delighted to provide this book under an open source
license, thereby removing financial barriers to its accessibility. As
its President, I take pride in what our collective staff has
accomplished and recognize the particular contribution that this
book’s authors are making to the global extension of our mission.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Terry Anderson & Fathi Elloumi
The Online Learning Series is a collection of works by practitioners
and scholars actively working in the field of distance education.
The text has been written at a time when the field is undergoing
fundamental change. Although not an old discipline by academic
standards, distance education practice and theory has evolved
through five generations in its 150 years of existence . For most of this time, distance education was an individual
pursuit defined by infrequent postal communication between
student and teacher. The last half of the twentieth century witnessed rapid developments and the emergence of three additional
generations, one supported by the mass media of television and
radio, another by the synchronous tools of video and audio teleconferencing, and yet another based on computer conferencing.
The first part of the twenty-first century has produced the first
visions of a fifth generation—based on autonomous agents and
intelligent, database-assisted learning—that we refer to as the
educational Semantic Web. Note that each of these generations has
followed more quickly upon its predecessor than the previous ones.
Moreover, none of these generations has completely displaced
previous ones, so that we are left with diverse yet viable systems of
distance education that use all five generations in combination.
Thus, the field can accurately be described as complex, diverse, and
rapidly evolving.
However, acknowledging complexity does not excuse inaction.
Distance educators, students, administrators, and parents are daily
forced to make choices regarding the pedagogical, economic,
systemic, and political characteristics of the distance education
systems within which they participate. To provide information,
knowledge, and, we hope, a measure of wisdom, the authors of this
text have shared their expertise, their vision, their concerns, and
their solutions to distance education practice in these disruptive
times. Each chapter is written as a jumping-off point for further
reflection, for discussion, and, most importantly, for action. Never
in the history of life on our planet has the need for informed and
wisdom-filled action been greater than it is today. We are convinced
that education—in its many forms—is the most hopeful antidote to
the errors of greed, of ignorance, and of life-threatening aggression
that menace our civilization and our planet.
Distance education is a discipline that subsumes the knowledge
and practice of pedagogy, of psychology and sociology, of
economics and business, of production and technology. We attempt
to address each of these perspectives through the words of those
trained to view their work through a particular disciplinary lens.
Thus, each of the chapters represents the specialized expertise of
individual authors who address that component piece of the whole
with which they have a unique familiarity. This expertise is defined
by a disciplinary background, a set of formal training skills, and a
practice within a component of the distance education system. It is
hardly surprising, then, that some of the chapters are more academic than others, reflecting the author’s primary role as scholar,
while others are grounded in the more practical application focus
of their authors.
In sum, the book is neither an academic tome, nor a prescriptive
“how to” guide. Like a university itself, the book represents a
blending of scholarship and of research, practical attention to the
details of teaching and of provision for learning opportunity,
dissemination of research results, and mindful attention to the
economics of the business of education.
In many ways the chapters represent the best of what makes for
a university community. The word “university” comes from the
Latin universitas (totality or wholeness), which itself contains two
simpler roots, unus (one or singular) and versere (to turn). Thus, a
university reflects a singleness or sense of all encompassing wholeness, implying a study of all that is relevant and an acceptance of
all types of pursuit of knowledge. The word also retains the sense
of evolution and growth implied by the action embedded in the
verb “to turn.” As we enter the twenty-first century, the world is in
the midst of a great turning as we adopt and adapt to the technological capabilities that allow information and communication to
be distributed anywhere/anytime.
The ubiquity and multiplicity of human and agent communication, coupled with tremendous increases in information
production and retrieval, are the most compelling characteristics of
the Net-based culture and economy in which we now function. The
famous quote from Oracle Corporation, “The Net changes
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
everything,” applies directly to the formal provision of education.
Institutions that formerly relied on students gathering in campusbased classrooms are suddenly able (and many seem eager) to offer
their programming on the Internet. Similarly, institutions
accustomed to large-scale distance delivery via print or television
are now being asked to provide more flexible, interactive, and
responsive Net-based alternatives. Each of the chapters in the book
reflects the often disruptive effect of the Net on particular
components of a distance education system.
Open Source Licensing
This book is written by authors from a single university—
Athabasca University—which has branded itself “Canada’s Open
University.” As an open university, we are pleased to be the first
such institution to provide a text such as this one as an open and
free gift to others. The book is published under a Creative
Commons license (see to allow for
free use by all, yet the copyright is retained by the University (see
the copyright page for license details). This open-source license
format was chosen for a number of reasons. First, it is true to the
original spirit of the university, and especially of an open university.
We believe that knowledge is meant to be shared, and further, that
such sharing does not diminish its value to its creator. Thomas
Jefferson eloquently expressed these ideas in 1813 when he wrote
He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself
without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine,
receives light without darkening me. That ideas should freely
spread from one to another over the globe, for the moral and
mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition,
seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently designed by
nature, when she made them, like fire, expansible over all
space, without lessening their density in any point, and like the
air in which we breathe, move, and have our physical being,
incapable of confinement or exclusive appropriation. (1854,
pp. 180-181)
Introduction
As you will see from the quotations and references that augment
the text in most chapters, we have learned much from the works of
others, and thus feel bound to return this gift of knowledge to the
wider community.
Second, we believe that education is one of the few sustainable
means to equip humans around the globe with the skills and
resources to confront the challenges of ignorance, poverty, war, and
environmental degradation. Distance education is perhaps the most
powerful means of extending this resource and making it accessible
to all. Thus, we contribute to the elimination of human suffering by
making as freely available as we can the knowledge that we have
gained developing distance education alternatives.
Third, the Creative Commons license provides our book as a
form of “gift culture.” Gift giving has been a component of many
cultures; witness, for example, the famed Potlatch ceremonies of
Canadian West Coast First Nations peoples. More recently, gift
giving has been a major motivation of hackers developing many of
the most widely used products on the Internet .
Distributing this text as an open source gift serves many of the
same functions gift giving has done through millennia. The gift
weaves bonds within our community and empowers those who
benefit from it to create new knowledge that they can then share
with others and with ourselves. Interestingly, new recent research
on neuro-economics is showing that freely giving and sharing is a
behavior that has had important survival functions for humans
groups since earliest times . David Bollier 
argues that gift cultures are surprisingly resilient and effective at
creating and distributing goods, while protecting both long-term
capacity for sustained production and growing cultural assets.
Bollier also decries the private plunder of our common wealth, and
discusses the obligation that those employed in the public sector
have to ensure that the results of publicly funded efforts are not
exploited for personal gain.
Open source gifts also provide those from wealthy countries
with some small way to redress many economic inequalities and to
share more equitably the gifts we receive from our planet home. We
hope especially that this text will be incorporated into the syllabi of
the growing number of programs of distance education study that
are being offered by both campus and distance education
universities throughout the world. In the words of Sir John Daniel,
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
former Vice Chancellor of the Open University of the United
Kingdom, sharing offers a viable means to “increase the quality
and quantity of electronic courseware as materials are refined,
versioned and adapted to academics around the world and made
freely available in these new formats” . We believe that
the free sharing of course content is a powerful tool to encourage
the growth of public education institutions. We also think that such
sharing will not result in a net value loss for the delivering
institution. Rather, its reputation will be enhanced and its saleable
services will increase in value.
Fourth, providing this book as open source frees us from
potentially acrimonious debates over ownership, return for value,
and distribution of any profit. Educational books rarely make large
profits for their authors, and most of us have personally witnessed
the old aphorism that “acrimony in academic arguments runs so
high because the stakes are so low.” Open source licensing allows
us to go beyond financial arguments that are likely to have little
consequence in any case.
Finally, we hope that open sourcing this book will allow it be
more widely distributed and read. Through this dissemination, the
ideas proposed will be exposed to critical dialogue and reflection.
We hope that much of this commentary will make its way back to
the authors or flow into the discussion forums associated with the
text’s Web site. Through review within the community of practice,
ideas are honed, developed, and sometimes even refuted. Such
discourse not only improves the field as a whole, but also directly
benefits our work at Athabasca University, and thus handsomely
repays our efforts.
In summary, we license the use of this book to all—not so much
with a sense of naïve idealism, but with a realism that has been
developed through our life work—to increase access to and opportunity for all to quality learning opportunities.
Introduction
Book Organization and Introduction to the Chapters
In the following pages, we briefly review the main themes covered
in this book and its chapters. We used the value chain of online
learning framework to help organize our themes and chapters. The
value chain framework is an approach for breaking down the
sequence (chain) of an organization’s functions into the strategically relevant activities through which utility is added to its
offerings and services. The components of an online learning organization’s value chain are depicted in the following figure.
Inbound logistics involves preparations for course development,
including curriculum planning and related activities. Operations
involve the actual process of course development, including writing,
multimedia creation, editing, formatting, graphic design, printing,
and Web publishing. Outbound logistics concerns the packaging
and storage of courses, and the process of mailing, e-mailing, or
otherwise delivering the material to the students. The delivery,
collaborations, and marketing value chain involves a series of value
adding activities, such as student registration through a Web portal;
course delivery; the preparation of brochures, advertising materials,
and the university calendar; developing a branding strategy for the
online learning offerings; and establishing strategic partnerships and
alliances. The service value chain provides online support (technical
and academic) to learners, including counseling, tutoring, marking
of assignments and examinations, delivery and invigilation of examinations, and maintenance of student records. It also includes
learner self-service through Web sites and Web portals. For a more
detailed discussion of the online learning value chain, refer to
Chapter 3 in this volume.
Using a value chain perspective to understand how we have
organized the themes in this book will help the reader focus on the
strategic activities of the online learning institution. Part 1 provides
a foundation to educational theory for online learning, to prepare
the ground for discussing the different components of the online
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
collaborations,
and marketing
Operations
learning value chain in Parts 2-4. Part 2 deals with inbound
logistics, Part 3 with production and with aspects of outbound
logistics, and Part 4 with delivery, marketing, and service to
learners. The following figure illustrates the organization of this
“Part 1: Role and Function of Theory in Online Education
Development and Delivery” provides the theoretical foundations
for this volume. Chapter 1 presents the foundation of education
theory for online learning. It opens the debate by discussing the
contributions of behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist theories
to the design of online materials, noting that behaviorist strategies
can be used to teach the facts (what), cognitivist strategies the
principles and processes (how), and constructivist strategies the
real-life and personal applications and contextual learning. The
chapter mentions a shift toward constructive learning, in which
learners are given the opportunity to construct their own meaning
from the information presented during online sessions. Learning
objects will be used to promote flexibility and reuse of online
Introduction
collaborations,
and marketing
Operations
Infrastructure
and Support
for Content
Development
Design and
Development
Delivery, Quality
Control, and Student
Support of
Online Courses
Role and Function of
Theory in Online
Education Development
and Delivery
materials to meet the needs of individual learners, and online
learning materials will be created in such a way that they can be
redesigned for different learners and different contexts. Finally,
online learning will become increasingly diverse to allow it to
respond to diverse learning cultures, styles, and motivations.
Chapter 2 presents a general assessment of how people learn. It
assesses the unique characteristics of the Web to enhance these
generalized learning contexts, and discusses the six forms of
interaction and their critical role in engaging and supporting both
learners and teachers. The author presents a model of online
learning, a first step toward a theory in which the two predominant
forms of online learning—collaborative and independent study—
are considered, along with a brief discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of each. Finally, the chapter discusses the emerging
tools of the Semantic Web, and the way they will affect future
developments of the theory and practice of online learning.
Chapter 3 discusses the value chain framework in online
learning. It presents the online learning value chain components;
highlights its strategic power; presents the methodology for
constructing, analyzing, and using a value chain in an online
learning institution; and portrays the online distance teaching value
system and market map.
“Part 2: Infrastructure and Support for Content Development”
covers aspects of the inbound logistics value chain. Chapter 4
discusses the various factors that must be considered in developing
the infrastructure for online learning, including planning, structural
and organizational issues, the components of a system and the
interfaces among them, and various related issues, such as human
resources, decision making, and training. The author explains why
any designed online learning infrastructure must also be able to
evolve and work in a context of constant and accelerating change
to accommodate changing student needs, technologies, and
curricula.
Chapter 5 examines some available and potential technologies
and features used in online instruction. Rather than continue to
focus on how technology has helped or can help the instructor,
teacher, or tutor, this chapter concludes with a look at how
technologies—existing and emerging—can aid the first generation
of online learners.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Chapter 6 discusses some attributes of media and of the modes
of teaching presentation and learning performance they support, in
relation to some influential learning models. It also clarifies some
of the implications in the choice of any specific delivery or
presentation medium. The author notes that the decision to adopt
online technology is always complex and can be risky, especially if
the adopting organization lacks structural, cultural, or financial
prerequisites, and concludes that, while education has a
responsibility to keep pace with technological change, educational
institutions can reduce the costs and uncertainties of invention by
following the technological lead of the corporate sector. Chapters 4
through 6 thus present three perspectives on the inbound logistics
value chain for online learning, and open discussions about
opportunities and challenges in selecting, developing, and adapting
infrastructure and support for content development.
“Part 3: Design and Development of Online Courses” is
concerned with the two following segments of the organization’s
online learning value chain: operations and outbound logistics.
Four chapters are organized to shed light on these processes.
Chapter 10 describes the role of instructional design, multimedia
development, and editing in the design and development process by
describing a professional role that has been developed to accommodate all these functions—that of the Multimedia Instructional
Design Editor (MIDE). Mainly, this role is concerned with facilitating communication between the author and the learner, and
between the author and the technical staff who create the multimedia tools and instructional technology used in course delivery.
The MIDE brings together elements and participants in the value
chain, and adds value to the course development process by enhancing the ability of other participants to produce effective online
learning experiences. One of the MIDE’s most important contributions to the course design and development value chain is quality
control. The quality control function has become more critical as
courses have come to contain multimedia components and have
begun to move into the online learning environment.
Chapter 9 deals with another aspect of design, development and
quality control in online courses: copyright. Copyright, in Canada
and throughout the modern technological world, is described as
being in a state of flux. Advances in information and communication technologies are stressing existing copyright Acts, and
Introduction
forcing changes to them. As they embrace new electronic
technologies, online educators are in a position to lead advances in
copyright law, and to help ensure that the rights of both users and
creators are respected, and that the intellectual property ownership
issues that are emerging in the electronic world are widely
understood and respected.
Chapters 7 and 8 discuss the process of developing effective
instructional materials. Chapter 7 presents the role of instructional
media developers in the course development process. These
professionals are involved from the beginning, to consult with and
advise course team members on development-related topics as they
arise. The author presents pedagogical standards designed to help
all those involved in online instructional development to ensure
that their efforts are rewarded, ultimately, with satisfied learners.
Chapter 8 describes several experiences in developing knowledge of
team dynamics and communications, and accomplishing team
project work, in an online environment. In describing aspects of
teaching and applying team dynamics online, the authors highlight
the unique values and capabilities of an online learning
environment.
“Part 4: Delivery, Quality Control, and Student Support of
Online Courses” is concerned with the last two parts of the
organization’s online learning value chain: delivery and service.
Chapter 11 focuses on the role of the teacher or tutor in an online
learning context. It uses a theoretical model that views the creation
of an effective online educational community as involving three
critical components: cognitive presence, social presence, and
teaching presence. The chapter provides suggestions and guidelines
for max-imizing the effectiveness of the teaching function in online
Chapter 12 presents the call center concept for course delivery
and student support in online courses. In distance education in
particular, the call center can be an effective communication tool,
enabling the institution to provide and improve service to students
in many areas, including instruction. This chapter describes how
the call center concept is used at Athabasca University and how it
has proven to be effective in three areas: increasing student service
and retention, allowing for direct marketing, and enhancing
management information and learner feedback.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Chapter 13 presents a system that supports asynchronous
discussion for online learners (the ASKS system). This system is
designed to allow students in both paced and unpaced online
learning environments to participate in grouped assessment
activities. It also permits instructors to assess individual contributions quickly, and to provide tailored, automated feedback to
students. The ASKS system addresses some of the problems
associated with group participation in any online environment,
such as immediate and relevant feedback for students, evaluation,
and instructor workload.
Chapter 14 discusses the library support needed by online
learners. It examines how libraries are responding to the challenges
and opportunities of delivering core services to online learners.
This chapter portrays some of the library practices and technologies now being applied in the construction of virtual libraries.
The authors stress the importance of providing support within a
collaborative environment, which considers human factors, such as
communication and interaction. Chapter 15 continues this discussion by stressing the importance of setting up a supportive learning
environment for online learners, and provides some practical
advice. Underlying this advice is a philosophy that encourages an
environment that aims to develop the learner’s independence, while
ensuring that supports are readily available when needed. Student
supports that are flexible, clear, and continually available are
described, and best practices outlined.
Chapter 16 provides a discussion of the contexts of quality
assurance activities in higher education in general, and of the
competing paradigms highlighted by online learning. The author
notes that the greatest challenge for trying to define quality is that
quality remains a relative experience, realized in large part through
an individual’s level of expectation. On the basis of this insight, the
chapter goes on to examine quality standards that have been
proposed for the delivery of online instruction in four jurisdictions:
Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.
Introduction
References
Bollier, D. . Private theft: The private plunder of our
common wealth. New York: Routledge.
Creative Commons. (N.d.). Home page. Retrieved December 17,
2003, from 
Daniel, J. . Evolution not an e-revolution in global
learning. Times Higher Education Supplement, p. VIII.
Grimes, K. . To trust is human. New Scientist, 178, 32-37.
Jefferson, T. (1854). Letter to Isaac McPherson. In H. A.
Washinton (Ed.), Writings of Thomas Jefferson (vol. 6)
(pp. 180-181). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Raymond, E. . The cathedral and the bazaar. Cambridge
MA: O'Reilly. Retrieved December 13, 2003, from 
.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue3_3/raymond
Taylor, J. . The future of learning—learning for the future:
Shaping the transition. Proceedings of the 20th ICDE World
Congress. Retrieved December 17, 2003, from 
.fernuni-hagen.de/ICDE/D-2001/final/keynote_speeches/
wednesday/taylor_keynote.pdf
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Introduction
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Function of
Development
and Delivery
Volume 1–Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1
FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATIONAL
THEORY FOR ONLINE LEARNING
Mohamed Ally
Athabasca University
Introduction
There is ongoing debate about whether it is the use of a particular
delivery technology or the design of the instruction that improves
learning . It has long been recognized
that specialized delivery technologies can provide efficient and
timely access to learning materials; however, Clark has
claimed that technologies are merely vehicles that deliver instruction, but do not themselves influence student achievement. As Clark
notes, meta-analysis studies on media research have shown that
students gain significant learning benefits when learning from
audio-visual or computer media, as opposed to conventional instruction; however, the same studies suggest that the reason for
those benefits is not the medium of instruction, but the instructional
strategies built into the learning materials. Similarly, Schramm
 suggested that learning is influenced more by the content and
instructional strategy in the learning materials than by the type of
technology used to deliver instruction.
According to Bonk and Reynolds , to promote higherorder thinking on the Web, online learning must create challenging
activities that enable learners to link new information to old,
acquire meaningful knowledge, and use their metacognitive
abilities; hence, it is the instructional strategy and not the technology that influences the quality of learning. Kozma argues
that the particular attributes of the computer are needed to bring
real-life models and simulations to the learner; thus, the medium
does influence learning. However, it is not the computer per se that
makes students learn, but the design of the real-life models and
simulations, and the students’ interaction with those models and
simulations. The computer is merely the vehicle that provides the
processing capability and delivers the instruction to learners . Kozma is correct in his claim, but learners will not learn
from the simulations if the simulations are not developed using
sound design principles.
Online learning allows for flexibility of access, from anywhere
and usually at anytime—essentially, it allows participants to
collapse time and space —however, the learning
materials must be designed properly to engage the learner and
promote learning. According to Rossett , online learning has
many promises, but it takes commitment and resources, and it must
be done right. “Doing it right” means that online learning materials
must be designed properly, with the learners and learning in focus,
and that adequate support must be provided. Ring and Mathieux
 suggest that online learning should have high authenticity
(i.e., students should learn in the context of the workplace), high
interactivity, and high collaboration. This paper discusses the
foundation of educational theory for the design of effective online
learning materials, and suggests a model for developing online
instruction based on appropriate educational theory.
Different terminologies have been used for online learning, a
fact that makes it difficult to develop a generic definition. Terms
that are commonly used include e-learning, Internet learning,
distributed learning, networked learning, tele-learning, virtual
learning, computer-assisted learning, Web-based learning, and distance learning. All of these terms imply that the learner is at a
distance from the tutor or instructor, that the learner uses some
form of technology (usually a computer) to access the learning
materials, that the learner uses technology to interact with the tutor
or instructor and other learners, and that some form of support is
provided to learners. This paper will use the term “online learning”
throughout. There are many definitions of online learning in the
literature, definitions that reflect the diversity of practice and
associated technologies. Carliner defines online learning as
educational material that is presented on a computer. Khan 
defines online instruction as an innovative approach for delivering
instruction to a remote audience, using the Web as the medium.
However, online learning involves more than just the presentation
and delivery of the materials using the Web: the learner and the
learning process should be the focus of online learning. As a result,
the author defines online learning as
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
the use of the Internet to access learning materials; to interact
with the content, instructor, and other learners; and to obtain
support during the learning process, in order to acquire
knowledge, to construct personal meaning, and to grow from
the learning experience.
Benefits of Online Learning
Increasingly, organizations are adopting online learning as the main
delivery method to train employees . At the same
time, educational institutions are moving toward the use of the
Internet for delivery, both on campus and at a distance. However,
for organizations and institutions to make this often expensive
move, there must be a perception that using online learning
provides major benefits. Some of the benefits for learners and
instructors are outlined below. For learners, online learning knows
no time zones, and location and distance are not an issue. In
asynchronous online learning, students can access the online
materials at anytime, while synchronous online learning allows for
real time interaction between students and the instructor. Learners
can use the Internet to access up-to-date and relevant learning
materials, and can communicate with experts in the field in which
they are studying. Situated learning is facilitated, since learners can
complete online courses while working on the job or in their own
space, and can contextualize the learning.
For the instructor, tutoring can be done at anytime and from
anywhere. Online materials can be updated, and learners are able
to see the changes at once. When learners are able to access
materials on the Internet, it is easier for instructors to direct them
to appropriate information based on their needs. If designed
properly, online learning systems can be used to determine learners’
needs and current level of expertise, and to assign appropriate
materials for learners to select from to achieve the desired learning
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Designing Online Learning Materials
The goal of any instructional system is to promote learning.
Therefore, before any learning materials are developed, educators
must, tacitly or explicitly, know the principles of learning and how
students learn. This is especially true for online learning, where the
instructor and the learner are separated. The development of
effective online learning materials should be based on proven and
sound learning theories. As we discussed above, the delivery
medium is not the determining factor in the quality of learning;
rather, the design of the course determines the effectiveness of the
learning .
There are many schools of thought on learning, and no one
school is used exclusively to design online learning materials. As
there is no single learning theory to follow, one can use a
combination of theories to develop online learning materials. In
addition, as research progresses, new theories are evolving that
should be used in developing online materials. The online
developer must know the different approaches to learning in order
to select the most appropriate instructional strategies. Learning
strategies should be selected to motivate learners, facilitate deep
processing, build the whole person, cater for individual differences,
promote meaningful learning, encourage interaction, provide
feedback, facilitate contextual learning, and provide support
during the learning process. The remaining sections of this paper
will present the different schools of thought on learning, and will
suggest how they can be used to develop effective online materials.
Schools of Learning
Early computer learning systems were designed based on a behaviorist approach to learning. The behaviorist school of thought,
influenced by Thorndike , Pavlov , and Skinner
 , postulates that learning is a change in observable behavior
caused by external stimuli in the environment .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Behaviorists claim that it is the observable behavior that indicates
whether or not the learner has learned something, and not what is
going on in the learner’s head. In response, some educators claimed
that not all learning is observable and that there is more to learning
than a change in behavior. As a result, there was a shift away from
behaviorist to cognitive learning theories.
Cognitive psychology claims that learning involves the use of
memory, motivation, and thinking, and that reflection plays an
important part in learning. They see learning as an internal process,
and contend that the amount learned depends on the processing
capacity of the learner, the amount of effort expended during the
learning process, the depth of the processing , and the learner’s existing knowledge structure .
Recently, there has been a move to constructivism. Constructivist theorists claim that learners interpret information and the
world according to their personal reality, and that they learn by
observation, processing, and interpretation, and then personalize
the information into personal knowledge . Learners learn best when they can contextualize what they
learn for immediate application and to acquire personal meaning.
When the behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist schools of
thought are analyzed closely, many overlaps in the ideas and
principles become apparent. The design of online learning materials
can include principles from all three. According to Ertmer and
Newby , the three schools of thought can in fact be used as
a taxonomy for learning. Behaviorists’ strategies can be used to
teach the “what” (facts), cognitive strategies can be used to teach
the “how” (processes and principles), and constructivist strategies
can be used to teach the “why” (higher level thinking that promotes personal meaning and situated and contextual learning).
Janicki and Liegle analyzed different instructional design
models to identify the components that support quality design of
Web-based instruction. Components were identified from each of
the behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist schools of learning.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Behaviorist School of Learning
The behaviorist school sees the mind as a “black box,” in the sense
that a response to a stimulus can be observed quantitatively, totally
ignoring the effect of thought processes occurring in the mind. The
school, therefore, looks at overt behaviors that can be observed and
measured as indicators of learning .
Implications for Online Learning
1. Learners should be told the explicit outcomes of the learning so
that they can set expectations and can judge for themselves
whether or not they have achieved the outcome of the online
2. Learners must be tested to determine whether or not they have
achieved the learning outcome. Online testing or other forms of
testing and assessment should be integrated into the learning
sequence to check the learner’s achievement level and to provide
appropriate feedback.
3. Learning materials must be sequenced appropriately to promote
learning. The sequencing could take the form of simple to
complex, known to unknown, and knowledge to application.
4. Learners must be provided with feedback so that they can monitor how they are doing and take corrective action if required.
Cognitivist School of Learning Part 1: Memory
Cognitivists see learning as an internal process that involves
memory, thinking, reflection, abstraction, motivation, and metacognition. Cognitive psychology looks at learning from an information processing point of view, where the learner uses different
types of memory during learning (Figure 1-1). Sensations are
received through the senses into the sensory store before processing
occurs. The information persists in the sensory store for less than
one second ; if it is not transferred to working
memory immediately, it is lost.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Online instruction must use strategies to allow learners to attend
to the learning materials so that they can be transferred from the
senses to the sensory store and then to working memory. The
amount of information transferred to working memory depends on
the amount of attention that was paid to the incoming information,
and on whether cognitive structures are in place to make sense of
the information. So, designers must check to see if the appropriate
existing cognitive structure is present to enable the learner to
process the information. If the relevant cognitive structure is not
present, pre-instructional strategies, such as advance organizers,
should be included as part of the learning process .
The duration in working memory is approximately 20 seconds,
and if information in working memory is not processed efficiently,
it is not transferred to long-term memory for storage .
Online learning strategies must present the materials and use
strategies to enable students to process the materials efficiently.
Since working memory has limited capacity, information should be
organized or chunked in pieces of appropriate size to facilitate
processing. According to Miller , because humans have
limited short-term memory capacity, information should be
grouped into meaningful sequences. He suggests that information
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Information from
the senses
Sensory store
Short-term
Figure 1-1.
Types of memory.
should be chunked into five to nine (i.e., 7 ± 2) meaningful units to
compensate for the limited capacity of short-term memory.
After the information is processed in working memory, it is
stored in long-term memory. The amount transferred to long-term
memory is determined by the quality and depth of processing in
working memory. The deeper the processing, the more associations
the acquired new information forms in memory. Information
transferred from short-term memory to long-term memory is either
assimilated or accommodated in long-term memory. During
assimilation, the information is changed to fit into existing cognitive
structures. Accommodation occurs when an existing cognitive
structure is changed to incorporate the new information.
Cognitive psychology postulates that information is stored in
long-term memory in the form of nodes which connect to form
relationships; that is, in networks. Information maps that show the
major concepts in a topic and the relationships between those
concepts should be included in the online learning materials.
According to Stoyanova and Kommers , information map
generation requires critical reflection and is a method for externalizing the cognitive structure of learners. To facilitate deeper processing, learners should be encouraged to generate their own information maps.
Implications for Online Learning
1. Strategies should be used to allow learners to perceive and attend
to the information so that it can be transferred to working
memory. Learners use their sensory systems to register the
information in the form of sensations. Strategies to facilitate
maximum sensation should be used. Examples include the proper
location of the information on the screen, the attributes of the
screen (color, graphics, size of text, etc.), the pacing of the
information, and the mode of delivery (audio, visuals,
animations, video). Learners must receive the information in the
form of sensations before perception and processing can occur;
however, they must not be overloaded with sensations, which
could be counterproductive to the learning process. Non-essential
sensations should be avoided to allow learners to attend to the
important information. Strategies to promote perception and
attention for online learning include those listed below.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Important information should be placed in the center of the
screen for reading, and learners must be able to read from left to
• Information critical for learning should be highlighted to focus
learners’ attention. For example, in an online lesson, headings
should be used to organize the details, and formatted to allow
learners to attend to and process the information they contain.
• Learners should be told why they should take the lesson, so that
they can attend to the information throughout the lesson.
• The difficulty level of the material must match the cognitive level
of the learner, so that the learner can both attend to and relate
to the material. Links to both simpler and more complicated
materials can be used to accommodate learners at different
knowledge levels.
2. Strategies should be used to allow learners to retrieve existing
information from long-term memory to help make sense of the
new information. Learners must construct a memory link
between the new information and some related information
already stored in long-term memory. Strategies to facilitate the
use of existing schema are listed below.
• Use advance organizers to activate an existing cognitive
structure or to provide the information to incorporate the details
of the lesson . A comparative advance organizer
can be used to recall prior knowledge to help in processing, and
an expository advance organizer can be used to help incorporate
the details of the lesson . Mayer conducted a
meta-analysis of advance organizer studies, and found that these
strategies are effective when students are learning from text that
is presented in an unfamiliar form. Since most courses contain
materials that are new to learners, advance organizers should be
used to provide the framework for learning.
• Provide conceptual models that learners can use to retrieve
existing mental models or to store the structure they will need to
use to learn the details of the lesson.
• Use pre-instructional questions to set expectations and to
activate the learners’ existing knowledge structure. Questions
presented before the lesson facilitate the recall of existing
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
knowledge, and so help learners learn the materials and
motivate them to find additional resources to achieve the lesson
• Use prerequisite test questions to activate the prerequisite
knowledge structure required for learning the new materials.
With the flexibility of online learning, students with diverse
backgrounds and knowledge can choose the most appropriate
path to review previous or prerequisite learning before new
information is presented.
3. Information should be chunked to prevent overload during
processing in working memory . Online learning
materials should present between five and nine items on a screen
to facilitate efficient processing in working memory. If there are
many items in a lesson, the items should be organized in the form
of information maps to show their organization. A generalized
information map is provided as an overview for the online lesson,
and can be linear, hierarchical, or spider-shaped, as illustrated in
Figures 1-2 to 1-4 .
As the lesson progresses, each item in the generalized information
map is presented and broken down into sub-items. At the end of
the lesson, the generalized map is shown again, but with the
relationships among the items illustrated.
To facilitate deep processing, learners should be asked to
generate the information maps during the learning process or as
a summary activity after the lesson . In
addition to facilitating deep processing, information maps can
provide the “big picture” to learners, to help them comprehend
the details of a lesson. Online learning can capitalize on the
processing and visual capabilities of the computer to present
information maps to learners or to ask learners to generate
information maps using mapmaking software.
4. Other strategies that promote deep processing should be used to
help transfer information to long-term storage. Strategies that
require learners to apply, analyze, synthesize, and evaluate
promote higher-level learning, which makes the transfer to longterm memory more effective. Online strategies to allow learners
to apply the information in real life should also be included, to
contextualize the learning and to facilitate deep processing.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Figure 1-2.
Linear information
Main Topic
Sub-item 1
Sub-item 3
Sub-item 2
Figure 1-3.
Spider-shaped
information map.
Figure 1-4.
Hierarchical
information map.
Main topic
Cognitive School of Learning Part 2: Individual Differences
The cognitive school recognizes the importance of individual
differences, and of including a variety of learning strategies in online
instruction to accommodate those differences. Learning style refers
to how a learner perceives, interacts with, and responds to the
learning environment; it is a measure of individual differences. Different learning style instruments are used to determine students’
learning styles. The Kolb Learning Style Inventory (LSI) looks at how learners perceive and process information,
whereas the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator uses
dichotomous scales to measure extroversion versus introversion,
sensing versus intuition, thinking versus feeling, and judging versus
perception. In the following discussion, we consider the Kolb
Learning Style Inventory.
Kolb suggests that two components make up our
learning experience: perceiving and processing. Perceiving refers to
the way learners sense and absorb the information around them,
from concrete experience to reflective observation. Concrete
experience relates to students’ desire to learn things that have
personal meaning in life. During reflective observation, students
like to take the time to think about and reflect on the learning
materials. The second component, processing, is related to how
learners understand and process the information that is absorbed
after perceiving. Processing ranges from abstract conceptualization
to active experimentation. Learners who have a preference for
abstract conceptualization like to learn facts and figures, and to
research new information on different topics. Learners who have a
preference for active experimentation prefer to apply what they
learn to real-life situations and to go beyond what was presented.
They like to try things and learn from their experience. Online
learning can cater for individual differences by determining the
learner’s preference and providing appropriate learning activities
based on the learner’s style.
Cognitive style refers to a learner’s preferred way of processing
information; that is, the person’s typical mode of thinking, remembering, or problem solving. Thus, cognitive style is another individual difference indicator. Cognitive style is considered to be a
personality dimension that influences attitudes, values, and social
interaction. One of the dimensions of cognitive style that has
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
implications for online learning is the distinction between fielddependent and field-independent personalities . Field-independent personalities approach the environment
in an analytical manner; for example, they are able to distinguish
figures as discrete from their backgrounds. Field-dependent
individuals experience events in a more global, less differentiated
way. Field-dependent individuals have a greater social orientation
compared with field-independent personalities. Field-independent
individuals are likely to learn more effectively under conditions of
intrinsic motivation (e.g., self-study), and are influenced less by
social reinforcement.
Implications for Online Learning Continued
5. Online learning materials should include activities for the
different learning styles, so that learners can select appropriate
activities based on their preferred style. Concrete-experience
learners prefer specific examples in which they can be involved,
and they relate to peers and not to people in authority. They like
group work and peer feedback, and they see the instructor as
coach or helper. These learners prefer support methods that
allow them to interact with peers and obtain coaching from the
instructor. Reflective-observation learners like to observe
carefully before taking any action. They prefer that all the
information be available for learning, and see the instructor as
the expert. They tend to avoid interaction with others. Abstractconceptualization learners like to work more with things and
symbols and less with people. They like to work with theory and
to conduct systematic analyses. Active-experimentation learners
prefer to learn by doing practical projects and through group
discussions. They prefer active learning methods and interacting
with peers for feedback and information. They tend to establish
their own criteria for evaluating situations.
6. In addition to activities, adequate supports should be provided
for students with different learning styles. Ally and Fahy 
found that students with different learning styles have different
preferences for support. For example, assimilators prefer high
instructor presence, while accommodators prefer low instructor
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
7. Information should be presented in different modes to
accommodate individual differences in processing and to
facilitate transfer to long-term memory. Where possible, textual,
verbal, and visual information should be presented to encourage
encoding. According to dual-coding theory ,
information received in different modes (textual and visual) will
be processed better than that presented in a single mode (textual
only). Dual-coded information is processed in different parts of
the brain, resulting in more encoding.
8. Learners should be motivated to learn. It does not matter how
effective the online materials are, if learners are not motivated,
they will not learn. The issue is whether to use intrinsic
motivation (driven from within the learner) or extrinsic
motivation (instructor and performance driven). Designers of
online learning materials should use intrinsic motivation
strategies ; however, extrinsic motivation should
also be used since some learners are motivated by externally
driven methods. Keller proposed a model (ARCS—attention,
relevance, confidence, satisfaction) for motivating learners
during learning .
Attention: Capture the learners’ attention at the start of the
lesson and maintain it throughout the lesson. The online
learning materials must include an activity at the start of the
learning session to connect with the learners.
Relevance: Inform learners of the importance of the lesson and
how taking the lesson could benefit them. Strategies could include
describing how learners will benefit from taking the lesson, and
how they can use what they learn in real-life situations. This
strategy helps to contextualize the learning and make it more
meaningful, thereby maintaining interest throughout the learning
Confidence: Use strategies such as designing for success and
informing learners of the lesson expectations. Design for success
by sequencing from simple to complex, or known to unknown,
and use a competency-based approach where learners are given
the opportunity to use different strategies to complete the lesson.
Inform learners of the lesson outcome and provide ongoing
encouragement to complete the lesson.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Satisfaction: Provide feedback on performance and allow
learners to apply what they learn in real-life situations. Learners
like to know how they are doing, and they like to contextualize
what they are learning by applying the information in real life.
9. Encourage learners to use their metacognitive skills to help in
the learning process .
Metacognition is a learner’s ability to be aware of his or her
cognitive capabilities and use these capabilities to learn. When
learning online, learners should be given the opportunity to
reflect on what they are learning, collaborate with other
learners, and to check their progress. Self-check questions and
exercises with feedback throughout a lesson are good strategies
to allow learners to check how they are doing, so that they can
use their metacognitive skills to adjust their learning approach if
necessary.
10. Online strategies that facilitate the transfer of learning should
be used to encourage application in different and real-life
situations. Simulation of the real situation, using real-life cases,
should be part of the lesson. Also, learners should be given the
opportunity to complete assignments and projects that use reallife applications and information. Transfer to real-life situations
could assist the learners to develop personal meaning and
contextualize the information.
Cognitive psychology suggests that learners receive and process
information to be transferred into long-term memory for
storage. The amount of information processed depends on the
amount that is perceived, and the amount stored in long-term
memory depends on the quality of the processing in working
memory. Effective online lessons must use techniques to allow
learners to sense and perceive the information, and must include
strategies to facilitate high-level processing for transfer of
information to long-term memory. After learners acquire the
information, they create personal knowledge to make the
materials meaningful. The constructivist school of learning,
which is discussed below, suggests that learners construct
personal knowledge from the learning experience.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Constructivist School of Learning
Constructivists see learners as being active rather than passive.
Knowledge is not received from the outside or from someone else;
rather, it is the individual learner’s interpretation and processing of
what is received through the senses that creates knowledge. The
learner is the center of the learning, with the instructor playing an
advising and facilitating role. Learners should be allowed to
construct knowledge rather than being given knowledge through
instruction . A major emphasis of
constructivists is situated learning, which sees learning as
contextual. Learning activities that allow learners to contextualize
the information should be used in online instruction. If the
information has to be applied in many contexts, then learning
strategies that promote multi-contextual learning should be used to
make sure that learners can indeed apply the information broadly.
Learning is moving away from one-way instruction to construction
and discovery of knowledge .
In his transformation theory, Mezirow uses both
constructivism and cognitivism to explain how people learn. He
sees learning as “the process of using a prior interpretation to
construe a new or revised interpretation of the meaning of one’s
experience in order to guide future action” (p. 12). Transformative
learning involves “reflectively transforming the beliefs, attitudes,
opinions, and emotional reactions that constitute our meaning
schemes or transforming our meaning perspectives” (p. 223).
Mezirow claimed that learning involves five interacting contexts:
the frame of reference or meaning perspective in which the learning
is embedded, the conditions of communication, the line of action
(process) in which the learning occurs, the self-image of the learner,
and the situation encountered during the learning process (p. 13).
Implications for Online Learning
1. Learning should be an active process. Keeping learners active
doing meaningful activities results in high-level processing,
which facilitates the creation of personalized meaning. Asking
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learners to apply the information in a practical situation is an
active process, and facilitates personal interpretation and
relevance.
2. Learners should construct their own knowledge rather than
accepting that given by the instructor. Knowledge construction
is facilitated by good interactive online instruction, since the
students have to take the initiative to learn and to interact with
other students and the instructor, and because the learning
agenda is controlled by the student . In the online environment, students experience the information at first-hand, rather than receiving filtered information
from an instructor whose style or background may differ from
theirs. In a traditional lecture, the instructor contextualizes and
personalizes the information to meet their own needs, which
may not be appropriate for all learners. In online instruction,
learners experience the information first-hand, which gives them
the opportunity to contextualize and personalize the information themselves.
3. Collaborative and cooperative learning should be encouraged to
facilitate constructivist learning . Working with
other learners gives learners real-life experience of working in a
group, and allows them to use their metacognitive skills.
Learners will also be able to use the strengths of other learners,
and to learn from others. When assigning learners for group
work, membership should be based on the expertise level and
learning style of individual group members, so that individual
team members can benefit from one another’s strengths.
4. Learners should be given control of the learning process. There
should be a form of guided discovery where learners are allowed
to make decision on learning goals, but with some guidance
from the instructor.
5. Learners should be given time and opportunity to reflect. When
learning online, students need the time to reflect and internalize
the information. Embedded questions on the content can be
used throughout the lesson to encourage learners to reflect on
and process the information in a relevant and meaningful
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
manner; or learners can be asked to generate a learning journal
during the learning process to encourage reflection and
processing.
6. Learning should be made meaningful for learners. The learning
materials should include examples that relate to students, so that
they can make sense of the information. Assignments and
projects should allow learners to choose meaningful activities to
help them apply and personalize the information.
7. Learning should be interactive to promote higher-level learning
and social presence, and to help develop personal meaning.
According to Heinich et al. , learning is the development
of new knowledge, skills, and attitudes as the learner interacts
with information and the environment. Interaction is also
critical to creating a sense of presence and a sense of community
for online learners, and to promoting transformational learning
 . Learners receive the learning
materials through the technology, process the information, and
then personalize and contextualize the information. In the transformation process, learners interact with the content, with other
learners, and with the instructors to test and confirm ideas and
to apply what they learn. Garrison claimed that it is the
design of the educational experience that includes the transactional nature of the relationship between instructor, learners,
and content that is of significance to the learning experience.
Different kinds of interaction will promote learning at different
levels. Figure 1-5 shows interactive strategies to promote higher
level learning . Hirumi proposed a framework of
interaction in online learning that consists of three levels. Level one
is learner-self interaction, which occurs within the learner to help
the learner monitor and regulate their own learning. Level two
interaction is learner-human and learner-non-human interactions,
where the learner interacts with human and non-human resources.
Level three is learner-instruction interaction, which consists of
activities to achieve a learning outcome. This paper will go one step
further and propose interactions that go from lower-level to higherlevel interactions based on behaviorist, cognitivist, and
constructivist schools of learning.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
At the lowest level of interaction, there must be learner-interface
interaction to allow the learner to access and sense the information.
The interface is where learners use the senses to register the
information in sensory storage. In online learning, the interface is
with the computer to access the content and to interact with others.
Once learners access the online materials, there must be learnercontent interaction to process the information. Learners navigate
through the content to access the components of the lesson, which
could take the form of pre-learning, learning, and post-learning
activities. These activities could access reusable learning objects
from a repository , or they could use
content that has been custom created by the designer or instructor.
Students should be given the ability to choose their own sequence
of learning, or should be given one or more suggested sequences. As
online learners interact with the content, they should be
encouraged to apply, assess, analyze, synthesize, evaluate, and
reflect on what they learn . It is during the learner-
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Learner-interface
interaction
Learner-content
interaction
Learner-support
interaction
Learner-instructor
Learner-instructor
Learner-instructor
Learner-context
interaction
Figure 1-5.
Levels of interaction in
online learning.
content interaction that learners process the information to
transform it from short-term to long-term memory. The higher the
level of processing, the more associations are made in long-term
memory, which results in higher-level learning.
As learners work through the content, they will find the need for
learner support, which could take the form of learner-to-learner,
learner-to-instructor, instructor-to-learner, and learner-to-expert
interactions .
There should be strategies to promote learner-context interaction
to allow learners to apply what they learn in real life so that they
can contextualize the information. Learner-context interaction
allows learners to develop personal knowledge and construct
personal meaning from the information.
Conclusion
This paper concludes by proposing a model, based on educational
theory, that shows important learning components that should be
used when designing online materials. Neither placing information
on the Web nor linking to other digital resources on the Web
constitutes online instruction. Online instruction occurs when
learners use the Web to go through the sequence of instruction, to
complete the learning activities, and to achieve learning outcomes
and objectives . A variety of
learning activities should be used to accommodate the different
learning styles. Learners will choose the appropriate strategy to
meet their learning needs. Refer to Figure 1-6 for key components
that should be considered when designing online learning
materials.
Learner Preparation
A variety of pre-learning activities can be used to prepare learners for
the details of the lesson, and to get them connected and motivated to
learn the online lesson. A rationale should be provided to inform
learners of the importance of taking the online lesson and to show
how it will benefit them. A concept map is provided to establish the
existing cognitive structure, to incorporate the details of the online
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
lesson, and to activate learners’ existing structures to help them learn
the details in the lesson. The lesson concept map also gives learners
the “big picture.”
Learners should be informed of the learning outcomes of the
lesson, so that they know what is expected of them and will be able
to gauge when they have achieved the lesson outcomes. An advance
organizer should be provided to establish a structure to organize
the details in the online lesson or to bridge what learners already
know and what they need to know.
Learners must be told the prerequisite requirements so that they
can check whether they are ready for the lesson. Providing the
prerequisites to learners also activates the required cognitive
structure to help them learn the materials. A self-assessment should
be provided at the start of the lesson to allow learners to check
whether they already have the knowledge and skills taught in the
online lesson. If learners think they have the knowledge and skills,
they should be allowed to take the lesson final test. The selfassessment also helps learners to organize the lesson materials and
to recognize the important materials in the lesson. Once learners
are prepared for the details of the lesson, they can go on to
complete the online learning activities to learn the details of the
Learner Activities
Online learners should be provided with a variety of learning
activities to achieve the lesson learning outcome and to accommodate learners’ individual needs. Examples of learning activities
include reading textual materials, listening to audio materials, or
viewing visuals or video materials. Learners can conduct research
on the Internet and link to online information and libraries to
acquire further information. The preparation of a learning journal
will allow learners to reflect on what they learn and provide
personal meaning to the information. Appropriate application
exercises should be embedded throughout the online lesson to
establish the relevance of the materials. Practice activities, with
feedback, should be included to allow learners to monitor how they
are performing, so that they can adjust their learning method if
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
necessary. A summary should be provided, or learners should be
required to generate a lesson summary, to promote higher-level
processing and to bring closure to the lesson.
Learner Interaction
As learners complete the learning activities, they will be involved
with a variety of interactions. Learners need to interact with the
interface to access the online materials. The interface should not
overload learners, and should make it as easy as possible for
learners to sense the information for transfer to sensory store and
then into short-term memory for processing. Learners must interact
with the content to acquire the information needed to form the
knowledge base. There should be interaction between the learner
and other learners, between the learner and the instructor, and
between the learner and experts to collaborate, participate in
shared cognition, form social networks, and establish social
presence. Learners should be able to interact within their context to
personalize information and construct their own meaning.
Learner Transfer
Opportunities should be provided for learners to transfer what they
learn to real-life applications, so that they can be creative and go
beyond what was presented in the online lesson.
Looking Ahead
Behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist theories have contributed in different ways to the design of online materials, and they
will continue to be used to develop learning materials for online
learning. Behaviorist strategies can be used to teach the facts
(what); cognitivist strategies to teach the principles and processes
(how); and constructivist strategies to teach the real-life and
personal applications and contextual learning. There is a shift
toward constructive learning, in which learners are given the
opportunity to construct their own meaning from the information
presented during the online sessions. The use of learning objects to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Figure 1-6.
Components
of effective online
Learning outcomes
Advanced organizer
Content map
Prerequisites
Content map
Prerequisites
Journalizing
Read, listen,
application
Learner-interface
Learner-content
Learner-context
Learner-support
preparation
activities
interaction
promote flexibility and reuse of online materials to meet the needs
of individual learners will become more common in the future.
Online learning materials will be designed in small coherent
segments, so that they can be redesigned for different learners and
different contexts. Finally, online learning will be increasingly
diverse to respond to different learning cultures, styles, and
motivations.
References
Ally, M. . An investigation of the relative effectiveness of
prose and pictorial advance organizers on reading from prose.
Unpublished master’s thesis, Concordia University, Montreal,
Ally, M. . Designing and managing successful online
distance education courses. Workshop presented at the 2002
World Computer Congress, Montreal, Canada.
Ally, M., & Fahy, P. . Using students’ learning styles
to provide support in distance education. Proceedings of the
Eighteenth Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and
Learning, Madison, WI.
Ausubel, D. P. . The use of advance organizers in the
learning and retention of meaningful verbal material. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 51, 267-272.
Ausubel, D. P. . Educational psychology: A cognitive view.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Berge, Z. L. . Interaction in post-secondary Web-based
learning. Educational Technology, 39(1), 5-11.
Berge, Z. L. . Active, interactive, and reflective learning. The
Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3(2), 181-190.
Bonk, C. J., & Reynolds, T. H. . Learner-centered Web
instruction for higher-order thinking, teamwork, and
apprenticeship. In B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp.
167-178). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology
Publications.
Carliner, S. . Overview of online learning. Amherst, MA:
Human Resource Development Press.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Clark, R. E. . Reconsidering research on learning from
media. Review of Educational Research, 53(4), 445-459.
Clark, R. E. . A summary of disagreements with the “mere
vehicles” argument. In R. E. Clark (Ed.), Learning from media:
Arguments, analysis, and evidence (pp. 125-136). Greenwich,
CT: Information Age Publishing Inc.
Cole, R. A. . Issues in Web-based pedagogy: A critical
primer. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Cooper, P. A. . Paradigm shifts in designing instruction:
From behaviorism to cognitivism to constructivism. Educational
Technology, 33(5), 12-19.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. . Levels of processing: A
framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. . Depth of processing and the
retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 104, 268-294.
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. . Constructivism:
Implications for the design and delivery of instruction. In D. H.
Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and technology (pp. 170-198). New York: Simon &
Schuster Macmillan.
Ertmer, P. A., & Newby, T. J. . Behaviorism, cognitivism, constructivism: Comparing critical features from an instructional
design perspective. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 6(4),
Garrison, D. R. . Will distance disappear in distance studies?
A reaction. Journal of Distance Education, 13(2), 10-13.
Gilbert, L., & Moore, D. L. . Building interactivity into Web
courses: Tools for social and instructional interaction.
Educational Technology, 38(3), 29-35.
Good, T. L., & Brophy, J. E. . Educational psychology: A
realistic approach (4th ed.).White Plains, NY: Longman.
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J. D., & Smaldino, S. E. .
Instructional media and technologies for learning. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Hirumi, A. . A framework for analyzing, designing, and
sequencing planned e-learning interactions. The Quarterly
Review of Distance Education, 3(2), 141-160.
Holley, C. D., Dansereau, D. F., McDonald, B. A., Garland, J. C.,
& Collins, K. W. . Evaluation of a hierarchical mapping
technique as an aid to prose processing. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 4, 227-237.
Hooper, S., & Hannafin, M. J. . The effects of group composition on achievement, interaction, and learning efficiency
during computer-based cooperative instruction. Educational
Technology Research and Development, 39(3), 27-40.
Janicki, T., & Liegle, J. O. . Development and evaluation of
a framework for creating Web-based learning modules: A
pedagogical and systems approach. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, 5(1). Retrieved August 29, 2003, from
 
v5n1_janicki.pdf
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. . Cooperation and the use
of technology. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research
for educational communications and technology (pp. 170-198).
New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Kalat, J. W. . Introduction to psychology. Pacific Grove, CA:
Wadsworth-Thompson Learning.
Keller, J. M. . Motivational design of instruction. In C. M.
Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and instruction:
An overview of their current status (pp. 383-429). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Keller, J. M., & Suzuki, K. . Use of the ARCS motivation
model in courseware design. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Instructional design for microcomputer courseware (pp. 401-434).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Khan, B. . Web-based instruction: What is it and why is it?
In B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp. 5-18).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Kolb, D. A. . Experiential learning: Experience as the source
of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Kozma, R. B. . Counterpoint theory of “learning with
media.” In R. E. Clark (Ed.), Learning from media: Arguments,
analysis, and evidence (pp. 137-178). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing Inc.
Malone, T. W. . Towards a theory of intrinsically motivating
instruction. Cognitive Science, 5, 333-369.
Mayer, R. E. . Twenty years of research on advance
organizers: Assimilation theory is still the best predictor of
results. Instructional Science, 8(2), 133-167.
McGreal, R. . A primer on metadata standards.
Session presented at Athabasca University.
Meyer, R. E. . Cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational
aspects of problem solving. Instructional Science, 26(1-2), 49-
Mezirow, J. . Transformative dimensions of adult learning.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Miller, G. A. . The magical number seven, plus or minus
two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.
Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Moore, M. G. . Three types of interaction. The American
Journal of Distance Education, 3(2), 1-6.
Murphy, K. L., & Cifuentes, L. . Using Web tools,
collaborating, and learning online. Distance Education, 22(2),
Myers, I. . Myers-Briggs type indicator. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Paivio, A. . Mental representations: A dual coding approach.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Palloff, R. M., & Pratt, K. . Building learning communities
in cyberspace. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pavlov, I. P. . Conditioned reflexes. London: Clarendon Press.
Ring, G., & Mathieux, G. . The key components
of quality learning. Paper presented at the ASTD Techknowledge
2002 Conference, Las Vegas.
Ritchie, D. C., & Hoffman, B. . Incorporating instructional
design principles with the world wide Web. In B. H. Khan (Ed.),
Web-based instruction (pp. 135-138). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Educational Technology Publications.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Rossett, A. . Waking in the night and thinking about
e-learning. In A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-learning handbook
(pp. 3-18). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. .
Assessing social presence in asynchronous text-based computer
conferencing. Journal of Distance Education, 14 (2). Retrieved
August 29, 2003 from 
_et_al.html
Rovai, A. . Building sense of community at a distance.
International Review of Research in Open and Distance
Learning (IRRODL), 3, 1. Retrieved August 29, 2003, from
 
Schramm, W. . Big media, little media. Beverly Hills, CA:
Schwier, R. A., & Misanchuk, E. . Interactive multimedia
instruction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology
Publications.
Simmons, D. E. . The forum report: E-learning adoption
rates and barriers. In A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-learning
handbook (pp. 19-23). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Skinner, B. F. . About behaviorism. New York: Knopf.
Smith, P. L., & Ragan, T. J. . Instructional design. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Sternberg, R. J. . Metacognition, abilities, and developing
expertise: What makes an expert student? Instructional Science,
26(1-2), 127-140.
Stoyanova, N., & Kommers, P. . Concept mapping as a
medium of shared cognition in computer-supported collaborative
problem-solving. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 13(1,
2), 111-133.
Tapscott, D. . Growing up digital: The rise of the Net
generation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Thiessen, J. . Faculty attitudes in delivering undergraduate
distance education. Unpublished master’s thesis, Athabasca
University, Athabasca, Alberta.
Thorndike, E. L. . Educational psychology: The psychology
of learning. New York: Teachers College Press.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Wiley, D. . Learning objects need instructional design theory.
In A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-Learning handbook (pp. 115-
126). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson, B. G. . Reflections on constructivism and instructional design. In C. R. Dills & A. J. Romiszowski (Eds.),
Instructional development paradigms (pp. 63-80). Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Witkin, H. A., Moore, C. A., Goodenough, D. R., & Cox, P. W.
 . Field-dependent and field-independent cognitive styles
and their educational implications. Review of Educational
Research, 47, 1-64.
Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 2
TOWARD A THEORY OF ONLINE LEARNING
Terry Anderson
Athabasca University
It is the theory which decides what we can observe.
~ Albert Einstein 
There is nothing more practical than a good theory.
~ Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev 
Introduction
Theory has both been celebrated and condemned in educational
practice and research. Many proponents have argued that theory
allows—even forces—us to see the “big picture” and makes it
possible for us to view our practice and our research from a
broader perspective than that envisioned from the murky trenches
of our practice. This broader perspective helps us to make connections with the work of others, facilitates coherent frameworks
and deeper understanding of our actions, and perhaps most
importantly allows us to transfer the experience gained in one
context to new experiences and contexts. Critics of theory have argued that too strict an adherence to any particular
theoretical viewpoint often filters our perceptions and blinds us to
important lessons of reality. The intent of this chapter is to look at
learning theory generally, and then focus on those attributes of the
online learning context that allow us to develop deeper and more
useful theories of online learning
Wilson has described three functions of a good
educational theory. First, it helps us to envision new worlds. Few of
us need help envisioning new worlds in the midst of the hype and
exuberance of online learning proponents that flood the popular
press, but we do need theory to help us envision how education can
best take advantage of the enhanced communication, information
retrieval, and management capability provided by the Net. It is all
too easy to consider new innovations in a “horseless carriage”
manner, and to attempt to develop new actions based on old
adaptations to obsolete contexts.
Second, a good theory helps us to make things. We need theories
of online learning that help us to invest our time and limited
resources most effectively. There are many opportunities, but
always a critical shortage of resources, a situation which demands
that we maximize the efficiency of our development and delivery
efforts. This book contains a number of chapters with particular
recommendations and suggestions for online course development
and teaching. It is hoped that this chapter provides a theoretical
“big picture” that will help make sense of these specific
recommendations.
Third, Wilson argues that a good theory keeps us honest. Good
theory builds upon what is already known, and helps us to
interpret and plan for the unknown. It also forces us to look
beyond day-to-day contingencies and to ensure that our knowledge
and practice of online learning is robust, considered, and ever
expanding.
This chapter begins with a general assessment of how people
learn that is based on Bransford, Brown, and Cocking’s 
work. It then assesses the unique characteristics of the Web that
enable it to enhance these generalized learning contexts; that is, the
Web’s “affordances.” The chapter next discusses the six forms of
interaction and their critical role in engaging and supporting both
learners and teachers. It then presents a model of e-learning, a first
step toward a theory in which the two predominant forms of elearning—the collaborative and independent study modes—are
presented, with a brief discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of each. The chapter ends with a discussion of the
emerging tools of the “Semantic Web” and the way they will affect
future developments of the theory and practice of online learning
Attributes of Learning
As many theorists have argued , and as
practitioners experience for themselves, online learning is a subset
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
of learning in general; thus, we can expect issues relevant to how
adults learn generally to be relevant to how they learn in an online
context. In an insightful book on the “new science of learning,”
Bransford, Brown, and Cocking provide evidence that
effective learning environments are framed within the convergence
of four overlapping lenses. They argue that effective learning is
learner centered, knowledge centered, assessment centered, and
community centered. Discussing each of these lenses helps us to
define learning in a general sense, before we apply this analytical
framework to the unique characteristics of online learning.
Learner Centered
A learner-centered context is not one in which the whims and
peculiarities of each individual learner are uniquely catered to. In
fact, we must be careful to recognize that learner-centered contexts
must also meet the needs of the teacher, of the institution, of the
larger society that provides support for the student and the
institution, and often of a group or class of students. For this
reason, I have argued elsewhere (Anderson, in press) that this attribute might more accurately be labeled “learning centered,” than
“learner centered.”
Learner-centered learning, according to Bransford et al., includes
awareness of the unique cognitive structures and understandings
that the learners bring to the learning context. Thus, a teacher
makes efforts to gain an understanding of students’ pre-existing
knowledge, including any misconceptions that the learner starts
with in their construction of new knowledge. Further, the learning
environment respects and accommodates the particular cultural
attributes, especially the language and particular forms of
expression, that the learner uses to interpret and build knowledge.
Learner-centered activities make extensive use of diagnostic tools
and activities, so that these pre-existing knowledge structures are
made visible to both the teacher and the student.
Online learning can present challenges to educators, because the
tools and opportunities for discovering students’ preconceptions
and cultural perspectives are often limited by bandwidth
constraints that limit the view of body language and paralinguistic
clues. Some researchers have argued that these restrictions
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
negatively affect the efficacy of communication . Others have argued that the unique characteristics
that define online learning (most commonly asynchronous textbased interaction) can actually lead to enhanced or hyper
communications .
We have found evidence of significant social presence in
computer conferencing contexts . Nonetheless, it is fair
to say that the challenges of assessing student preconditions and
cultural prerequisites are often more difficult in an online learning
context, because teachers are less able to interact transparently with
students—especially in the critical early stages of the formation of a
learning community. It is for this reason that experienced online
learning teachers make time at the commencement of their learning
interactions to provide incentive and opportunity for students to
share their understandings, their culture, and unique aspects of
themselves. This sharing can be done formally, through
electronically administered surveys and questionnaires, but is often
accomplished more effectively by virtual icebreakers, and by the
provision of an opportunity for students to introduce themselves
and to express any issues or concerns to the teacher and the class.
The online learning environment is also a unique cultural
context in itself. Benedikt has argued that cyberspace “has
a geography, a physics, a nature and a rule of human law” (p. 123).
Many students will be new to this context, but increasingly,
students will come to online learning with preconceptions gathered
from both formal and informal experience in virtual environments.
They will exercise their mastery of communication norms and
tools, some of which will not be appropriate to an educational
online context. Researchers have attempted to quantify this
proficiency and comfort with online environments through the use
of survey instruments that measure a learner’s internet efficacy
 . They have argued that it is not Internet
skill alone that determines competency; rather, a strong sense of
Internet efficacy allows users to adapt effectively to the
requirements of working in this environment. Thus, the effective
online learning teacher is constantly probing for learner comfort
and competence with the intervening technology, and providing
safe environments for them to increase their sense of Internet
efficacy. Learner-centered online-learning contexts thus are
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
sensitive to the cultural overlay acquired in offline contexts, and
the ways in which it interacts with the Web’s affordances.
Knowledge Centered
Effective learning does not happen in a content vacuum. McPeck
 and other theorists of critical thinking have argued that
teaching generalized thinking skills and techniques is useless
outside of a particular knowledge domain in which they can be
grounded. Similarly, Bransford et al. argue that effective learning is
both defined and bounded by the epistemology, language, and
context of disciplinary thought. Each discipline or field of study
contains a world view that provides often unique ways of
understanding and talking about knowledge. Students need
opportunities to experience this discourse, as well as the knowledge
structures that undergraduate teaching affords. They also need
opportunities to reflect upon their own thinking: automacy is a
useful and necessary skill for expert thinking, but without reflective
capacity, it greatly limits one’s ability to transfer knowledge to an
unfamiliar context or to develop new knowledge structures.
In comparison to campus-based learning, online learning neither
advantages nor disadvantages knowledge-centered learning. As I
discuss below, the Net provides expanded opportunities for
students to plunge ever deeper into knowledge resources, thus
affording a near limitless means for students to grow their
knowledge, to find their own way around the knowledge of the
discipline, and to benefit from its expression in thousands of
formats and contexts. However, this provision of resources can be
overwhelming, and the skillful e-teacher needs to provide the “big
picture” scaffolding on which students can grow their own
knowledge and discipline-centered discoveries.
Assessment Centered
The third perspective on learning environments presented by
Bransford et al. is the necessity for effective learning environments
to be assessment centered. In making this assertion, they do not
give unqualified support for summative assessments (especially
those supposedly used for national or provincial accountability),
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
but rather look to formative evaluation that serves to motivate,
inform, and provide feedback to both learners and teachers.
Quality online learning provides many opportunities for
assessment: not only opportunities that involve the teacher, but also
ones that exploit the influence and expertise of peers, others that
use simple and complex machine algorithms to assess student
production, and, perhaps most importantly, those that encourage
learners to assess their own learning reflectively. Understanding
what is most usefully rather than what is most easily assessed is a
challenge for the designers of online learning. Developments in
cognitive learning theories and their application to assessment
design are helping us to devise assessments that are aligned with the
subject content, and that assess cognitive processes as well as end
results. For example, Baxter, Elder, and Glaser found that
competent students should be able to provide coherent explanations, generate plans for problem solution, implement solution
strategies, and monitor and adjust their activities. I am continually
disappointed when reviewing assessments that my own children are
subjected to in school and at university to note the very high
percentage of recall questions and the lack of assessment strategies
that effectively measure the four sets of competencies identified by
Baxter et al.
Can we do any better in online learning? The diminution of
opportunities for immediate interaction between learners and
teachers might reduce opportunities for process assessment; however, the enhanced communications capacity of online learning and
the focus of most adult online learning in the real world of work
provide opportunities to create assessment activities that are project and workplace based, that are constructed collaboratively, that
benefit from peer review, and that are infused with both the opportunity and the requirement for self-assessment.
A danger of assessment-centered learning systems is the potential
increase in the workload demanded of busy online learning teachers.
Strategies that are designed to provide formative and summative
assessment with minimal direct impact on teacher workload are
urgently needed. There is a growing list of tools that provide such
assessment without increased teacher participation, including
• the use of online computer-marked assessments that extend
beyond quizzes to simulation exercises, virtual labs, and other
automated assessments of active student learning;
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• collaborative learning environments that students create to
document and assess their own learning in virtual groups;
• mechanisms, such as online automated tutors, that support and
scaffold students’ evaluation of their own work and that of their
• student agents who facilitate and monitor peer activities to allow
students to assess and aid each other informally;
• the use of sophisticated software tools, such as latent semantic
analysis (LSA) or neural networks, to machine-score even complicated materials, such as students’ essays.
Thus, the challenge of online learning is to provide high quantity
and quality of assessment while maintaining student interest and
commitment. These goals are often best achieved through the
development of a learning community, to which we turn next.
Community Centered
The community-centered lens allows us to include the critical social
component of learning in our online learning designs. Here we find
Vygotsky’s popular concepts of social cognition to be
relevant as we consider how students can work together in an
online learning context to create new knowledge collaboratively.
These ideas have been expanded in Lipman’s community of
inquiry and Wenger’s ideas of community of practice to
show how members of a learning community both support and
challenge each other, leading to effective and relevant knowledge
construction. Wilson has described participants in online
communities as having a shared sense of belonging, trust,
expectation of learning, and commitment to participate and to
contribute to the community.
Although there are many online learning researchers who celebrate the capacity to create learning communities at a distance
 , there are also those who
note problems associated with lack of attention and participation
 , economic restraints , and
an in-built resistance among many faculty and institutions to the
threatening competition from virtual learning environments . Ethnographic studies of the Net illustrate how
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
the lack of “placedness” and the complications of anonymity
attenuate different components of community when the
community is located in virtual space. In short, it may be more
challenging than we think to create and sustain these communities,
and the differences—linked to a lack of placedness and
synchronicity, that is, mutual presence in time and place—may be
more fundamental than the mere absence of body language and
social presence.
I have been struck by the wide variation in the expectations of
learners about participation in a community of learners.
Traditionally, distance education has attracted students who value
the freedom from constraints of time and place that is provided by
independent modes of distance education. Contrary to popular
belief, the major motivation for enrollment in distance education is
not physical access, but rather, temporal freedom to move through
a course of studies at a pace of the student’s choice. Participation in
a community of learners almost inevitably places constraints on this
independence, even when the pressure of synchronous connection is
eliminated by use of asynchronous communications tools. The
demands of a learning-centered context might at times force us to
modify the prescriptive participation in communities of learning,
even though we might have evidence that such participation will
further advance knowledge creation and attention. The flexibility of
virtual communities allows more universal participation, but a
single environment that responds to all students does not exist; thus,
the need for variations that accommodate the diverse needs of
learners and teachers at different stages of their life cycles.
These potential barriers argue for a theory of online learning
that accommodates, but does not prescribe, any particular
boundaries of time and place, and that allows for appropriate substitution of independent and community-centered learning. To this
requirement, we add the need for a theory of e-learning that is
learning centered, provides a wide variety of authentic assessment
opportunities, and is grounded in existing knowledge contexts.
Affordances of the Net
Effective educational theory must address the affordances and the
limitations of the context for which it is designed .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
The World Wide Web is a multifaceted technology that provides a
large set of communication and information management tools
that can be harnessed for effective education provision. It also
suffers from a set of constraints that are briefly outlined in this
Online learning, as a subset of all distance education, has always
been concerned with providing access to educational experience
that is at least more flexible in time and in space than campusbased education. Access to the Web is now nearly ubiquitous in
developed countries. The Wall Street Journal of February 4, 2002,
reported that 54% of U.S. adults use the Web on a regular basis,
and 90% of 15-17 years olds are regular Web users. This high percentage of users would probably include well over 90% of those
citizens interested in taking a formal education course. Access to
the Web is primarily through home or workplace machines, but
placements in public libraries and Internet cafes and connections
through personal wireless devices are such that access poses no
problems for the vast majority of citizens of developed countries. I
have also been surprised by the availability of access in developing
countries, as exemplified by free use of the Net in McDonald’s
restaurants in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and the numerous Internet cafés,
in most Chinese cities. Access is still problematic for those with a
variety of physical handicaps; however, in comparison with books
or video media, the Web provides much greater quality and
quantity of access to nearly all citizens, with or without physical
disabilities.
Access is increasing, not only to technology, but also to an evergrowing body of content. The number of scholarly journals (see
 educational objects (see 
merlot.org/Home.po), educational discussion lists (see 
.kovacs.com/directory), courses (see 
subjects/index.cfm), and general references to millions of pages of
commercial, educational, and cultural content (see 
.google.com) is large and increasing at an exponential rate. Thus,
online learning theory must acknowledge the change from an era of
shortage and restrictions in content to one in which content
resources are so large that filtering and reducing choice is as
important as providing sufficient content.
The Web is quickly changing from a context defined by textbased content and interactions to one in which all forms of media
are supported. Much of the early work on the instructional use of
the Internet assumed that
asynchronous text-based interaction defined the medium. Techniques were developed to maximize interaction using this relatively
lean medium. We are now entering an era where streaming video,
video and audio conferencing, and virtual worlds are readily available for educational use. Thus, online learning theory needs to help
educators to decide which of the many technological options is best
suited for their application.
The Web’s in-built capacity for hyperlinking has been compared
to the way in which human knowledge is stored in mental schema
and to the subsequent development of mental structures . Further, the capacity for students to create their own
learning paths through content that is formatted with hypertext
links is congruent with constructivist instructional design theory
that stresses individual discovery and construction of knowledge
 .
Finally, the growing ease with which content can be updated and
revised (both manually and through use of autonomous agent
technology) is making online learning content much more responsive
and potentially more current than content developed for other
media. The explosion of Web “blogs” and userfriendly course-content management systems, built into Web delivery
systems such as WebCT or Blackboard, is creating an environment in
which teachers and learners can very create and update their course
content without the aid of programmers or designers. Naturally, this
ease of creation and revision leads to potential for error and lessthan-professional-standard output; however, educators who are
anxious to retain control of their educational content and context
welcome this openness and freedom.
Education is not only about access to content, however. The
greatest affordance of the Web for educational use is the profound
and multifaceted increase in communication and interaction
capability that it provides. The next section discusses this
affordance in greater detail.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The Role of Interaction in Online Learning
Defining and Valuing Interaction in Online Learning
Communication technologies are used in education to enhance
interaction between all participants in the educational transaction.
However, although interaction has long been a defining and critical
component of the educational process and context, it is surprisingly
difficult to find a clear and precise definition of this concept in the
education literature. In popular culture, the use of the term to
describe everything from toasters to video games to holiday resorts
further confuses precise definition. I have discussed the varying
definitions of interaction at length in an earlier paper , and so I will here simply accept Wagner’s definition
of interaction as “reciprocal events that require at least two objects
and two actions. Interactions occur when these objects and events
mutually influence one another” (p. 8).
Interaction (or interactivity) serves a variety of functions in the
educational transaction. Sims has listed these functions as
allowing for learner control, facilitating program adaptation based
on learner input, allowing various forms of participation and
communication, and acting as an aid to meaningful learning. In
addition, interactivity is fundamental to creation of the learning
communities espoused by Lipman , Wenger , and
other influential educational theorists who focus on the critical role
of community in learning. Finally, the value of another person’s
perspective, usually gained through interaction, is a key learning
component in constructivist learning theories , and
in inducing mindfulness in learners 
Interaction has always been valued in distance education, even
in its most traditional, independent study format. Holmberg 
argued for the superiority of individualized interaction between
student and tutor when supported by written postal correspondence or by real-time telephone tutoring. Holmberg also introduced us to the idea of simulated interaction that defines the
writing style appropriate for independent study models of distance
education, programming that he referred to as “guided didactic
interaction.” Garrison and Shale defined all forms of
education (including that delivered at a distance) as essentially
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
interactions between content, students, and teachers. Laurillard
 constructed a conversational model of learning in which
interaction between students and teachers plays the critical role.
As long ago as 1916, John Dewey referred to interaction as the
defining component of the educational process that occurs when
the student transforms the inert information passed to them from
another, and constructs it into knowledge with personal application
and value . Bates argued that interactivity
should be the primary criterion for selecting media for educational
delivery. Thus, there is a long history of study and recognition of
the critical role of interaction in supporting, and even defining,
education.
The Web affords interaction in many modalities. In Figure 2-1,
we see the common forms of media used in distance education
charted against their capacity to support independence (of time and
place) and their capacity to support interaction. It can be seen that,
generally, the higher and richer the form of communication, the
more restrictions it places on independence.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Educational media
Interaction
Face-to-face
Video conferencing
Audio conferencing
Independence of time and distance
Computer conferencing
Correspondence
Television
Figure 2-1.
Attributes
of educational
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Educational media
Interaction
Face-to-face
Video conferencing
Audio conferencing
Independence of time and distance
Computer conferencing
Correspondence
Television
Figure 2-2.
Educational
media subsumed
by the Web.
Figure 2-2 shows the capability of the Web to support these
modalities. As can be seen, all forms of mediated educational
interaction are now supported, assuming one adds the use of the
Web to enhance classroom-based education. Thus, the capacity for
the Web to support online learning in general is usually too large a
domain for meaningful discussion until one specifies the particular
modality of interaction in use.
Interaction can also be delineated in terms of the actors
participating in it. Michael Moore first discussed the three most
common forms of interaction in distance education: studentstudent, student-teacher, and student-content . This
list was expanded by Anderson and Garrison to include
teacher-teacher, teacher-content, and content-content interaction. I
have been developing an equivalency theorem describing the
capacity to substitute one form of interaction for another, based on
cost and accessibility factors .
Figure 2-3 illustrates these six types of educational interaction, and
each is described briefly below.
Student-student Interaction
Traditionally, student-student interaction has been downplayed as
a requirement of distance education as a result of constraints on the
availability of technology and an earlier bias among distanceeducation theorists toward individualized learning . Modern constructivist theorists stress the value of peer-topeer interaction in investigating and developing multiple
perspectives. Work on collaborative learning illustrates potential
gains in cognitive learning tasks, as well as increases in completion
rates and the acquisition of critical social skills in education . Work by Damon and others related to peer tutoring
illustrates the benefits to both the tutor and the tutee that can result
from a variety of forms of “reciprocal” teaching. Finally, peer
interaction is critical to the development of communities of
learning that allow learners
to develop interpersonal skills, and to investigate tacit knowledge
shared by community members as well as a formal curriculum of
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 2-3.
Educational interactions.
Student-teacher Interaction
Student-teacher interaction is supported in online learning in a
large number of varieties and formats that include asynchronous
and synchronous communication using text, audio, and video. The
facility of such communications leads many new teachers to be
overwhelmed by the quantity of student communications and by
the rise in students’ expectations for immediate responses.
Student-content Interaction
Student-content interaction has always been a major component of
formal education, even in the form of library study or the reading
of textbooks in face-to-face instruction. The Web supports these
more passive forms of student-content interaction, and also
provides a host of new opportunities, including immersion in
microenvironments, exercises in virtual labs, online computerassisted tutorials, and the development of interactive content that
responds to student behavior and attributes (often referred to as
“student models”). Eklund lists some potential advantages
of such approaches, noting that they allow instructors to
• provide an on line or intelligent help facility, if a user is modeled
and their path is traced through the information space;
• use an adaptive interface based on several stereotypical user
classes to modify the environment to suit individual users; and
• provide adaptive advice, and model the learner’s use of the
environment (including navigational use, answers to questions,
and help requested) to make intelligent suggestions about a
preferred individualized path through the knowledge base.
To these advantages must be added the capacity for immediate
feedback, not only for formal learning guidance, but also for justin-time learning assistance through job aids and other performance
support tools.
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Teacher-teacher Interaction
Teacher-teacher interaction creates the opportunity for professional
development and support that sustains teachers through communities of like-minded colleagues. These interactions also
encourage teachers to take advantage of knowledge growth and
discovery in their own subject and within the scholarly community
of teachers.
Teacher-content Interaction
Teacher-content interaction focuses on the creation of content and
learning activities by teachers. It allows teachers continuously to
monitor and update the content resources and activities that they
create for student learning.
Content-content Interaction
Content-content interaction is a newly developing mode of
educational interaction in which content is programmed to interact
with other automated information sources, so as to refresh itself
constantly, and to acquire new capabilities. For example, a weather
tutorial might take its data from current meteorological servers,
creating a learning context that is up-to-date and relevant to the
learner’s context. Content-content interaction is also necessary to
provide a means of asserting control of rights and facilitating
tracking of the use of content by diverse groups of learners and
A Model of E-learning
A first step in theory building often consists of the construction of
a model in which the major variables are displayed and the relationships among the variables are schematized. Figure 2-4 provides
a model that illustrates the two major modes of online learning.
The model illustrates the two major human actors, learners and
teachers, and their interactions with each other and with content.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Learners can of course interact directly with content that they find
in multiple formats, and especially on the Web; however, many
choose to have their learning sequenced, directed, and evaluated
with the assistance of a teacher. This interaction can take place
within a community of inquiry, using a variety of Net-based synchronous and asynchronous activities (video, audio, computer
conferencing, chats, or virtual world interaction). These environments are particularly rich, and allow for the learning of social
skills, the collaborative learning of content, and the development of
personal relationships among participants. However, the
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Figure 2-4.
A model of online
learning showing types
of interaction.
community binds learners in time, forcing regular sessions or at
least group-paced learning. Community models are also, generally,
more expensive, as they suffer from an inability to scale to large
numbers of learners. The second model of learning (on the right)
illustrates the structured learning tools associated with independent
learning. Common tools used in this mode include computerassisted tutorials, drills, and simulations. Virtual labs, in which
students complete simulations of lab experiments, and sophisticated search and retrieval tools are also becoming common
instruments for individual learning. Printed texts (now often
distributed and read online) have long been used to convey teacher
interpretations and insights in independent study. However, it
should also be emphasized that, although engaged in independent
study, the student is not alone. Often colleagues in the work place,
peers located locally (or distributed, perhaps across the Net), and
family members have been shown to be significant sources of
support and assistance to independent study learners argues that different learning outcomes are
best learned through particular types of learning activities. Prensky
asks not, “How do students learn?” but more specifically, “How
do they learn what?”
Prensky postulates that, in general, we all learn:
• behaviors through imitation, feedback, and practice;
• creativity through playing;
• facts through association, drill, memory, and questions;
• judgment through reviewing cases, asking questions, making
choices, and receiving feedback and coaching;
• language through imitation, practice, and immersion;
• observation through viewing examples and receiving feedback;
• procedures through imitation and practice;
• processes through system analysis, deconstruction, and practice;
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• systems through discovering principles and undertaking
graduated tasks;
• reasoning through puzzles, problems, and examples;
• skills (physical or mental) through imitation, feedback,
continuous practice, and increasing challenge;
• speeches or performance roles through memorization, practice,
and coaching;
• theories through logic, explanation, and questioning.
Prensky also argues that there are forms and styles of games that
can be used, online or offline, to facilitate the learning of each of
these skills.
I would argue that each of these activities can be accomplished
through e-learning, using some combination of online community
activities and computer-supported independent-study activities. By
tracing the interactions expected and provided for learners through
the model, one can plan for and ensure that an appropriate mix of
student, teacher, and content interaction is designed for each
learning outcome.
Online Learning and the Semantic Web
We are entering an era in which the Web is changing from a
medium to display content, to one in which content is endowed
with semantic meaning . If the format and
structure of content is described in formalized and machinereadable languages, then it can be searched and acted upon, not
only by humans but also by computer programs commonly known
as autonomous agents. This new capacity has been most prominently championed by the original designer of the Web, Tim
Berners-Lee, and is named by him the “Semantic Web.”
The Semantic Web will be populated by a variety of autonomous
agents—small computer programs designed to navigate the Web,
searching for particular information and then acting on that
information in support of their assigned task. In education, student
agents will be used for intelligent searching of relevant content, and
as secretaries for booking and arranging for collaborative meetings,
for reminding students of deadlines, and for negotiating with the
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
agents of other students for assistance, collaboration, or
socialization. Teacher agents will be used to provide remedial
tuition, and to assist with record keeping, with monitoring student
progress, and even with marking and responding to student
communications. Content itself can be augmented with agents that
control rights to its use, automatically update it, and track the
means by which the content is used by students .
The Semantic Web also supports the reuse and adaptation of
content by supporting the construction, distribution, and dissemination of digitized content that is formatted and formally
described . The recent emergence of
educational modeling languages allows educators to
describe, in a language accessible on the Web, not only the content
but also the activities and context or environment of learning
experiences. Together these capabilities afforded by the Semantic
Web allow us to envision an e-learning environment that is rich
with student-student, student-content, and student-teacher interactions that are affordable, reusable, and facilitated by active
agents (see Figure 2-5, below).
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
The Web offers a host of very powerful affordances to educators.
Existing and older education provisions have been defined by the
techniques and tools designed to overcome the limitations and
exploit the capacities of earlier media. For example, the earliest
universities were constructed around medieval libraries that afforded access to rare hand-written books and manuscripts. Early
forms of distance education were constructed using text and the
delayed forms of asynchronous communications afforded by mail
services. Campus-based education systems are constructed around
physical buildings that afford meeting and lecture spaces for
teachers and groups of students. The Web provides nearly ubiquitous access to quantities of content that are many orders of magnitude larger than those provided in any other medium.
From our earlier discussion, we see that the Web affords a vast
potential for education delivery that generally subsumes almost all
the modes and means of education delivery previously used, with
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
perhaps the exception of the rich face-to-face interaction of the
classroom. We have also seen that the most critical component of
formal education consists of interaction between and among
multiple actors, humans and agents included.
Thus, I conclude this chapter with an overview of a theory of
online learning interaction that suggests that the various forms of
student interaction can be substituted for each other, depending on
costs, content, learning objectives, convenience, technology, and
available time. The substitutions do not result in decreases in the
quality of the learning that results. More formally:
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Figure 2-5.
Educational
interactions on the
Semantic Web.
Sufficient levels of deep and meaningful learning can be
developed, as long as one of the three forms of interaction
(student-teacher; student-student; student-content) is at
very high levels. The other two may be offered at minimal
levels or even eliminated without degrading the educational
experience. 
The challenge for teachers and course developers working in an
online learning context is to construct a learning environment that
is simultaneously learning centered, content centered, community
centered, and assessment centered. There is no single, right medium
of online learning, nor a formulaic specification that dictates the
kind of interaction most conducive to learning in all domains with
all learners. Rather, teachers must learn to develop their skills so
that they can respond to student and curriculum needs by
developing a set of online learning activities that are adaptable to
diverse student needs. Table 2-1 illustrates how the affordances of
these emerging technologies can be directed so as to create the
environment that is most supportive of “how people learn.”
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Table 2-1.
Affordances of the
network environment
and the attributes of
“How people learn.”
“How people
learn” framework
(Bransford et al.)
Affordances
of the current
Affordances
of the Semantic
Capacity to support
individualized and
community centered
learning activities
Direct access to vast
libraries of content
and learning activities
organized from a variety
of discipline perspectives
Asynchronous and
synchronous;
collaborative and
individual interactions
in many formats
Agents for translating,
reformatting, time shifting,
monitoring, and summarizing community
interactions
Assessment
Multiple time- and placeshifted opportunities for
formative and summative
assessment by self, peers,
and teachers
Agents for assessing,
critiquing, and
providing “just in
time feedback”
Content that changes
in response to
individualized and
group learner models
Agents for selecting,
personalizing, and
reusing content
Conclusion
This discussion highlights the wide and diverse forms of teaching
and learning that can be supported on the Web today, and the
realization that the educational Semantic Web will further enhance
the possibilities and affordances of the Web, making it premature
to define a particular theory of online learning. However, we can
expect that online learning, like all forms of quality learning, will
be knowledge, community, assessment, and learner centered.
Online learning will enhance the critical function of interaction in
education in multiple formats and styles among all the participants.
These interactions will be supported by autonomous agents
working on behalf of all participants. The task of the online course
designer and teacher is to choose, adapt, and perfect (through
feedback, assessment, and reflection) educational activities that
maximize the affordances of the Web. In doing so, they create
learning-, knowledge-, assessment-, and community-centered
educational experiences that result in high levels of learning by all
participants. Integration of the new tools and affordances of the
Semantic Web further enhances the quality, accessibility, and
affordability of online learning experiences.
Our challenge as theory builders and online practitioners is to
delineate which modes, methods, activities, and actors are most
effective, in terms of cost and learning, in creating and distributing
quality e-learning programs. The creation of a model is often the
first step toward the development of a theory. The model presented
illustrates most of the key variables that interact to create online
educational experiences and contexts. The next step is to theorize
and measure the direction and magnitude of the effect of each of
these variables on relevant outcome variables, including learning,
cost, completion, and satisfaction. The models presented in this
chapter and other chapters in this book do not yet constitute a
theory of online learning, but it is hoped that they will help us to
deepen our understanding of this complex educational context and
lead us to hypotheses, predictions, and most importantly
improvements in our professional practice. It is hoped that the
model and discussion in this and other chapters in this book lead
us toward a theory of online learning.
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
References
Anderson, T. . Getting the mix right: An updated and
theoretical rationale for interaction. ITFORUM, Paper #63.
Retrieved June 6, 2003, from 
paper63/paper63.htm
Anderson, T. . Modes of interaction in distance education:
Recent developments and research questions. In M. Moore &
G. Anderson (Eds.), Handbook of distance education (pp. 129-
144). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, T. (in press). A second look at learning sciences,
classrooms and technology. In T. Duffy & J. Kirkley (Eds.)
Learner centered theory and practice in distance education.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, T., & Garrison, D. R. . Learning in a networked
world: New roles and responsibilities. In C. Gibson (Ed.),
Distance learners in higher education (pp. 97-112). Madison,
WI: Atwood Publishing.
Anderson, T., & Kanuka, H. . E-research: Issues, strategies
and methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Annand, D. . The problem of computer conferencing for
distance-based universities. Open Learning, 14(3), 47-52.
Bates, A. . Interactivity as a criterion for media selection in
distance education. Never Too Far, 16, 5-9.
Baxter, G. P., Elder, A. D., & Glaser, R. . Knowledge-based
cognition and performance assessment in the science classroom.
Educational Psychologist, 31(2), 133-140.
Benedikt, M. . Cyberspace: Some proposals. In M. Benedikt
(Ed.), Cyberspace: First steps (pp. 119-224). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Berners-Lee, T. . Weaving the Web: The original design and
ultimate destiny of the World Wide Web by its inventor. San
Francisco: Harper.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. . How people learn:
Brain, mind experience and school. Retrieved June 6, 2003,
from the National Academy of Sciences Web site: http://
www.nap.edu/html/howpeople1
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Damon, W. . Peer interaction: The untapped potential.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 5, 331-343.
Dewey, J. . Democracy and education. New York:
Macmillan. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from the Institute for
Learning Technologies Web site: 
publications/dewey.html
Downes, S. . Learning objects. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from
 
Eastin, M., & LaRose, R. . Internet self-efficacy and the
psychology of the digital divide. Journal of Computer Mediated
Communications, 6(1).
Eklund, J. . Cognitive models for structuring hypermedia
and implications for learning from the World Wide Web.
Proceedings of AusWEB 95. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from
 
Feenberg, A. . The written world: On the theory and practice
of computer conferencing. In R. Mason & A. Kaye (Eds.),
Mindweave: Communication, computers, and distance education
(pp. 22-39). Toronto: Pergamon Press.
Garrison, D. R., & Shale, D. . A new framework and
perspective. In D. R. Garrison & D. Shale (Eds.), Education at a
distance: From issues to practice (pp. 123-133). Malabar, FL:
Robert E. Krieger.
Google, Inc. . Google search engine. Retrieved July 19,
2003, from 
Harasim, L. . On-line education: A new domain. In R. Mason
& A. Kaye (Eds.), Mindweave: Communication, computers, and
distance education (pp. 50-62). Toronto: Pergamon Press.
Harasim, L., Hiltz, S., Teles, L., & Turoff, M. . Learning
networks: A field guide to teaching and learning online. London:
MIT Press.
Hine, C. . Virtual ethnography. London: Sage.
Holmberg, B. . Theory and practice of distance education.
London: Routledge.
Jaffee, D. . Institutionalized resistance to asynchronous
learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 2(2) Retrieved June 6, 2003, from 
publications/jaln/v2n2/pdf/v2n2_jaffee.pdf
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Jonassen, D. . Evaluating constructivistic learning. Educational Technology, 31(10), 28-33.
Jonassen, D. . Designing hypertext for learning. In E. Scanlon
& T. O’Shea (Eds.), New directions in educational technology
(pp. 123-130). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Koper, R. . Modelling units of study from a pedgagogical
perspective: The pedagogical meta-model behind EML.
Retrieved June 6, 2003 from the Open University of the
Netherlands Web site: 
Kovacs Consulting. . Directory of scholarly and professional
e-conferences. Retrieved July 17, 2003, from 
kovacs.com/directory
Langer, E. . Mindfulness. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Laurillard, D. . Rethinking university teaching: A framework
for the effective use of educational technology. London:
Routledge.
Lipman, M. . Thinking in education. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mason, J., & Hart, G. . Effective use of asynchronous
virtual learning communities. Retrieved June 6, 2003 from
 
McPeck, J. . Teaching critical thinking. New York: Routledge.
MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and
Online Teaching). . Home page. Retrieved July 17,
2003, from 
Moore, M. . Three types of interaction. American Journal of
Distance Education, 3(2), 1-6.
Norman, D. . Affordance, conventions and design.
Interactions, 6(3), 38-43. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from http://
www.jnd.org/dn.mss/affordances-interactions.html
Notess, G. . The Blog realm: News sources, searching with
Daypop, and content management. Online, 26(5). Retrieved June
6, 2003, from 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Potter, J. . Beyond access: Student perspective on support
service needs in distance education. The Canadian Journal of
University Continuing Education/Revue canadienne de
l’éducation permanante universitaire, 24(1), 59-82.
Prensky, M. . Digital game-based learning. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. . Exploring social presence in
computer conferencing. Journal of Interactive Learning
Research, 13(3), 259-275. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from
 
munication.pdf
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Archer, W., & Garrison, D. R. .
Assessing social presence in asynchronous, text-based computer
conferences. Journal of Distance Education, 14(3), 51-70.
Shaw, E., Johnson, W. L., & Ganeshan, R. . Pedagogical
agents on the Web. Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Autonomous Agents. Retrieved June 6, 2003,
from 
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. . Theoretical approaches
to differences between media. In J. Short, E. Williams, &
B. Christie (Eds.), The social psychology of telecommunications
(pp. 61-76). Toronto: John Wiley & Sons.
Sims, R. . Interactivity on stage: Strategies for learnerdesigner communication. Australian Journal of Educational
Technology, 15(3), 257-272. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from http:
//www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet15/sims.html
Slavin, R. . Cooperative learning theory, research, and
practice. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Thaiupathump, C., Bourne, J., & Campbell, J. . Intelligent
agents for online learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Network, 3(2)
Vygotsky, L. S. . Mind in society, the development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Wagner, E. D. . In support of a functional definition of
interaction. The American Journal of Distance Education, 8(2),
Toward a Theory of Online Learning
Walther, J. B. . Computer mediated communication:
Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal interaction.
Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.
Wenger, E. . Supporting communities of practice: A survey of
community-orientated technologies (1.3 ed.) (Shareware).
Retrieved June 6, 2003, from 
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. . Cultivating
communities of practice: A guide to managing knowledge.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Wiley, D. . Connecting learning objects to instructional design
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy. In D. A. Wiley
(Ed.), The instructional use of learning objects: Online version.
Retrieved June 6, 2003, from 
Wilson, B. . Thoughts on theory in educational technology.
Educational Technology, 37(1), 22-26.
Wilson, B. . The dangers of theory-based design. ITFORUM,
Paper #31. Retrieved June 6, 2003, from 
itforum/paper31/paper31.html
Wilson, B. . Sense of community as a valued outcome for
electronic courses, cohorts, and programs. Retrieved June 6,
2003, from 
munity.html
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 3
VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS: A STRATEGIC
APPROACH TO ONLINE LEARNING
Fathi Elloumi
Athabasca University
Only by integrating the Internet into overall strategy will this
powerful new technology become an equally powerful force for
competitive advantage. 
Introduction
Distance education uses mediated information and instruction,
encompassing all available technologies and a variety of other
forms of instruction at a distance, to deliver knowledge and skills
to the learner. Online education is an extension of the traditional
form of distance education. Typically it involves
the use of the Internet to access learning materials; to interact
with the content, instructor, and other learners; and to obtain
support during the learning process, in order to acquire
knowledge, to construct personal meaning, and to grow from
the learning experience. 
Online education includes mechanisms to facilitate the
development of and access to a variety of learning services; an
underpinning technological platform; means to help potential
learners select and enrol in learning experiences; and supporting
administrative processes. Strategic planning questions about the
use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) in
education must work in a context of constant and accelerating
change that demands flexibility in the design of the online learning
institution’s structure and course and program offerings. The use of
technology must be embedded within a wider strategy for teaching,
learning, and service that is responsive to the challenges of
technological change .
Many adult education and training providers are running to get
on the online learning bandwagon. Several global groups of
institutions are collaborating to promote distance education,
including British International Studies Association, Central and
East European International Studies Association, European
Association of International Education, U.S. International Studies
Association, U.S. Information Agency, IDP Education Australia,
European Universities Continuing Education Network, and Global
Wireless Education Consortium . They are busy transforming existing courses and creating
new ones for online delivery. The participation of single institutions
and groups of institutions has resulted in increased opportunities
for online learning all over the world. Institutions are trying new
delivery and support strategies, and looking at competency-based
credentialing systems and performance-based learning.
On the other hand, several institutions have recently pulled out
of online distance education. NYU Online, a three-year-old venture
of New York University, folded as a result of economic conditions
 , a plight shared by UMUC (University of Maryland University College) Online, and Temple University's Virtual
Temple . The economic conditions
referred to have to do with heavy competition from other more
successful institutions, such as the University of Phoenix (http://
www.phoenix.edu), and enrollments that were significantly lower
than predicted.
There are many reasons why online distance education
institutions have failed, including high cost of technology, poor
decisions, competition, and the absence of appropriate (or any)
business strategies, especially market assessment of consumer
demand. Many of these institutions rushed to offer any conceivable
course, and attempted to replicate the classroom experience online
 ; most failed to deliver real value that could earn
a sustainable and profitable return from learners. By failing to
follow appropriate business strategies, many online learning institutions reduced the likelihood that they could gain any competitive
advantage. They failed to capitalize on the Internet’s capacity to
support convenience, service, high quality learning, customization,
richness, and other features of value to learners.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Various authors have argued for the special role of the
University, and for the need for it to operate outside of the
economic forces that define activity in the commercial sector . There may be strong
arguments for public support for the University to allow it, to a
limited degree, to sit outside of the competitive marketplace.
However, in the neoliberal climate of the day, the emergence of forprofit university corporations and the need to ensure value in order
to gain and retain public support, compels university administrators and faculty to examine the means by which value is created
and retained by their institution. Thus, this chapter focuses on the
online university (public, private, or for-profit), and attempts to
enhance our understanding of the ways in which market forces can
be understood and manipulated so as to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness—and thus the viability—of a university in a
networked economy. This chapter emphasizes the role of strategy
for online learning institution, and uses the value chain framework
for discussing the particular management challenges, skills, and
practices associated with online learning.
The first section defines the theoretical framework for value
chain analysis, and highlights its strategic power. The second
section presents the online distance teaching value system and
market map. The third section discusses the methodology for constructing and using a value chain in an online learning institution.
The final section discusses the application of the value chain
framework to understanding developments at a particular distance
and online learning institution—Athabasca University. It also
considers limitations to and problems posed by value chain
Gaining a Competitive Advantage
The value chain framework is an approach for breaking down the
sequence (chain) of business functions into the strategically relevant
activities through which utility is added to products and services.
Value chain analysis is undertaken in order to understand the
behavior of costs and the sources of differentiation . In education, differentiation is achieved by
creating a perception among targeted learners that the course, the
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
program, or the university’s offerings as a whole are unique in some
important way, usually by being of higher quality. The appeal of
differentiation is strong for higher education institutions, for which
image and the perception of quality are important. This perception
allows the institution to charge higher tuition fees, and so to
outperform the competition in revenues without reducing costs
significantly.
Porter argued that a business can develop a sustainable
competitive advantage based on cost, differentiation, or both, as
shown in Figure 3-1.
To survive in today’s highly competitive business environment,
any organization must achieve, at least temporarily, a competitive
advantage. A low cost/price strategy focuses on providing goods or
services at a lower cost than the competition, or superior goods or
services at an equal cost. In education, it might be accomplished by
limiting programs and courses offerings, by reducing the
complexity of the course design and production process, or by
limiting service or learner support. This strategy requires as well a
tight cost-control system, benefiting from economies of scale in
production, and experience curve effects.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 3-1.
Developing
competitive
advantage.
Relative differentiation
Relative cost position
Differentiation
Differentiation and
cost advantage
Stuck-in-the-middle
Low cost advantage
Source: Shank and Govindarajan .
For example, at the University of Phoenix online (UOP),
managers determined that faculty, facilities, and support staff
accounted for a large portion of their costs. They targeted these
three components to make a dramatic reduction in their cost
structure. Almost all faculty members at UOP teach part time and
hold other full-time jobs. According to Jackson ,
faculty are paid U.S. $900-U.S. $1200 to teach a course, and are
expected to focus almost exclusively on teaching rather than on
other responsibilities that are common in most universities (student
advising, course creation, university management, research, and
community service). UOP estimates that faculty must spend 100
hours on their first course, less as they become more proficient
(referring to the learning curve benefits). Faculty at the University
of Phoenix are not provided with offices, thus reducing the
investment in buildings and the cost of operating them. UOP seems
to realize costs savings by marginalizing academics and reducing
their pay and advantages. On the other hand, there are few support
services for students, and the library is accessible only via the World
Wide Web, thus reducing dramatically the cost of housing books
and paying for professional support staff. UOP is an accredited
university . Courses and instructors are constantly
measured for both learning and student (customer) satisfaction.
Perhaps most critically, UOP has eliminated the role of research—
except as it affects online education—from the traditional role of
the University. UOP receives no government subsidies, has
consistently returned profits to its shareholder owners, and charges
competitive tuition rates. UOP uses a business approach rather than
an academic approach to education, and is one of the few
profitable for-profit universities in the U.S. .
The second strategy for gaining competitive advantage is
differentiation. The primary focus of this strategy is to create a
unique position in the market through provision of goods or
services that are valued for their uniqueness or fit to the needs of a
particular group of buyers. A differentiating strategy also requires
ongoing cost control efforts within a strategic management
emphasis geared towards differentiating offerings. For example, the
course package by itself could not provide competitive differentiated advantage, as it is fairly easy for other institutions to
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
duplicate it, either by buying it directly from the producing
institution, or by creating a very similar package. However, when
the services of highly competent academics and tutors, registry
staff, student advisors, and counselors are added, a strong and
unique bond can be created between the university and its learners.
This unique bond becomes a differentiating competitive advantage
when the institution subscribes to a vision of quality, support,
service, and excellence .
A vision of excellence for online learning institutions is not a
choice, but a market driven imperative. The institution cannot rely
upon the recruitment of learners within a geographic catchment
area, as can many campus-based institutions. In order to gain
global competitive advantage and respect, the online learning
institution must prove that it is an “excellent fit for purpose,” not
only for its suitability to its target market, but also for its strategic
and operational processes. Capella University Online is pursuing a
differentiation competitive advantage. Capella is “trying to provide
adult learners with programs that are going to have an immediate
impact in their work, that are going to provide sustained value to
them as professionals, that are based on what we call an intimate
learning experience” . To differentiate itself
from other online learning institutions, Capella uses the tag line
“Education. RebornSM” everywhere in its internal and external
public relation documents and Web sites.
Capella emphasizes competency-based learning, and targets
adult working learners seeking to have learning relevant to their
jobs. Capella has shaped its programs and courses to suit the very
particular needs of its learners. For example, Capella revamped its
MBA Program, introducing a unique component called the
“professional effectiveness” core that was developed as a result of
a market study conducted in 2001 of 37 U.S. companies. The
professional effectiveness core addresses perceived corporate
management needs with courses that focus on such issues as
building relationships, leading and facilitating change, leading
teams, and negotiating for results .
Capella re-enforced these offerings with a patented “Professional Effectiveness CoachingSM” process, encompassing two forms
of coaching. One is an in-course process, where learners do peer
coaching with each other; the other is one-on-one coaching, where
each learner has the option of choosing a certified coach, hired by
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Capella, to provide guidance in improving the learner’s “management effectiveness and apply new behaviors on the job” .
A third competitive strategy not depicted by Porter’s framework
is called focus: a strategy for targeting a very specific segment of the
market as defined, for example, by type of learner (e.g., Aboriginal
students), specific type of program offered, or specific
characteristics of a geographic area. This strategy is used to choose
market niches where competition is the weakest, or where the
online learning institution has a competitive advantage because of
technology or other forms of differentiation. The focused
institution succeeds by avoiding direct competition. It may also
have strong differentiation advantage, a low cost advantage, or
both, for its market segment. For example, professional organizations, such as the Certified General Accountants Association
(www.cga-canada.org), the Society of Management Accountants of
Canada (www.cma-canada.org), and Chartered Accountants
School of Business ( fall into this category of
focused competitive advantage.
Value Chain Analysis
Value chain analysis can help an institution determine which type
of competitive advantage to pursue, and how to pursue it. There
are two components of value chain analysis: the industry value
chain and the organization’s internal value chain. The industry
value chain is composed of all the value-creating activities within
the industry, beginning with the first step in the course development
process, and ending with the completed delivery of courses and
related services to the learner. Porter identified five
competitive forces interacting within a given industry: the intensity
of rivalry among existing competitors, the barriers to entry for new
competitors, the threat of substitute products and services, the
bargaining power of suppliers, and the bargaining power of buyers
(see Figure 3-2). Analyzing these forces will reveal the industry’s
fundamental attractiveness, expose the underlying drivers of
average industry profitability, and provide insight into how
profitability will evolve in the future, given different changes
among suppliers, channels, substitutes, competitors, or technology.
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
The structural attractiveness of the distance education industry
is also determined by the same five underlying forces. In 2001,
Porter argued that, while the Internet has helped distance education
to expand impressively, it has only changed the front end of the
industry process (p. 66).
Hence, the competitive attractiveness of online education can be
analyzed using Porter’s framework. The competitive forces
presented in Figure 3-2 show that deploying the Internet and other
ICTs within distance education has expanded the size of the
market, not only allowing access to greater markets but also
bringing many more companies into competition with one another.
This development can place intense demands on university
administrations to manage costs while ensuring quality education
and service . The pressure on
administrators comes from the changing cost structure that the
Internet and the use of ICTs produce; that is, a reduction in variable
costs and a tilting of cost structures towards fixed costs . In fact, compared to other distance education systems,
online learning requires a heavy investment in technology
(computers; servers; learning specific hardware; learning systems;
acquiring authoring development tools, delivery tools, and
collaboration tools; etc.) and also requires specialists (multimedia
instructional designers, Web designers, technologists, faculty, etc.)
to develop, run, and integrate mediated instructions. These two
major categories of costs are mainly fixed. On the other hand,
instructional materials are partially or totally digitized, thus
reducing variable costs. The concepts of fixed and variable costs
are central to cost analysis, in particular to understanding the
behavior of costs, and to cost/volume/profit (CVP) analysis.
CVP analysis is concerned with how profit is determined by sales
volume, sales price, variable expenses, and fixed expenses. A major
application of CVP is in breakeven analysis, which provides a
concise presentation of the relationship between cost and volume
changes, and their effect on profit. The breakeven point is the point
where total revenue equals total expenses, resulting in neither a
profit nor a loss. Once “breakeven” is achieved, net income will
increase by the contribution margin per unit for each additional
unit sold. From a managerial perspective, fixed costs increase the
risk to the company because they cannot be altered once incurred;
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Internet reduces differences among competitors;
migrates competition to price; increases the
number of competitors; lowers variable cost
relative to fixed cost, increasing pressures for
price discounting.
(substitutes can arise from
new generations of ICTs and
the proliferation of Internet
approaches)
Buyers of educational
(students can move
to other schools;
in online distance
education, students
can potentially enroll
at schools anywhere
in the world)
Internet reduces
switching costs and
shifts bargaining
power to the
Internet can expand the size of the
market. The pace of change in ICTs
creates new substitution threats.
Internet reduced barriers to entry as
investment in physical assets
became minimal.
Rivalry among current
competitors
(existing OL institutions
can provide better quality,
cheaper service, etc.)
New entrants
(new OL institution,
private and public,
entering “territory”)
Internet provides a
channel for suppliers
to reach end users.
Procurement over
the Internet raises
bargaining power
over suppliers,
reduces differentiation
because of the need
for standardization.
(especially in distance
education, suppliers
such as publishers,
professional organizations, and database
managers can produce
and market selflearning packages)
Source: Adapted from Porter 
and from Woudstra and Powell .
Figure 3-2.
Industry competitive
therefore, online learning increases the risk to the institution. This
kind of cost structure creates greater pressure for managers to
engage in destructive price competition.
To understand why managers adopt price competition strategies
when corporate cost structure is predominately fixed, it is necessary
to understand the concept of operating leverage. Operating
leverage is the measure of the extent to which fixed costs are being
used in an organization. Using fixed costs, managers apply
operating leverage to convert small changes in revenue to
significant changes in profitability. The idea of operating leverage
is consistent with the economies of scale concept developed by
economists to describe the fact that cost per unit can be reduced by
taking advantage of opportunities that become available as the size
of an operation increases.
The degree of operating leverage is very important to managers,
as it enables them to focus on the appropriate activities. For
example, when the company operates near the breakeven point,
managers should focus their attention on activities that increase
sales (hence, the destructive price strategy), because increased sales
will have a significant impact on profitability. On the other hand,
when the company operates far from the breakeven point, the focus
of managers should be oriented to cost control or new product
development.
Online Distance Teaching Value System and Market Map
Online learning institutions operate in an open system; therefore,
companies have more difficulty in maintaining proprietary offerings,
and require a sound strategic perspective to gain sustainable
competitive advantage. The Internet has intensified the competition
and rivalry among post-secondary institutions, especially in distance
education, where the pressure to enhance efficiency and effectiveness
is intense. While it is true that Internet and the use of ICT in distance
education have changed significantly the look and feel of the learning
experience, conventional factors, such as scale, the skills of personnel,
internal processes, and physical investments, remain a permanent
source of competitive advantage.
In online distance teaching organizations, many actors are involved
in the educational process: faculty, course coordinators, editors,
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
instructional designers, technology specialists, academic experts,
examination invigilators, and technical and other administrative
personnel who support the educational process. As these actors work
in administratively distinct units of the organization, intra- and interdepartmental linkages are critical to efficient and effective service in
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
Figure 3-3.
Online distance
teaching value system
and market map.
of content:
· publishers
· courseware
· learning
· programs
· off-the-shelf
· customized
· non credit/
· certification
Authoring &
development
· authoring
· multimedia
creation tools
· design tools
· html, xml,
java . . .
· consulting on strategy and deployment
· instructional design
· media design and development
· custom content development
· coaching, mentoring, instructing
· assessment and testing
· localization and globalization
· technical support services
Learning specific
· client/server
· peer-to-peer
· wireless
· PDA/cell phone
Enterprise
· Learning
Management
Systems (LMS)
· Learning
Management
· Knowledge
Management
Delivery &
collaboration
· live learning
· meeting and
collaboration
· threaded
discussion
educational
· Workplace
· Consumer
· Government
· Professional
organization
· International
constituencies
· Special needs
Suppliers value chains/Organization value chains/Channel value chains
Source: Adapted from Stacey .
online distance education organizations .
An online learning distance education institution is typically only a
part of the larger set of activities in what Porter calls the value
delivery system. As depicted in Figure 3-3, the value chain of an online
learning institution affects (and is affected by) others in the value
system, including publishers, providers of authoring and development
tools, enterprise systems, portals integrators, distributors and delivery
partners, suppliers, the government, other educational institutions,
and learners (buyers of educational services). In effect, each firm
establishes itself in one or more parts of the value system, on the basis
of a strategic analysis of its competitive advantage.
The application of the Internet and ICT to distance education is
enabling the integration of the industry’s entire value system; that is,
the set of value chains in an entire industry, encompassing those of
suppliers, channels, organizations, and buyers of educational services.
For example, an online learning organization can incorporate the
suppliers’ design capabilities to reach back to its suppliers’ value
chains to form linkages, improve response capabilities, share costs,
and gain competitive advantage . By
connecting various activities and players in the value system, the use
of Internet and ICT in distance education will optimize its workings,
including sourcing, production, delivery, and service to students.
The value chain framework highlights how the online learning
institution’s offerings fit into the learner’s value chain. When Capella
University launched its revamped Online MBA, with its unique
“professional effectiveness” component, the intention was to fit this
program into buyers’ specific program and organizational needs.
Value chain analysis explicitly recognizes the fact that the various
activities within a firm are not independent, but rather, interdependent. By recognizing interdependencies, value chain analysis
admits to the possibility that deliberately increasing costs in one value
activity may bring about a reduction in total costs. For example, the
extra money spent in creating or buying a high-quality self-contained
course might reduce the cost of student support and overall cost as
well. The next sections discuss value chain analysis and methodology.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Value Chain Analysis and Methodology
The internal value chain of an online learning institution consists of
all physically and technologically distinct activities within the
institution that add value to the learner’s experience. The key to
analyzing the value chain is understanding the activities within the
institution that create a competitive advantage, and then managing
those activities better than other institutions in the industry. Porter
 suggested that the activities of a business can be grouped
under two headings: primary activities, those that are directly
involved with the physical creation and delivery of the product or
service; and support activities, which feed both into primary
activities and into each other. Support activities (e.g., human
resource management, technology development) are not directly
involved in production, but have the potential to increase effectiveness and efficiency. It is rare for an organization to undertake
all primary and support activities. Value chain analysis is thus a
means for examining internal processes and identifying which
activities are best provided by others. Figure 3-4 presents a generic
value chain adapted for an online learning institution.
Support activities consist of
1. organizational infrastructure, which is concerned with a wide
range of support systems and functions, such as finance,
planning, quality control, and general senior management.
2. human resource management, dealing with those activities
concerned with recruiting, developing, motivating, and
rewarding the workforce of the organization.
3. technology development, dealing with those activities concerned
with managing information processing and the development and
protection of "knowledge" in the organization.
4. procurement, which deals with how resources are acquired for
the organization (e.g., sourcing and negotiating with suppliers).
The overall primary structure in an online distance education
organization such as the UK Open University ( 
.ac.uk) or Athabasca University ( can be
described in terms of five sectors: inbound logistics, production,
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
outbound logistics, delivery and marketing, and service to learners.
These sectors are discussed briefly below.
Inbound logistics involves preparations for course development,
including curriculum planning; acquiring or preparing for learning
specific hardware (LSH), learning management systems (LMS), and
learning content management systems (LCMS); hiring of authors;
ordering of reference materials, including textbooks; and formation
of internal course teams.
Operations involve the actual process of course development,
including writing, multimedia creation, editing, formatting, graphic
design, printing, and Web publishing.
Outbound logistics concerns the packaging and storage of
courses, and the process of mailing or otherwise delivering the
material to the students. Providing registered students with access
to their courses through an integrated portal where they can
retrieve customized and relevant information about their account is
another aspect of outbound logistics. Student portals are important
for online learning, as they help build a virtual campus community.
In one secure place, a student can access their account to register in
a course, order a transcript, ask for student financial aid, access the
library and bookstore, and benefit from a variety of student
orientation tools, including advising, support, counseling, and
other resources.
The university enters into a contract for tuition and other
services with a student when they register in a particular course. A
registration is considered a sale, as funds change hands for access
to the course and for purchase of the learning materials. The core
revenue stream of the online learning institution derives from the
provision of learning; therefore, tuition is often considered the
main source of revenue for such institutions. Other sources of
revenue include government funding; sales of in-house-developed
products, design tools, and databases; and provision of other
services to students (e.g., admission, contract extension, transcripts, challenge fees).
The preparation of brochures, advertising materials, and the
university calendar is the traditional and main marketing strategy
to promote the university’s offerings. Given the nature of online
learning, the online university must craft a branding strategy to
communicate the benefits, attributes, culture, and competitive
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 3-4.
(opposite)
Online learning
value chain.
· Learning Specific
Hardware (LSH)
(client/server,
peer-to-peer)
· Learning
Management
Systems (LMS)
· Learning Content
Management
Systems (LCMS)
· Knowledge
Management
· Real-time
integrated
scheduling of
· Dissemination of
real-time inbound
inventory data
· Hiring of authors
· Authoring tools
Operations
instructional
· Content (learning
objects, units,
· Courseware,
study guide, and
student manual
development
· Formatting
· Capture and edit
· Multimedia
· Graphic design
· Printing
· Integrated
information
scheduling, inhouse course
production,
contract SMEs,
and publishers
· Real time
transaction of
registration
· Integrated portal
· Packaging and
storage of courses
· Learner access to
course (Web
access or mail
· Integrated
management
(process control)
· Automated
learner specific
account and
contract terms
· Real-time
information
available to
advisors PR, and
Delivery (sales),
collaboration
and marketing
· Live learning
· Virtual classroom
· Course delivery
· Threaded
discussion
· Audio/video
· Real time access
to student
information,
calendar, fees,
course availability
· Real-time learner
feedback through
Web surveys and
response tracking
· Branding
· Entering strategic
partnership
communities
· Online support
of learners
· Coaching,
· Assessment
and testing
· Technical and
support services
· Learner selfservice via Web
intelligent service
processing
· Real-time field
service access to
account/courses
reviews, etc.
· Localization and
globalization
· Tutor support
· Academic
experts/marking
· Counseling
· Granting awards
Organizational
infrastructure
· Web-based,
distributed financial
and ERP systems
· Online learner
relations (e.g.,
information
dissemination . . . )
Human resource
management
· Self-service personnel
and benefits
administration
· Web-based training
· Internet-based sharing
and dissemination
of organization
information
· Electronic time and
expense reporting
Technology
development
· Collaborative
course/program design
across locations and
among multiple valuesystem participants
· Knowledge directories
accessible from all
parts of the
organization
Procurement
· Internet-enabled
demand planning; realtime available/capable
of promise and fulfillment
· Other linkage of
purchase, inventory,
and forecasting systems
with suppliers
· Automated “requisition
to pay” and “expense
claim” systems
· Direct and indirect
procurement via
marketplaces,
exchanges, and
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES
PRIMARY ACTIVITIES
Generation of knowledge and research
Source: Adapted from Porter .
advantage of the institution and its unique online learning
offerings; it must also establish strategic partnerships and alliances
that are able to give the institution a unique position in the minds
of stakeholders.
The service sector provides online support (technical and
academic) to learners, counseling, tutoring, marking of assignments
and examinations, delivery and invigilation of examinations, and
maintenance of student records. It also includes learner self-service
through Web sites and Web portals.
It may seem surprising that research is not mentioned explicitly
as a sector in the value chain, especially as research has
traditionally been considered a primary function of universities,
one perceived by academics and the public as a value adding
activity, as it helps the university to make a significant contribution
to society. As you can see in Figure 3-4, however, research and the
generation of knowledge are components of many value chain
activities. Research is an essential element in all world-class universities. It ensures a vibrant academic environment, and enables the
university to attract and retain good faculty, while building a strong
academic reputation and contributing to the continual improvement of curriculum, learning systems, and programs.
A value chain analysis explicitly recognizes the interdependencies and the profit cost efficiencies accruing from
exploiting linkages among value activities across the organization.
For example, the timing of promotional campaigns (one value
activity) significantly influences capacity use in course production
and operations (another value activity). These linked activities must
be coordinated if the full effect of the promotion is to be realized.
Promoting a new program while a number of required program
courses are unavailable will damage the image of the institution
and result in lost registrations (revenue). Consider also that a welldesigned course (one value activity) will lose value if not
complemented with a suitable delivery strategy (a second value
activity), and by a well-thought-out student support strategy (a
third value activity). By focusing on such linkages, the value chain
analysis provides a powerful tool for strategic thinking to gain
sustainable competitive advantage.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Value Chain Methodology
The methodology for constructing and using a value chain involves
four steps: identify value chain activities, determine which value
chain activities are strategic, trace costs to value chain activities,
and use the activity cost information to manage the strategic value
chain activities. An organization that can do these things better
than its competitors creates a sustainable competitive advantage.
Identify Internal Value Chain Activities
To identify its internal value chain activities, the online learning
institution should first look for discrete activities that create value in
fundamentally different ways. Figure 3-4 lists a set of discrete
activities, such as course design, online registration, program and
course promotion, counseling, etc. Each of these activities has
distinctively different costs, cost drivers, and assets, involves different
personnel, and creates value in a fundamentally different way.
Second, when identifying value chain activities, the institution
should take a broad view of the organization’s activities. To gain an
understanding of this big picture, the institution should identify
and separate out three categories of value chain activities:
structural, procedural, and operational .
Structural activities, such the number and location of satellite
campuses and learning centers, or the number of course production
facilities, determine the underlying economic nature of the online
learning institution. Procedural activities, such as total quality
management, or awarding degrees and diplomas, pervade all aspects
of the institution operation and reflect the organization’s ability to
perform processes efficiently and effectively. Finally, operational
activities, such as course production, instructional design, printing,
and teaching are the day-to-day activities of the institution.
Third, the institution should focus on structural and procedural
activities. Most traditional cost management efforts concentrate on
operational activities that have unit- or batch-driven costs. These
traditional cost control efforts can be relatively easy to initiate, but
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
may be too narrow in focus, because they seek to control short-run
operational costs. If competition is intense, then controlling shortrun operational cost is necessary but may be insufficient. It is
important to identify, and then focus management attention on, the
organizational and procedural cost drivers, because they often
represent the long-run strategic drivers of organizational cost. It is
likely that such activities will be the source of an institution’s
competitive advantage.
Determine Which Activities Are Strategic
To determine which of the value chain activities are strategic, the
online learning institution must begin by identifying the characteristics of its services that are valued by existing learners, and the
characteristics that the organization can best exploit to create value
for future learners. These characteristics may include quality, perfect
fit to specific learners’ needs, student support, or any other tangible
or intangible feature of the institution’s offerings.
After identifying the distinctive characteristics of its offerings,
the institution should find out which specific activities in the
organization are responsible for creating those characteristics. The
identified activities represent the most important value chain
activities, or in other words, the strategic value chain activities that
provide a competitive advantage.
For example, Athabasca University, a not-for-profit university is
seeking to gain competitive advantage by meeting student’s needs.
The university provides students with open access, flexible learning
systems (with continuous enrollment and flexible completion times
for undergraduate courses), and high-quality courses, programs,
and student support services. Therefore, the activities considered
strategic within the University include developing a wide variety of
new undergraduate and graduate programs; promoting courses and
programs; seeking new partners for strategic alliances and collaborations; targeting and attracting students identified with
traditionally under-represented groups; reducing traditional barriers to access (e.g., residency); offering prior learning assessment
and different and flexible course delivery modes (e.g., individualized home study, electronic, etc.); and integrating appropriate
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
technologies into course development, delivery, student support,
and administrative systems.
After identifying strategic value chain activities, the institution
must identify the non-strategic activities as well. These remaining
value chain activities are important, but they do not represent the
sources of strategic advantage for the organization.
For example, the role of research remains a contentious issue
among universities when attempting to differentiate between
strategic and non-strategic activities. For many, pursuit of new
knowledge through research is a critical and defining feature of the
University. However, research is expensive and is more often associated with a de-emphasis on quality of teaching than one might
expect, given the often strongly held belief that research enhances
the quality of teaching . A metadata
analysis of research on the relationship between quality learning
and teaching concluded that “the likelihood that research
productivity actually benefits teaching is extremely small . . . the
two, for all practical purposes, are essentially unrelated” . Universities that use faculty from other
institutions to create and deliver courses thus have considerable
cost advantages, but they may be vulnerable to criticism and lack
of public support as a result of a perception that they make a
smaller contribution to society because of their neglect of the
traditional research function of the University. Thus for some
universities, research is viewed as a non-strategic activity, whereas
for many others, research remains a core strategic value. Athabasca
University has attempted to strike a balance by supporting a core
research faculty with a special emphasis on research on the core
strategic activity of the university—teaching and learning at a
Trace Costs to Activities
Each value activity incurs costs, generates revenues, and ties up
assets. After identifying the value chain and its strategic and nonstrategic activities, one must assign operating costs, revenues, and
assets to individual activities. The accounting system should be
designed to accomplish this task. One technique developed to aid
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
the process of allocating costs to the appropriate value chain
activities cost is activity-based costing (ABC) .
Identifying the value chain activity cost drivers is a way of
understanding cost behavior and identifying strategic and nonstrategic activities. However, managers must keep in mind the
broader framework of the value chain as a whole. What is more
useful in a strategic sense is to explain cost position in terms of
structural choices, procedural practices, and operational skills
 .
Figure 3-5 provides some examples of structural, procedural, and
operational activities for an online learning institution, including
possible cost drivers for each. It is important to note that, for
strategic analysis, volume is usually not the most useful way to
explain cost behavior. Financial and non-financial measures and cost
drivers both lagging (those that result from past actions) and leading
(those that inform future performance) are important. The Balanced
Scorecard Framework provides senior
managers with a focus on the organization’s vision and strategy,
helps them communicate strategy throughout the organization, links
strategic objectives to long-term targets, and helps managers create
consensus on organization competitive advantages.
Improve Management of Value Chain Analysis
Organizations achieve a competitive advantage by managing the
value chain better than other institutions in their industry.
Managing the value chain implies increasing the quality of
products and services, while reducing the institution’s costs and
increasing revenue, thus increasing competitive advantage.
Examining a firm’s value chain and comparing it to those of key
rivals indicates areas of cost advantage or disadvantage. An online
learning institution’s decision to undertake certain activities is
directly linked to achieving competitive advantage. For example, a
school wishing to outperform its competitors by differentiating
itself through higher quality will have to perform its value chain
activities better than the competition. By contrast, a strategy based
on seeking cost leadership will require a reduction in the costs
associated with the value chain activities, or a reduction in the total
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
COST DRIVERS
number and
location of satellite
campuses, number
of industry and
social segments in
which the institution
is present, number
of students or
registrations
types of process
technologies
number of different
courses and
debt level, debt
capacity, tax status
(favorable or
unfavorable)
effectiveness of
professional training,
team building,
knowledge sharing,
economies of scale
VALUE CHAIN ACTIVITIES
Structural activities
Manage location and articulate
strategy. Location and strategic choices
need constant articulation and are
considered cost drivers. Activities in
this category include framing the
market opportunity, managing the
scope of the market, managing the
value proposition, managing the
organization’s unique resource system,
articulating the financial model, and
managing integration (vertical or
horizontal).
Manage technology. What process
does the online learning institution use
to manage its technology through the
value chain? The level of expertise and
effectiveness of use, compared to
competitors, will affect overall
organization-level costs.
Manage complexity of university
offerings. The breadth of the programs
and courses being offered is an
important driver of costs.
Manage institutional structure.
Financial structure, accountability, and
debt level affect many costs and the
organization’s flexibility.
Gain experience, learn, and manage
skill sets. An organization’s learning,
growth, experience, and application of
that experience drive significant
portion of cost. For example, when a
university lacks experience in
developing online courses, this fact
would be a significant driver of its
online course introduction costs.
Figure 3-5.
Examples of value
chain activities and
cost drivers.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Manage and support research
activities. This activity requires that the
institution develop, promote, and
support an active research culture;
network with funding agencies,
government departments, companies,
and other potential sources of funding;
and support the development and
enhance the reputation of the
university’s research profile.
Procedural activities
Provide quality. Quality management
training, quality standards, and
employee empowerment are directly
related to overall organizational
Manage employees. Management
determines employee-grouping
schemes, including the degree of
centralization of authority, size of work
unit, and number of work units. The
work environment and climate are also
managed through the extent and nature
of training, degree of employee
empowerment, maintenance of a
networked working environment, and
other factors.
Manage capacity. Capacity utilization
may be considered a strategic driver of
cost of organizational offerings.
Unused capacity must be dealt with
through efforts to bring more students
to the institution, reducing the capacity
(if possible), changing some capacity
constraining policies, or a combination
of these strategies.
amount of external
funding; number of
successful research
publications; impact
of research on
learning, teaching,
and support services;
number of graduate
employee training
level, student drop
out rate, student
satisfaction
employee morale
and satisfaction
level, turnover rate,
span of command
percentage of course
development capacity utilization, percentage of delivery
capacity utilization,
percentage of tutorial
system capacity
utilization, discretionary policies
restraining capacity
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
Manage efficiency. There are many
type of efficiency, but this activity
represents a broad perspective of
efficiency, including efficiency in
program and course introduction, and
overall course production, delivery,
and student support.
Manage course complexity. Given the
breadth of offerings for the online
learning institution, procedures must
be in place to control the complexity
of the course design, production,
delivery, and service to student.
Operational activities
Manage course production. The actual
process of course development
including writing, multimedia creation,
editing, formatting, graphic design,
printing, and Web publishing
Manage inbound logistics. Preparation
for course development, including
curriculum planning; acquiring or
preparing for learning specific
hardware (LSH), learning management
systems (LMS), and learning content
management systems (LCMS); hiring of
authors; ordering of reference
materials, including textbooks; and
formation of internal course teams.
lead time from
program or
course concept
to up-andrunning offering,
availability
use of learning
repository,
components, and
authoring and
development
of faculty,
instructional
designers,
editors, graphic
hardware and
availability (LSH,
LMS, LCMS),
procurement,
set-ups, number
of direct-labour
Source: Adapted from Donelan and Kaplan .
amount of resources used. An online learning institution might also
choose to follow a focus strategy by targeting a specific market
segment or a specific offering.
In controlling costs in a value chain, managers try to answer the
questions given below.
• Can we reduce costs in this activity, holding value (revenue,
service, credibility, etc.) constant?
• Can we increase value in this activity, holding costs constant?
• Can we reduce assets in this activity, holding costs and value
(revenue, service, credibility, etc.) constant?
Costs for an activity can be reduced only if the reduction does
not adversely affect strategic advantage. For example, an acrossthe-board spending cut may result in a short-run cost reduction,
but it could be a disastrous long-run strategy. Reducing spending
on course design and development could reduce course quality,
increase overall production costs, and delay the scheduling of new
courses. Benchmarking against similar institutions is another way
to gain cost advantage, acquire good practices, and create differentiation advantage . Thus, internal value
chain analysis makes one thing clear: value chain activities are
interrelated, and no activity should be managed independently
without considering its impact on all other activities.
Concluding Remarks
Chapter Summary
The use of value chain analysis facilitates the strategic management
of an organization. Michael Porter’s seminal work in strategic
management explains the fundamentals of how organizations
compete. The three main types of competitive strategy are cost
leadership, differentiation, and focus. Cost leadership is a strategy
that relies on lowest-cost production and delivery, while
differentiation relies on outstanding quality or product (program/
course) features. The focus strategy relies on differentiation or cost
leadership for a particular product or market niche.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Value chain analysis is a framework that can provide a number
of benefits to the management of online learning organizations.
This analysis can help managers of these organizations to identify
linkages between value activities within the organization, and to
think in terms of process rather than function or department.
Through analysis of the value system, managers can identify
potentials for strategic alliances with various actors in the industry
value system. Identification of cost drivers and linkage with value
chain activities help managers focus on cost reduction and on
finding ways to optimize returns throughout the value chain. As
well, value chain analysis helps managers understand cost
management problems. Failure to see the impact of a decision on
the overall value chain will result in missed opportunities.
The value chain framework allows online learning organizations
to break down the chain—from basic infrastructure and support,
to content development, to student support and service—into
strategically relevant activities to understand the behavior of costs
and the sources of differentiation. The online learning organization
is typically only one part of the larger set of activities in the value
delivery system. Gaining and sustaining a competitive advantage
requires that the organization understands the entire value delivery
system, not just the portion of the value chain in which it
participates. Suppliers and distribution channels have profit
margins that must be identified if one is to understand an organization’s cost or differentiation positioning, because the end-users
(learners) ultimately pay for all the profit margins throughout the
value chain. An example of an online learning university value
chain and illustrations of how value chain analysis can improve the
management of the university value chain activities follows.
A Value Chain Example: Athabasca University
Woudstra and Powell presented an interesting analysis of
the value chain of Athabasca University. They divided the University’s primary activities into five fairly discrete chains as depicted in
Figure 3-6.
The five value activity chains are supplemented and supported by
many others in the areas identified as “support activities” in the
generic value chain depicted in Figure 3-4. The primary chains
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
themselves can be subdivided into smaller and smaller chains,
depending on the detail of analysis required. As value chain analysis
shows patterns within and relationships among primary and support
activity chains, it becomes a helpful tool for coping with change.
The discussion below provides some examples of decisions and
projects undertaken at Athabasca University in the last few years,
and considers how they have affected the performance of the
institution’s value chain.
• Improving course availability and quality through a problemsolving approach in the course development process and
production value chain (for examples, see the discussions in all
of the chapters in Part 3 of this volume).
• Improving the quality of service to students through the
improvement of turnaround in assignment and examination
marking. Besides expanding the use of communications
technologies, Athabasca University looked at training and
empowerment to provide employees with the skills and
authority to affect these factors. The creation of a call center
 that responds to and tracks student,
academic, technical, and administrative requests serves this
objective as well (see Chapter 12 of this volume). Athabasca
University’s Tutorial Services Department plays an integrative
role in this process. This department has its primary function in
the course delivery chain, but also performs some support
activities through its involvement in the hiring of tutors, and in
maintaining and developing tutorial policy. Finally, it
participates in the marketing area through its field officers, who
contract with outside agencies and partners for collaborative
delivery of courses.
• Working with suppliers of telecommunications, publishing,
authoring, development, and other suppliers to digitize the
University’s authoring, publishing, and printing processes. In
addition, the University is establishing liaisons with publishers
to gain access to their learning materials and Web sites, so that
their materials can be customized, adapted, and integrated more
easily into Athabasca University’s course offerings.
• Focusing the electronic student support services on the needs of
individual learners by implementing U-portal technology that
enables the creation of individual “My AU” entry points to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
online student services, and by launching an online, Webinterfaced registration system (see Chapter 15 of this volume).
• Integrating appropriate technologies into course development,
delivery, student support, and administrative systems by
developing and implementing annual, three-year operational
Online Learning, Student Services, and Systems Development
Other initiatives include linking curriculum to students’
priorities by ensuring that the curriculum is relevant to diverse
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
development
& production
editing, and
printing. The
package is
assembled by
components
available to
the course
Admissions
The admission and
credit transfer chain
provides a
service to
assessment
education is
mandatory.
registration
& materials
Begins with
application
to register for
a particular
course, which
triggers the
release of a
package of
course materials to be
sent to the
student. The
student is also
assigned a
This chain is
accomplished
by the call
center, telephone tutors
markers, and
the course
coordinator.
Examinations
are issued
and marked
centrally.
Some student
services and
counseling
activities are
The production of the
university
and materials
the university
Included in
this chain are
activities by
cooperative
arrangements,
Source: Adapted from Woudstra and Powell .
Figure 3-6.
Athabasca University’s
value chain.
student populations; and increasing linkages in program
development, delivery, and administrative systems, and in research
agendas, both between undergraduate and graduate centers, and
across graduate centers. These internal collaborations are designed
to maximize synergies and facilitate cross-fertilization of best
practices.
Value Chain Analysis Challenges
There are several challenges in using value chain analysis. First,
traditional accounting systems are not designed for classifying costs
by value activities. But with newer accounting systems, such as those
based upon activity-based costing, this type of cost classification
problem can be solved. Furthermore, some online learning
institutions may have very complex value chains, a fact that makes
the analysis difficult. Some would even argue that strategic management is unsuitable for knowledge-based organizations . We argue that online learning institutions possess characteristics very similar to those of industrial organizations, and that,
therefore, strategic planning is essential to their operations and their
survival. Value chain analysis is an important tool for strategic
management, and when competition is intense, companies must
manage activities and costs strategically, or they will lose their
competitive advantage.
The model presented in this chapter originated from strategic
management theory and has been proven very effective in the
corporate world. The industry of online learning is an open market
for both for-profit and not-for-profit organizations. According to
Michael Brennen , Online Learning Research Manager at
International Data Corporation, spending on online learning
within corporations will jump from $3.65 billion to $12.98 billion
Sensing a market opportunity, for-profit universities, such as the
University of Phoenix and Capella University, also target working
adult students with online programs. Added to this mix of providers are the technology companies that offer Web-based continuing education, and traditional publishers that offer product
certification courses, and Web-portal companies that aggregate
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
course content from other content sources. A potentially lucrative
and very competitive market has emerged.
In this environment, not-for-profit universities have little choice
but to play by the same rules that govern for-profit universities.
Value chain analysis may play a significant role in enabling them to
do so. A not-for-profit university must satisfy funding authorities,
political leaders, and the general public as to its effectiveness and
efficiency. Value chain analysis can be used for determining at what
point costs can be reduced or value added in the organization’s value
chain. A not-for profit organization must continually prove that it is
serving specific public needs identified in its mission statement. The
organization must also develop its various resources, and use them
effectively and efficiently, and to demonstrate its ability to manage
its operating systems successfully by delivering a quality service to
the public served. The value chain analysis is a useful framework to
facilitate these requirements.
References
Adria, M., & Woudstra, A. . Who's on the line? Managing
student communications in distance learning using a onewindow approach. Open Learning, 16(3), 249-261.
Alley, L. R. . Sustainable global development of human and
economic resources through lifelong continuous learning and
personal knowledge-management. European Journal of Higher
Education, 1-12.
Ally, M. . Foundations of educational theory for online
learning. In T. Anderson & F. Elloumi (Eds.), Theory and practice
of online learning (pp. 3-31). Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University.
Athabasca University. (N.d.). Home page. Retrieved December 18,
2003, from 
Athabasca University. . Athabasca University Strategic
University Plan, 2002-2006. Retrieved October 18, 2003, from
 
Bates, A. W. . Managing technological change: Strategies for
college and university leaders. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
Brennen, M. . Corporate e-learning market forecast, 2001-
2005. Unpublished manuscript.
Carlson, S., & Carnevale, S. . Debating the
demise of NYU on-line. The Chronicle of Higher Education,
Carnevale, D. . Accrediting panel grants
candidate status to Western Governors U. The Chronicle of
Higher Education, A51.
Certified General Accountants Association. . Home page.
Retrieved December 18, 2003, from www.cga-canada.org
Chartered Accountants School of Business. . Home page.
Retrieved December 18, 2003, from 
Cooper, R. . Cost classifications in unit-based and
activity-based manufacturing cost systems. Journal of Cost
Management, 4-14.
Cooper, R. . Explicating the logic of ABC.
Management Accounting, 58-60.
Cooper, R. . Activity-based costing: Theory and practice. In
B. J. Brinker, J. G. Kammlade, C. Marx, G. Eiler, & L. S. Maisel
(Eds.), Handbook of cost management (B1-B33). (S.p.): Warren,
Gorham and Lamont.
Cooper, R., & Kaplan, R. S. . Activity-based
systems: Measuring the costs of resource usage. Accounting
Horizons, 1-13.
Donelan, J. G., & Kaplan, E. A. , Value chain
analysis: A strategic approach to cost management. Journal of
Cost Management, 7-15.
Gilbert, A. D. . The idea of a university: Enterprise or
academy. Manning Clark Symposium. Retrieved December 18,
2003, from 
Hattie, J., & Marsh, H. W. . The relationship between
research and teaching: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational
Research, 66(4), 507-542.
Jackson, G. B. . University of Phoenix: A new model for
tertiary education in developing countries? TechKnowLogia,
2(1), 34-37.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Jackson, N., & Lund, H. . Benchmarking for higher
education. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Kaplan, R. S., & Norton, D. P. . The
balanced scorecard: Measures that drive performance. Harvard
Business Review, 71-79.
Kilmurray, J. . E-learning: It’s more than automation. The
Technology Source. Retrieved September 20, 2003, from http://
ts.mivu.org/default.asp?show=article&id=1014&action
Lorenzo, G. . Story of a for-profit. Educational Pathways,
2(4). 1-8.
Moran, C. . Strategic information technology planning in
higher education. In D. Oblinger & S. Rush (Eds.), The future
compatible campus (pp. 151-163). Bolton, MA: Anker.
Open University (N.d.). Home page. Retrieved October 17, 2003,
from 
Pocklington, T., & Tupper, A. . No place to learn: Why
universities aren't working. Vancouver: UBC Press.
Pister, K. . The university of the future: Place, process or
paradigm. In J. Brennan, J. Fedrowitz, M. Huber, & T. Shah
(Eds.), What kind of university? International perspectives on
knowledge, participation and governance (pp. 229-239).
Buckingham, UK: SRHE and Open University Press.
Porter, M. . Competitive strategy. New York: The Free Press.
Porter, M. . Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining
superior performance. New York: The Free Press.
Porter, M. . Strategy and the Internet. Harvard Business
Review, 79(3), 62-78.
Riley, D. . Competitive cost based investment strategies for
industrial companies. In Manufacturing Issues (pp. 30-34). New
York: Booz, Allen, and Hamilton.
Scott, P. . Decline or transformation? The future of the
university in a knowledge economy and a post-modern world. In
P. Baggen, A. Tellings, & W. van Haaften (Eds.), The university
and the knowledge society (pp. 7-13). Bemmel-London-Paris:
Concorde Publishing House.
Shank, J. K., & Govindarajan, V. . Strategic cost management: The new tool for competitive advantage. New York: The
Free Press.
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
Society of Management Accountants of Canada. .
Home page. Retrieved December 18, 2003, from www.cmacanada.org
Stacey, P. . E-learning value chain and market map.
Retrieved September 20, 2003, from 
.com/statics/bcelearning.swf
University of Phoenix . Home page. Retrieved October 16,
2003, from 
Woudstra, A., & Adria, M. . Organizing for the new
network and virtual forms of distance education. In M. Moore
(Ed.), Handbook of distance education (pp. 531-47). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Woudstra, A., & Powell, R. . Value chain analysis: A
framework for management of distance education, The American Journal of Distance Education, 3(3), 7-21.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Value Chain Analysis: A Strategic Approach to Online Learning
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Infrastructure
and Support
for Content
Development
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 4
DEVELOPING AN INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR ONLINE LEARNING
Alan Davis
Athabasca University
Introduction
In 1995, distance learners at Athabasca University (AU) were
surveyed about their access to and use of computers in their
learning. About 25% of those surveyed responded to the effect that
they had access to a computer and to the Internet. Interested staff
members considered this proportion high enough to push ahead
with all sorts of computer-based learning initiatives. By 2002, the
number of students with access to the World Wide Web had grown
to 93%, and the pioneers were smugly standing by watching their
colleagues reinvent “the online learning wheel” . It was planned that, by 2003, as a result of the
implementation of an e-learning plan, AU would officially be an
“online” institution . As is the case
with many other institutions and organizations, much has changed
in a very short time.
Online learning is now becoming ubiquitous at all levels of
education, in all institutions of learning, and in the workplace.
Distance education has been at the vanguard of these developments, but campus-based students are also mixing and matching
their classroom and online learning in all sorts of often unanticipated ways.
Building the infrastructure for online learning requires that
many factors be considered, so it is difficult to provide a straightforward checklist or recipe to follow. All educational endeavors are
systems, made up of various interconnected components. In traditional universities and colleges, teachers can be unaware of all the
complexities involved, but in distance education, understanding
how the entire system of course development and delivery occurs,
and how these systems link to services and other components are
vital aspects of ensuring effectiveness and quality.
Scientists often classify systems as “ideal” versus “non-ideal”
(more commonly understood as “real”). If we apply this concept
here, we can define the ideal, and then look at the deviations from
ideality that manifest themselves in the real .
The ideal online learning and teaching system is one that is
developed from scratch, without restriction on costs and staffing,
and uninhibited by resistance to change from previous practices. A
real system, however, is one where any or all of the following
deviations from the ideal occur: limited resources, legacy systems
that have loyal advocates, key staff who must be retrained,
unworkable policies and practices that you never knew existed,
inadequate governance processes, administrative systems that might
or might not be made to work with the new systems, etc.
Furthermore, after these deviations from the ideal are factored in,
curricula, online learning technologies and approaches evolve all the
time, and therefore any real system must also be able to change
constantly.
In this paper, therefore, the key aspects of an ideal online
learning infrastructure are described and then adjusted for real
situations, and some ideas are presented on how subsequent and
inevitable change can be managed.
Basic Thinking
Any system is built in a context, and for any online learning endeavor, each discipline, department, faculty, institution, or
company will have a mandate, a mission, specific goals, and values
that have to be considered when planning and designing an ideal
system. For a real system, even at this conceptual level, there will
be many other internal and external environmental factors, such as
competing priorities, budget constraints, professional group
requirements, and so on. All of these factors must be well understood and accounted for at the outset.
All teaching and learning systems should be built on two
foundations: the needs of the intended students, and the learning
outcomes of the course or program (i.e., the knowledge, skills, and
attributes that students want). An ideal online learning system will
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
be based on a plan that flows from a full understanding of these
two fundamentals.
An understanding of the technological background of the
intended students is crucial, including their expectations, their
financial and other resources, their access to the Web or other
online networks, their bandwidth limitations, and any other
pertinent information about their preparedness and ability to
participate equally and fully in the learning experience. In reality,
of course, such a complete picture is rarely available, and a
judgment call must be made on how much the system employs
technologies that we know the students are familiar with and have
access to, versus those that are new and unfamiliar, but are
expected to become widely available. A good example is the extent
to which distance students have access to high-speed connectivity.
Since this access is expanding, an organization might choose to use
a system that requires high bandwidth, and to provide alternative
access to the online learning components (e.g., by CD-ROM) to the
declining number not yet served by high speed systems.
Considerations of student demographics and other factors would,
of course, affect the timing of such a decision.
The clear identification of the learning outcomes of a course, a
program, or a training event of any kind is useful in many ways: in
the design of a learning assessment system, in determining the
degree of prior learning considered necessary, and in measuring the
quality of the offering. In applied and professional fields, describing the intent of the educational experience in terms of the
knowledge, skills, and attributes expected of a successful completer
is fairly routine, and a curriculum and associated teaching and
learning system can be devised and cross-referenced with those
ends clearly in mind.
In academic fields (the “real” world in this context), such
outcomes are not often so well or explicitly stated. For example, all
programs claim to develop critical thinking skills, but few define
those skills, identify what taxonomy is used to determine the extent
of their achievement, or discuss exactly how the content and
program design link to them. If the ability to work in groups is an
outcome, or the ability to undertake independent research from a
wide range of resources, or the ability to make critical analyses of
case studies, then these goals will drive the design and functionality
of the online learning system needed to deliver that curriculum.
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
Having comprehensive and clearly stated learning outcomes, and a
curriculum and associated teaching approaches that are designed to
meet these outcomes, makes the task of building the ideal online
learning system much easier. If well-expressed learning outcomes
are not available, at least some understanding of, and linking with,
good principles of teaching and learning should be in place
 .
Closely related to these two foundations (intended students and
learning outcomes) is the size and scalability of the online learning
system. Whether the program is to be delivered to a well-defined
and selected cohort of students once a year, or is to be made
available to all comers (as driven by mandate or a business plan
predicated on growth) will have a strong impact on how the system
is designed.
The real situation, of course, is much less rational. Online
learning initiatives often spring from the experimentation of an
individual educator or a small group of educators and technologists
who sometimes have no clear idea of what benefit (if any) the
experiment will bring to the learning experience, but who are well
intentioned nonetheless. The addition of a new functionality, new
content, or a new tool sometimes does not add value and is ignored
by students, but in other cases, a simple enhancement can reap
great educational and other rewards for all concerned, and
sometimes in unanticipated ways. The degree to which an organization (department, faculty, company, or institution) wants to
foster and allow experimentation, versus keeping tight control over
a single online learning system, will be driven by its mission,
mandate, core values, and financial resources. There are interesting
case studies of how institutions have adopted various strategies, intentionally or not, along this centralization/decentralization spectrum [see International Review of Research in Open and Distance
Learning, 1(2) ]. The decision is a very important one,
however, because it will determine how the online learning system
is to be designed, developed, resourced, and governed.
Even where the student market is well understood and learning
outcomes are clearly defined or prescribed, the implementation of
online learning often involves a good deal of trial and error. With
the best information and intentions, the results and experience
rarely meet expectations, and thus the ability to adapt and refine
the online learning system is crucial.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Overall Structure and Organization
The ideal case is based upon a good understanding of an institution
or company’s core business and values, of the nature of the
intended student market, and of the needs of the curriculum. This
understanding is expressed through the learning outcomes of the
program to be developed and delivered. On this basis, an overall
online learning framework can be developed. This framework will
show the organization of the various components of the proposed
system, and will facilitate the development of a fairly complete
business plan for the endeavor. Figure 4-1 and the subsequent
discussion describe one such framework for a post-secondary
institution.
Ideally, the learning outcomes (i) are translated into course
content, resources and an approach to the teaching and learning
process that will enable a student to achieve those outcomes. Once
these basic parameters have been thought through, the courseware
development team (ii) will share the responsibility of translating the
theory and intentions into courseware and online learning
functions to be delivered by the learning management system
(LMS) (iii), which interfaces with the library and other digital
resources (iv), related services (v), and the student information
system (SIS) (vi) through a secure server (vii) that can authenticate
the student login.
From the students’ point of view, they will connect to the LMS
and the related services through a user-friendly users’ portal (viii),
so that, with a single login, they can have access to their courses
and can be linked to all related resources and services.
Finally, to ensure ongoing improvement, an evaluation process
for the effectiveness of the system, based on achievement of the
learning outcomes and students’ feedback is in place, in the form of
an independent quality assessment process (ix), which also feeds
back into the development cycle.
Aspects of the online learning infrastructure are discussed
below; however, to conclude this section on overall organization,
the general relationships, particularly among the units responsible
for information technology support, should be considered.
Paul raised a number of important issues about the
incorporation of technology into learning systems, many of which
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
we still grapple with. Two in particular are intertwined and are
pertinent here.
The first is the relationship between academic and administrative computing, that is, whether or not these two information
technology functions should be connected, and in either case, how
they can interface with each other. This relationship is a significant
aspect of the centralization/decentralization issue. Although the
normal structure is to have the functions separated, and often
reporting through different executive officers, the online learning
staff and systems need a lot of support and maintenance from the
central administrative computing unit, as do key service areas, such
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 4-1.
An online learning
system framework.
i. Learning outcomes
Pedagogy, content
ii. Courseware
development team
instructional
design, editing,
visual design,
multimedia,
templates,
guidelines,
“look and feel,”
viii. User’s portal
v. Services
exams etc.
repositories
ix. Quality
assessment
iv. Library via
and digital
iii. Curriculum
delivery via
the learning
management
vii. Secure
vi. Student
information
as student registration, the library, and other learning resources.
The second and related issue is that of centralization versus
decentralization of control. Normally, the administrative computing
units prefer a more centralized system to avoid duplication, ensure
security, and minimize the divergence of approaches and the subsequent complexity of support. Those involved in the design and
delivery of educational programming prefer a more decentralized
approach, with more freedom to innovate and to choose platforms
and applications that suit their specific needs and preferences. Of
even greater possible political consequence is the deep desire for
academic values and needs to have priority over those of the central
administrative unit.
In an ideal case, it should not matter how such units are
organized or linked, because the overall goals and values of the
institution or company would govern people’s behavior and
attitudes, and everyone would accommodate each other’s needs,
responsibilities, and functions. In the real world of online learning,
conflicting priorities and approaches quickly arise, and clear statements of roles and responsibilities, processes, and policies must be
established to help balance the relative need for control/centralization and freedom/decentralization.
The Components of an Online Learning System
The Development of Courseware
Even in the initial stages of thinking about the development of an
online learning program, it is wise to involve all those who are
likely to be involved at any stage. To foster such involvement, the
sponsors of the program can prepare a preliminary proposal laying
out the objectives of the program, the intended student market, and
the proposed online learning approach. This strategy gives the
service units a chance to comment on matters that will affect them,
and for fellow educators to comment on the proposed content and
pedagogy. The proposal should also identify the composition of the
development and delivery teams that will be established to
undertake the project. The nature of these teams can vary widely.
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
The smallest “team” would be a single person, the content expert,
who is also the educator, and who is also well trained to use a
comprehensive Web learning platform that is already fully
supported by the institution or company. This individual would
just need routine support from areas such as copyright and the
library. A complex team, however, involves a project manager as
well as content experts, educators, instructional designers, editors,
visual designers, multimedia designers, programmers, systems staff,
etc., who undertake the design of a course that needs new online
learning functions, connects uniquely to the other systems, and
involves the creation of new multimedia digital learning objects. In
either case, the preliminary proposal must provide sufficient
information for all concerned to understand what their probable
roles and responsibilities will be, and what direct and indirect costs
are involved.
For those familiar with formal project management processes
and techniques, this detailed discussion of the proposal and the
project team will seem redundant, but it is surprising, in academe
especially, how little attention is paid to this process. Much of it is
just common sense, common courtesy, and good planning.
However, depending on the size and scope of the task, some basic
understanding and application of the principles of project
management are also needed for online learning courseware
development. The roles of team members can vary widely, but the
types of positions, and the general roles they play in the team, are
described further in Chapter 7 of this volume.
The Learning Management System
Another key decision to be made at the development phase is the
choice of LMS. The first question to be considered in this decision
is whether to use imported proprietary software or to develop an
in-house system, which may or may not also be based on freely
available, imported open-source software.
Many very good and comprehensive proprietary packages are
available; some come as an add-on to the SIS, and others can be
interfaced with the system. Staff can be oriented to and updated on
the software’s development and functionality at training events,
conferences, and meetings. Assessing which of the available
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
proprietary options is the best fit for the needs of a particular
online learning system can be an onerous task, and choices must be
carefully considered, and are often made with the help of an
independent evaluation source .
For the in-house system, many free, open-source solutions are
available, which can emulate the functionality of the proprietary
systems, and can be adapted in any manner needed. This approach,
however, might require more initial development and different skill
sets among staff to ensure the robustness of the system, to provide
a higher level of on-going technical support, to prepare
documentation and training, and to interface with other systems as
necessary.
In the ideal case, the choice of LMS is based on the needs of the
course, without consideration of costs, the availability of qualified
staff, or any requirement to use existing systems. The real case,
however, is often more complicated: either one is constrained to a
single solution based on previous institutional or company
decisions (which some would think of as ideal), or the choice is
limited (as it should be) by practicalities such as the costs of
adopting yet another proprietary LMS, or the human resource and
other implications of building or adapting an open-source LMS.
Each new solution adds considerable pressure on back-end systems,
especially services such as the technical helpdesk, and the need to
adapt to a new LMS can have a negative impact on a student’s
learning experience. Finally, there is a lock-in factor: the costs of
changing systems can be very high, and, although much effort is
being made to develop standards for online learning that will
improve interoperability and reusability of online content, the
promise has not yet been met.
Library and Digital Resources
Linking the course or program LMS to the necessary online
resources is a key element of any online system. Institutional and
public libraries have been leaders in the development of systems
and protocols to acquire and share resources. Many now have
electronic gateways to their own holdings, to those housed
elsewhere, to digital databases of journals, magazines, and
government publications (including much in the way of full-text
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
materials), and to specially developed supplementary databases of
materials selected for a particular course. In addition, learning
objects will be increasingly accessible through in-house and
external digital repositories.
These components are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 14,
but the key point in developing the infrastructure for online
learning is that the availability of such online resources should be
ensured, or at least anticipated, so that the courseware is developed
accordingly, the LMS is appropriately configured, and any access
that the student may require is enabled.
Learner Services
In online learning, most attention is always paid to the courseware
and delivery platform. However, those who have worked in various
forms of distributed learning for any length of time know only too
well the vital importance of the non-academic learner supports that
are needed to ensure student success and satisfaction. Depending
on the enterprise involved, such supports would include technical
help, educational advising, various forms of counseling, services for
learners with special needs, and so on (see Chapter 15). In an ideal
online learning system, these aspects would be given equal priority
with and would be developed in conjunction with the curriculum.
In the real situation, it is likely that such services already exist, and
must be converted and enhanced for online learning, and provided
with the ability to adapt and change as new options appear and
learner expectations change.
Interface with the Student Information System
Ideally, the LMS is linked to the SIS in such a manner that the right
student is automatically in the right course at the right time, and
that all the right student information is easily available to the right
instructor and any other authorized person. This strategy avoids
the need to input student names into the LMS, with the associated
errors and waste of time. The instructor should be able to
manipulate the student data as needed for the course (e.g.,
submitting and editing final marks), and to contact the students as
a group, in sub-groups and individually.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
All this requires clever and robust programming in the LMS, a
server to authenticate student log-ins and ensure a secure interface
with the SIS, and some appropriate programming in the SIS itself.
This is where an integrated SIS/LMS system might seem attractive
if one is building an online learning system from scratch. In many
real situations, there will be more than one LMS, each of which
needs to be interfaced to the SIS, and any or all of which might be
composed of proprietary, imported, or home-built systems.
The Users’ Portal
As in most sophisticated online enterprises (travel, banking, shopping, etc.), the nature of the portal provided to the user (and indeed
to staff in various ways) is important. Ideally, the portal should
allow the learner, with one secure login, to access everything that is
of interest to them: the LMS (and from there, other essential links),
their grades and other applicable documentation on their student
file, and related learner services and accounts. It will also allow
them to customize their portal Web page to be a unique interface,
showing their own preferences, and allowing them to link easily
with other learners and staff, related services, and the student
association.
Quality Assessment
Most institutions and organizations will have a unit dedicated to
providing a thorough and independent evaluation of any enterprise
as part of the routine process of quality assurance and improvement. Ideally, the development of an e-learning system should
include a plan for the independent evaluation of all aspects of the
system, and especially of the degree to which it enables or enhances
the achievement of the stated learning outcomes (primarily in the
opinion of its users). Furthermore, such an evaluation would also
provide information on the return on investment of the system,
especially the unanticipated or unseen costs of implementation on
back-end systems, staff attitudes, and infrastructure.
In the real situation, where a variety of systems could be in place,
the tendency will be for each group to undertake its own research,
which can often be biased (intentionally or not) and difficult to
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
compare with that of other groups unless a strict, common framework is in place. Even if only one system exists, larger corporate
pressures might be applied to ensure that a project is “doomed to
Quality assessment is an aspect of online learning in which a
strong and centralized approach is preferred. The type, scope, and
framework of evaluation must be independent and structured if the
results are to lead to real improvements in systems, and to
appropriate decisions about whether to scrap them or to build on
them with new resources (see Chapter 16).
Related Issues
Many institutions and organizations that have shifted their core
business to an online environment have noticed both predicted and
unanticipated effects on all aspects of their enterprise. For online
learning, some of these effects are straightforward and can be
factored in early on, with systematic updates.
Back-end hardware (servers, switches, etc.) and connectivity will
need to be estimated in the beginning, and then adjusted routinely
as the number of users grows, the system evolves, and standards
and expectations for “up-time” increase (usually to 24 hours a day,
7 days a week).
Policies related to access to servers, to security, and to the use of
the online learning system need to be in place, and must balance the
need for stability and security with the need to innovate (Kotter,
Technical help and helpdesk support must be in place, possibly
linked to a training, orientation, and documentation function that
provides support to students and staff. Since this function can be
spread between the core information service units and the teaching
units, clear mandates and lines of responsibility must be in place to
avoid duplication of effort or gaps in support.
A host of human resource issues must be addressed. Some of
them are tied to collective agreement and employment contract
terms and conditions, especially those related to the service
standards and expectations (which go beyond the normal working
day), and to the automatic flexibility that online learning provides,
not only to the student, but also to the staff in terms of the place
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and time of work. New policies may be needed on attendance and
on standards for being in touch with the central office for
administrative matters.
Another human resource issue is the constantly shifting nature
of the work that staff undertake. Many of those working in online
learning have had dated training, or no official training whatever,
but have learned and adapted successfully to new approaches and
new technologies. There are many stories of staff who entered
organizations at a junior level and worked their way into key roles
in online learning quite unexpectedly, as the organization’s needs
and their abilities evolved. Traditional approaches to hiring, appointment, promotions, position classification, access to training
and professional development, etc., must be adapted to maximize
the opportunity to invest in and reward staff in such a dynamic
environment, and to avoid exploiting staff who might be working
well above the level for which they are paid. The long-term
sustainability of the online learning system will depend to a large
extent on how this new human resource environment is addressed.
The online learning system itself should inspire new kinds of
flexible training for staff, with inter- and intra-institutional support
groups and learning communities, information links, etc.
Finally, the process for decision making and resource allocation
related to online learning must be carefully considered. If new
committees are to be established to provide recommendations on
directions and investments, care must be taken to balance the
discussion between those who know and understand a lot (but
might champion one approach), central and decentralized technical
staff (who directly support the online system and who often want
more freedom), the central administration (who likely do not know
as much, but are accountable for the success and effectiveness of
the system), and the users (teachers and learners). The role of
independent and thorough evaluation becomes very important in
this process.
Change Management
Any credible educational endeavor is dynamic in nature, responding
to new knowledge, understandings, and approaches to the
disciplines, to new employment market needs, to changing student
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
demographics, and so on. In a traditional campus or classroom
environment, the expectation is that the teachers and curriculum
developers will ensure this “currency,” and the same is true in online
systems. However, in the online system, change is more complicated,
because any change in content or approach can have a wide impact
on a number of aspects of the system. Because online learning
technologies evolve as quickly, and often as unexpectedly, as do the
curriculum, students’ expectations and connectivity, etc., the ability
to manage change effectively is important.
Assuming that the organization as whole respects and
encourages change in such systems, there still remains the matter of
how it is to be managed within the context of online learning. The
first issue is one of balance: between constant change every time an
idea or product comes into view (and so frustrating those affected,
including students), and sticking with a system (for administrative
ease and staff convenience) long after it has been superseded by
better, proven systems.
The degree of centralization or decentralization of the system (or
systems) also drives the change process. To what extent will some
units be free to explore and try new systems, and to what extent
should those lagging behind be forced to update their approaches?
Because they relate to core aspects of an organization’s business
and culture, such questions can only be answered in that context,
but the following dimensions of an online system infrastructure
would appear to be key factors in handling change well.
Leadership
As in any organizational issue, effective change starts with leadership. Having the right attitude toward change and its importance
and value is essential. Change should be embraced, and not seen to
be just another headache to be dealt with. Kotter gives a
concise explanation of why change is inevitable and crucial in
modern business, and provides specific ideas on how change can be
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Scouting Reports
Some staff must be assigned the tasks of looking for emerging
trends and ideas in online learning systems, and of providing a
place for others to feed information they come across. These
scouting reports need to be compiled and shared.
Governance
A governance body is needed that not only deals with current issues
related to online systems, but also provides a forum for discussion
of emerging trends, organizes meetings and events for sharing and
demonstration of new ideas, and revisits the vision for the online
learning system regularly (perhaps once every year or two). [Note
that the vision should be detailed enough to allow affected
managers to adjust plans and budgets in the context of the
organization’s regular cycle.] The terms of reference and reporting
relationship of the governance body should be commensurate with
the importance of online learning to the organization.
The membership of such a body can be difficult to determine.
The first impulse is to include those most intimately involved in
online systems—the technical experts and educational technology
champions—and their opinions are, of course, valuable. However,
a more important criterion for membership is the individual’s
willingness to consider a wide variety of alternatives, and not
stubbornly to defend their own preferred approach. In addition,
users of the online systems, such as neophyte teachers, students,
and user-support staff, will provide an important balance to
discussions that otherwise can degenerate into purely technical
banter. Finally, this body should be chaired by the highest possible
level of relevant management.
Communication
The governance body must establish a process whereby
developments and ideas in online education are regularly broadcast
internally through newsletters and other forums, and, where appropriate, externally through journals and conferences. In any com-
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
munication between the governance body and the users’ community,
simplicity of language is important. Furthermore, such communications must give users the opportunity to provide input to the
governance body, and that body must be seen to be responding to
the input; for example, by explaining seeming inconsistencies of
Pilot Projects and Evaluation
An important dimension of change is the use of pilot projects for
new developments. Of course, the impacts of such projects must be
evaluated before the developments proceed to wider adoption. The
governance body could provide the approval for such pilots, and
could have a pool of resources to allocate to approved projects.
Evaluation of the pilots should be conducted at arm’s length, and
the results should be widely shared. In this way, the organization
can receive the fullest benefit from the pilots, and the process of
innovation can be seen to be open and effective.
Resources for Change
As implied above, new ideas and approaches must be fostered, not
just by words, but also by financial and in-kind resources, and they
need to be coordinated by an open and widely representative
governance body. The intention would be to balance the need for
some control over innovation, which can diverge rapidly if separate
units are left to their own devices, and the need constantly to
explore and innovate in anticipation of broader change. For the
employees, a balance must be struck between recognition for
contributions to innovation and to ongoing operations.
Conclusion
In developing an infrastructure that supports excellence in online
learning, the issues to be addressed are almost all the same as for
any post-secondary educational enterprise: a clear understanding of
the goals of the curriculum and of the characteristics and needs of
the intended students; and a healthy working environment, with
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
committed staff, where implementation can proceed, and where
constant change is understood to be the norm. Within these general
areas, there are, of course, a host of technical, procedural, and
policy decisions to be made, but online learning is now mature
enough that such decisions need not be made haphazardly: plenty
of research and information is available, and there are many
successful examples of online learning systems to learn from (see
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
1(2) ). In contrast to those who were in the vanguard of this
exciting educational development, new contributors can focus on
getting the basic principles and goals in order before proceeding to
implementation. Ultimately, as is any educational system, online
learning is fundamentally a human endeavor, with the technology
available to support the agreed upon principles and goals, not vice
References
Athabasca University . Student Academic Services 2002.
Retrieved July 21, 2003, from 
reports/student_satisf_acad_services_2002.doc
Athabasca University. . Education Plan. Retrieved July 21,
2003, from 
Chickering, A., & Ehrmann, S. C. . Implementing
the seven principles: Technology as lever. American Association
for Higher Education Bulletin, 49(2), 3-6. Retrieved July 21,
2003, from 
Edutools. . Course Management Systems. . Retrieved
July 21, 2003, from the Western Cooperative for Educational
Telecommunications Web site: 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
1(2) . Retrieved July 21, 2003, from 
.org/content/v1.2/index.html
Kotter, J. P. . Leading change. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning
Lu, M. . SparkNotes studyguide on ideal gases. Retrieved
July 21, 2003 from the Barnes and Noble Learning Network
Web site: 
Paul, R. H. . Open learning and open management:
Leadership and integrity in distance education. New York:
Nichols Publishing.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 5
TECHNOLOGIES OF ONLINE LEARNING
(E-LEARNING)
Rory McGreal, Athabasca University, &
Michael Elliott, Mosaic Technologies
Introduction
This chapter includes an examination of some of the most exciting
technologies and features used in online instruction today, and
those we may use tomorrow. Education is one of the fastestgrowing economic and social sectors in the world, and the use of
new technologies is an integral and driving component of that
Multimedia on the Internet
Multimedia incorporates text, graphics, and audio media (often
with real video or animations) and combines them, using a
computer. Almost every personal computer built today is capable of
delivering multimedia presentations for entertainment, advertising,
or education. Edutainment is a word for applications that incorporate multimedia entertainment with educational objectives.
Multimedia on the Internet is still not an everyday reality in the
same sense as multimedia on CD-ROM or DVD, which may be
commonplace in the home or classroom. Internet connection
speeds limit the quality and quantity of what can be transmitted.
Even with wired/wireless and high-speed advances, the transmission of large sound, animation, and video files can be timeconsuming and frustrating.
However, with the introduction of streaming multimedia in the
past five or six years, large multimedia files can now be delivered
even over modem connections. Streaming multimedia is an Internet
data transfer method that facilitates the transfer of audio and video
files from computer to computer in a “stream.” Streamed media
packets can be played as soon as the data starts arriving at the
receiving computer—users do not have to wait until the full file has
been downloaded. Streaming audio has been more successful than
video, which has generally been limited to small picture sizes or low
resolution (grainy) video projections, but as the bandwidth
increases, higher quality, full-screen video becomes possible.
The key to this breakthrough is the format in which the files are
distributed, or served, over the Internet. Large audio or video files
are converted into a format that can be sent as a continuous stream
of small pieces to a user’s computer. At the user’s end of the
connection, special software interprets the “stream” of data and
begins to play the sample. While the first part of the sample is being
played, the next is being downloaded. The second begins
seamlessly, the first is deleted, and the third is downloaded. Using
this format, hours of audio and video content can be received over
a slow modem connection.
Recommended Links
The following links provide some good examples of educational
multimedia on the Web:
• Arnett, B., Nine Planets: A multimedia tour of the solar system:
 
• East-West Project, Digital Numbering (flash): 
.nb.ca/it/module3/section2/ASCII/ASCII.html
• Malloy, T., Understanding ANOVA Visually 
utah.edu/stat/introstats/anovaflash.html
Streaming Audio
Audio was the first type of multimedia to be delivered over the
Internet in a streaming format, and concerts and “live” radio
broadcasts were among the first examples of streamed audio to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
appear. A wide range of streaming audio formats is in use on the
Web today, but while each is different in name, the basic technology remains the same.
When a sound file is to be prepared for streaming, it is
compressed to reduce the overall size of the file. A news broadcast,
for example, consisting of a single recorded voice, would normally
be a smaller file than an orchestral sample. In some cases,
compression also means that the quality of the file is affected.
Different programs are available for receiving streaming audio,
each with its own proprietary sound or media format. Quality
varies from format to format, but all are compatible with modem
connections. Recently, these programs have become more generic,
which is good news for the end user, who no longer faces the hassle
of installing three different programs in order to listen to three
different sound formats. Instead, the newer, more powerful media
players can decode, decompress, and play a variety of proprietary
sound samples.
Many of the Internet’s most widely publicized “firsts” have
happened as a result of streaming media events. The longest continuous Internet broadcast in history was in the form of a “jam
session” held during the East Coast Music Awards in Moncton,
NB, in 1997; and the record was bettered during the following
year’s ceremony. Producing a live, continuous stream of music (and
in subsequent years, video) for over 80 hours was truly an
impressive feat. Another, more widely known “first” was Paul
McCartney’s 1999 return to The Cavern, the bar in Liverpool
where the Beatles first played. This live broadcast over the Internet
was the most listened-to sound production in Internet history.
Educational Uses
Streaming audio is currently being used as a supplement to
classroom-based and online course delivery, usually in the form of
prerecorded lectures, interviews with guests, student projects,
samples of student classroom interaction, or sound bytes of content
relevant to the course of study. For music or English composition
courses, it could be used by teachers or students to record samples
of their work and to make them available to the teacher and other
students. Streaming on demand is becoming a key feature in Web-
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
based education. For example, listen to Gustav Holst’s musical
interpretation of The Planets included in the list of recommended
links given below.
Recommended Links
• Trussler, B., Gustav Holst: The Planets Suite: 
.aquarianage.org/lore/holst.html
• Jupitermedia Corp., What’s New: Internet News Channel: http:
//www.internet.com/sections/news.html
• East Coast Music Association, Your Music: 
• Jupitermedia Corp., Streaming Media World: 
.streamingmediaworld.com
Streaming Video
First came radio, and then came television. And on the Web, first
came streaming audio, and then streaming video. When a video
sample is presented in electronic format, there are many more
“layers” of data to be converted and compressed than is the case
with audio alone. As a result, when this multimedia format is
delivered over the Internet in a streaming delivery system, more
technical and educational issues must be taken into consideration.
Size is the first issue. Video files are much larger than audio files,
and video combined with audio is larger still. Video samples also
demand more processing power on the part of the receiving
computer. It is relatively simple to record sound—music, voice, or
both—even on a home computer. However, recording video and
saving it in an electronic format is more demanding on hardware
and requires additional software. Because of this and other issues,
video has taken longer to become an industry standard, and it is
harder to find educational applications for streaming on the Web.
Receiving streaming video feeds on a home computer is not
difficult. The newer versions of Windows, Apple OS, and Linux
come with pre-installed streamers for audio and video. Generally,
these streamers are sufficient for most educational applications. As
is the case with streaming audio, different formats require different
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
applications; however, most multimedia applications now available
for the home market have been designed to receive both audio and
video streams. Superbowl XXXV, held in January 2001, saw the
recreational and commercial use of streaming multimedia go to
new heights. Long known for its glamorous halftime shows and
extremely expensive commercials, this event was different from
those of past years because of the means by which the commercials
were broadcast. For those unable or unwilling to sit through hours
of football to see a few commercials, several online video streaming
sites encoded and broadcast the commercials within minutes of
their “traditional” broadcast. By noon of the next day, hundreds of
thousands of people had a chance to see what they had missed the
night before. This application illustrates how events or sequences
can be decomposed to extract only the relevant components. This
technique is now driving the creation of modular, chunk-sized
content objects often referred to as learning objects, or more
precisely, knowledge objects.
Educational Uses
The stiff, unemotional “talking head” of a professor or tutor in a
corner of an e-learning Web page is the image that most quickly
comes to mind when one considers video clip use in an online
educational situation. In such a presentation, a professor or tutor
delivers a prepared lecture or shows an example of a hands-on
activity; however, almost any video sample with educational value
can be converted to a streaming format, and many will serve as
excellent additional resources on an educational Web page or for
classroom courses or online courses delivered synchronously. When
implemented wisely, video can alleviate the “page-turning”
boredom of many online courses. The LearnAlberta.ca project,
included in the list of recommended links provided below, is an
example of an educational video streaming project with a variety of
video-based curricula for Alberta teachers and students. This
project was established to define and deploy a prototype K-12
application.
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
Recommended Links
• Alberta Learning, LearnAlberta.ca: 
• University of Washington, EDGE, Streaming Video Site:
 
• CyberTech Media Group, Streaming Video over an Intranet:
 
MP3, Top 40 Charts: 
Push Technologies and Data Channels
It was inevitable that proponents, developers, and consumers of the
existing forms of media (television, radio, and print) would attempt
to take advantage of the Web’s capacity to play “on demand,” its
exponential growth, and its diverse global audience. There are innumerable examples of new technologies that try to address the
marriage between existing media, with their synchronous broadcasting of news, weather, and sports, and the asynchronous nature
of Web publishing. Pointcast (now Infogate Inc.) was the first such
service, offering up-to-the-minute customizable information to
individual desktops.
Channels of “pushed content” are another source of dynamic
and often media-rich content online. Channels are customized
communications paths between computers, and are comparable to
“Bookmarks” or “Favorites” within a browser, but with added
features and interactivity. Standard Web sites require that the user
browse the site to see any new developments or changes; however,
Web content that is formatted for channel-based delivery is pushed
directly to the end-user’s desktop. Channels can be chosen,
modified, or created from scratch. They are used for monitoring
new content from relevant sites, as well as for navigating sites that
the channel holder considers interesting. An individual user can
create his or her own channel that links to a number of sites that
pertain to a specific subject of interest. Customizable default
channels might be “Archeology” or “Arachnids.” Each channel can
be subdivided into folders with further links; for example,
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
“Archeology” could be divided into “Roman,” “Greek,” “Indian,”
and “MesoAmerican” subchannels.
Educational Uses
Push technology applications can be used to feed inexpensive and
timely news, weather, and sports or other information from relevant
sites to a classroom for use in reports, essays, or current events
classes. The growing number of channels available for subscription
can offer supplementary information from a wide variety of sources,
including sites such as NASA, the Science Channel, and the
Computing Channel. As these technologies evolve, individual classes
and schools will create their own dynamic channels, narrow-casting
school updates to parents and other interested parties. Schools and
parents should be vigilant in their school’s use of these channels to
ensure that they are used for educational purposes and not for
advertising and other commercial concerns.
Recommended Links
• Discovery Communications, The Science Channel: 
.discovery.com
ZDNet, The Computing Channel: 
datafeed/ie4/channels/zdnet/cached/index.htm
• NeoPlanet, Neoplanet Browser: 
products/browser.html
TEAM Software, Channels.com (the largest collection of
channel links on the Internet): 
Audio Chat and Voice over Internet Protocol
Text chat has long been a popular feature of the Internet. More
recently, audio chat has also become popular. Point-to-point audio
connections can be made between almost any two computers on
the Internet, and some Internet service providers (ISPs) and online
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
services are now offering free Internet-based long-distance service
that connects individuals calling through a personal computer to
the public telephone system.
Although the quality of Internet phone calls, or voice over
Internet protocol (VoIP), is currently somewhat inferior to that of
dial-up long-distance telephone, consumers are becoming
increasingly attracted to Internet telephony because of the lure of
free or extremely cheap calls. About 25 million Americans now use
Internet-based voice communication, up from five million in 1999
 , and about two dozen companies have begun to
offer online voice communication. Internet telephony is relatively
simple, requiring an Internet hookup, headphones or speakers, and
a microphone. After signing up with an Internet telephony
provider, users can make local or long-distance calls to people with
any type of phone. However, since voice transmissions are carried
over the Internet in small packets, in the same manner as data
transmissions, conversations can be subject to delays. Without a
high-speed Internet connection, the quality of an Internet call can
be poor, but companies are working to improve it. By 2006,
International Data Corporation (IDC) estimates that 50% of the
traffic minutes will be transmitted using VoIP .
Educational Uses
Classroom-based, e-mail pen pal programs have been used for a
long time as a way of making intercultural connections between
schools. Internet telephony will add an opportunity for students to
speak to others in their age group, almost anywhere in the world,
It will, therefore, facilitate more fluid and natural communication
between different cultural groups, and will be especially useful for
foreign language exposure and practice.
Teacher or tutor and student communication can be greatly
enhanced by the opportunity to speak to one another to discuss an
assignment or a difficult concept without the expense of longdistance tolls. An electronic blackboard can be used along with
VoIP for synchronous teaching. This practice is known as audiographic teleconferencing. Microsoft’s NetMeeting is often used in
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Recommended Links
• FunPhone.com (Internet telephone and communicator): http://
www.funphone.com
• Cybration Inc./ICUII.com. ICUII Video Chat (I See You Too,
audio and video phone): 
• Selectra OOD, PC-Telephone.com: 
• Microsoft Corp., NetMeeting: 
windows/netmeeting
Web Whiteboarding
Web whiteboarding is a form of graphic conferencing used in
combination with VoIP as a single tool in general Web applications
that support real-time collaboration. Whiteboarding emulates
writing or drawing on a blackboard. With a whiteboard, both
teachers and learners can create, manipulate, review, and update
graphical information online in real time while participating in a
lecture or discussion. Using a mouse, an electronic stylus with a
tablet, or even a large electronic classroom-sized whiteboard, users
can annotate by writing; cutting and pasting; or clicking, dragging,
and dropping. Contents can be saved and used in future
presentations. Imported graphics can be used as underlays that the
user can trace over, using an “onionskin” “placed” on top of the
image; for example, routes can be drawn and redrawn on maps.
The providers listed in the “Recommended Links” section below
sell or rent “virtual classrooms,” with size (number of simultaneous
log-ons permitted) determined by the license and the bandwidth
available at the central site. These products are now incorporating
small video images as well as “Web safaris,” in which the teacher
leads the class to visit various sites, and application sharing that
allows any of the distributed users to control a single application.
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
Educational Uses
This blackboard substitute allows for the emulation of classroom
lessons. Students in different locations can participate actively and
collaboratively with the teacher and with other students in the
creation and adaptation of graphical information. It is particularly
appropriate for brainstorming sessions.
Recommended Links
• Centra Software, Inc. Centra.com: 
• Elliminate, Inc., Elluminate.com: 
• Electronics for Imaging, Inc., eBeam: 
• Department of Computer Science, University College, London,
WBD Whiteboard: 
software/wbd
Instant Messaging
ICQ (I seek you), a commercial product distributed freely over the
Net, has been heralded as the “killer app” of the instant messenger
genre. The easiest way to describe ICQ is to call it an Internet
paging device. It has some similarities to other modes of text-based
communication, such as e-mail or Internet Relay Chat (IRC). It
allows short messages to be sent electronically from computer to
computer. As in e-mail, the messages are stored on a central server
until the recipient collects them; however, ICQ is more dynamic in
that it shows all of the group members when the recipient logs on.
Thus, the exchanges are often very rapid and work much like
synchronous text exchanges. Attachments and Web addresses
(URLs) can also be sent. Unlike e-mail, however, ICQ allows group
chat sessions to be opened and voice chats to be established. In
addition, and unlike most e-mail systems, ICQ
transportable: a user could have ICQ on a computer at work, at
home, and on a laptop, and receive “pages” only on the active
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
ICQ is only one of a growing number of instant messenger
services that have appeared online in the last three years. Other
than ICQ, users can choose from MSN Messenger (from
Microsoft), AIM (AOL Instant Messenger), and a bevy of other
similar applications. ICQ has been popular for some time,
especially with technically proficient Internet users. More recently,
because of the capacity of central servers, immediate and delayed
message delivery, and increased functionality, instant messaging has
become a popular choice for millions of users.
Educational Uses
Instant messaging is not yet used as an efficient content-delivery
teaching tool. Its strength lies in its ability to facilitate immediate
contact with other students and teachers, or with a tutor who is
supervising chat sessions.
Recommended Links
ICQ, Inc., ICQ: 
• Microsoft Corp., MSN Messenger: 
AOL Canada Inc., AOL Instant Messenger: 
aim/index_eng.adp
• Jupitermedia Corp., Instant Messaging Planet: 
.instantmessagingplanet.com
• International Engineering Consortium, Instant messaging
(tutorial): 
Hand-held and Wireless Technologies
Imagine the power of the Internet in the palm of your hand, using
a HandSpring, Palm Pilot or other personal information manager
(PIM). Wireless technologies, cellular modems and hand-held
devices are moving from elite gadgetry into the mainstream. How
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
will this cord-free revolution change how we work and learn?
Fortune magazine claims that
Your next computer probably won’t be a computer. It’ll be a
phone, an organizer, or a pager. You’ll use it for communications: to read e-mail on the go, to find the nearest gas station,
to check your bank balance, to buy groceries. And it will
connect to the Internet wirelessly. 
Mobile computing has arrived. Already, wireless devices are
being chosen over desktop and even laptop computers, not only as
the preferred Internet access tool, but also for common computing
applications, such as word processing and spreadsheets. These
devices are being disguised as telephones, tablets, e-books, and Web
pads, and are now including a Web browser, an instant messenger,
and an e-mailer, along with other features.
So your next computer probably will not be just a computer. It
will also be a phone and an organizer, and will include other serious
and gaming applications. You will use it to check your bank
balance, buy groceries, and bet on the lottery. Cordless devices,
pocket PCs, or PDAs (personal data assistants) are the wallets,
checkbooks, calculators, and Rolodexes of the twenty-first century.
The size of a calculator, or smaller, these devices are capable of
basic computing tasks, such as handwriting-recognition text
processing and contact management. More complex and higherend hand-helds have multimedia capabilities, wired or wireless
Internet access, and the ability to send and receive data and text
alike. With the advent of infrared networking, these hand-held
computer devices can offer students and teachers a previously
unknown degree of flexibility.
Dr. Bess Sullivan Scott, a principal at Goodrich Middle School
in Lincoln, Nebraska, has this to say about her handheld device:
My Palm IIIc has improved my focus on instructional leadership
by eliminating organizational time spent coordinating various
paper records. Through analysis of data I have increased my
time in classrooms as well as distributed my time among
teachers more equitably. 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Dr. Scott understands the usefulness of wireless technology in
educational management.
The basic construction set for much of the wireless traffic and
applications to come stems from the Wireless Applications Protocol
(WAP). Microsoft, among others, has joined a forum that will help
to shape the programming languages, protocols, and processes for
the next generation of the Internet, one that transcends the very
infrastructure—cables, servers, and phone lines—that the Web is
founded upon 
would have wireless access. By 2005, there should be a total of 1.2
billion people on the Internet, with the anticipated 730 million
wireless users accounting for 62.1% of the total .
As affordable access to high bandwidth increases, and as the
cost of wireless devices that will be able to incorporate all the
features of a PC decreases, the educational possibilities become
unlimited. It might mean the end of paper-based teaching and
learning, lost homework, missing tests, and costly textbooks. In the
Philippines, for example, people living in rural environments, even
in communities without electricity, are using their cellular phones
for text-based digital messaging. Newer applications, available
using small devices, are opening up the possibility of using wireless
to deliver graphics and video to users no matter where they are.
Learning becomes universally accessible.
Recommended Links
PDA Verticals Corp., pdaED.com: 
• Palm Inc., Palm Products: 
• Casio Computer Company, Inc., Casio.com (for handheld
devices, go to “USA” and check under “Personal PCs”):
 
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
• Handspring, Handspring.com (handheld devices): 
.handspring.com
• Tucows, Mobile/PDA (PDA and handheld device software):
 
• Lincoln Public Schools, Goodrich Middle School: http://
goodrich.lps.org
Peer-to-peer File Sharing
Perhaps the most publicized Internet event in the past couple of
years has been the controversy surrounding peer-to-peer, or filesharing, applications. Peer-to-peer applications allow users,
regardless of location or connection speed, to share practically any
kind of file with a limitless population of other Internet users. In
contrast to the currently predominant client-to-server model, where
users retrieve information from a centralized server, the peer-topeer model allows members of its “community” to transer files
directly between users, without having to access, or be constrained
by, a centralized server.
Of all the P2P (peer-to-peer) applications, Napster has become
the most well-known, because of its popularity and its ultimate
demise in the courtrooms. Napster became prominent because of
its focus on facilitating the distribution and sharing of files, and
especially copyright-protected media, mainly music files encoded in
the MP3 format. While P2P software and services have been
considered mainly as a means of downloading music files, the
technology and goals behind the peer-to-peer concept allow for
much more wide-ranging uses.
Andy Oram, editor of Peer-to-peer: Harnessing the Power of
Disruptive Technologies, notes that communities on the Internet
have been limited by the flat interactive qualities of e-mail and
network newsgroups, and that users have great difficulty
commenting on each other’s postings, structuring information, and
so on. So he recommends the use of peer-to-peer applications with
structured metadata for enhancing the activities of almost any
group of people who share an interest .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Educational Uses
It is easy to make connections between learning objects, intelligent
educational systems, and the peer-to-peer model. Research and
other materials could easily be offered online and “harvested” by a
well-designed P2P program, offering the student or teacher a
wealth of knowledge that might not otherwise be available.
Upcoming peer-to-peer educational applications include edutella
and eduSplash, products that support the exchange of learning
objects or units of learning.
Recommended Links
• Nejdl et al., Project edutella: 
• eduSplash.net, Welcome to Splash: 
• Roxio, Inc., Napster (the infamous P2P
application):
 
• Audiogalaxy, Inc., About the satellite (the next generation of
P2P): 
• Sharman Networks, Kazaa Media Desktop (P2P continues):
 
Learning Objects
Knowledge objects are discrete items that can be integrated into
lessons; for example, a text, graphic, audio, video, or interactive
file. Learning objects are more highly developed, consisting of
discrete lessons, learning units, or courses. A video clip from a
speech would be an example of a simple knowledge object. It
becomes a learning object when a lesson is added to it. Many
different learning objects can be created from one such component;
for example, lessons in politics, history, ethics, media studies, and
many other subjects could be created from a single video clip. They
could then be made available in online databases for efficient access
by learners using international standards. Imagine having seamless
access to a vast store of learning objects in the form of animations,
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
videos, simulations, educational games, and multimedia texts, in
the same way that Napster users had access to music files.
Educational Uses
The principal benefit of learning objects comes from their
reusability. As discrete units, they can be incorporated into a wide
range of courses or learning scenarios. Their standards-based
structure makes them available for use in many different learning
management systems and other applications. They also appear to
be pedagogically effective:
NETg compared typical expositive courses with a blend of
case-based learning and self-study learning objects. They found
that the students who used the objects-based course enjoyed a
41 percent drop in the time required to complete the task that
was taught. 
Recommended Links
MERLOT, Welcome to MERLOT!: 
CAREO, Home: 
• Longmire, W., A primer on learning objects: 
.learningcircuits.com/mar2000/primer.html
• McGreal, R., & Roberts, T., A primer on metadata for learning
objects: 
Detail.jsp?id=2031
Conclusion
Does the Web offer us the potential to expand our classrooms and
study halls beyond the school grounds, beyond provincial and
national boundaries? Can our educational systems evolve into
entirely new institutes that support learning by taking full
advantage of the emerging technologies? Certainly, distance
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
education and traditional correspondence courses will never be the
same because of the World Wide Web. All levels of education stand
to benefit from what the Internet has to offer. For educators, Web
participation could range from simply putting class notes and
lecture materials online for absent students, to integrating dynamic
online quizzing systems, to preparing classes for upcoming tests
and examinations, all the way to enabling learners to participate in
highly interactive, true-to-life simulations and games.
With the evolution of more user-friendly applications and
interactive content encapsulated in learning objects, one need not
be a coding expert to take advantage of the learning opportunities
that are becoming available on the Web. Many instructors and
learners are already bridging the divide by using hybrid access and
delivery models, complete with an Internet component. As the cost
of hardware, software, and telecommunications declines, even
developing countries can look forward to a future where access to
the wealth of the world’s knowledge is assured. The future has
Disclaimer: The site links in this chapter were working at the
time of submission in summer 2003. Some sites are those of small
companies that tend to change from time to time. If you find a dead
link, you should try a search using the title given.
References
Alberta Learning. . LearnAlberta.ca. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
AOL Canada Inc. . AOL Instant Messenger. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Arnett, Bill. . The nine planets: A multimedia tour of
the solar system. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from the University of
Arizona Web site: 
planets/nineplanets.html
Audiogalaxy, Inc. . About the satellite. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
CAREO (Campus Alberta Repository of Educational Objects).
 . Home Page. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
.careo.org
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
Casio Computer Co., Ltd. . Casio Worldwide. Retrieved
July 22, 2003, from 
Centra Software, Inc. . Centra.com. Retrieved July 22, 2003,
from 
Clark, R., & Rossett, A. . Learning solutions
—learning objects: Behind the buzz. Retrieved July 22, 2003,
from 
.asp?articleid=24&zoneid=30
CyberTech Media Group. (N.d.). Streaming video over an Intranet.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
intranet.html
Cybration, Inc./ICUII.com. ICUII Video Chat. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Department of Computer Science, University College London.
(N.d.). WBD Whiteboard. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from http://
www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.uk/multimedia/software/wbd/index.html
Discovery Communications, Inc. . The Science Channel.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
East Coast Music Association. . Your Music. Retrieved
July 22, 2003, from 
East-West Project .
demo. Module 3,
Telecommunication Networks. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
the TeleEducation NB Web site: 
module3/section2/ASCII/ASCII.html
eduSplash.net . Welcome to Splash. Retrieved July 22, 2003,
from 
Electronics for Imaging, Inc. . eBeam. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Elluminate, Inc. . Elluminate.com. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Ewalt, D. M. . Report predicts a billion Web
users by 2005. Retrieved July 23, 2003, from 
.cconvergence.com/article/IWK20010208S0002
FunPhone.com. FunPhone.com. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
 
Glascock, S. . AT&T CTO upbeat about
VoIP. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
.com/breakingNews/INW20020411S0002
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Handspring. . Handspring.com. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
ICQ Inc. . ICQ. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
International Engineering Consortium. . Instant messaging
(Tutorial). Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
online/tutorials/instant_msg
Jupitermedia Corporation . Instant Messaging Planet.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
planet.com
Jupitermedia Corporation . What’s New: Internet News
Channel. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
.com/sections/news.html
Jupitermedia Corporation . Streaming Media World.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
Lincoln Public Schools, Lincoln, NE. (N.d.). Goodrich Middle
School. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
Longmire, W. . A primer on learning objects.
Learning Circuits: ASTD’s Online Magazine All About E-
Learning. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
circuits.com/mar2000/primer.html
Malloy, T. . Understanding ANOVA visually. Retrieved
July 22, 2003, from the University of Utah Web site: 
.psych.utah.edu/stat/introstats/anovaflash.html
McGreal, R. & Roberts, T. . A primer on metadata
for learning objects: Fostering an interoperable environment.
Learning and Training Innovations Magazine. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Detail.jsp?id=2031
MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and
Online Teaching). . Welcome to MERLOT! Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
Microsoft Corporation. . MSN Messenger. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Microsoft Corporation. . NetMeeting. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
MP3.com Inc. . Top 40 charts. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
 
Nejdl, Wolfgang, Decker, Stefan, & Siberski, Wolf. Project edutella.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
NeoPlanet, Inc. . NeoPlanet Browser. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Oram, A. (Ed.). . Peer-to-peer: Harnessing the power of
disruptive technologies.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly and
Associates.
Palm Inc. . Palm Products. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
 
PDA Verticals Corp. . pdaED.com. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Romero, S. . IP: Millions phoning online: Price is right
even if quality isn’t. New York Times, C1. Abstract retrieved July
23, 2004, from 
F30F13FD355D0C758CDDAE0894D8404482
Roxio, Inc. . Napster. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from http:
//www.napster.com
Scott, B. S. . PDA: An essential tool for the principal.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
features/Principal.xml
Selectra OOD. PC-Telephone.com. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
 
Shaffer, R. A. . The emergence of the wireless
Web. Fortune. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
.business2.com/articles/mag/print/0,1643,6052,00.html
Sharman Networks. . Kazaa Media Desktop.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
TEAM Software, Inc. . Channels.com. Retrieved July 22,
2003, from 
Trussler, B. . Gustav Holst: The Planets Suite. Retrieved
July 22, 2003, from the AquarianAge Web site: 
.aquarianage.org/lore/holst.html
Tucows. . Mobile/PDA. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from
 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
University of Washington, EDGE (Education at a Distance for
Growth and Excellence). . Streaming Video Site.
Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
edge/streaming.html
Wireless Application Protocol Forum Ltd. . WAP Information Home. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from 
.wapforum.org
ZDNet. . The Computing Channel. Retrieved July 22, 2003,
from 
cached/index.htm
Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 6
MEDIA CHARACTERISTICS AND ONLINE
LEARNING TECHNOLOGY
Patrick J. Fahy
Athabasca University
Introduction
The decision to adopt online technology (defined here as predominantly Internet-based delivery, with provision for interaction
throughout the process), even on a limited basis, is always complex
and can be risky, especially if the adopting organization lacks
structural, cultural, or financial prerequisites . A
discussion of some attributes of media and of the modes of teaching
presentation and learning performance they support, in relation to
some influential learning models, might help to clarify some of the
implications in the choice of any specific delivery or presentation
Other chapters in this volume address learning theories and
styles (see Chapters 1 and 2). The analysis of media characteristics
in this chapter draws directly upon Fleming’s six-element
typology of teaching tasks and objectives: 1) attention, 2)
perception and recall, 3) organization and sequencing, 4)
instruction and feedback, 5) learner participation, and 6) higherorder thinking and concept formation. The following media and
modes are considered because they are common and familiar, and
also because they constitute the tools most available to online
teachers, trainers, and learners: 1) print and text, 2) still graphics
and illustrations, 3) sound and music, 4) video and moving
graphics, and 5) multimedia.
Teaching Tasks and Learning Theories
Before applying Fleming’s typology, it might be useful to determine
how this conception of learning relates to some well-known preonline learning models and standards. Figure 6-1 shows the
correspondence of Fleming’s categories to those of Bloom’s
alterable variables of learning , Chickering and Gamson’s
 seven principles of good practice, and Moore’s needs of
distance learners . The point to note is that most
of the attention in the three pre-online learning models is focused
on direct teaching and student involvement tasks, while prelearning tasks, such as attention, perception, and recall, are not
specifically addressed. The task of organization and sequencing
(which assumes that instructional materials and activities may vary
in response to individual needs and circumstances) is found only in
two of the models1.
Figure 6-1 suggests that older models of learning, which the
above represent, may not address all of the elements necessary for
efficient learning. Fleming’s framework is more complete,
addressing as it does the pre-learning elements of attention,
perception, and recall. For designers and users of online learning,
Fleming’s model also draws attention to key learning activities
which media might help to accommodate and monitor, as described
in the following discussion.
Analysis of the Requirements of Teaching Tasks
This section contains a summary of conclusions about media in
learning, drawn primarily from Fleming’s work. The
purpose of this review is to provide a basis for the observations
contained in Figure 6-1, and those to be made later in the chapter
regarding uses and limitations of multimedia.
Given the importance of attention in learning, it is surprising that the
learning models displayed in Figure 6-1 do not mention it specifically.
 ,
as did others , but in his mastery
learning model, this
element received reduced
emphasis, and does not
constitute one of the
“alterable variables” that
emerged from mastery
learning research.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Learning and
best-practice
Bloom 
Chickering &
Gamson 
(in Garrison,
Perception
Organization
& sequencing
to learners’
Instruction
& feedback
tutorials;
reinforcement
and feedback;
explanations
contact with
instructor
Understandable teaching;
participation
participation;
time on task
Cooperation
active learning;
time on task
involvement
Higher-order
Reading and
study skills
improvement
expectations
communicated
to learners
Figure 6-1.
Learning and bestpractice models, and
learning tasks.
assumed to be an outcome of other activities, an element of quality
learning materials, or an outcome of contact with the instructor or
other learners, for example. The message of Figure 6-1 is more the
importance of the task and the possible usefulness of media, than a
critique of these models, which are used here because they have
otherwise proven useful, even classic, in their scope and influence.)
A key learning principle, according to Fleming , is that
attention by the learner to appropriate instructional stimuli is fundamental to learning. To be effective, training must attract and
hold the learner's attention. Instruction must also recognize that
attention tends to be
• individual—the capacity to be attentive varies among individuals, and it varies for any individual at different times (e.g.,
fatigue or lack of background can cause attention to wander
sooner than usual).
• selective—at any one time, a learner’s attention can be focused
on only a small part of the learning content.
• fluid—as a teaching topic changes, the learner must know when
and how to shift attention; however, some learners may become
distracted, confused, or otherwise lose the main point during
shifts in attention.
• especially attracted to novelty, to moderate levels of complexity,
and to the contents of more focused, less complex displays.
Perception and Recall
Perception requires that the learner selectively focus on and make
sense of stimulation in the environment, including the learner’s own
internal states and responses (thoughts, feelings, and physiological
states). In a sense, all education and training is intended to make
learners capable of finer and more articulate perceptions and
distinctions . Recall involves the ability to remember and make use of relevant prior learning, as well as of the
learning acquired in a given situation.
Perception and recall in teaching draw on principles such as
those below .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Organization affects perception; that is, events, ideas, words,
concepts, and other stimuli that are not organized in some
meaningful way are more difficult to understand and remember
than those that are.
• Perception and recall can be aided by comparison and contrast;
similarity and grouping also assist recall.
• Presentations that focus on differences are distinguished better
by learners, and their contents may be easier to recall.
Organization and Sequencing
Organization and sequencing are present in the learning models
represented in Figure 6-1. In Chickering and Gamson’s 
model, responding to diversity in learners’ needs suggests the
possibility of reorganizing and resequencing materials and activities.
In regard to Moore’s model, providing guidance
and support has direct implications for organization and sequence.
(Bloom’s “quality tutorials” could also extend to
organization and sequence, depending upon the definition of
“quality.”)
For Fleming , the organization and sequencing of
materials is an important task in instructional planning. The
general principles listed below particularly apply to media design.
• The first and last items in a sequence are especially important;
introductions and summaries represent key learning opportunities.
• Modeling and demonstrations can result in learning. While
learners eventually must become active in the process of
acquiring skills and knowledge, students can also learn while
watching. Active internal states produce intellectual engagement, just as psychomotor activity accompanies the learning of
physical skills.
• Repetition and review increase learning up to a point. Repetition
can be used to increase skill, automaticity, and speed; however,
power (depth of understanding, breadth of proficiency) is
usually not increased by repetition alone.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Instruction and Feedback
While learners require skilful instruction, they also require
feedback to enable them to monitor their progress, to discover
errors or misconceptions, and to recognize what they should do
differently (or continue to do) to gain further proficiency. Not all
feedback is equally useful, however, and not all learners require the
same kind of feedback . Principles applicable to
media design and use include those listed below.
• The more mature the learner, the more informative the feedback
should be.
• With mature learners, correct answers should simply be marked
“correct.” Mature learners tend to dislike excessively demonstrative praise .
• Feedback should be prompt, but it does not have to be
immediate. Learners should know how much delay to expect in
test results and marking.
• Exceptions to the above point occur when feedback on previous
steps is needed before subsequent ones can be taken; when there
is a safety concern (i.e., previous steps must be correct or later
ones could result in a dangerous situation); or when the task is
highly complex.
• Feedback can be reduced as the learner becomes more
experienced and more proficient. Initially, feedback should be
frequent for most learners, to ensure that they have a positive
initial experience.
All of the models in Figure 6-1 recognize that quality instruction
includes the presentation to the learner of appropriate explanations, with the option for additional feedback. Chickering and
Gamson’s reference to student-instructor “contact” implies
this element in their model. Importantly for this discussion of
media-based learning, none of the models assumes that contact or
interaction need be face-to-face to be effective.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Learner Participation
Learning requires engagement with the subject matter, and
engagement often implies some kind of performance. In the case of
psychomotor skills, the activity is usually physical, with evaluation
dependent on observable outcomes. Occasionally, however, an
activity may be completely or largely mental, according to the
following principles .
• Activities that encourage the formation in the learner of mental
images increase learning. Activities that require the learner first
to process and then to reproduce a version of the original
information do more to encourage learning than do rote reproduction and imitation alone.
• Language use accompanying or providing context for newly
learned concepts increases learning; for example, composing a
verbal narrative while learning complex or abstract material
assists in retention. This principle can even extend to psychomotor skills, which is the reasoning behind “visualization”
exercises in sports.
The use of experience and practice in learning requires willing
learner participation and the conscientious application of new skills
and knowledge for proficiency to develop. Peter Garrison 
quotes Galison’s observation that moving from declarative
knowledge (knowing that something is true, or how something
might theoretically be done), through procedural knowledge
(knowing how an activity is performed), to craft knowledge (being
able to perform a procedure or to use knowledge with expert
proficiency) requires practice, feedback, and application. Craft
knowledge, the distinction between the novice and the expert, is the
objective of many kinds of academic learning, and all higher-level
skill training.
As are the tasks of instruction and feedback, learner
involvement is common to all three learning models under discussion here (Figure 6-1). Time on task is added to show that participation must be purposive and relevant. The noun “cooperation”
and the adjective “active” in Chickering and Gamson’s 
model add the notion that the learner’s involvement should be more
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
than passive observation of others’ efforts or conclusions, a
position with definite implications for media implementation.
Concept Formation and Higher-order Thinking
The learning of concepts or principles is often intended to be part
of a process leading to engagement with other, related concepts. In
formulations such as Gagne’s , below, the learning sequence
is hierarchical, and as the learner moves up the sequence, more
complex orders of reasoning are required:
1. signal learning—involuntary responses; for example, the startle
response, or removing a hand from heat.
2. stimulus-response learning—voluntary, selective responses; for
example, signaling in response to a specific cue, or imitating an
3. motor-chain learning—performing a sequence of actions in a
certain order; for example, dancing, parallel parking, or
replacing a light bulb.
4. verbal association or verbal chaining—reciting correct responses
to cues; for example, singing the lyrics of a song, reciting the
alphabet, or translating a word from one language to another.
5. multiple discrimination—responding differently to similar
stimuli; for example, distinguishing individual but related
members of a group, or giving an appropriate English equivalent
for a foreign word.
6. concept learning—responding to new stimuli according to
properties they share with previously encountered stimuli, or
comparing properties of phenomena; for example, estimating
the characteristics of similar objects based on knowledge about
their composition (a large rock vs. a large pillow), identifying
members of a group (saltwater vs. freshwater fish), and distinguishing examples and non-examples of a class or phenomenon
(vegetables vs. non-vegetables).
7. principle learning—putting two or more concepts together in a
relationship (without necessarily being able to explain the underlying rule governing the relationship); for example, applying
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
physical laws (“matter expands when heated”) or mathematical
8. problem-solving—recalling previously learned principles and
using them in combination to achieve a goal; for example,
selecting and combining facts in an essay to persuade, analyzing
a problem to determine its cause, or solving a complex problem
by selecting and applying previously learned facts and
principles.
Higher-order thinking skills (HOTS) are a challenge in
technology-based learning. A persistent criticism of computerassisted learning (CAL) and case-based learning using intelligent
agents and artificial intelligence algorithms has been their failure to
move beyond the mere identification and use of facts, to creative
and synergistic linking of concepts .
In Figure 6-1, HOTS are present by implication in two of the
models, in references to improved reading and study skills , and in the objective of communicating high expectations to
learners . However, the lack of specific
reference to concept formation or higher-order thinking in these
models, and the other apparent gaps in the resulting table, may be
less a lapse than a reminder in this discussion that somehow these
tasks must be addressed in media-based learning. The developers of
the pre-online models represented in Figure 6-1 undoubtedly accept
that higher-order outcomes are preferred. The challenge to media
developers is to make this objective specific and achievable, as
discussed below.
Implications
The implications of the above observations for the design and use
of technology in general teaching include the following caution about the use of attention-getting
strategies, especially on the computer, continues to be relevant. He
notes that screen motion and animated movement are very
powerful in attracting attention. The program should be careful
about asking a user to do more than one thing at a time, such as
requiring reading during an animated display (p. 112). Audio,
however, might be used effectively with animation, since listening
should not distract from watching the graphic display (Mayer,
Perception and recall
• Captions aid recall.
• To make distinctions easier to perceive, displays should especially
highlight differences (ideally moving from more obvious
differences to finer ones).
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Vision and hearing comprise perception. Vision is most acute in
the center of the spectrum of visible light (yellow and yellowgreen are the most visible colors, especially in dim light); and
hearing is most acute in the center of the range of audible sound.
• Similarity, predictability, and routine aid the process of
perception. The use of familiar designs and displays with new
material permits learners to use previously learned perceptual
skills when focusing on salient elements of new material.
Organization and sequencing
• In organizing and structuring opportunities for learning and
practice, the designer or teacher should consider, and where
possible accommodate, individual differences. If the information
or skill is new to the individual learner, they will usually need
more time to acquire it and to bring it to proficiency and
automaticity. Novice performance is typically slow, selfconscious, and awkward; with proficiency, execution becomes
more fluid, automatic, and natural .
• Practice is effective in facilitating long-term memory; if longterm retention is desired, practice should be spaced rather than
massed. “Cramming” does not promote long-term retention.
• Repetition with variety (paraphrasing, rephrasing, and other
forms of learner processing of information) is more effective for
long-term retention than rote reproduction. Regurgitation of
information is less likely to produce learning than reworking
and rephrasing it.
• With fully mature learners, all incorrect responses should be
accompanied by some explanatory feedback, not simply a
"wrong" mark.
• For mature learners, correct responses should not be indicated
by sound effects or other displays; a simple “OK” is sufficient.
• If feedback is to be delayed (for any reason, deliberate or
otherwise), trainees should be told how long the delay will be.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Learner participation
• Participation in learning may take many forms, limited chiefly
by the creativity of the participants, the resources, and the
technologies available. Possible examples include questions,
activities, seminars, learning teams, small-group discussions,
case studies, team learning, peer and cohort groups, written assignments, tests, field trips, labs, oral presentations of written
reports, debates, expert panels, etc. .
Higher-order thinking and concept formation
• In any discipline, the solving of authentic problems is the best
test of a learner’s mastery of facts, data sources, reasoning
processes, and fundamental principles.
• In Bloom's terms, concept formation occurs at the higher levels
of the taxonomy, specifically in activities that call for analysis,
synthesis, and evaluation.
• Non-examples are helpful in enabling learners to develop
concepts. They illustrate the differences between a concept and
others that are similar. Similarly, non-examples can help learners
to distinguish and clarify examples. When using examples and
non-examples, the contrast between them should initially be
large, and should be made progressively smaller as the learner
demonstrates the ability to discriminate.
• Concrete concepts are generally easier to grasp than abstract
ones, and thus may be useful in illustrating abstractions. It is
easier to learn abstract (or concrete) concepts when constructs
such as examples, models, analogies, descriptions, synonyms,
and definitions are used.
Constructivism and Media
The use of media for teaching assumes that learning, as both an
individual and a social activity , may
be facilitated by intentional interaction. Constructivism is a general
term for the view that the world is often too complex for general
principles to be useful in teaching, and that the best learning results
when the learner processes and integrates new experiences into his
or her existing constructs .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Constructivist teaching tends to be more holistic, more collaborative in method, and more encouraging and accepting of learner
initiatives, including greater freedom and variety in assignments
and assessments . The role of the instructor also
changes in constructivist teaching from “sage on the stage” to
“guide on the side,” or coach . Constructivism is discussed further
in Chapter 1 of this volume.
In relation to Figure 6-1, constructivist teaching addresses the
teaching tasks shown by emphasizing the learners’ unique
background and consequent preparedness. Constructivist learning
outcomes strive to apply real-world standards, and to assure that
learning outcomes are applicable beyond a merely academic
context. “Higher-order” constructivist outcomes have the potential
to be relevant in daily life to real problems or situations.
The uses of technology may vary, too, in different constructivist
environments. Social and radical constructivists view interaction as
of greater importance to learning than mere access to information,
while information processing and interactive constructivists view
information, facts, and contact with a wide circle of informed
people as critical to the student’s development of a fully adequate
construction of the world .
In common, constructivists tend to use technologies for
purposes such as those identified by Jonassen :
• acquainting and involving students with real-world problems
and situations.
• modeling the analytic and thinking skills of the instructor and
other experts, which learners then apply, with appropriate feedback, to their own problems and constructs.
• working within an authentic problem context that reflects as
much as possible the problem’s real context and characteristics.
Overall, the contribution online media often make to constructivist teaching is in expanding the range and variety of experiences
usually available in classroom-based learning. Because online
media are by definition linked to networks of external resources,
they can provide access to people, ideas, and information beyond
those found in the classroom. Whether the result is a nearly selfsufficient collaborative learning environment , or,
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
more simply, a forum for problem-based learning ,
the result is an opening-up of the learning space to a wider variety
of ideas and points of view.
Media, Modes, and Learning
Background Concepts
Technologies, as channels through which modes (symbols acting as
stimuli) pass, differ in the responses they evoke in users. For
example, text is a mode of presentation. Print-on-paper is one possible medium (channel) for text, but there are others: a computer
monitor, an overhead projection, a television screen, film (moving or
still), etc. Wherever it is used, text remains text, and must be read to
be comprehended.
Despite their different characteristics, useful online training
technologies have in common the effect of somehow bringing
students into contact with their tutors, the content, and their peers
 . In this way, media may help to reduce “transactional distance” in learning—the communication gap or psychological distance between participants which may open in a teachinglearning situation . Although similar in
producing these outcomes, the differences in how various
technologies accomplish their effects are important to their potential
usefulness.
Human and Technology-based Teaching
Technologies differ from one another, and instruction delivered
online differs from human-delivered teaching. Consider, in the
analysis below (Figure 6-2), the effects of media-based training
compared with training done by stand-up, face-to-face instructors
 .
A conclusion following from Figure 6-2 is that, as in most
instructional design decisions, there are trade-offs related to the
needs of the users and the resources available. An analysis such as
that presented above may assist in identifying the trade-offs involved
in the choice of one online technology over another approach.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
preparation
Interactivity
Consistency
performance
Figure 6-2.
Comparison of human
and technology-based
instruction.
Elements: Fischer, 1997, pp. 29-30.
Technology-based
Must be systematically
designed to conform to
the training plan
May depart from
industry standards if
subject-matter experts
are not carefully
selected, or if materials
are not kept current
Can focus on individual
needs for content,
pacing, review,
remediation, etc.
Can be up to 50%
higher than for
instructor-led group
Rigorously maintains
the standards set for it,
but may also adapt to
learner’s performance or
preferences, if designed
Better at keeping
records and generating
reports of outcomes;
designing systems to
adapt instruction based
on feedback (a
cybernetic system) is
costly, complex
Human trainer
Can design training to
correspond to the
training plan, then
assure subsequent
consistency with the
Presenters hired from
industry represent the
most current knowledge
and highest expertise
Tend to train the group,
ignore individual needs
Retention rates vary
Tend to adapt to the
audience, lose
consistency
Humans are especially
good at ongoing
evaluation, and
response to trainee
performance
Interestingly, it appears from Figure 6-2 that human trainers are
superior in exactly those activities shown to be overlooked in
Figure 6-1: planning and preparation, and feedback and performance tracking (in relation to higher-order outcomes). Human
trainers can deftly detect and respond to unexpected needs, if
disposed and permitted to do so, while technology-based training
programs must be specially designed to assess and respond to
unanticipated outcomes. Fleming’s framework again
appears to be superior for analysis of media’s design needs.
Media Characteristics and Impacts on Learning
Five types of media, from print to multimedia , are discussed below. The
intention is to make distinctions among media in relation to modes
of delivery and presentation commonly used in teaching and
training. The argument here is that, as technologies continue to
evolve, it will be increasingly possible, technically, to use ever more
complex media, including multimedia as defined above, to deliver
instruction. Criteria will be needed, therefore, for making wise
choices among the options, and for designing and supporting
instruction based not only on the capabilities of the technology to
deliver it, but also on the ability of learners to make effective use of
the tools.
Print and Text
There is no medium more ubiquitous than print, and no mode
more familiar than text in its many forms. Print was part of the first
teaching machine—the book—and books were the first massproduced commodity . Print has been the
dominant medium to date in distance education , and distance students have traditionally spent most of their
time studying alone, often using print materials only . The question is whether this situation is likely to continue.
The answer requires consideration of the strengths and weaknesses
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
of text and print. The chief strengths of print and text have
traditionally included
• cost—Bates reports that print is one of the lowest
cost one-way technologies.
• flexibility and robustness—print scores highest on these features
 .
• portability and ease of production—with desktop publishing
hardware and software, printing has become enormously
simpler and its quality much higher . In addition,
costs can be reduced with local production.
• stability —organization and sequencing are
positively affected, since text-only printed and online materials
can be reorganized and resequenced with relative ease by cutand-paste operations, using word-processors and HTML editors.
• convenience, familiarity, and economy—instruction and feedback are facilitated by the medium’s familiarity, as, for adept
learners and the highly literate, are higher-order thinking and
concept formation .
Ironically, the major disadvantages of print are related to some
of its advantages, and include those listed below (Newby et al.,
• Print is static, and may fail to gain adequate involvement from
low-functioning readers. Attention, perception and recall, and
active learner participation may thus be lower for less able
• Print is relatively non-interactive, or at least non-responsive, and
may lead to passive, rote learning.
• Print often requires substantial literacy levels.
Print is accessible (to the literate), and comparatively low in
cost; furthermore, online text is easy to produce, translates well
across various platforms and operating systems, and in some of its
forms, may be manipulated by the user if desired. However, print
may be seen by some as the “slightly seedy poor relation” of other instructional media. Text’s lack of appeal is
exacerbated by the alternatives to reading which are increasingly
appearing, and which use multimedia (especially audio and
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
graphics) and improvements in voice recognition and reproduction
technologies to make reading less critical for users. As a result, nonprint multimedia-based technologies could come to be regarded as
cost-effective, especially in cultures or industries where high levels
of literacy cannot be assumed, or where the costs of reading
inefficiencies are high. Developments such as instant text messaging
and e-paper could reverse this trend, giving print and print-based
materials new life, at least until e-paper-based multimedia evolve to
make text less important once more .
Still Graphics and Static Displays
A wide and growing selection of graphic technologies is available
to online programmers, from older technologies, such as overhead
projectors and 35mm slide projectors, broadcast TV, and preproduced videotapes, to various forms of digital video (interactive
and non-interactive), computer-generated video, and interpersonal
communications tools such as group and desktop videoconferencing using Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
Graphics can increase the motivation of users to attend, prompt
perception, and aid recall, and assist in the development of higherorder thinking and concept formation. Furthermore, still graphics
combine high information content (they can illustrate abstract or
unfamiliar concepts) with relatively low production and distribution costs. Online compression formats, such as .jpg, permit lowbandwidth distribution of high quality graphics.
Screen resolution can be an issue in the use of graphics. The size
at which a graphic is captured is key: capture at a high resolution
and display at a lower resolution will result in a much larger image,
which, depending upon the monitor’s settings, may not be
completely visible on the viewer’s screen; conversely, an image
captured at a lower resolution than that at which it is displayed will
appear smaller. The end-users’ likely technology platform should be
the standard, to ensure that graphics will be viewed as intended.
Online users should always be advised about which settings are
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Online static visual displays which draw upon established design
principles, including those listed below , are more likely to be successful.
• Visuals that emphasize the critical details relevant to learning
are most effective. Unnecessary visuals may be distracting,
especially to learners with limited attention spans or discrimination skills.
• The addition of detail and realism to displays does not increase
learning. Unnecessary detail can add to learning time without
increasing achievement, and in online situations can increase
transfer times dramatically. Depending on the relevance of the
cues to the learning task, simple line drawings tend to be
superior to photographs or more realistic drawings.
• Winn cautions that diagrams, charts, and
graphs should not be assumed to be self-explanatory, but may
require the learner to process the information given and to
understand certain conventions. He suggests that graphics
should routinely include supporting captions.
With the exception of instruction that directly employs color for
teaching (e.g., identifying color-coded elements), there is little
evidence that color enhances learning. Color may even distract
some learners . Some other
generalizations about color are given below .
• Color may increase the speed at which lists can be searched.
• The use of too many colors may reduce the legibility of a
presentation. A maximum of four colors was suggested in one
study, but up to eleven colors in screen displays were found to
be acceptable in another.
• The most highly recommended colors are vivid versions of
green, cyan, white, and yellow.
• The heavy use of color may degrade performance of some older
microcomputers and monitors, or may be displayed differently
on various systems.
Based on his review of the data, Szabo concluded that
“The disparity between effectiveness and perceived effectiveness is
nowhere as great as it is in the realm of color” (p. 27).
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Some further advice on the use of color in media production is
presented below .
• End-users should control the color of displays, given the
prevalence of color-blindness (found to some degree in 8% of
men and 0.5% of women).
• The best color display combinations are blue, black, or red on a
white background, or white, yellow, or green on a black
background.
For online uses of still graphics, the following characteristics of
the computer as a delivery medium must be accommodated by
developers .
• A PC screen is about 1/3 of a piece of paper in display area, and
most monitors are less sharp than the best laser printers or
photographic reproductions. Screen positioning is critical:
important information should go to the top-left; the lower-left is
the least noticed area of the page/screen. What works on paper
may not work, without translation or redesign, on a computer
screen. (Designers should not assume users have superior
equipment; design should be for displays of mid-range quality
and size.)
• Single-color backgrounds, with a high contrast ratio between
the background and the text, are easiest for readers; white or
off-white is best for the background.
• Textured backgrounds display differently on various systems,
and should be used with care, if at all.
• Sans serif fonts, with mixed upper and lower case, are best for
legibility and reading ease.
• The size of the font depends on the purpose. For extended
reading, smaller (12-point) fonts are suitable; for presenting
information that will be skimmed or scanned, larger fonts may
be more appropriate.
• Font changes can be effective for emphasis (size and type), as
can capitals, underlining, and especially the use of bolding. The
use of color alone should be avoided for emphasis, as systems
handle color differently. All of the above techniques should be
used sparingly, to preserve their impact.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Sound and Music
The principal issues in online audio are technical (storage and
bandwidth) and pedagogical. For maximum effect, materials must
not simply be a recorded version of another medium (e.g., a
lecture), but should be rescripted to incorporate and interrelate
with other modes of presentation .
Online audio (including, when file sizes are large, distribution by
CD and DVD) can be particularly useful in teaching for several
technical reasons, presented below.
• An audio summary of previous material can aid recall, help
retention, and lead to concept formation and higher-order
• Although CDs and DVDs are one-way technologies (noninteractive, like a lecture), they have the great advantage of
learner control.
CDs and DVDs are easy and cheap to produce and ship, and so
reduce cost and improve accessibility.
• The technology of discs is easy to use and familiar. Operating
systems (Windows, Apple OS, and Linux) now usually offer
built-in sound reproduction technologies for both streamed and
static sound files.
• The mode of presentation most often found on this medium, the
human voice, is a familiar and powerful teaching tool.
• Audio may be more motivating than print alone, and together
with print may form a powerful alternative and aid to reading
alone .
A key issue in selecting a mix of other technologies to be used
with audioconferencing is the relative importance of relationship
building vs. information exchange. Picard sees audioconferencing's key contribution in its ability to promote relationship
building in work or learning. The need for other technologies,
according to Picard, is dependent upon the degree to which there is
also a need to exchange information (for which, she warns, audio
is not particularly effective). The schema presented in Figure 6-3
emerges from Picard's analysis.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
In Picard’s analysis, when relationship building and
information exchange needs are both low, audioconferencing alone
may suffice. When both needs are high, however, audioconferencing, video, and data (including text) should all be present.
Relationship building can be enhanced by combining audioconferencing and video together with data, especially text. (Text has
formidable relationship building capabilities, as anyone who has
ever had a pen-pal knows, but it assumes considerable skill on the
user’s part.) Video increases the likelihood that interaction will
promote relationships, but audio alone is less capable of promoting
this outcome. Data exchange alone seems to do little to promote
relationships among those with access to other forms of interaction.
As technological evolutions permit more audio-based delivery,
both interactive (e.g., VoIP) and one-way (streaming audio clips),
research findings about audio’s teaching capabilities become
applicable .
• Learning gains from one-way audio alone are at best weak.
• Learners possessing higher verbal skills usually do not benefit
from audio added to text.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 6-3.
Association of
audioconferencing,
data, and video with
information exchange
and relationship
building objectives.
Information exchange
Audio + data
Audio + video
Audio only
Audio + data + video
Relationship building
• There are few or no apparent significant immediate recall effects
between text-only and text plus audio presentation, except that
sometimes audio may lengthen the time required to complete
instruction .
• Audio may limit the ability of learners to proceed through
material at their own individual rate.
• The quality and utility of digitized speech depends upon the
amount of compression, the sampling rate, and the bandwidth
available to the user.
• Users may relatively quickly become accustomed to synthetic
speech; however, more cognitive effort is needed, and increased
demands on short-term memory may reduce retention.
(Synthesized speech may be more useful in reading back a
learner’s work, for example from a word processor, than in
presenting unfamiliar learning content.)
• For general audiences, the possible benefits of audio must be
weighed against the increased costs. Exceptions include uses
such as language training, music instruction, and as an aid to the
visually impaired.
• Where possible, the learner should be able to decide whether or
not to use available audio.
The key limitation to the use of synchronous (live) audio on the
Internet continues to be bandwidth, but impressive advances in
VoIP audio programs are reducing the limitations. Some VoIP
packages permit only point-to-point voice communications
between two computers, while others permit point-to-multipoint
group interaction, much like a teleconference, and require as little
bandwidth as 56 Kbps. This online technology is expanding rapidly
in business: in 2001, the proportion of companies of 100
employees or more using VoIP for business communications rose
from 7% to 26% .
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Video and Animation
Video suffers from the same kinds of limitations as audio, but to an
even greater degree; bandwidth is the primary limitation to greater
video use online. According to Roberts , video
• adds a sense of direct involvement and physical presence among
geographically dispersed learners.
• provides quality learning opportunities (as good as or better
than those offered by other methods and technologies).
• gives distant sites live, interactive learning opportunities.
• enables the delivery of global expertise to remote learners.
• eliminates or reduces travel time and time away from jobs and
The following strengths of video for learning and teaching can
be exploited, with appropriate instructional strategies.
• The social presence and cohesion that video fosters among users
is often valued, especially by participants new to distance
education, and may improve motivation.
• The technology permits the sharing of various visual resources.
• Group-based learning activities may be more attractive and
feasible with video technology support.
• Well-designed and appropriately implemented uses of video can
help in the teaching of abstract, time-protracted, hazardous, or
unfamiliar concepts.
The advantages in actual practice of various forms of video
continue to be debated. In some studies, animation has been shown
to result in a reduction in study time, “suggesting that animation
results in more efficient learning” , with
learning effects persisting over time . There is, however, also some indication that, when compared with “highly imaginative examples and illustrations,” the
advantages of animated simulations were less obvious . Szabo concluded from his analysis
that “any widespread belief in the superiority of animation over
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
non-animated instruction within the context of computer-based
instruction is at odds with the research” .
According to Roberts , critical issues in the delivery of
video-based training include those listed below.
1. Proper training of instructors.
2. User self-consciousness.
3. Integration of other media into video presentations.
4. Optimum length of sessions and size of groups.
5. Session variety.
6. Technical design and support.
7. Professional quality visual elements. (p. 96)
Obviously, video delivery is complex, potentially costly, and of
uncertain benefit for some teaching tasks over simpler, more
economical media. A clear pedagogic and business case is obviously
needed for its use.
Multimedia
As Oliver notes, the term multimedia has not always
designated computer-based media, as it does now, but originally
referred to combinations of audio, visual, and print materials
delivered by various media. Now, however, “the term has been
adopted by the computer industry and re-defined to mean ‘the
integration of video, audio, graphics, and data within a single
computer workstation’ ” . Roblyer and Schwier 
note that the term has become “too slippery” to define easily, that
consensus about its characteristics is rare, and that as a concept it
is converging with others, including hypermedia.
While multimedia applications offer advantages and benefits,
these do not come without costs, awareness of which may help
users to make informed decisions about the true advantages of the
medium . The key concerns include unnecessary duplication of existing instructional materials;
teachers untrained in design becoming bogged down in the
production of low-quality multimedia; problems of assessment
using multimedia materials, which occur because learners using
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
hyperlinks in multimedia do not always cover the same material in
the same sequence; and high technical demands, with technical
difficulties arising because of the complexity of some multimedia
applications.
Obstacles to the widespread use of multimedia are myriad, and
arise in part from the fact that multimedia applications, even if
instituted carefully and with the intention of altering the learners'
experiences, are an example of change and innovation, and so may
provoke resistance, including such obstacles as :
• reluctance on the part of teachers to see materials transformed.
• the fear felt by users (staff and learners) over the level of
technical knowledge required to get involved.
• the need of many tutors for special training (which may or may
not be conveniently available) to use multimedia effectively.
• the significant challenge and expense of “adapting and
transforming material intended for traditional delivery methods
into new media” (p. 135).
• the desire to tinker endlessly and mindlessly on presentations,
with negative results for productivity . This effect,
called "the futz factor" , has been estimated
to cost US $5600 yearly for every corporate computer . Futzing may be a “revenge effect” of technology, an
unexpected and troubling result of the interaction of computer
technology with the “real world” .
Despite these potential limitations and weaknesses, multimedia
also has potential strengths when used appropriately. Newby et al.
 list the following advantages of multimedia for
instruction:
• multiple, active learning modalities.
• accommodation of different learning styles and preferences,
including disabilities.
• effective instruction across learning domains, including affective
and psychomotor (with simulations, case studies, and other
representational and interactive uses), promoting development
of higher-order thinking skills, and concept formation.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• realism, especially when coupled with graphics and video.
• potential interactivity.
• individualization, with use of computer branching capabilities
and CML (computer-managed learning).
• consistent experiences, compared with group-based face-to-face
instruction.
• potential for high levels of learner control.
The impact of multimedia in teaching is ultimately dependent
upon the incorporation of certain principles that govern its
usefulness and effects. Mayer has suggested seven such
principles, based on empirical evidence from his ongoing research
on multimedia and actual learning. These principles not only
describe the various impacts of multimedia on learning, they also
constitute a good basic primer for instructional designers working
with media generally.
1. Multimedia principle: Students learn better from words and
graphics or pictures than from words alone (p. 68).
2. Spatial contiguity principle: Students learn better when
corresponding words and pictures are presented near rather
than far from each other on the page or screen.
3. Temporal contiguity principle: Students learn better when
corresponding words and pictures are presented simultaneously
rather than successively.
4. Coherence principle: Students learn better when extraneous
words, pictures, and sounds are excluded rather than included
5. Modality principle: Students learn better from animation and
audible narration than from animation and on-screen text
6. Redundancy principle: People have only limited capacity to
process visual and auditory material presented simultaneously
(p. 152); therefore, students learn better from animation and
narration than from a combination of animation, generation,
and onscreen text (p. 153).
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
7. Individual differences principle: Design effects are stronger for
low-knowledge learners than for high-knowledge learners, and
for high-spatial-ability learners than for low-spatial-ability
learners (p. 184). (Spatial ability is the ability mentally to
generate, maintain, and manipulate visual images, see p. 172.)
The Internet
As noted at the outset of this chapter, “online learning” almost
always denotes learning “on the Internet.” The Internet offers both
advantages and challenges to educators and trainers. The
advantages arise from the Internet's enormous capacity to link
participants with information and with each other . But problems with navigation, structure,
interactivity, complexity, security, and sheer consumption of time
must be addressed.
The Internet is potentially a powerful linking and communication vehicle. Heinich, Molenda, Russell, and Smaldino suggest that the Internet’s power lies in its capacity for
providing numerous connections to engrossing, multi-sensory
experiences, suited to individual needs. The fact that these can be
constructed by teachers themselves, and can incorporate knowledge of their students’ needs and feature meaningful studentstudent collaboration and student-teacher interaction, also makes
the Internet a revolutionary learning tool. At the same time, the
Web’s inherent lack of structure may result in some users getting
unintentionally “lost in cyberspace,” or making poor use of time
(“surfing,” or exploring interesting but irrelevant minutiae). Also,
Internet materials often fail to exploit the medium’s potential for
interactivity, consisting of one-way presentations of information.
The reliability of online information may also be suspect, unless its
provenance is known. And successful use of the Internet currently
demands proficient literacy and computer skills. (As noted earlier,
this may change as bandwidth availability makes supplemental
audio and video more available.)
In relation to Figure 6-1, the Internet offers a means for gaining
the attention of learners, and of presenting opportunities for
focusing perceptions and prompting recall. Learner participation
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
can also be supported, especially with CMC and use of
collaborative learning projects. Providing instruction, and assuring
appropriate organization, sequencing, and higher-order outcomes
are less easily accomplished with the Internet, for reasons discussed
Limitations such as those mentioned above may account for
some of the increasing class of former users called “Internet
dropouts.” Of those who have stopped using the Internet, only
28% expect to return, having concluded that they have “no need”
for the Web. While other reasons include cost (cited by 17% of
dropouts) and lack of convenient access to a computer (14%), the
fact that lack of utility is the most common reason indicates a
serious potential problem for future Internet growth: unless a tool
has a perceived legitimate purpose, it may not prosper, or even
survive .
Two related Internet-based media show particular instructional
promise for those with the skill and discipline to use them well,
especially in relation to organization and sequencing challenges
presented by the Internet: hypermedia and hypertext. Hypermedia
is the linking of multimedia documents, while hypertext is the
linking of words or phrases to other words or phrases in the same
or another document. Internet delivery may be hyperlinked or
linear. As a technology, hypermedia has existed for decades, but
with advances in hardware, software, and human-computer
interfaces, it is now technically feasible to incorporate hypermedia
systems routinely in teaching, and dozens of hypertext and
hypermedia development systems now exist.
While hypermedia permit huge amounts of information from a
variety of media to be stored in a compact and easily accessible
form, the sheer amount of available information may also
overwhelm learners, especially if they are unable to refine a search
or conduct an exploration successfully (with focus). Users require
skills (some technical, others related to organization and selfdiscipline) to make efficient use of hypermedia materials
 . Although the results of hypertext use
in teaching have previously been somewhat mixed , the promise is in the potential to offer self-directed
learners the option to control the details of their own learning to a
much greater extent than is possible in group instruction. With
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
emerging online communications capabilities, the ability for
teachers to oversee and monitor this kind of learning also increases.
The problem, as in many of these new implementations, is to
overcome the users’ tendency only to “focus on facilitating access
to information,” and not on actual learning outcomes . This is an important distinction, and one that could
be applied to any of the media discussed here.
Conclusion
Online learning is still in its early infancy. There are many outstanding, and, in some cases, vexing issues: costs are declining, but
still limit widespread access; many users (teachers, trainers and
learners) feel they do not have all the skills they need to make
mature use of online learning’s potential; administrators and
policy-makers often overstate the likely impacts of going online
 ; and the relation of learning outcomes to technology use, for specific populations and in particular circumstances, has not been clearly identified, and is not well understood
 .
Although these realities prove that there must be evolution
before online learning can be seen as mature, at the same time there
are promising signs. Access to the Internet is improving, especially
for some previously disenfranchised groups; for example, women
as a group now exceed men in numbers of Internet users . Some consensus about good practice is emerging, including
examples of clearly successful uses of technology to meet persistent
learning needs. Finally, in-service training is increasingly available
to potential users.
Will these trends continue? Change has been a constant in the
online learning world, and as technical capabilities come out of the
lab, they are quickly packaged and made available to users by
entrepreneurs. Education could keep pace, and could avoid the
costs and uncertainties of invention, by merely following the technological lead of the corporate sector.
Whether online learning follows this path or not, it has a good
chance to grow because online access to information—wired or
wireless, structured or user-driven—and interaction using various
computer-based technologies are established social and economic
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
realities . Whether one deplores or applauds this reality, it is
nevertheless a fact that as a culture we now go online for many
purposes. Consequently, every educator—and especially every
distance educator and trainer—should consider the potential of
online media as an element of their practice.
References
Bates, A. W. . Technology for distance education: A 10-year
prospective. Open Learning, 3(3), 3-12.
Bates, A. W. . Technology, open learning and distance
education. New York: Routledge.
Bates, A. W., Harrington, R., Gilmore, D., & van Soest, C. .
Compressed video and video-conferencing in open and distance
learning: A guide to current developments. Unpublished
manuscript, The Open Learning Agency, Burnaby, BC.
Bloom, B. S. . Human characteristics and school learning.
Toronto: McGraw-Hill.
Bloom, B. S. . The 2-sigma problem: The search
for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one
tutoring. Educational Researcher, 4-16.
Bloom, B. S., Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. J., Hill, W. H., &
Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). . Taxonomy of educational
objectives: The classification of educational goals. Handbook 1:
Cognitive domain. New York: David McKay.
Bourdieu, P. . Distinction: A social critique of the judgment
of taste. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bridges, E. M. . Problem-based learning: Background and
rationale. In E. M. Bridges, Problem-based learning for administrators. ERIC Documents: ED347617.
Burge E. J., & Roberts, J. M. . Classrooms with a difference:
A practical guide to the use of conferencing technologies.
Toronto: University of Toronto, OISE Distance Learning Office.
Cannell, L. . Review of [distance education] literature.
Unpublished paper. Distance education association of
theological schools, Winnipeg, MB.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Carroll, J. B. . A model of school learning. Teachers College
Record, 64, 723-733.
Chen, Y., & Willits, F. . A path analysis of the concepts in
Moore's theory of transactional distance in a videoconferencing
environment. Journal of Distance Education, 13(2), 51-65.
Chickering, A., & Gamson, Z. . Seven principles for
good practice in undergraduate education. AAHE Bulletin, 3-7.
Coleman, S., Perry, J., & Schwen, T. . Constructivist
instructional development: Reflecting on practice from an
alternative paradigm. In A. J. Romiszowski (Ed.), Instructional
development paradigms (pp. 269-282). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Educational Technology Publications.
Cooper, P. . Paradigm shifts in designed instruction: From
behaviorism to cognitivism to constructivism. Educational
Technology, 23(5)12-19.
Crompton, S., Ellison, J., & Stevenson, K. Better things to do or
dealt out of the game? Internet dropouts and infrequent users.
Retrieved January 27, 2004, from the Statistics Canada Web
site, 
2002065000s2a01.pdf
Dalal, S. . Futzers draining production budgets.
The Edmonton Journal, pp. F-1, 8.
Fahy, P. J. . Reflections on the productivity paradox and
distance education technology. Journal of Distance Education,
13(2), 66-73.
Fernandez, B. . Productivity improvements not
computing. Edmonton Journal, p. J16.
Fischer, B. . Instructor-led vs. interactive: Not an
either/or proposition. Corporate University Review, 5(1),
pp. 29-30.
Fleming, M. . Displays and communication. In R. M. Gagne
(Ed.), Instructional technology foundations (pp. 233-260).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
French, D., Hale, C., Johnson, C., & Farr, G. (Eds.). .
Internet-based learning. London: Kogan Page.
Gagne, R. M. . The conditions of learning (2d ed.). New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Garrison, D. R. . Understanding distance education: A
framework for the future. New York: Routledge.
Garrison, D. R. . Theoretical challenges for distance
education in the twenty-first century: A shift from structural to
transactional issues. International Review of Research in Open
and Distance Learning, 1(1). Retrieved July 14, 2003, from
 
Garrison, P. . Analyzing the analysts. Flying, 128(3), 95-97.
Grabe, C., & Grabe, M. . Integrating technology for
meaningful learning. Toronto: Houghton Mifflin.
Grow, G. . Teaching learners to be self-directed.
Adult Education Quarterly, 41(3), 125-149.
Haughey, M., & Anderson, T. . Networked learning: The
pedagogy of the Internet. Montreal: Chenelière/McGraw-Hill.
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J. D., & Smaldino, S. E. .
Instructional media and technologies for learning (5th ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Helm, P., & McClements, R. . Multimedia business training:
The big thing or the next best thing? In J. Frankl & B. O’Reilly
(Eds.). 1996 EDEN Conference: Lifelong learning, open
learning, distance learning (pp. 134-137). Poitiers, France:
European Distance Education Network.
Henriques, L. . Constructivist teaching and learning.
Retrieved March 14, 2000, from 
/snsc/temporary/cnstrct.htm
Ihde, D. . Philosophy of technology. New York: Paragon
Jonassen, D. . Designing constructivist learning environments. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional theories and
models (2d ed.) (pp. 1-21). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Koumi, J. . Media comparisons and deployment: A
practitioner’s view. British Journal of Educational Technology,
25(1), 41-57.
Kozma, R. . Learning with media. Review of Educational
Research, 61(2), 179 -211.
Machrone, B. . The price of wireless shopping. PC
Magazine, 20(6), 77.
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Maier, P., Barnett, L., Warren, A., & Brunner, D. . Using
technology in teaching and learning. London: Kogan Page.
Mann, C. . Electronic paper turns the page.
Technology Review, 104(2), 42-48.
Marchionini, G. . Hypermedia and learning: Freedom and
chaos. Educational Technology, 28(11), 8-12.
Mayer, R. E. . Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
McLuhan, M. . Understanding media, the extensions of
man. Toronto: McGraw-Hill.
Mehlinger, H. . School reform in the information
age. Phi Delta Kappan, 77(6), 400-407. Retrieved July 16,
2003, from 
Merrill, P. F. . Software evaluation. In P. Merrill,
K. Hammons, B. R. Vincent, P. L. Reynolds, & L. B.
Christensen, Computers in education (3d ed.) (pp. 109-119).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Moore, M. G. . Three types of interaction. American Journal
of Distance Education, 3(2), 1-6. Retrieved July 14, 2003, from
 
Net Talk. . PC Magazine, 20(19), p. 27.
Networking . CA*net 4 coming down the pipe.
Retrieved July 14, 2003, from 
/may2002/briefs.html#1
Newby, T., Stepich, D., Lehman, J., & Russell, J. .
Instructional technology for teaching and learning (2d ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.
Nikiforuk, A. . The digerati are bluffing. The Globe
and Mail, p. D15.
Oliver, E. L. . Video tools for distance education. In B. Willis
(Ed.), Distance education strategies and tools (pp. 165-173).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Pastore, M. . Women maintain lead in Internet use.
Retrieved July 18, 2002, from 
/big_picture/demographics/article/0,,5901_786791,00.html
Picard, J. . Creating virtual work teams using IP
videoconferencing. Presentation at the Distance Education
Technology ’99 Workshop, Edmonton, Alberta.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Pittman, V. V. . The persistence of print: Correspondence
study and the new media. The American Journal of Distance
Education, 1(1), 31-36.
Roberts, J. . Compressed video learning: Creating active
learners. Toronto: Chenelière/McGraw-Hill.
Roblyer, M. D., & Schwier, R. A. . Integrating educational
technology into teaching, Canadian edition. Toronto: Pearson
Education Canada, Inc.
Rockley, A. . Intranet publishing. Stouffville, ON: The
Rockley Group.
Rupley, S. . I2, near you. PC Magazine, 21(4), 21.
Scriven, B. . Trends and issues in the use of communication
technologies in distance education. In G. Davies & B. Samways
(Eds.), Teleteaching (pp. 71-78). North-Holland: Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Szabo, M. . A survey of research on selected components of
interactive multimedia on learning, efficiency and attitude.
Unpublished paper, the University of Alberta, Department of
Educational Psychology, Edmonton.
Szabo, M. . Survey of educational technology research. The
Educational Technology Professional Development Project
(ETPDP) Series. Edmonton, AB: Grant MacEwan Community
College and Northern Alberta Institute of Technology.
Tenner, A. T. . Why things bite back: Technology and the
revenge of unintended consequences. New York: Knopf.
Welsch, E. . Cautious steps ahead. Online Learning, 6(1),
Media Characteristics and Online Learning Technology
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Design and
Development
Volume 1–Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 7
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ONLINE COURSES
Dean Caplan
Bow Valley College
Introduction
In the ideal world, instructional media developers—those who will
actually create the planned instructional materials with which the
student will interact—are included in the course development
process from the beginning, to consult with and advise course team
members on development-related topics as they arise. Then, on
receiving a detailed design document from the subject matter expert
or instructor, developers will set to work, assured that
• the instructional designs of the learning materials are stable
because they have been based firmly on sound, proven learning
• these instructional designs will meet the institution’s identified
and articulated internal and external standards for quality,
usability, and interoperability;
• appropriate media have been selected to meet these standards;
• the technologies selected for course delivery are not
superfluous—rather, the course design will exploit the unique
characteristics of the selected media in engaging and supporting
both learners and teachers (such characteristics may include
accessibility of content, multimedia, hyperlinking, multiple or
global perspectives, ease of revision, accommodation of many
forms of interaction, etc.); and
• the designs are practical and can be developed in a cost-effective
and timely way.
Of course, most of us do not have the luxury of working in an
ideal world. There’s a good chance that a very thick file has just
landed on your desk(top), and you’re not sure where to start! The
first part of this chapter discusses the infrastructures that must be
in place to support the development of course materials. The
second part considers the key roles on a course production team, a
few instructional development models, and some technical issues in
the process of developing an online course.
What Must Be in Place before Development Can Occur
Computer-mediated distance education is becoming ubiquitous and
is being demanded more and more by students. However, despite
what some might believe, Internet-based instruction is by no means
the “magic bullet” that automatically guarantees a rich learning
environment. Although research continues to confirm that there is
no significant difference among student outcomes based on mode
of course delivery , we must keep in mind that Webbased distance education technology and pedagogy is still very
much in its infancy. Hence, those of us working in Internet-based
instruction are blazing new trails in developing the essential
elements and processes that will lead to high-quality, active, online
learning environments.
It is generally agreed that the World Wide Web is a compelling,
resource-rich, multimedia environment with great potential to
serve large numbers of widely dispersed students at relatively low
cost. Although many educational institutions have undertaken
strategic planning for the systematic implementation of Web-based
distance education, not all have succeeded. An institutional model
that is distinct from the traditional instructional-planning model,
and that supports the design, development, and implementation of
high-quality instruction on the Internet, is a fundamental
requirement for gaining support for Web-based instruction from
faculty, administrators, and students. Each of these stakeholder
groups has to be assured that Web-based instruction is a viable
means of delivering courses and programs, and accommodating
student needs. To create those assurances, the Web-based
instruction model that is to be implemented must deal with some
fundamental issues that may have never been addressed before.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Definition of an Online Course
What does it mean for a course to be considered “online”? Since
the Web-based delivery option is new to many institutions, there is
no standard, accepted definition of what constitutes an online
course. An examination of Internet-based courses currently offered
reveals two basic categories, with a large middle ground: courses
that are primarily text based (the text being delivered either online
or by mailed hard copy), with computer-mediated enhancements;
and courses that are designed specifically for the distributed
Internet setting, and that merge several smaller educational
components into a single course of study.
To date, the majority of distance-education courses found on the
Web are of the former type, involving text that has merely been
converted to electronic form and placed on a Web site for students
to read, or, more likely, to print and then read. The advantages of
this method of delivery include getting the materials to the student
almost immediately and circumventing postal delays; facilitating
easy searching and manipulation of the text by the student; cutting
the costs of publishing and shipping; and increasing the ease of
development (often using a course template), updating, and
revision. In addition, the communications capability of the Internet
allows for a variety of forms of student-student; student-content,
and student-teacher interaction, which can be used to augment the
students’ independent interaction with the printed course contents.
An example of a text-based, template-produced online course can
be seen at .
The loudest criticisms of this type of course are that it does not
make any use of the multi-modal, computer-mediated instructional
means that are available, and that the printing costs are
downloaded onto the student. Another criticism is that these textbased online courses are often supplemented with electronic
interactive tools, such as discussion forums and chats, that are
implemented as “extras” or afterthoughts to the course—their
pedagogical value is often artificial and suspect.
As online course development evolves, the type of course at the
other end of the online course spectrum is gaining popularity. These
courses take advantage of the strengths of the Internet as a teaching
The Development of Online Courses
and learning environment; that is, its open, distributed, dynamic,
globally accessible, filtered, interactive, and archival nature .
In this type of online course, all course materials and activities
are Internet based. Although text can still play a part in instruction,
it appears in short, concise “chunks”; the instruction is also
distributed among other multimedia components. These online
components, which are becoming known as learning objects,
include text; electronic mail, discussion boards, chat utilities, voice
over Internet protocol, and instant messaging; synchronous audio;
video clips; interactive activities, simulations, and games; selfgrading exercises, quizzes, and examinations; and Web sites.
Building an entire course of study around these learning objects
can satisfy both immediate learning needs, as in a knowledge-based
or skills-based course, and current and future learning needs that are
not course based . To date, finding an exemplary
course built entirely around learning objects is difficult; however,
Web sites such as National Geographic’s children’s site (http://
www.nationalgeographic.com/kids) and the British Broadcasting
Corporation’s history site ( 
_zone) show the beginnings of how multi-media objects can be used
online to promote learning in a subject area.
The type of online course you are planning to develop might fall
into one of the two categories above, or it might fit somewhere in
between, and it might contain any combination of the above
learning objects. However, regardless of how you define your
online instructional materials, your course should contain certain
administrative documents to help instructors organize and prepare,
and to help orient students, especially if they are new to online
learning. These documents could include
• a personalized letter of welcome for each new student.
• general information about online learning, technology requirements, and the resources available to students for technical help
and for obtaining the proper software and Internet services
required for the course.
• information about how to access the course on the Web, and
how to navigate it it successfully.
• student log-in and password information for course Web site.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• rules, procedures, and help for use of the interactive tools.
• a course syllabus—preferably on public pages so that prospective students can see what they are getting into in advance—
including instructor or tutor contact information; a course
overview; a course schedule; a list of required text and materials
(if applicable); clearly defined academic and computer skills
prerequisites; clear communication about expectations; instructions about activities, assignments, and deadlines; faculty contact information and office hours; and student support contact
information.
• administrative regulations, including guidelines on plagiarism,
privacy, academic appeal procedures, library facilities, and access to counseling and advisory services
Faculty Buy-in
The World Wide Web was unveiled in 1992, and only in the past
few years has it begun to be accepted as a workable vehicle for the
delivery of instruction. Consequently, many faculty working in
post-secondary educational institutions were not hired with the
expectation that they would employ educational technology in
their teaching. This new mode of learning is also redefining
teaching. Access to new cohorts of students and to new media
makes it possible, sometimes necessary, to teach in new, innovative
Some faculty will take to these new methods immediately; others
will be unsure if they have, or even want, the technical abilities to
develop an online course. The importance of the degree to which
faculty feel that they are receiving encouragement and solid support
in all areas of online development should not be underestimated.
Administrators can initiate certain policies designed to encourage
and support faculty acceptance of online teaching. Faculty should be
reassured that they are not about to lose their jobs to technology,
but rather that they can expand the ways they do their jobs by
employing technology. Finally, it is crucial that undertaking the
considerable personal effort and risk to develop courses and teach
online is adequately rewarded, especially within the merit award
and promotion processes associated with performance reviews.
The Development of Online Courses
Focus on Sound Pedagogy
Any given instructional strategy can be supported by a number
of contrasting technologies (old and new), just as any given
technology might support different instructional strategies. But
for any given instructional strategy, some technologies are better
than others: Better to turn a screw with a screwdriver than a
hammer—a dime may also do the trick, but a screwdriver is
usually better. 
Faculty concerns about using new teaching methods and media
often center on pedagogy. Unfortunately, there are many examples
to be found of poor pedagogical application in Web-based
instruction, often in the form of the text-based online courses
described above. The prevalence of such examples is largely the
result of the novelty of the notion of online instruction, and of the
fact that a critical mass has yet to be achieved, in design and in
practice, that proves the value of online learning. One way to
address concerns about inferior pedagogy online is to dictate that
the same educational standards will apply to the development of
instruction for the Internet as to any other delivery medium, such
as the classroom.
The American Association of Higher Education’s “Seven
principles for good practice in undergraduate education” is one
such set of standards . Originally
written for classroom instruction, it was subsequently revised to
include online educational practice, and is now widely accepted
among post-secondary institutions.
Good practice in undergraduate education:
1. Encourages contacts between students and faculty.
2. Develops reciprocity and cooperation among students.
3. Uses active learning techniques.
4. Gives prompt feedback.
5. Emphasizes time on task.
6. Communicates high expectations.
7. Respects diverse talents and ways of learning. (p. 3)
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Arthur Chickering and Steve Erhmann have recently updated
these practice guidelines to illustrate how communications
technologies, and especially the Internet, can be used to support
these seven “good practices” (see 
/programs/seven.html).
Another set of standards is presented in the Western Interstate
Commission for Higher Education’s “Principles of Good Practice
for Electronically Offered Academic Degree and Certificate
Programs” . Some of these principles can be
paraphrased as follows.
• Programs provide for timely and appropriate interaction
between students and faculty and among students.
• The institution’s faculty assumes responsibility for and exercises
oversight over distance education, ensuring both the rigor of
programs and the quality of instruction.
• The institution provides appropriate faculty support services
specifically related to distance education.
• The institution provides appropriate training for faculty who
teach in distance education programs.
• The institution ensures that students have access to and can
effectively use appropriate library resources.
• The institution provides adequate access to the range of student
services appropriate to support the programs, including
admissions, financial aid, academic advising, delivery of course
materials, and placement and counseling.
Your institution may have its own set of standards. The point,
however, is that all instructional endeavors, regardless of their
medium of delivery, should be measured equally against an
explicitly stated set of criteria.
New Teaching Paradigm
The unique possibilities inherent in Web-based instruction originate,
not from the Web itself, but from the instructionally innovative
ways in which it may be used. It is helpful to consider the Web not
simply as a new medium for distance education delivery, but also as
The Development of Online Courses
a partnership of a new teaching paradigm and new technology,
creating the potential for fundamental changes in how we undertake
teaching and learning.
Instructors and other members of the online course development
team should strive to create learning environments that exploit the
features inherent in computers and the Web, in order to promote
active learning that resides in the control of the student, and that
can effectively lead to the development of high-order and critical
thinking skills. In addition to the AAHE’s seven principles, cited
above, Fox and Helford list several more suggestions
specific to effective teaching online. They are paraphrased below.
• Develop tolerance for ambiguity (recognize that there may be no
“right” answer to a given question, emphasize cognitive
flexibility).
• Use scaffolding principles (create material that is slightly too
difficult for the student, to encourage cognitive “stretch”).
• Use problems that require students to understand and
manipulate course content.
• Create opportunities for high levels of interaction, both studentstudent and instructor-student.
• Integrate formative assessment throughout the course.
Teacher Education Is Critical
One of the WICHE principles of good practice recommends
appropriate training for faculty who use technology to teach by
distance education. Many of the skills that faculty had honed in
face-to-face settings no longer apply online; and some teachers
must “unlearn” certain teaching methods as much as they need to
learn new ones. For the sake of both teacher and learner, faculty
should undergo some training before launching into the online
teaching arena.
One way for faculty to become familiar with the skills and
resources needed to be successful online teachers is to become
online learners. Many institutions advocate that their online
teaching faculty initially enroll in an online course that teaches
them how to develop online instruction. This strategy often proves
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
invaluable, as teachers experience the same challenges that their
students will face: problems with inadequate computer abilities,
learning about the variety of interactive tools, and underestimating
the amount of time needed to complete the online readings and
homework. To be successful in the online course, faculty must not
only develop new pedagogical skills, but like their students, they
must also gain new administrative and technical skills. The lists
below summarize the most crucial of these new skills.
Pedagogical proficiencies
• Think of the online environment as just a different kind of
classroom for interacting with students.
• Look at other online courses, take some yourself, and ask
colleagues if you can access theirs.
• Be prepared to invest the effort and time necessary to deliver a
course online. Exploit technology to help provide students with
responses to questions and requests for assistance, as well as
timely feedback on assignments and grades.
• Always remember to weigh how important something is against
how much time it takes to transmit and receive it, and to ask
whether or not the user can see and hear exactly the way you
• Be creative in planning how to use technology to teach more
effectively. To inform your planning, invest time and effort in
gaining a basic understanding of how the technology works (see
“Technical skills,” below).
Administrative skills
• Teaching online often requires more anticipatory effort than
teaching in a classroom. Lay out your ground rules right away.
Unless you explicitly tell them otherwise, students will want to
interact with you right when they need you. Earlier, you were
advised to create a course syllabus. The syllabus should include
the class rules, and you should make sure that your students read
it, so that they are aware of the rules. Then stick to those rules.
• Find out where your help is, and know when use it. As
mentioned in the WICHE principles above, your institution
should have various personnel whose job it is to support you;
The Development of Online Courses
for example, computing helpdesk staff or media development
departments. Find out who those people are before you need
them, and do not wait to call on them.
Technical skills
• Determine whether you possess that basic PC skills; for example,
at minimum a familiarity with file structure, with opening,
copying, saving, and moving files, with creating and managing
backup files, with keyboard and mouse functions, with screen
and windows features, and with Web browser functions.
• Determine whether you need to learn new software applications
for teaching on the Web, and if so, whether you are willing to
learn them, and whether can you do so with external support
• Determine whether your institution supplies regular training in
new software applications.
• Make certain that you are very comfortable with using e-mail. It
will be the most common means of communication with
• Make certain that you understand basic Internet functionality,
bandwidth, and connections speed issues. Your computer and
computing environment is probably not like the ones that your
students are using. At work, you are likely to be using a local
area network (LAN), but when you log on using a modem and
an older computer, you get a better sense of what your students
see and experience.
• Make certain that you have a basic understanding of how Web
browser windows on different types of machines affect the
appearance and functionality of your material.
Time and Resource Management
During the semester in which the course is implemented, the
instructor’s time is frequently taken up with responding to student
e-mails, marking homework assignments, and dealing with other
interactive components of the class, such as discussion forums and
chats. Because of the nature of Web courses, student interaction
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
will be sporadic, and will at times produce a surge of e-mail
messages for the instructor to respond to. So, for example, an
instructor should expect to receive many e-mail messages at the
beginning of the course (students will initially have many questions
about online learning), if course material becomes inaccessible as a
result of technological problems, and from students experiencing
difficulty with submitting assignments. To deal with e-mail
messages, instructors can
• solicit help from a technical assistant (graduate student, teaching
assistant, etc.) to respond to course e-mails;
• create a “frequently asked questions” page, where students can
find information typically needed throughout the course;
• create a protocol in which students must ask questions over the
course forum (bulletin board) prior to e-mailing the instructor;
• refer students to a helpdesk contact to handle the inevitable
technological obstacles that are inherent in accessing a Webbased course.
It is important that you get your course online, but it is equally
important that you plan and design your course completely before
it is opened to students, because positive first impressions in this
new medium are vital for the success of teachers and learners.
Trying to develop course materials while teaching the course can be
overwhelming.
Many instructors underestimate the time and assets required to
develop, maintain, and offer an online course. Efficient planning
and time management are fundamental to the success of the course.
Faculty are strongly advised to become familiar with their institution’s Web development unit, technical training unit, IT unit, and
other supports, and to strike a strong working relationship with
those supports.
Rewarding Faculty
A final strategic building block in the success of online course
offerings is the institutional development of a process that encourages and inspires faculty to be creative in a Web-based environ-
The Development of Online Courses
ment. Faculty are often suspicious about technology-based instruction, and hesitant to experiment with it. Setting up supportive
systems, as described above, will go a long way toward gaining
faculty “buy in.” However, it is often more meaningful for faculty
members to know that they will receive recognition for their
willingness to engage in innovative online education activities, and
that their efforts will reward them with tenure, promotion, salary
merit increases, and other tangible benefits.
Online Course Development
Centralizing the Online Development Unit
Online course development is a complex endeavor, and it is not
reasonable to believe that a high calibre online course of instruction
can be created by just one or two people. Quality courseware
production requires a highly organized, concerted effort from many
Centralizing Web development roles into one departmental unit
has proved to be beneficial in ensuring that courses are of high
quality and meet institutional guidelines. Members of this
department may be described as “para-academics,” a role comparable to that of paramedic in medicine. Para-academics are the
“first on the scene” of course development; they liaise with the
course author or subject matter expert (SME) throughout the
authoring process to prevent or remove any instructional barriers
that might arise, and they also look after the interests of the
institution (e.g., obtaining copyright permissions for images used in
the course) and undertake other routine tasks that must be dealt
with before a course can be published. Roles in this group include
project manager, copy editor, IT expert, HTML coder, media
developer, instructional designer, graphic designer, administrative
assistant, and, sometimes, copyright officer.
The Course Development Team
The core of an online course development team might comprise as
few as five key roles: SME or author, graphic designer, Web
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
developer, programmer, and instructional designer. In larger commercial organizations, it is not uncommon for development teams
to be much larger, as the expertise in each of these five roles is
subdivided and specialists are employed. However, in non-profit
education circles, where budgets are tight, it is more likely that a
few people will fulfill hyphenated roles; Web developerprogrammer, for example.
There are both advantages and disadvantages to these
hyphenates. Although one person who performs multiple roles can
perhaps exercise more creative control, their workload may, in
essence, double. Hyphenates can also see their capabilities and their
output become “watered-down,” as they end up working in areas
in which they may not have expertise. The reality is that, in online
educational development today, those who already possess strong
skills in at least one of the areas described above are considered
even more valuable if they also possess the ability and desire to
learn new skills in other areas.
It is worth noting that, as the popularity of the Internet continues to increase, software applications and other development
tools that are able to combine and automate several development
tasks into a single package are constantly being introduced.
Macromedia’s Flash® application is one example: it allows its users
to create script-based interactions without actually writing any programming code, and to export the results in a Web-based format
automatically, without having any in-depth knowledge of Web
development.
Although the team roles are described and discussed linearly
here, each member will work with other team members, often in
different combinations and at different stages within the
development process.
Subject Matter Expert
SMEs are responsible for ensuring that the content of the online
course is an appropriate alternative to the lecture content normally
given in a traditional course. In addition, the SME must write the
exercises, activities, and examinations needed to reinforce the new
learning. It is also essential that SMEs commit to working as an
integral part of the team throughout the development process,
The Development of Online Courses
ensuring that the online course content is easy to access and
interesting for the students. Other tasks that SMEs perform include
• identifying or creating textbooks, readings, and resources;
• ensuring a pedagogical “match” among the course objectives,
content, exercises, examinations, and assignments;
• identifying materials that require copyright clearance, and
providing the instructional designer with the necessary
information; and
• providing other team members with a legible copy of any
written material.
Instructional Designer
While there are hundreds of instructional design models, certain
generic processes emerge from their common features . These processes are described by Seels and
Glasgow as follows.
• Analysis—the process of defining what is to be learned.
• Design—the process of specifying how learning will occur.
• Development—the process of authoring and producing the
materials.
• Implementation—the process of installing the instruction in
the real world.
• Evaluation—the process of determining the impact of
instruction. (p. 7)
In practical terms, the instructional designer
• helps to make the SME aware of appropriate pedagogical
strategies and options;
• helps to determine, create, and adapt instructional resources;
• provides advice on how best to present information;
• writes statements of learning outcomes;
• sequences learning outcomes;
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• sequences activities;
• evaluates instruction;
• arranges technical production and services;
• usually acts as project manager;
• acts as editor; and
• acts as Web developer.
Web Developer
It is one of the challenges of the Web course designer to help create
an atmosphere of confidence in the process in the early stages of
development. Web developers should show faculty examples of
online materials that illustrate the various kinds of content and
interactive options that are available to them. They should then
describe to faculty how their courses can be produced using a
consistent organizational template that provides students with
knowledge of the learning objectives, an outline of the content,
assignments, evaluation information, resources, links, a list of
requirements, and FAQs. An example of such a template is
available at 
 .
Other roles of the Web developer include
• helping the SME or instructor to use the tools to create the
course Web pages, and to maintain the course when complete;
• helping the instructor or tutor to use the tools needed to make
the course interactive, such as e-mail and chat utilities;
• working with the graphic designer to conceptualize the screens,
backgrounds, buttons, window frames, and text elements in the
• creating interactivity, and determining the “look and feel” of the
interface; and
• creating design storyboards.
The Development of Online Courses
In a small production group, the Web developer may act as the
graphic designer, photographer, and director, and as the editor of
video, audio, and animations. In a larger group, the Web developer
would consult with other team members for the additional aspects
of the program; for example, collaborating with the sound designer
on the music, or working with the programmer on functionality
Graphic (Visual) Designer
Visual design for Athabasca University courses, whether printbased or electronic, is driven by the needs of students and
academics, and by the content of the course itself. Course
materials can be enhanced for distance education by including
technical drawings, illustrations, graphics, and photography to
interpret course content . . . . Visual design for electronic
courses or optional electronic enhancements of print-based
courses includes the development and creation of generic or
cus-tomized templates, navigational icons, icons or images to
aid recognition of location within a non-linear presentation of
materials, and visuals or graphics to enhance textual content.
 
The World Wide Web has turned the Internet into a compelling
visual medium; however, in production terms, good visual design
and development can often consume the largest amount of time in
a project. As the Web allows educational media to rely more and
more on visuals, the importance of clear visual design cannot be
overstated. The visuals that students, especially those new to online
learning, encounter in an online course can often set the tone for
their entire learning experience.
As content is being developed, the graphic designer works with
the Web developer and the author to create a unique course look,
while at the same time integrating the course’s functionality into the
common institutional template. The use of these common elements
provides familiarity for online students and makes it possible for
them to take several courses, but to learn how to learn online only
once. The graphic designer also ensures that faculty will have
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
continuing support in designing consistent graphical elements when
courses are being updated or revised.
For graphic designers, Adobe Photoshop® has been the “musthave” software tool for years. For those developing specifically for
online delivery, Photoshop has added an adjunct application, called
ImageReady®, that formats images for the Web. Other applications
that are becoming more important in the visual designer’s stable are
those that create vector-based images (as opposed to bitmaps);
examples include Adobe Illustrator® and Macromedia Freehand®.
Programmer and Multimedia Author
The programmer is responsible for program functionality. The
programmer uses specialized software tools to enable the interactivity that is suggested and desired in online courses. In the most
productive teams, programming is treated as a highly specialized
and separate discipline.
There are many software applications available to programmers,
and each programmer seems to have a favorite working tool.
Programmers should endeavor to provide development team
members with a basic understanding of the classes of programming
tools and their capabilities. Generally, there are two classes of these
tools: code-based programming languages, and graphical-userinterfaced (GUI) authoring programs. The code-based languages
require that programmers use a proprietary computer language to
create applications that can then be delivered over the Internet. For
example, these languages enable the processing of information users
supply on Web-based forms. GUI authoring programs may enable
similar processes, but they also offer some automated generation of
computer code. This chapter is not meant to be a comparison of
these tools—there are hundreds of articles about that—but currently
there does seem to be a clear line between the followers of codebased programming techniques and those who prefer GUI applications. One clear advantage of code-based programming is that
these tools are often open source; that is, they are created from
freely available, stable code that encourages collaborative development. Commercial GUI software often requires less technical expertise to use than code programming, but it can be expensive, and the
The Development of Online Courses
companies who publish these proprietary software programs update
them often, rendering earlier versions obsolete and constantly
forcing developers who rely on them to purchase new versions.
Below is a partial list of the types of applications that programmers typically work with in a Web-based course.
Open-source code-based programming languages include
• Hypertext markup language (HTML)
• Javascript
• Extensible markup language (XML)
Proprietary GUI Web-development software packages include
• Macromedia Dreamweaver®, Flash®, Director®, Authorware®
• Microsoft .NET®, Visual Basic®
• Adobe GoLive®, Photoshop®, Illustrator®
Conclusion
Developing effective instructional materials depends on a great deal
of planning and collaboration, and concerted efforts from many
people skilled at using the right tools. These requirements are even
more crucial in online multimedia and course development, which
is highly dependent on ever-changing computer technologies.
Pedagogical standards must not be compromised, regardless of
the instructional medium employed. Employing the principles and
guidelines offered in this chapter will help all stakeholders involved
in online instructional development to ensure that their efforts are
rewarded, ultimately, with satisfied learners.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
References
Athabasca University . MKTG 406 demo. Athabasca, AB:
Athabasca University. Retrieved July 15, 2003, from http://
eclass.athabascau.ca/eclass/Demoec.nsf
Athabasca University . Visual design. Athabasca, AB:
Athabasca University. Retrieved July 15, 2003, from 
.athabascau.ca/html/visualdesign.html
Broadcasting
Corporation.
 .
multimedia zone. London: British Broadcasting Corporation.
Retrieved July 15, 2003, from 
/multimedia_zone
Chickering, A., & Ehrmann, S. . Implementing the seven
principles: Technology as lever. American Association for
Higher Education Bulletin 49(2), 3-6. Retrieved July 15, 2003,
from 
Chickering, A., & Gamson, Z. . Seven principles for good
practice in undergraduate education. American Association for
Higher Education Bulletin, 39(7), 3-7 Retrieved July 15, 2003,
from 
ples1987.asp
Elliott, M., & McGreal, R. . Learning on the Web, 2002
edition. Fredericton, NB: TeleEducation NB. Retrieved July 16,
2003, from 
Fox, M., & Helford, P. . Northern Arizona University:
Advancing the boundaries of higher education in Arizona using
the World Wide Web. Interactive Learning Environments, 7(2-
3), 155-174.
Graham, C., Cagiltay, K., Lim, B., Craner, J., & Duffy, T. . Seven principles of effective teaching: A practical
lens for evaluating online courses. Technology Source. Retrieved
July 16, 2003, from 
/dd93a8da0b7ccce0852567b00054e2b6/b495223246cabd6b85
256a090058ab98?OpenDocument
Longmire, W. . A primer on learning objects.
Learning Circuits. Retrieved July 16, 2003, from 
.learningcircuits.org/mar2000/primer.html
The Development of Online Courses
National Geographic Society. . National Geographic
Kids.com. Washington, DC: National Geographic Society.
Retrieved July 15, 2003, from 
Russell, T. . The no significant difference phenomenon.
Raleigh, NC: Office of Instructional Telecommunications,
North Carolina State University.
Seels, B., & Glasgow, Z. . Making instructional design
decisions (2d ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.
TeleEducation NB. . TeleEducation NB Online Course
Template. Fredericton, NB: NB Distance Education Inc.
Retrieved July 16, 2003, from 
/eastwest/template
Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education .
Principles of good practice for electronically offered academic
degree and certificate programs. [Online]. Retrieved July 16,
2003, from 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 8
DEVELOPING TEAM SKILLS AND
ACCOMPLISHING TEAM PROJECTS ONLINE
Deborah C. Hurst & Janice Thomas
Centre for Innovative Management
Athabasca University
Introduction
Traditionally, the primary weakness attributed to distance
education at the MBA or professional education level has been in
the teaching of team or leadership aspects of the curriculum. Some
academics question the suitability of a topic such as team dynamics
and communications as a candidate for online learning, believing
that this aspect of the curriculum cannot be adequately taught
through distance means. Clearly, a lot of what occurs in typical
team training programs involves experiential forms of human
interaction, conflict resolution, goal setting, and so on. Questions
remain regarding the ability to develop “soft” skills online.
In this chapter, we present our experience in teaching and
encouraging the exercise of soft team skills in a online environment. Three examples of online team training and team skills
practice are illustrated. These case examples exemplify what is
possible with respect to developing knowledge of team dynamics
and communications, and accomplishing team project work in an
online environment. The paper begins with an online application of
teaching team concepts at a distance to mid-career professionals. In
describing aspects of the team dynamics module, we highlight the
unique value and capabilities of an online learning environment.
The second part of the paper elaborates ideas about online
learning and working introduced in the first case example through
two additional examples. Case 2 examines the operation and
characteristics of a highly successful online project team, and Case 3
presents some collected experiences from MBA-level online learning
teams. We then synthesize lessons learned from all three cases. We
highlight key benefits gained through structured interaction
incorporating solid project management and team development
practices—specifically, gaining agreement on how members will
work together, assign accountability, manage flexibility, monitor
progress, and incorporate social interaction. These, we believe, are
the key ingredients for successful online teaming in learning (or any
other) environments.
Two key ingredients emphasized throughout the discussion of
successful online and distance teaming are technology and trust.
We make some summary comments on the impact and role of these
two concepts, and conclude with some practical recommendations
about managing online learning teams.
Ultimately, we are interested in challenging perceived barriers
surrounding the ability of online learning to contribute to soft skill
and competency development. It is our view that this method of
team development is not only effective in developing competency in
soft skills and social interaction, but that online learning may in
fact be the superior method. We hope that our evidence of what is
possible in an online learning environment provides some specific
practical guidance on what it takes to accomplish team
development and project work online.
Developing Team Skills Online
In this section of the chapter, we describe an example of a leadingedge team development training program delivered online and at a
distance. Our purpose in emphasizing this module is to provide
concrete evidence of how one institution provides soft skill training
The module described herein is part of an overall package
owned by the Canadian Professional Logistics Institute (CPLI),
created in response to increasing development needs of the
emerging professionals within the logistics field.1 The CPLI decided
to combine face-to-face with online learning methods within their
program. Modules delivered online include the topics of team
dynamics, integrated logistics networks, and logistics process
diagnosis. Modules delivered in a face-to-face format include the
topics of leading and managing change, supply chain strategies,
ethics, and leadership. The CPLI program blends the different
learning methods in a unique way to develop soft and hard
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
1 Dr. Hurst worked with a
team invited by the CPLI to
develop learning modules
for their “millennium
project,” a professional
learning program. The
invitation was based on
her research interests and
previous experience in the
logistics field. The team
dynamics and communications module was
developed as a two-part
learning program, the first
part an individual experience of a virtual reality
simulation intended to
allow the participant to
“learn about” concepts in
a simulated team, and the
second part an online
learning environment via
the Internet allowing the
participant to “learn how
to” participate in a online
team with other real
participants. The real
team sessions are facilitated while students work
through and apply
concepts. This module is
facilitated, evaluated, and
revised on an ongoing
basis by Dr. Hurst. The
experiences described
here are used with the
permission of the
Canadian Professional
Logistics Institute.
practical skills and understanding (with a heavier emphasis on soft
skills than is typically provided in this field), as well as tacit insight,
competence, trust, and confidence in a online collaborative process
for learning and working.
We refer here to the team dynamics and communications
module that is delivered online. The module materials are quite like
those delivered in a face-to-face context. Learners build on insights
and ideas taken from Katzenbach and Smith , among others,
to develop key success indicators of teams. However, the online
delivery method is very different, in that people connect only
through information technology and do not meet face-to-face
during the module. They do however, meet face-to-face in other
modules, usually after they have completed the team dynamics
module. The online learning environment allows users to get
beyond the significant challenges of cost, time, and risk imposed by
more traditional forms of corporate training and university
teaching designed to provide experiential learning to employees or
This particular module uses technology in two ways to support
learning. The module is six weeks in duration, split into two
phases. Phase 1 is made up of a stand-alone CD-based virtual
reality simulation that each student completes independently. The
second phase involves student interaction that is facilitated
technologically, through asynchronous and synchronous tools. A
human facilitator also working from a distance guides participant
interactions by asking questions and making suggestions
throughout the module. We explore the value of both the virtual
reality simulation and the online team work that follows in
providing “teachable moments” from which learning—both tacit
and explicit—is derived.
The Team Dynamics and Communications (TDC)
Module—Phase 1
The first part of the TDC module has learners engage in
experiential individual learning though a simulation containing
scenarios of typical team challenges. The learner is expected to
interact with simulated team members (filmed scenarios and prerecorded graphics) on a time-sensitive, critical mission, to gather
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
information, and to experience team and team-relevant issues as
they progress through the various scenarios. Overall, the TDC
simulation focuses on skills needed for effective team dynamics and
“online teaming”: team process discussions, role assignments,
leadership, conflict resolution, decision making, and planning for
goal success. Many of the scenarios crafted were taken from real
experiences that highlighted the most salient issues of team
development. Information on how different people store
information and label organizational stories was used to construct
the decision paths in each scene of the scenarios. Cultural ideas
around probable failures and interpretations of these failures were
used to inform the scripting. The resulting scenarios were dramatic
and interesting, and encouraged participation.
The setting for the virtual reality simulation is a remote area
where lightning has started a forest fire and damaged a
telecommunications tower. The learner enters the online space and
becomes part of an emergency response team that has been given
the responsibility of repairing the tower. To ensure some team
struggle at this stage of learning, participants are required to deal
online with the challenges of travel by canoe, arriving, and
completing the mission within a set period of time. If the team
functions poorly on the tasks and arrives late, the consequence
presented is that telecommunications in the area will go down, and
firefighters will not be able to prevent the forest fire from
approaching a small nearby town. Every decision that learners
make is shown to have immediate consequences within the
simulated world, and collectively they convey the risk of failure.
Teachable Moments
Although a learner’s poor decision or mistake may have only
caused the team to lose time on the trip, mistakes create important
“teachable moments.”2 Failure on any task is considered to be an
opportunity to learn by determining “what went wrong.” To
facilitate learning at these moments, an online coach pops up
within the simulated environment to provide just-in-time positive
and negative feedback, depending on the learner’s decisions. The
learner therefore immediately faces their mistakes, and is able to
learn from them in a private and safe environment.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
2 “Teachable moment”
is defined as the precise
point at which a learner
makes a mistake and
wants to correct it, or to
learn alternative information with which to
interpret questions or
responses. It is a brief
window where the learner
is most receptive to new
information that is
focused, personalized,
and in context. Schank
 adds to our
understanding of the
teachable moment by
suggesting that, once a
learner makes a mistake,
they are emotionally
aroused. If the error
occurs publicly, the
individual will close off,
as a result of embarrassment; however, if
such failure is private, the
learner at that moment is
most receptive to new
information and learning.
The teachable moment
often begins with a
question and has much
to do with an individual’s
personal curiosity .
It is Schank’s view that real learning occurs only when
people are thrown into scenarios in this way. Participants make
decisions, solve problems, make mistakes, and have access to an
expert as required to answer questions and to give them advice.
Because simulations as such are private, Schank believes that
learners may be more willing to risk failure and use that experience
for learning. By contrast, failure in organizations is more often
negatively perceived, a fact that stifles creativity. In a simulation,
people can fail privately with dignity rather than being humiliated
when failure occurs in a public way. Failure, like having fun and
telling stories, is a powerful way to induce emotion and a powerful
learning tool.
Emotions coupled with technology can produce a further
positive situation. Computers store learning that has occurred, and
can retrieve it if similar patterns are observed later on, thus making
learning more specific to individual needs. It is our view that
learning facilitated by emotional drive and technological tools is
very powerful. Underlying this statement is a key assumption that
it is through this unique approach that individuals are provided
with an opportunity to learn to do something extremely relevant to
them (rather than simply learning about something), making the
knowledge gained through experience both explicit and tacit
 .
Scenarios come to life, and require that learners interact with
conceptual information built into the scenarios. Different conceptual aspects of team structure, culture, accountability, and politics
are woven into the module design. Information is presented
sequentially. Scripts were built in a way similar to a child’s multiple
path story, where the development of the story depends on choices
made. Learning becomes customized, allowing participants to
spend greater amounts of time dealing with concepts and skills that
are more unfamiliar to or challenging for them. Story-telling is
incorporated into the simulated environment as a means of relating
content and experiences back to the workplace.
Getting Beyond Technological Apprehension
In an initial evaluation of this product, Hurst and Follows 
stated that, as participants enter the module for the first time, some
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
learners experience technical challenges. The challenges were related
not only to computer incompatibility, but also to the degree to
which participants were ready to engage in online learning
environments. For many, there appeared to be an initial hesitancy
and fear associated with learning in a technologically mediated
environment. In the evaluation phase, many related their early
experiences with the technology to their later impressions of the
module. They found the module to be “fun, challenging . . . an
overall good learning experience,” but noted that it had been “quite
different and a little scary in the beginning.” For some, technical
problems persisted.
Interestingly, when probed, individuals remained worried that
they would fail in a public way, and as a result become
embarrassed, because of their unfamiliarity with the technology.
This finding highlights the need to do further work in making
participants comfortable with the online environment early in the
process. The strength of the apprehension around failure prior to
entry into the virtual learning environment was very apparent, and
provides clear evidence that Schank’s claim about a learner’s
willingness to take risks and fail privately is of critical importance.
To deal with this learning barrier, further facilitation was
introduced before learners used the CD-ROM; the intent was to
encourage a greater level of comfort among learners and to
minimize any emergent stress. Once the apprehension surrounding
technical difficulties was dealt with in this way, the learners’
evaluations of their online learning experience became much more
positive. One participant noted that, “I thought that the interactive
CD was very well put together and a neat way to learn. I know I
now have a better understanding of team building, conflict
resolution and the importance of communication.”
Capturing and Building on the Learning
Learners are asked from time to time to make notes of what they
are thinking and feeling about their experiences, so that they can
use their insights later, in online discussions. Self-evaluation tools
concerned with communication preferences, leadership style, and
conflict handling are built into the module to give learners an
opportunity to focus on specific issues and to develop, and reflect
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
on, their new skills and competencies. Self-reflective tools are
intended to supplement the experience of the simulation through
private assessment of personalized feedback. This feedback and
record keeping provide learners with input to the second portion of
the module, where they engage in a more traditional teamwork
simulation with “live” team members, albeit facilitated online and
at a distance.
TDC Module—Phase 2
In the second phase of the TDC module, learners enter a synchronous chat environment where weekly synchronous meetings take
place. In addition to weekly facilitated meetings, participants are
provided with an asynchronous message board for posting
documents and questions for review. During the initial chat
meeting, smaller teams are formed, and members are encouraged to
introduce themselves, discuss their impressions of the CD-ROM
experience and their past initial discomfort, and work together to
come up with a team name. The new team is then asked to review
their experiences of the first phase of the module, and state which
aspects they found to be the most important to their learning, and
most helpful in forming a new team. Members are encouraged to
discuss aspects of team structure, roles, processes, measures of
success, accountability, and so on. The new team is also asked to
review a chat protocol, provided below, which serves to encourage
the participants to discuss conduct expectations and provide
additional information based on the team’s needs.
Chat Protocol
• Allow each learner to complete his/her thought before
responding—this means do not interrupt or intrude with your
thought while another is speaking.
• Be patient; not everyone has advanced keyboard skills.
• Avoid having side conversations; it’s rude not to pay
attention.
• Signal when you’ve finished a statement [some use a happy
face to signal they have completed their input ☺].
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
• Signal when you don’t understand something; use a question
mark to get the facilitator’s attention.
• Signal your “reactions” by using an exclamation mark (!) for
surprise or a sad face for disagreement  or some
combination of symbols.
• Do not shout [CAPITALS MEAN THAT YOU ARE SHOUTING].
• Do not leave your computer during a scheduled session; it is
impossible to get your attention if you leave the room.
• Officially sign on and off so that everyone knows when you
are present.
• Keep statements brief and to the point; the chat box has a
limit of 256 characters per statement; you can keep talking
but in spurts.
• Prepare notes and key ideas ahead of time so that you can
engage in the discussion without trying to figure out how to
word your statements. 
Once ground rules and initial discussions have taken place, the
team is assigned the task of creating a reverse logistics plan as a
followup to their personal work with the CD-ROM in Phase 1. This
task provides continuity as well as additional time for social
interaction, allowing participants to get to know one another and
become comfortable with the facilitated online chat environment.
During this initial stage, it is important for participants to establish
and re-establish how their conversations would take place, and
who would speak, in what order, to ensure full participation in the
experience.
To launch the team task, members are presented with a scenario
update, and advised that the fire is almost under control, and that
the crew will be finished repairing the tower in approximately six
hours. The team task is to work together to create a plan to get
team members and the used and remaindered supplies back to the
point of origin. They are given three possible options to discuss, as
well as many contingencies to consider in coming up with a
detailed reverse logistics plan. The facilitator emphasizes the importance of consensus decision making for the task, and reminds team
members of lessons learned during the first part of the module.
The facilitator also works to introduce new constraints in an
effort to surprise the team, and as a way of introducing potentially
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
conflicting ideas to get the team working through the developmental phases experientially as well as intellectually. Additional
constraints imposed include changes in the mode of transport, environmental conditions, presence of wildlife, handling and disposing
of hazardous goods, and other options to challenge the team and
bring out different and creative points of view. The goal in this part
of the module is to force differences among team members to the
surface, with the hope of inciting conflict so that participants have
the opportunity to experience and work through new ideas, skills,
and competencies in team dynamics and communications.
The second task assigned is the creation of a team charter template, a tool for governing the team’s work and social interaction.
This is the core activity for the module. With the permission of
previous module students, a sample student team charter is attached in Appendix 8A. As this sample team charter shows, the
completed document resembles a checklist or template containing a
summary of what the team members believe to be the important
issues to be addressed in creating and deploying a new team as
quickly and effectively as possible. The document contains ideas on
how teams should be formed and structured; how their purpose
should be defined; how team culture should be developed; and how
the team should collaborate, ensure accountability, measure
success, and achieve high performance. Learners are instructed first
to respond individually to the questions posed, and then to work in
their teams to synthesize the information and create one common
document. Individuals attend weekly meetings in the chat room to
discuss what should and should not be included in the document.
The roles of leader, scribe, and timekeeper are rotated among
participants, to allow for skill development. By the time learners
are given this assignment, they are very comfortable with the online
environment and appear to “forget the lack of face-to face cues”
 .
Encouraging Explicit and Tacit Learning
In each offering of the module thus far, learners completing the task
spent most of their time discussing team structure and process
issues. Interestingly, a parallel of explicit and tacit learning occurs;
that is, as team members discuss pertinent team-development
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
issues, participants also appear to experience the same issues.
During a more recent offering of the module, a discussion took
place around conflict resolution. There was mild disagreement
among team members over how conflicts at an impasse should be
resolved. While some argued that “trouble makers had the option
to leave the team,” others stressed that this was not an appropriate
option. Their view was that “consensus must occur.”
The discussion heated and circled for some time, until the
similarities between the topic under discussion and the discussion
itself were pointed out. This created a powerful learning moment,
combining intellectual and experiential elements. Since participants
had already discussed effective listening at length, they were able to
recognize the value of the discussion, and moved forward with
developing a process they could all live with. The learning opportunity or teachable moment was noted as one in which concepts
were both discussed and experienced. The template task provided
the opportunity for learners to crystallize their learning in the
creation of the document itself, take stock of what they have learned
individually and collectively, and consider where such learning
could be recreated in future teams beyond the module.
Increasing Trust in Technology, the Process, and Each Other
At the end of the module, participants were feeling quite
comfortable with the technologically mediated environment, with
one another, and with the facilitator. The participant comfort level
increased after the first chat meeting experience. One learner noted
that, “I initially found it difficult to converse electronically with ten
other people, although I see my children doing it all the time. Once
I got the hang of it, it became enjoyable.” People commented
increasingly on the content of the module as they became more
comfortable with the technology, and the use of it became tacit
during Phase 2. Team members took control of the work, held
additional meetings, assigned tasks to sub-group members, posted
longer documents, and so on. Phase 2 activities worked to ground
the learner’s new skills and knowledge in additional collaborative
experiences. Individuals also had an opportunity to discuss their
ideas with others in a facilitated environment.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Participants also suggested improvements; for example, they
thought that the short introductions at the beginning of Phase 2 to
break the ice should be extended, and should perhaps include
personal biographies to allow for further confidence building and
comfort with the communications medium and each other in social
interaction. However, while many learners thought that the initial
introductions were too brief, and that it would be helpful for them
to be extended, it is interesting to note that when asked to provide
those same introductions at the beginning of each module, they
seemed guarded and reluctant to give much in the way of personal
information. It was only as team members became comfortable with
one another that the personal information and humor appeared.
Learners also provided feedback for how to improve team
communications during each session. One idea presented was the
development of a speakers’ order, so that all team members have a
chance to contribute fully to the conversation. When used, this
approach appeared to improve the team’s performance in
discussion, decision making, and collaborating in subsequent tasks,
and generally improved the team’s interactions with one another.
Team adjournment activities asked learners to comment on what
they found to be the most positive characteristics of the team
experience and each of their team members. Interestingly, during
the first pilot offering of the module, team members decided that
they did not want to comment on each individual in the way
requested, because they did not want to single out individuals—
they were a team. They met offline to discuss this issue, and the
team as a unit presented their revised version of the exercise to the
facilitator. The facilitator was pleased with how “the team took on
the issue and discussed it actively” noting that,
One individual on behalf of the team, suggested that the team
wanted to handle the task in a slightly different way and asked
first if they could as they had the full agreement of the team.
The team came together with a force that night while they
displayed excellent consensus decision-making. The activity
worked to catalyze the team and pushed them to a higher
performance level in terms of their morale and functioning.
 
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
We now take lessons from the online team dynamics and communications module and apply them more broadly to further online
teaming experiences. Important aspects of team development experience highlighted include an emphasis on member roles and competencies, such as autonomy, coordination, and collaboration. Here
we must note in particular organizational factors, the use of
technology, personal management, and interpersonal skills. Organizational factors include networking, knowing the organizational
landscape, and maintaining guidelines. The use of technology in
online teaming requires knowledge of when to communicate, coordinate, collaborate; of how to communicate effectively; and of communication etiquette. The personal management category includes
the ability to prioritize work, set limits, create opportunities for
learning and growth, collect and provide feedback, discuss strengths
and weaknesses, manage boundaries, and understand cultural perspectives and how these differences can affect perception.
Accomplishing Team Projects Online:
Two Further Case Examples
Building from our previous discussion of online team development,
we use this section of the chapter to explore and compare the
operation of a highly successful online project team and the
operation of online learning teams used in an online MBA program.
An online team is defined as a group of task-driven individuals
who behave as a temporary team, but who may be separated by
geographic or temporal space and use network based communication tools to bridge these spaces. By reviewing the experience of
these teams, we hope to provide insights into the practices that
facilitate collaboration and learning in an online world. Recommendations from these experiences may help others working in the
online world or endeavoring to use online learning teams, and so
may further develop online team learning programs in a distance
education environment.
We explore experience with two different types of online teams:
the first is an online research team that conducted a major,
practitioner-sponsored research study in three phases over a threeyear term; the other is one of the online learning teams used in
Athabasca University’s MBA program.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Online Research Team—Case 2
The first case study of a real-life online project team provided a
way to explore common assumptions and theories. The online team
in question participated in a meaningful project under serious
resource constraints and within a tight schedule. The project was
completed slightly behind schedule and over budget, but to great
critical acclaim.
At any one time the project team was composed of between four
and eight members. The core team was made up of four members
over the course of the first phase. During the second and third
phases, only three members participated throughout. All of the core
team members were academics and researchers (students). Each
team member took the lead on different project tasks; however, one
member acted as the formal team lead on contract documents and
in the majority of correspondence. The fourth core team member,
who joined the team after the project had been initiated and only
worked on the first phase of the project, tended to play a lesser role
overall. While three of the four core team members actually lived
in the same city, the team rarely met in person because of travel and
work schedules.
At the end of Phase 1 of the project, the four core team members
participated in a series of self- and team-assessments. The
instruments used were the Personal Style Inventory (PSI), developed
in 1980 by Hogan and Champagne; the Team Effectiveness Profile,
developed by Glaser and Glaser ; and the Trust Test,
developed by Ribble Livove and Russo . The tests were
chosen for their simplicity, availability, and potential to provide
interesting insights into the operation of the team. They are not
represented as the best or most suitable tests. An earlier paper
 presents the results of
the State (behavioral—trust orientation and team process) and
Trait (personality) assessments, highlighting the traits and
behaviors that contributed to the operation of this creative and
successful online project team.
In brief, the team as a whole was relatively balanced, with a
slight proclivity towards introverted, sensing, thinking, and judging
approaches to the world. All of the members tended to take a
judging stance, leading to a potential weakness on the feeling
factors. In addition, all four team members had a relatively trusting
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
orientation in general. Finally, team process assessments provided
evidence of a highly effective team, approaching synergistic operation. Further discussion of the impacts of these differences and the
usefulness of these tools can be found in Delisle et al. .
The team explicitly recognized its activities as a project and engaged in good project management practices. It did not, however,
actively engage with teaming literatures.
MBA Online Learning Teams—Case 3
The MBA learning teams were made up from a student population
that had an average age of 40 years, and that typically worked full
time in middle management roles in a variety of industries and
organizations of many different sizes. The students were randomly
placed in learning teams at the beginning of each course. Most
courses required that the team complete two or three major group
assignments (usually based on a Harvard-Business-School-type case
assessment) over the eight-week semester. These cases were done in
three stages. Two weeks were spent on preparing and analyzing the
case situation and providing recommendations in a report format.
Then one week was devoted to critiquing another group’s case
report, and then responding to the critique of one’s own case
report. In addition, the students engaged in asynchronous textbased discussion of course materials.
In the first class of the MBA program, students were given an
orientation to the online technology and to appropriate ways of
working in the online environment, and a quick introduction to
“best practices” in team development. Typically they were assigned
to learning groups with others they had never met before. As the
program progressed, there were increasing chances that the teams
could include a few members who had worked together before.
This situation was a relatively accurate simulation of the work
environment individuals faced in modern organizations. More
often than not, a team must rapidly come together with individuals
who may or may not know one another, and must quickly begin to
perform assigned tasks.
Unlike the research team, the students were encouraged to
review and adopt good teaming practices early in each and every
course. As was the case in the TDC module discussed earlier, online
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learning groups were assigned at the outset, and were given the task
of developing an operating team charter intended to shape the way
they would work together. However, this activity was not graded,
and was done with varying degrees of competence and intensity by
each learning team.
Another key difference from the research team is in the formal
application of project management practices to the operations of
each learning team. The research team consistently viewed their
work as project work; the duration of memberships might vary, but
the team was working toward a common completion goal. On the
other hand, the MBA teams tended to view their work as process
work toward an individual end result (an MBA), rather than work
on a specific project. This attitude may be a result of a combination
of lack of exposure to project management principles and the
nature of the learning environment.
The different contexts experienced by a team working on an
assigned project for the sake of the project and a team of students
working on a project for grades are quite different. However, in
each case, we have noticed important knowledge being transferred
through explicit and tacit learning while the team members worked
towards their goals. Several practices seemed to facilitate these
learning processes. We turn now to a discussion of the practices
that we believe support both learning and teaming in an online
environment.
Key Practices in Successful Online Teaming
Looking across the two different cases of team experiences and
drawing from our earlier discussions on teachable moments and
tacit and explicit learning, we saw emerging a number of key
attributes associated with the successful use of online teams. It is
our view that these key practices include agreement on how teams
will work together, assignment of accountability, monitoring of
progress, and incorporation of social interaction. We discuss each
of these practices with examples from the three cases presented
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Agreement on How Teams Will Work Together
In the case of the highly successful online research team, there was
very little initial discussion of how the team would work together.
The three initiating team members were driven overachievers who
were highly motivated by the task. All were known to each other.
Two had worked on a small project together earlier, and so had
already established a certain amount of trust and goodwill. This
relationship and common understanding of the importance of
meeting goals played a significant part in helping them to form and
start working quickly. These team members understood the need to
define deadlines and to complete deliverables on time. The common focus on agreed-upon goals and timelines enabled the team
members to monitor their own personal goals to ensure alignment
with the overall project goals.
The project began with almost impossible deadlines from the
beginning. Whereas this reality could be a recipe for failure on any
team, in this case, the common threat allowed the team to come
together quickly, and was the catalyst for many spin-off projects.
As the project careened towards its first “drop dead deadline”
about two weeks after the project started, tempers frayed and
workloads were heavy. Once the first deadline was met, there was
a one-month period in which the team waited to see if the proposal
would be accepted. During this time, the group sent numerous emails sharing their situations and discussing their goals, objectives,
and personal commitments for the period ahead.
By the time the proposal was accepted, the team had a much
clearer idea of each member’s individual commitments, and about
how difficult it would be to get this project successfully completed.
One team member was working 80 hours a week on a highpressure professional job. Another had a two-month-old baby, two
other children, a full time job, and a thesis to finish, in addition to
this project. The third was half way through a Ph.D. project and
had a faltering marriage. They discussed how they would meet the
upcoming deadlines, and who would take the lead on which tasks.
Sharing issues, life experiences, and challenges allowed the team to
feel a greater sense of cohesion and cooperation, and ultimately to
jump in and help each other out when necessary.
Slowly, and in an emerging rather than conscious fashion, an
agreement on how the team would work solidified. It was never
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
written down or formally agreed upon, but it seemed to involve the
principles noted below.
1. The deadlines must be met. This project was important to all.
2. Whoever was best able to lead on a particular task would do so.
3. Each member would contribute 150% to this project, and
endeavor not to let the other team members down.
4. Team members would raise a flag (let others know about tasks
not likely to get done on time).
5. Team members would pitch in to complete work as needed.
It seemed clear that this team would never have been able to
make the progress they did if they had not had this one-month
breathing space to work out how they would work together. They
learned these lessons experientially, by being thrown into the
process, and the result was fortunately positive. If this team had
clearly applied team-building approaches to their own work prior
to commencement, rather than after the first deadline, they may
have been able to tackle this task explicitly and incorporate some
“best practices” earlier, and avoided some angst later on. Whatever
the case, what is highlighted here is once again the unique marriage
of explicit and tacit learning about team process. The team learned
the importance of dealing with social interaction issues and ground
rules for working together as they stormed through their first real
process issues, realizing the teachable moment.
Experience with MBA project teams suggests, however, that
explicit teaming might not have helped. Students in every offering
of the project management course are encouraged to develop a
formal team charter before starting to work on the learning
exercise. Some individuals and some teams do take this task
seriously, and tease out the details of how they will work together
before beginning work, but most do not appear to think this task
important until after problems begin. The tight timelines and taskdriven individuals push the teams into action, much as in the case
of the research team introduced above. When conflicts begin to
brew or issues around collaboration become important, charters
are worked out on the fly, during the course of the first team
assignment. Some teams must call a halt and revisit this exercise
before they can make any progress on the projects; others fail
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
completely on the first task before they recognize the need for and
value of this process element.
The importance of this part of team process appears to be
learned explicitly, but as highlighted by the case examples, does not
become “real” until conflicts occur within the process and the team
acquires knowledge experientially. It seems that once the
importance of the charter becomes clear and the gap between
theory and practice obvious, the teachable moment can occur. In
some teams, this moment may be lost; however, it appears that in
the experience of each online team, it was not. Within the learning
module, the facilitator was able to use the moment to pull out or
convey some important information. Within both actual teams, the
team members were able to go back to information provided,
recognize the source of difficulty, and move on to develop a charter.
In our view, it is what occurs in the gap between failure and the
recognized need for additional information or work in order to
deal with the failure that builds capability. This is where we believe
online development products are most powerful. However, what is
also clear about this gap experience is that trust in technology, trust
in process, and trust between individuals are critical factors.
Team charters and chat protocols are some of the tangible tools
that force teams to explore these issues in advance. Incorporating
these products into any online teaming experience is likely to
improve the ability of the team members to work together.
Assignment of Accountability and Building in Flexibility
A definition of roles and responsibilities is often identified as a fundamental part of high performing teams. In traditional team
literature, the need for clearly defined roles is fairly well
recognized. It is believed that it is absolutely essential that everyone
clearly know who is doing what—particularly in online teams
where you may not be able to observe what others are working on.
At the same time, online teams require a certain amount of
flexibility to get the most out of their members. If one member of
a online team has a time differential that is advantageous, it only
makes sense for that person to take responsibility for certain tasks,
even though someone else may be accountable for them.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Sometimes, given the asynchronous nature of much online teaming,
this necessity can cause problems.
Lipnack and Stamps suggested that in online teams, team
roles defy definition, because online teams focus on achieving tasks
in a fluid and flexible manner. It is also recognized that shifts in
leadership can drive changes in team members’ roles. In online
teams, leadership moves from one group member to another, from
one geographic or temporal site to another, or both . In many cases, more than one team member
possesses information vital to the team’s functioning and well
being, and as a result will accept leadership status assigned by the
team. Team members are often willing to step into and out of the
leadership role without fear of stepping on one another’s toes.
Although there remain paradoxes in terms of power sharing and
role shifting, Gristock and Palmer and Johnson 
point out that online teams can experience simultaneous benefits of
vertical and lateral communication without reorganizing
physically.
Clearly, roles and leadership are not as clearly defined in the
online environment as in the “real” world. The literature suggests
that the need for boundary spanning and communication may
intensify as roles and objectives become more ambiguous . Furthermore, the amount of border
spanning may vary over time, influencing communication patterns
and the ability to shift roles easily . This ambiguity can be quite uncom-fortable for those
used to working within traditional, rules-based organizations.
Research suggests that teams that have met or have first established
face-to-face relationships appear to form bonds more easily and to
be more comfortable shifting roles . This finding
suggests the need for some form of kick-off for each online team—
face-to-face may be superior, but voice and online also work, as
evidenced by the research team and the online learning teams.
Sometimes the trick is simply to assign an initial responsibility,
and then trade it off as necessary. This was certainly the case in the
online research team. Tasks were initially accepted or assigned to
an individual based on availability or inclination. If there was some
reason that deadlines could not be met, the tasks were shared out
again. Careful records were always kept on who was doing what,
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
and when. This kind of tracking allowed for the development of
more ambiguous roles among members and for the sharing of
responsibility, while maintaining accountability for deliverables.
In the MBA teams, we see good use of role assignment in the
beginning of most courses. Every one signs up for a particular task.
Where it sometimes falls down is when an individual is assigned a
task for which they are not suited, or when circumstances make it
difficult for that individual to fulfill the assigned role. Many people
do not adapt well to the fluid nature of work that is characteristic
of asynchronous online teams. Because we are not necessarily doing
work at the same time of the same day, it is important that people
volunteer when they see that someone needs help, and that they
speak up when they are in that position. For people used to doing
their own jobs and letting someone else worry about the big
picture, this can be a difficult skill to master.
Teams that quickly come together and share details of their
personal schedules, why they are only available at certain times, and
when they may not be available, tend to work better. In the online
research team, one member could only work on the project before
8:30 am or between 7 pm and about 9 pm, because of work
commitments. Another tended to be a night owl, getting productive
between 10 and 4. The third and fourth members tended to have
more flexible daytime schedules. Thus, if one member could only
work until 8:30 and couldn’t finish the task, it only made sense for
someone with time during the day to take the next cut at it, then the
first could look at it again after dinner, and the next after 10 pm.
The balance between accountability and flexibility introduces an
ambiguity into the working relationship that many find difficult to
deal with. Can I count on you or not? Do I need to monitor you or
not? If I don’t, how do I know when to help out? To make the
process work, individuals must engage in self-monitoring, team
process monitoring, and proactive commitment to the work of
learning. Individuals whose sole goal is completion of the course or
project task are the least likely to be able to engage in this type of
behavior, and the most likely to exhibit free rider tendencies. It is
the commitment to the project, or the learning, or the individuals
that fosters a team member’s ability to deal with the ambiguity of
shifting roles and responsibilities. Without this commitment, and
trust, the team will not be able to balance accountability with
flexibility to get to synergy.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Monitoring Progress
The research team used minutes, e-mail and conference calls, and
deadlines to monitor task progress. Weekly conference calls were
boisterous, friendly events that each member looked forward to.
While this team rarely met face-to-face to hold each another
accountable for the many decisions, promises, and activities each
member took on, each individual’s personal urgency and commitment to come through on the commitments they made, and to
“cross another item off” their weekly list of deliverables, kept the
team moving forward. When commitments could not be met, team
members openly admitted the reason behind their lateness, and
took steps to complete the task or accepted another’s help to do so.
In the weekly conference calls, the team met for one hour once
a week. The first five minutes of any conference call were devoted
to catching up on “social history.” Roughly 45 minutes were
reserved for detailed discussion of upcoming deliverables and the
status on outstanding tasks. Team members took turns chairing
these meetings. The last 10 minutes of each meeting were used to
report on important external commitments of the team members
(thesis progress, work promotions, baby’s first steps, etc.) and their
personal stress levels.
The conference calls tended to be exuberant, extroverted
activities. The high introversion score seemed to be a puzzle to the
team members. While they all knew themselves to be quite introverted, they marvelled at the extroverted nature of their interactions both in e-mail and in conversation. One member stated,
“although we have three introverts, you’d never know it from our
interactions. Feeling comfortable, trusting and sharing with each
other brings out the E in us” . The conference
calls allowed the team to stay on top of three critical elements of
progress—social activities, project activities, and external
activities—each of which added an important component to the
interaction. Shared goals and open communication around
objectives and limitations, combined with trust in future reciprocity
for current efforts, made the team trust level expand.
In addition, the project team submitted monthly status reports
on project activity and accomplishments to the funding sponsor.
This formal requirement forced the research team to take stock on
a regular basis of accomplishments and outstanding tasks. The
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
“taking stock” activities encouraged accountability and the
meeting of deadlines. It also provided a formal arena for tackling
outstanding issues and raising concerns to be dealt with by all
major stakeholders in the project.
The MBA teams worked on much shorter timelines, measured in
weeks versus years. Their use of status reporting seemed to be
much lower. Some teams did status checks during the course of the
project, but most tended to set a plan and then try to work to it. As
in any project, this is where many of the problems come in, as the
team fails to manage the ambiguous and changing nature of the
work environment.
In the Team Development Module, the regularly scheduled
weekly “chats” served a similar structuring function as the monthly
status reports and weekly conference calls used by the research
team. The requirement to engage at one time with all members of
the team, and to be ready to make good use of this time served as
to facilitate some regular progress monitoring and progress
Competing demands, and disparities in team member commitment and what each member desired as a team outcome (“pass”
vs. “A”), combined and trapped many of the learning teams.
However, competing demands are no different in the working
world. The resolution as always rested with open communication
of goals and expectations, and then with working around each individual’s peculiar demands and interests. Status reporting and
regular discussions of process and feedback appeared to be
catalysts for this type of sharing, and for getting the important
issues addressed on a timely basis.
Incorporation of Social Interaction
In general, the social interaction on the research team occurred
sometimes by e-mail, sometimes in person, and most times by
conference calls. They tended to be boisterous times, filled with
laughter that all members appeared to highly value. Conference calls
often acted as a welcome counterbalance to the pressure on the
group to meet stakeholder expectations, deliver results on time and
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
on budget, and work through the many obstacles that emerged. It
created a supportive camaraderie that also helped members manage
their own substantial professional workloads above and beyond the
online project activities .
Hartman suggested that “fun” on projects is a substantial motivator, and contributes to a culture where work is
accomplished without the same level of burnout as in other
environments. In general, there were three things that the research
team did explicitly to ensure that the project was “fun” for all
1. Celebrate success: The beginning of each conference call always
included kudos to anyone having completed a task or reaching
some other milestone. E-cards were used judiciously to celebrate
any success or other event. Each status report always started
with accomplishments for the period even when the more
critical part was the concerns or issues that needed to be
addressed.
2. Plan for interaction: Some of the project’s limited funds were set
aside to support celebratory dinners or events when all the
parties could be found in the same locale. One research
conference a year was funded for the entire team to meet face to
face. This “face time” provided a lot of lingering benefits in
keeping the team motivated and onside for the more “tedious
grind” parts of the work.
3. Communicate about other than project activities: The research
team regularly made an effort to catch up on “social” aspects of
the various team members’ lives. Knowing how the rest of the
individual’s life was going provided good insight into what you
could be expected to do on the project tasks, and where others
might be able to help out. It also allowed trust to grow on a
number of levels. It is one thing to trust someone’s competence;
it is quite another to care about that individual and to trust that
they will care about you.
Admittedly, the second of the above goals is difficult to
accomplish, or to imagine as developing in an online learning
environment. However, it is surprising how innovative students can
be when given the opportunity. Since its inception, the Athabasca
University MBA program has provided a non-graded workspace
for students to use as they wish. It is thought of as akin to the
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
online water cooler or coffee house. It provides MBA students with
room to get to know each other away from the pressure cooker of
the team project workspace. Although the space is used to varying
degrees, it works most effectively as a way of enhancing the
learning environment. One student has very successfully run
“Joe’s” bar in the roundtable workspace of every course, much to
the delight of his fellow students and of academics. Sharing jokes,
humor, frustration, births, deaths, and other life occurrences in
these informal settings truly allows the students to get to know
each other in ways that they would normally do over a cup of
coffee or mug of beer outside of class time.
A variation of this phenomenon also began to occur in each
offering of the team development module. Participants appear to
regret the completion of the module, insofar as it means losing
access to the rich social interaction they experienced with their new
team. We found that adjournment ceremonies and behaviors online
and in the synchronous and asynchronous environments were quite
similar to those experienced in the adjournment phase of a face-toface team. MBA students often exhibit withdrawal at the end of the
program in a similar fashion. The research team experienced
similar “mourning” at the end of the project, as the unique circumstances of the project drove a fiercely supportive and productive
working relationship that has been difficult to replicate after
completion.
Furthermore, research on the effectiveness or contribution of
these technologically enhanced “social” realms to the learning
activity is needed. It would be interesting to see if the number of
entries in the various learning programs and actual teams correlate
with grades, or entries in the course work or case work, or student
satisfaction, or other measures defined as team success.
Cross-cutting Themes
Across all the online team experiences highlighted in this chapter,
we note three important cross-cutting themes with respect to using
teams and teaching about teams in an online context. The first
theme deals with the use of technology in enabling online teaming.
The second has to do with the impression that trust in the technology, the process, and the people is a prerequisite to both the
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learning and the functioning of the teams. Finally, developing a
supportive culture through instilling beliefs, values, and processes
that facilitate open communication, support, and trust is important
in realizing learning and teaming in this environment. Each of these
themes is briefly explored in closing.
Technology as Enabler
Technology plays two important roles in the online learning or
teaming experience.
1. Apprehension and preconceived notions about technologymediated discussion caused problems in getting teams started, as
evidenced in the team module and reaffirmed in every run of the
MBA courses.
2. Technology failure in online teams could be
a. a convenient excuse: “I didn’t get that note”; “I couldn’t participate in the teamwork because my computer hard drive crashed.”
b. a significant frustration. In an eight-week course, having your
hard drive go can take you down for a significant portion of the
course, and make it very difficult to carry your end of the team
commitment.
The Role of Trust
With respect to trust, there is one further distinction that we would
like to raise between online and traditional teams. This distinction
lies in the nature of the situational awareness. It has been suggested
that online teams function on an intentional awareness, because
only specific characteristics of suitable resources or providers may
be known . Situational awareness for online teams is
contrasted to the extensional awareness more likely in face-to-face
teams, where the specific resources or providers are known. This
different kind of awareness of the resources plays a big role in how
the team becomes an entity, as well as in how it will weave together
its skills sets, and in the process build trust.
It is our view that the level of trust among participants (perhaps
from having members who had worked on other teams together, or
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
from a shared level of trust in the experience through the culture of
the program, or as a result of trust in the coach) determines how
well people work together and how seriously the charter is taken.
It is clear to the team members of the online research team that they
would have been hard pressed to continue working together if they
did not have a strong desire to do so, and trust in the other team
member’s abilities. Thus trust in competence, contract,
commitment , and character all play a significant role in the initial stages of online team
development.
Weick suggests that people organize cooperatively on
teams in order to learn and complete their work. There is a
continuous mix of agency and communion that creates a shared
reciprocity between individuals and that benefits both learning and
team function. However, as highlighted in this chapter, trust is
required for meaningful cooperation, and is often missing in the
early stages of relationship building.
The development of trust in online teams is not nor can it be a
quick and easy task. There is a need to look behind apprehension
and fear to listen to and capture an individual’s heart before trust
can follow. There is an interesting paradox when considering trust.
On the one hand, we see that a team must be productive quickly,
and that individuals need to trust and to be trusted within the team.
But on the other hand, few people on teams or in any relationship
will trust immediately. Team members thrown together will more
likely distrust the motives of others at the outset. This human truth
has implications for development, early sharing of personal
information, and hence, charter development, as found in our three
cases. The cases also highlight the distance people will go when
they do trust, and how reluctant they are to let go of team members
once a trusting relationship is in place. Social interaction and trust
therefore are key in any team and learning process. Once team
members trust, they are more likely to make their tacit knowledge
explicit, transform explicit knowledge into tacit knowledge, and in
the process, enlarge overall understanding.
We obviously need to know more about how to discern trust
levels early, and about what we can do to build them rapidly.
Examples of factors that heavily weight our decisions to trust other
people include the degree of leeway or freedom to act without
controls in place, the level of benevolence, the evidence of
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
openness, and the degree of risk taking. When a high level of trust
exists, fewer rules or controls appear necessary. Obviously, trust is
a tricky concept and a necessary consideration in online teaming. If
we can invoke a culture and process that encourages rapid development of such assessments, we should be able to encourage rapid
trust building which can only facilitate our learning and teaming
processes.
The Importance of Learning and Teaming Culture
Another point highlighted by our discussion of trust, trust building,
and implications for team performance is how we might create or
transform a culture to allow meaningful, trusting relationships to
develop. Marshall states that
to create a truly customer-driven, team-based, and trustcentered organization . . . would require a fundamental change
in the organization system . . . new technologies would not fix
it . . . training programs [alone] could not make it happen . . .
restructuring into teams by itself would not meet the need.
Instead, transforming a business requires that we transform the
way work is accomplished and the culture within which it occurs.
A new approach would be relationship based, and would support
an agreement or covenant between management and others,
spelling out understandings of trade-offs between risk, skill, labor,
and rewards, and delineating the way people will treat each other.
The covenant would frame character, quality, and integrity in the
work relationship, and would reflect underlying beliefs about
human nature, drivers of the business, and how management and
other actors in the workplace will change.
Project management practices may provide tools for developing
a culture of trust, accountability, and transparency conducive to
rapid trust development. The importance of establishing a team
charter early on to focus the team is only one example of the
importance of engineering the culture of teams. The establishment
of the team charter and acknowledgement of culture was shown to
be important in our three cases, as in each case, team members
ignored this fact until faced with situations of conflict.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Conclusion
This chapter sheds light on some of the controversies associated
with teaching teaming and using online teaming in distance
education programs by providing some insights into the operations
of a team-building distance simulation, a successful online project
team, and the use of teams in a distance-based MBA program. Our
experience in these and other online team teaching and working
situations convince us that these skills are teachable and
transferable in a online world.
In multiple runs of the team-learning module, we have found the
virtual reality simulation to be a very effective way to introduce the
concepts of teamwork. Followed up with teamwork in an online
facilitated setting, it appears to be developing understanding and
soft skills in this new online environment.
Over the nearly ten-year history of the distance MBA programs
at Athabasca University, and particularly within the project
management course, we have witnessed similar results. Our
students develop not only an explicit understanding of online team
dynamics, but also tacit skills in making it happen. One of the
primary skills developed in traditional MBA
programs is
networking and oral presentation of information. In our program,
we work on these skills too, but the main skills our students
develop as a result of the program are the ability to share information, insights, and criticism over the Web, and to build and work
very effectively on online teams.
The biggest problem in any team undertaking is the assumption
that you can put people together to work on a task, and they will
automatically become a team and know how to work together.
This assumption is equally false in both the face-to-face and the
online team contexts. In the online world, it may be even easier to
ignore the human process side of team work in the absence of
physical clues revealing the psychic health (or lack of) of the team.
The trick is to put the effort into the process side of teaming and
teaching, even when it is less visible than in the face-to-face
environment. We reiterate, however, that it can and must be done.
Project team learning in an online world has become a fact of
life at work and in our education settings. The experience from the
three cases presented provides some suggestions for how to
approach this activity in a learning or work setting.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Recommendations
Effective teamwork requires continual monitoring and assessment.
Effective teaching does the same. The recommendations given
below may facilitate online teaming and learning endeavors.
• Work hard in the beginning to develop a trusting environment.
Without it nothing will work. Trust builds as relationships build
in online teaming, and therefore must be present in online team
development.
• Expect shifting of roles and leadership. Sometimes the teacher
will be the taught and the leader must learn to follow.
• Employ as many forms of interaction as possible in the initial
phases of the collaboration. If possible, face-to-face is probably
the ideal way to kick off. However, most of us do not have this
luxury, and there is growing evidence about and experience with
online kick-offs, such as the learning module discussed above.
• Open communication is critical to any team endeavor.
Determining how to encourage it in your particular online world
is your most critical task.
• Employ good project management practices. Agree how you will
work together. Plan the work. Assign responsibility. Monitor
progress. Celebrate success.
References
Aranda, E. K., Aranda, L., & Conlon, K. . Teams: Structure,
process, culture and politics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Bennett, C. . Capturing the teachable moment: Inhouse staff development. Oregon Library Association Quarterly,
5(4). Retrieved October 18, 2003, from 
quarterly/quar5-4/bennett.shtml
Burt, R. (Ed.). . The social structure of competition in
networks and organizations. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Canadian Professional Logistics Institute . Team dynamics
and communications module. Toronto, ON: Author.
Chen, L. L.-J. . Modeling the Internet as cyberorganism: A
living systems framework and investigative methodologies for
online cooperative interaction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Calgary.
Delisle, C., Thomas, J., Jugdev, K., & Buckle, P. .
Virtual project teaming to bridge the distance: A case study.
Paper presented at the 32nd annual Project Management
Institute Seminars & Symposium, Nashville, Tennessee.
Eccles, R. G., & Crane, D. B. . Managing through networks
in investment banking. California Management Review 30(1),
Glaser, R., & Glaser, C. . Team effectiveness profile. King of
Prussia, PA: Organizational Design and Development, Inc.
Gristock, J. . Communications and organizational virtuality.
E-Jov. The Electronic Journal of Organization Virtualness, 2(2),
Hartman, F. . Don’t park your brain outside. Philadelphia:
PMI Publications.
Hogan, C., & Champagne, D. . Personal style inventory: PSI
instrument. King of Prussia, PA: Organizational Design and
Development, Inc.
Hurst, D., & Follows, S. . Virtual team development:
building intellectual capital and cultural value change. In
M. Beyerlein (Ed.), The collaborative work systems fieldbook.
(pp. 543-560). Denton, TX: University of North Texas.
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. . The wisdom of teams:
Creating the high-performance organization. New York: Harper
Lipnack, J., & Stamps, J. . Virtual teams: Reaching across
space, time, and organizations with technology (2nd ed.). New
York: Wiley.
Marshall, E. M. . Building trust at the speed of change: The
power of the relationship-based corporation. New York: American Management Association.
Miller, P., Pons, J. M., & Naude, P. . Global teams.
Financial Times, 12
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Palmer, J. W., & Johnston, J. S. . Business-tobusiness connectivity on the Internet: EDI, intermediaries, and
interorganizational dimensions. In A. Rainer, B. F. Schmid,
D. Selz, & S. Zbornik. EM—Interorganizational Systems. EM—
Electronic Markets, 6(2). Retrieved December 22, 2003, from
 
publications.nsf/all_pk/74
Ribble Libove, L., & Russo, E. M. . Trust—the ultimate test.
King of Prussia, PA: Organizational Design and Development, Inc.
Reina D. S., & Reina, M. L. . Trust and betrayal in the
workplace: Building effective relationships in your organization.
San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Schank, R. . Online learning: A revolutionary approach to
building a highly skilled workforce. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stewart, A. . The wealth of knowledge: Intellectual capital
and the twenty-first century organization. New York: Currency.
Walther, B. J. . Computer-mediated communication:
Impersonal, interpersonal and hyperpersonal interaction.
Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.
Weick, K. E. . Management of organizational change among
loosely coupled elements. In P. S. Goodman (Ed.), Change in
organizations: New perspectives on theory, research and
practice (pp. 375-408). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Weick, K. . Enactment and the boundaryless career:
Organizing as we work. In M. B. Arthur & D. M. Rousseau
(Eds.), The boundaryless career: A new employment principle
for a new organizational era (pp. 40-57). New York: Oxford
University Press.
White, H. C., Boorman, S. A., & Breiger, R. L. . Social
structure from multiple networks I—block models of roles and
positions. American Journal of Sociology, 81(4), 730-780.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Appendix 8A: Example of CPLI Student Team Charter
Model adapted from
Aranda, E. K., Aranda, L. & Conlon, K. and
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. 
TEAM CHARTER
Team Dynamics & Communication
Canadian Professional Logistics Institute Module
October 2003
Membership
• For the purpose of voting the team membership should consist
of an odd number of members (suggest 5 or 7 members).
• Members should be chosen from the various key departments
within the company (Upper Management, Logistics, Finance,
Information Technology, Engineering, Research and Development, Sales and Marketing, etc.).
• Members should have unique roles on the team to avoid
duplication of effort and responsibility.
• Members should represent experts in their field from the various
key departments within the company (Upper Management,
Logistics, Finance, Information Technology, Engineering,
Research and Development, Sales and Marketing, etc.).
• Members should have the skills, experience, and authority to
make necessary decisions, supply answers and provide direction
in time of crisis.
• All team members should have excellent leadership, communication, and listening skills.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Outside skilled support people and/or agencies should be added
and included as needed during the crisis/disaster. Examples of
support people and agencies are Fire Department, Forestry
Department, Medical Agencies, Police, Military, Environmental
Agencies, others as required.
• Provide emergency services in the event of all natural disasters.
• Function analytically and provide alternative options for all
emergencies.
• Provide support to those on the front line, execute thoroughly,
safely, and quickly.
Assumptions
• Do not assume roles of responsibility. Define a roadmap of the
team’s objectives and goals and each team member’s role/
responsibility.
• Clearly set guidelines on how we will conduct and display our
disagreements and that no decision is made unless the team
agrees (consensus of course).
• Clarify assumptions about teamwork—how they might interfere
and why it is important to clarify in a team’s structure. I.e.
Dept. “X” contact Police, Fire, and Ambulance. Dept. “Y”
contacts . . . Dept. “W” coordinates . . .
• Recognize people will panic and thinking irrationally. Have
panic plan in place for various disasters.
• Assume the worst scenario and develop an action plan for the
most obvious change. I.e. Weather conditions.
Key Success Measures
• Take the necessary time to respond to tasks. Do not rush a
• Take measures to avoid a disaster.
• Establish a reaction time based on nature of disaster.
• Ensure teams know what, when, who, where and why in a
disaster. They know their place.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
• Ensure all teams prioritize their time and are available to react
to a disaster.
• Regular progress assessments should be maintained by the lead
for that disaster.
• A follow-up meeting or meetings will be established by the lead
for that disaster as required.
• During disaster situation try to avoid causing any disruption to
day-to-day operations as much as possible. Avoidance of down
• There should always be a focus on avoiding any unnecessary
risk of injury or casualties.
• A situational report and structure shall be established by the
lead for that disaster.
• A measurable reaction time to a disaster should be established.
• A monthly report will include test scenarios by activity and
specific disaster.
• A monthly communication shall be distributed to each team for
up to date information and events.
• Ultimately no casualties.
KPI’s (Key Performance Indicators)
• Reaction time
• Teams in place
• Available for action
• No down time
R & D Process
• Emergency Response Training for all areas to better understand
the nature of each disaster and action steps.
• Team leads will be established according to the nature of the
• A measurable response time to each disaster shall be established.
• A disaster may require the use of more than one leader
depending on the nature of the disaster.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• A defined set of responsibilities and hand off procedures shall be
established according to the disaster.
• Define the gaps within team members and arrange for
appropriate training.
• Visit and revisit purpose as team runs into challenges.
Leadership
• Team leads will be established according to the nature of the
• A disaster may require the use of more than one leader
depending on the nature of the disaster.
• A defined set of responsibilities and hand off procedures shall be
established according to the disaster for each leader.
• Across function/department, interaction and collaborative work
ethic shall be established.
• A leader shall establish a follow-up meeting or meetings for the
specific disaster as required.
• A leader shall empower members of his team or other teams in
an effort to resolve a disaster.
• Monthly meetings shall be held with leaders in each department.
• Establish skills and abilities of each team member and identify
the gaps. I.e.:
• stress levels
• collaboration skills
• problem solving skills
• decision-making skills
• communication effectiveness
• Maximize on individual expertise.
• Empower and encourage team member to take leadership roles,
particularly if their styles of communication are different.
• Rotating leadership roles according to the demands of the
situation can help spread the load and enhance innovation.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Ground Rule & Actions
• Turn off all cell phones prior to start of meeting.
• Respect the other members of the meeting, do not interrupt, &
listen to what they have to say.
• Participate in the discussion.
• Have an agenda & be prepared to deal with topics.
• Have predetermined roles for members, (i.e. Chair, Minutes,
• Before meeting is over, take 10-15 mins. to review session so
that all know what is expected.
• No one person has blame for failure & no one person has praise
for completion. One for all, & all for one.
• When good & productive ideas are offered, mold & praise the
person so that you build favorable responses in the future.
• During meetings, a section, or block of time needs to be set aside
for round table discussions, each member have the opportunity
to say or not to say anything.
• Regular training/re-training for all members of the team. Set an
amount of time between evaluations and all members need to
stick and abide by the timeline.
• Have “Night’s off” outings. The team goes out for dinner/drinks
to build trust & faith in one another.
• If a certain member’s ideas are implemented, recognize that (i.e.
Publications, Report, etc.).
• Regular reviews by co-members:
• Learn from mistakes
• Learn to take criticism
• Builds trust
• Start meetings off with 5 mins of new idea session after minutes
from last meeting are read.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• The roles of the team will have to be determined by members’
strengths and weaknesses.
• The Chair & Minute taker should remain the same but an
incident leader should be identified and it needs to be based on
their strengths for the issue (i.e. Fire Marshal for a fire, etc.).
• Set-up times frames for meetings and training.
• Set-up what type of meetings need to happen, face to face or
conference calls, weekend retreats?
• Set-up time frame and outline of meetings.
Managing Meetings Effectively
• Before meetings, an agenda is sent out to the members for
• Come prepared & ready to discuss the topics.
• 1st 5-10 mins should be a review of the previous meeting’s
minutes and then another 5-10 mins should be a round table of
“New Ideas,” opportunity for everyone to bring new ideas
forward for the group to evaluate.
• Egos will be left at the front door before you walk into the
• Listen and respect one another.
• Do not interrupt other members when he/she is talking.
• Ideas are all thrown out onto the table and group evaluates all
ideas, prioritize them if necessary, and discuss pros/cons. This is
done through discussions by all to build consensus and if that
cannot be completed a vote will be in order with majority ruling.
• Meetings must be kept to the order and period set out in the
ground rules.
Understanding Skills and Needs [personal and group]
Constructive feedback
• Team members must have an open mind and be open to other’s
opinions and be open to changing their mind.
• Acknowledge need for feedback.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
• Contract for the feedback.
• Know when to give feedback.
• Understand the context.
• Focus on the needs of the receiver.
• Must always show respect.
• Thinking must be proactive.
• Good listening skills are critical.
• Always be looking for opportunities for improvement.
• No laughing at others when they are speaking.
• Create a supportive environment.
• Remember the goal is important when giving feedback.
• The end state is what matters, not individualism.
• Restrict feedback to things known for certain and things that
can be changed.
When providing feedback to other team members, the
Constructive feedback model is to be applied.
• Ask for permission to speak.
• Check your perception of what the person is trying to
communicate.
• Interpret the data provided.
• Check if your own interpretation is correct.
• Express your own feelings.
• Express your own intentions.
• Suggest actions to bring the situation to resolution or problem
into focus.
This model can also be applied when dealing with conflict.
When providing feedback, team members should:
• Not try to evaluate the other person.
• Describe.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Not use labels.
• Speak for your own self, use “I” rather than “you.”
• Phrase the issue as a statement, not a question.
• Not exaggerate the statement of the facts and issues.
Active listening
• Listen to an entire point before commenting or interrupting.
• Listen with interest.
• Be in the moment, do not start thinking about your answer
before speaker has finished.
• Allow everyone to fully present their views.
• Allow the person to finish before airing out our thoughts.
• Ensure the point has been completed and understood before
moving on.
• Listeners must remember that no thought or idea is a bad one
and should be considered.
• Understanding is more than listening.
• Use the words like "What I hear you saying is" when
appropriate.
• Speaker should check for understanding.
• Poll each team member on the topic when needed.
• Ask someone from the group to summarize to ensure a group
understanding is at hand.
• Ask for clarification if unsure.
Conflict resolution (ten rules for crowd control)
• Everyone is Equal (titles are left at the door).
• One Speaker at a time.
• One Subject at a time.
• Use Sentences.
• Binary: Yes or No (no gray areas).
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
• Unanimous agreement.
• Do not duck it (tackle tough issues and problems).
• No Speeches.
• Ideas, thoughts, positions, are important. Spelling and grammar
will be corrected later.
• No interruptions (if someone leaves the session, they agree that
they will abide by the conclusions reached by the team).
Consensus building
All team members must understand the decision, accept it, and can
explain why the decided choice is the best. Requirements to do this
are as follows:
• Time (dedicated to discussion and decision-making).
• Active participation of all team members.
• Active listening.
• Conflict resolution.
• Facilitation skills.
• Creative and open-mind thinking.
• Emphasize the positives.
• Find out how serious the negative are.
• Keep summing up the areas of agreement.
• Commit to action.
• Encourage all participants to have a full say.
Handling change
Two biggest mistakes people make when confronted with change
• Being a victim.
• Trying to control the uncontrollable.
Dealing with change involves
• Understanding individuals’ fears.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Understand reasons for resistance.
• Leaders must have a clear direction.
• Explain what is going to affect people.
• Adequate training
One of the biggest mistakes that are made in trying to introduce
change is not understanding the reasons for resistance. What
people don’t realize when introducing change and communing up
against resistance is the following:
People do not resist change, they resist being changed . . .
Building Trust
• By communicating your strengths and weaknesses in the work
place to the group, people can find way to relate to the other
members. Open communication should always be encouraged
and welcomed regardless of the nature of the news. Members
should maintain consistency—“walk the talk.” You must prove
your competencies by always doing your part of the work when
you say you are going to do it. Remaining positive throughout
this entire process will also help to grow the trust within the
Team Rituals
• Developing team rituals are important as it motivates the team
to be the best that it can be. One ritual would be to acknowledge
the accomplishments of the team. There is no greater
satisfaction (not even money!) than recognition amongst your
peers. Each team should brainstorm to develop their own
rituals—as this will give commonality to the group and its
members and spark enthusiasm in doing the job!
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Diversity and Creativity
• Partnerships built on mutual empowerment and unconditional
support ensures that diverse perspectives, ideas, and experiences
are included. Optimizing diversity is extremely effective for
increasing collaboration, performance, creativity, learning, and
teaching. Optimizing each team member's uniqueness brings the
power of diversity into your team.
People and Behaviour
• All members expected to be open minded to other’s opinions.
• Challenge each other, but with respect.
• Support team atmosphere, “one for all and all for one.”
• Majority rules.
• Have non-directed discussions so people can open up, get to
know each other.
• Moreover, understand everyone’s values and different
perspectives.
• Evaluate the mix of team members to determine skills and
competencies for problem solving and decision-making.
People demonstrate four distinctive behavioral styles. Listed
below is a summary of each and the “Do’s and Don’ts” on how to
effectively manage and prepare you for such styles.
• With a driver, you need to be brief, specific and to the point.
Don’t chitchat. Come prepared to the meeting, plan your
presentation to present facts clearly, ask specific “what”
questions, if you disagree, take issue with facts not the person.
You finish your business move along quickly. Don’t waste their
time, ramble on, leave loopholes, appear disorganized, messy,
speculate wildly, direct or order them around.
• With an expressive, you must support their hopes, dreams,
intentions, leave time for socializing, talk about goals and what
is stimulating, deal with the big picture, ask for opinions and
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
ideas, offer special deals, extras and incentives. Do not try to
legislate, be cold, aloof or tight-lipped, leave things hanging in
the air, dream with them if time is of the essence, talk down to
them, be dogmatic.
• With amiables, you must start with some personal comment to
break the ice, show sincere interest in them as people, find areas
of commonality, listen and be responsive, be non-threatening,
casual, and informal, define individual contributions, provide
back-up support. Don’t rush headlong into business, stick to
business constantly, debate about facts and figures, be
patronizing, offer assurances you can’t live up to.
• With analyticals, prepare your information in advance, be
direct, stick to your knitting, present specifics and do what you
say you will do, follow through if you agree, be accurate,
realistic, provide tangible practical evidence. Try not to be
disorganized, casual, informal, loud, fail to follow through,
waste time, provide personal incentives, threaten, cajole,
wheedle, coax, whine, or be manipulative.
Motivating Contributions
• “Bright Ideas Award” incentive program. If implemented, cash
bonus payout.
• Team Recognition Program in the way of a plaque for all
company associates to view.
• Newsletter updates on team’s progress and assignments,
acknowledging outstanding performers/heroes etc.
• Mutual accountability for success.
Task Allocations
• Appointed and unchangeable initiator, who will call on experts
as required, i.e. Director or President.
• Depending on the emergency/disaster SME’s will be appointed
from all units with the most experience to lead the team
• Rotation of SME’s will also be necessary depending on the
emergency/disaster
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Moreover, their skill sets.
• Whoever’s department the emergency effects the most, will
assume a “leadership role” in assisting the SME in assigning
Accountability
Measuring Effectiveness
• Establish period for first line response team to call each other.
From first call of an emergency, the first line team has 30 minutes
in which to contact all of the rest on their ERP team. All contact
names and numbers, home, work and cell are to be documented.
First line team then determines which department will respond.
First line team determines if outside emergency personnel need to
be notified. This could be fire police ambulance or military.
• The second line or departmental ERP team then steps into their
action plan. Clear timelines are set out. They then have 30
minutes to be sure all of their team is on board and ready to roll
out action plan.
• Depending on the emergency clear steps are set out to follow.
Each phase will have a period established. A full ERP response
plan will have an overall period. Example; In 24 hours all steps
in the departmental ERP plan will have been implemented.
• All ERP plans will have periods. Examples would be:
• All computers are down IT has 1 hour to have all main frames
up and Running
• Bad product has been shipped into the market place-all
product must be off shelves in North America in 48 hours.
• The team must be fully packed and assembled and at a
specific location ready to go at 0800 for dispatch to the
Tower Fire.
Rewarding Success
KPI are set up on individual performance plans. It is part of a
bonus calculation.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• The whole team depends on each other to complete the ERP
plan and in turn achieve their individual goals.
• If the team pulls together and successfully completes the ERP
plan in the period specified the success is measured.
See attached performance document.
Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online
Team TOP Group Management Evaluation 2004
Annual Base Salary
Percentage of salary
possible to be earned
Total $ Possible
Performance
% of total $
Achievement
Be part of a highly
effective ERP Team
Having achieved
100% on time ERP
Other goals listed
October, 2003.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 9
COPYRIGHT ISSUES IN ONLINE COURSES:
A MOMENT IN TIME
Lori-Ann Claerhout
Athabasca University
Introduction
Copyright, in Canada and throughout the modern technological
world, is now in a state of flux. Since its promulgation in 1924, the
Canadian Copyright Act has survived many new technological
advances: the photocopier, radio and television broadcasting,
audio- and video-recording equipment, and the advent of mainframe and personal computers. Now, further technological advances in telecommunication, such as the Internet, are stressing the
Act to its fullest capacity. As they embrace new electronic
technologies, online educators are in a position to lead advances in
copyright law. Through involvement in Canada’s copyright consultation process, online educators are already setting the stage for
this rights-balancing drama. By following proper copyright
procedure in online course development, educators can sensitize
their students to the traditional rights of creators and users, and the
intellectual property ownership issues emerging in the electronic
Copyright Law
What Isn’t Yours Doesn’t Become Yours
When You Take It from a Web Site
Most pro-public-domain Web sites will argue that the true function
of the Internet is to present freely available material to any viewer,
who can then use that material for any purpose. Compare this view
to that of pay-for-use Web sites, which see this medium as another
cash-generating venue.
In Canada, copyright arises when original material is captured
in a fixed form. Along with paper, audiotape or videotape, canvas,
and photographic paper, Web or e-mail pages are fixed forms.
Therefore, when original material is uploaded, written in an e-mail,
or posted to a Web site, copyright arises. If no statement to the
contrary is given, it can be considered a violation of copyright to
use material presented on a Web site or contained in e-mail for any
purpose other than direct viewing. There is no need for any
statement asserting this right.
Jurisdiction and Fair Use
In online and other forms of distance education, the law of the
institution’s country is the law considered. Nevertheless, copyright
law in Canada is often confused with American law. The American
doctrine of “fair use” is often cited as a reason to use material
without permission.1 Fair use is not a Canadian concept and does
not apply in this country. Canadian law draws from larger frameworks.
As have most other nations, Canada has signed the Berne
Convention , which offers a common ground for copyright
basics. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) offers
best practice recommendations to treaty signatories (Canada is
one) to promote international understanding on copyright issues.
The United States has responded to the 1996 WIPO treaties by
implementing their much-publicized and debated Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).2 The government of Canada is in the
process of considering changes to the Canadian Copyright Act.
Copyright Law in Canada—Changes
The Speech from the Throne of October 2002 promised work to
bring the Canadian Copyright Act in line with current thinking on
digital copyright issues. Industry Canada’s report, titled Supporting
Culture and Innovation: Report on the Provisions and Operation
of the Copyright Act , outlines areas of the Act to be examined.3 Issues that
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
1 For information on
American copyright law,
see the Library of Congress
copyright site, retrieved
October 9, 2003, from
 
copyright/
2 For more information on
the DMCA, see Casey
Lide’s “What Colleges and
Universities Need to Know
about the Digital
Millennium Copyright
Act.” Retrieved October 9,
2003, from 
.educause.edu/ir/library/
html/cem9913.html
are not clearly addressed by the present Act include
Web-linking (or hotlinking) and Internet server liability. The 2002
Report on the Act also raised expanding the scope of “fair dealing”
to include more exceptions—much like the U.S. fair use doctrine.
Obligations to comply with 1997 amendments to the Canadian
Copyright Act and to WIPO’s copyright treaties4 have kept
Canadian Copyright Act evaluation in step with developments in
more than 150 other Internet-active countries.
Michael Geist argues that
digital copyright will take centre stage as the government
identifies technical-measures protection (which uses encryption
techniques to limit copyright of digital work) and ISP liability as
key issues. Moreover, the copyright concerns of photographers
and educational issues have catapulted to top priorities. 
Other issues to be tackled in the Canadian debate include the
term or lifespan of copyright protection, private copying, copyright
attached to traditional knowledge, and database protection
 .
The struggle within copyright law centres on a balance between
rights of the creator and rights of the user of copyright-protected
materials. As described in the 2002 Report on the Act:
Copyright is the right of the creator of an original work (and
certain other subject matter) to authorize or prohibit certain
uses of the work or to receive compensation for its use. It may
be an exclusive right to control certain uses such as reproduction or a right to receive compensation such as the communication to the public or performance in public of a sound
recording. Remuneration and control for rights holders, and
the dissemination and access to their works, are the two
fundamental principles underlying Canadian copyright policy.
 .
The original Copyright Act of 1924 remained effective for more
than 75 years. To be equally effective in a rapidly changing digital
environment, revisions to the Act must be fair to both producers and
consumers of copyright-protected material, and must address the
capabilities of current technologies and not-yet-created technologies. Economic considerations must also be at the forefront of
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
3 The full report is available online. Retrieved
October 9, 2003, from
 
epic/internet/incrp-prda
.nsf/vwGeneratedInterE/
rp00863e.html
4 The texts of the “Agreed
Statements Concerning
the WIPO Copyright
Treaty” are available
online. Retrieved October
9, 2003, from 
.wipo.int/treaties/ip/wct/
statements.html
discussion about compensation to copyright creators and affordability to consumers. National economic interests are at stake:
In 2000, the gross domestic product (GDP) of the copyrightrelated sectors (publishing, film, music, software, visual arts,
etc.) was estimated at $65.9 billion or 7.4 percent of Canadian
GDP. Between 1992 and 2000, the value of these sectors
increased by an annual average of 6.6 percent, compared with
3.3 percent for the rest of the Canadian economy. Together,
these sectors formed the third most important contributor to the
growth of Canada’s economy. 
Applications to Distance Education
Industry Canada recognizes “the importance of copyright reform
to the management of knowledge” , and
recognizes that both users and consumers want clear rules for
operating in the current electronically mediated world. Currently,
there are no provisions in the Act for management of knowledge in
distance education or for education outside classrooms or face-toface settings.
At Athabasca University, where traditional distance education
methods have been employed since the early 1980s, the body of
practice from print copyright is often the default when dealing with
new online issues. The bottom line is always due diligence. Each
third party copyright item in a course has its own paper permissions files, and, since the mid-1990s, an electronic permissions file
as well. The files are stored for historical reference (i.e., to provide
information about a course) as well as for legal protection.5
The Linking Debate
The use of hotlinks from course materials to Internet sites has
transformed distance education learning materials. At the time of
writing, there is no Canadian law to deal with issues of linking or
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
5 The Canadian Intellectual Property Web site
(English language version)
can be found at
 
sc_mrksv/cipo/welcome/
welcom-e.html
In particular, search
 
sc_mrksv/cipo/cp/
cp_main-e.html for
copyright-related information. Both pages
retrieved October 9,
deep-linking to another site. The controversy, however, is international, and outcomes could set boundaries for how material is
accessed through online courses. Corey Murray, assistant editor of
eSchool News, writes that “so-called deep-linking occurs whenever
a teacher or some other person provides a Web link that bypasses
another site’s home page and goes directly to a specific article deep
within that internet site” . Murray
acknowledges that although some online publishers have implied
otherwise, U.S. law does not currently address the deep-linking
issue. “Opponents of deep-linking argue that it costs sites in
valuable advertising revenue if visitors are not required to visit the
home page first” .
Murray interprets intellectual property lawyer Harvey Jacobs’s
predictions for lawsuits against deep-linking as follows:
he sees two possible strategies for those who would challenge
the practice in court: first, that deep-linking is a form of trespassing [and second] that visitors who enter a site by way of a
deep link cannot knowingly agree to the terms and conditions
of that site, which are normally listed on the home page.
 
Critics argue that the non-linear design of the Internet precludes
the type of hierarchy implied by the term “deep-linking,” as Web
pages are not stacked as such: each page stands alone, yet is
connected to other pages.
In Kelly v. Arriba , the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in
San Francisco found that “a search engine that linked to copyrighted material by ‘framing’ it in a new Web browser window
infringed on the copyright owner’s rights” . Framing,
however, is technically quite different from linking. Framing imports
the third-party Web page into the offender’s Web page, instead of
just leading to the third-party Web page, as is the case in linking.
A recent and defining case in linking practice is Danish
Newspaper Publishers Association v. Newsbooster. The Danish
Court ruled that Newsbooster violated copyright laws by deep
linking to articles on Danish newspaper sites . The legal
firm Hale and Dorr report five bases for the Danish Newspaper
Publishers Association’s injunction. Listed reasons include “repeated
and systematic extraction” of portions of news headlines, avoiding
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
advertising on the linked-to site, and financial gain.6
At Athabasca University, the course Web creator is advised to
send a notice to the Web administrator of the linked-to site,
informing them of our intent and purpose (see Figure 9-1).
Responses have ranged from angry e-mails asking us to please stop
wasting their time (as the Internet was developed to enable free
information distribution), to requests not to link to the site, and
even ecstatic notes because someone is interested in linking to their
site. As well, some responses request Athabasca University to
reroute through a more descriptive or main page. Sending these
messages has also resulted in notifications of Web address changes.
It is important for any educational institution to have clear copyright policy that outlines who owns course material, and how the
course material can be used by others.
Under Canadian law, copyright resides with the creator of
original material captured in a fixed form. The major exception
occurs when the creation is done under employment or using an
employer’s facilities or machinery. As the lines of what constitutes
“under employment” are indistinct (particularly in the university
environment, where work may be done on non-employer
computers and hours of work can be erratic), internal policy and
agreement are necessary. In most traditional universities in Canada
and elsewhere, the university explicitly returns copyright for educational and academic materials to the employee-creators
(normally the faculty members).
Athabasca University was created as a single-mode distance
education institution in the early 1970s, and from its origin has had
a much different policy in regard to ownership of instructional
content. Contributors to Athabasca University courses often include
visual designers, instructional designers, and editors, along with the
content developers or faculty members. With each profession
contributing to the whole course, rights are dispersed. In response,
the University has developed and maintains policy stating that the
University owns the copyright on all course materials created by any
and all University staff. In the electronic environment, course
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
6 Hale and Dorr’s October
2002 listing of deep
linking rulings is at
 
publications/pubsdetail.asp
?ID=133761032002
(retrieved November 16,
Note that, at publication,
previously available
translated transcripts of
court proceedings and the
general Newsbooster site
(www.newsbooster.com)
were unavailable.
production methods have changed and new technological positions
have been added; however, Athabasca University’s original rights
ownership policy (created primarily for print-based courses)
remains the same. Athabasca University’s goodwill agreement with
staff creators does allow material originally written for their courses
to be used in other academic publications, provided that reference is
made to the employer.
Simonson et al. describe a hybrid model of ownership as another
possibility. In this model, the institution owns the course and the
faculty member owns the content.
In this situation, if the faculty member accepts a position
elsewhere, she or he can take the course content to the new
campus and use it there. However, the course itself, including
the content, also may be used by the former institution, with a
new instructor assigned to teach the course. 
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
Figure 9-1.
Hotlinking letter.
Attention: Webmaster
RE: Your Internet site, as located at ____________
Athabasca University would like to provide an option for
students enrolled in our course, _________, to visit your Internet
site. A hotlink from the course Web page would enable our
students to reach your information quickly. We trust that this
will meet with your approval.
Athabasca University is a public, government-supported, nonprofit distance education institution. Enrolled students may
choose from two basic delivery modes: individualized study
(print-based or online-enhanced) or grouped study (classroom
or e-Class®). Each delivery mode implements different learning
methods, including online and online-enhanced courses,
classroom instruction, e-Class®, tele- and video-conferencing,
telecourses, home labs, and computer-mediated instruction.
Thank you for your consideration.
Source: Athabasca University Copyright Web page. Retrieved October 9, 2003,
from 
Simonson et al. also describe policies specifying royalty
payouts to each party working on the course, including faculty and
instruc-tional technologists.
Student Expectations
Professors are eager to use new online options, and so are students.
Student essays are no longer static documents written on paper—
they now include audio and video material, and links to Web sites.
Dynamic “papers” are being created and submitted, and with
them, a new set of rules is emerging. New citation formats are
developing and becoming established.7 The growth of full-text
database and e-book accessibility enables students to use others’
works more easily and accurately. With this accessibility, though,
comes the risk of improper use of others’ materials.
Plagiarism—the Risks Increase Online
Students are expected to submit original work. Plagiarism,
however, has become technologically much easier. Online teachers
must be more diligent about explaining plagiarism and intellectual
honesty to students, and must be familiar with plagiarism search
tools. The University of Alberta Web site “Guide to Plagiarism and
Cyber-Plagiarism” is an excellent source for information on online
plagiarism, examining subtopics such as “Why Students
Plagiarize,” “Preventing Plagiarism,” “Detecting Plagiarism,” and
“Paper Mills,” and including resources and links to other Web sites
or software that can help identify plagiarized material.8
In “Why Students Plagiarize,” University of Alberta authors
comment that
Plagiarism is a difficult concept to define because it
encompasses a wide range of actions, from merely writing
incorrect citations to the wholesale theft of someone else’s work
or ideas. Also, the type of plagiarism—deliberate or
unintentional—have an impact upon the perception of the
offence for both faculty and students. The exact causes of
plagiarism are complex, but worth examining. 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
7 See (1) the “Electronic
References” section of the
American Psychological
Association Style.org Web
site. Retrieved October 9,
2003, from 
.apastyle.org/
(2) the “Frequently Asked
Questions about MLA
Style” page. Retrieved
October 9, 2003, from
 
8 Retrieved October 9,
2003, from 
.library.ualberta.ca/guides/
plagiarism
To encourage intellectual honesty, and to contribute to
education on plagiarism, every Athabasca University course
contains a notice like that shown in Figure 9-2, under the heading
“Intellectual Indebtedness and Plagiarism” (Athabasca University,
Practical Guidelines
Collective Licensing
Collective licenses, such as those administered by Access Copyright
in Canada and the Copyright Clearance Center in the U.S., have
been helpful to post-secondary educational institutions. Collective
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
Figure 9-2.
Intellectual
indebtedness
and plagiarism
statement.
Students enrolled in an Athabasca University course such as
[course name] are considered to be responsible scholars, and
are therefore expected to adhere rigorously to the principles of
intellectual honesty. Plagiarism is a form of intellectual
dishonesty in which another’s work is presented as one’s own,
and, as is the case with any form of academic misconduct,
plagiarism will be severely penalized. Depending on the
circumstances, penalties may involve rejection of the submitted
work; expulsion from the examination, the course, or the
program; or legal action.
Students sometimes commit plagiarism inadvertently. To avoid
doing so, make certain that you acknowledge all your sources,
both primary and secondary, in a full and consistent manner.
All direct quotes (quotations from an original work) and indirect
quotes (paraphrases of ideas presented in an original work)
must be acknowledged either through in-text citations,
footnotes, or endnotes.
Whatever system of documentation you use, you must provide
the author’s name, the title of the work, the place of
publication, the publisher, the year of publication, and the page
number from which the quote or information was taken. Full
bibliographic information on each source cited must also be
given in the bibliography at the end of your essay.
9 The Web site of the
Canadian copyright
licensing agency, Access
Copyright, is given below.
Retrieved October 9,
 
copyright.ca
licensing agencies work with creators to administer rights payments
for reproduction of creators’ work.9 Users of collective licensing
agencies benefit from the “rights clearinghouse” effect of collective
licenses. That is, where certain rights are allowed, users pay perstudent and per-page fees to reproduce creators’ works. The
collective then distributes collected funds to the copyright holders.
Collective licenses are only beginning to work for users wanting to
reproduce materials electronically, and such licensing arrangements
are not nearly as efficient as they have been for print reproduction.
At Athabasca University, more than two-thirds of print-based
reproduction occurs under a collective license, whereas nearly all
electronic reproduction rights are negotiated directly with the
copyright holder.
Twenty years ago, the Athabasca University copyright office
cleared rights to reprint third-party copyright holders’ material by
using the telephone, fax machine, and Canada Post. In a best-case
scenario, rights would be granted in about two weeks. The worst
case scenario occurred when the suspected copyright holder, who
could only be reached by regular mail, turned out not to be the
actual copyright holder, and other contacts had to be tried and
negotiated with. This process could and often did take a year.
Recently, for online courses and electronic reproduction, copyright
clearance turnaround timelines are similar to the print-based ranges
of the early 1980s (six months to a year), but current collective
licensing arrangements can make rights permission for print-based
reproduction instantaneous. With cooperating individual copyright
holders, print and some electronic-based permissions have been
hastened by the use of e-mail and online forms. For examples, see
the Web sites listed below.
• Thomson Learning’s site at 
permissions/action/begin
• Pearson Education Canada’s online form at 
.pearsoned.ca/highered/permission.html
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• Public Works and Government Services Canada provides their
preferred form online at 
application-e.pdf
• Ivey School of Business forms can be found under
“Permission/Order Forms” at 
.asp?pvar=Main
• Prentice Hall (Pearson U.S.) forms are at 
.com/mischtm/permissions.html
The (American) Copyright Clearance Center will grant electronic
rights to Canadian requesters on behalf of affiliated copyright
holders, and Canada’s Access Copyright is also now trying this
strategy as well.
Public Domain
With the lack of an efficient mechanism for collective licensing for
electronic use of materials, the public domain becomes much more
important to online course creation and delivery. Materials in the
public domain are not subject to copyright restrictions. In Canada,
textual material automatically enters the public domain on
January 1 of the 51st year after the creator’s death. The situation is
different in the United States, which is currently debating the length
of time required before materials enter the public domain.
According to John Bloom , the original term of copyright in
the U.S. was 14 years, with an added 14 years if the author were
still alive. Bloom goes on to note that
we have gradually lengthened that 14-year limit on copyrights.
At one time it was as much as 99 years, then scaled back to 75
years, then—in one of the most anti-American acts of the last
century—suspended entirely in 1998. The Sonny Bono
Copyright Term Extension Act of that year says simply that there
will be no copyright expirations for 20 years, meaning that
everything published between 1923 and 1943 will not be
released into the public domain. 
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
The maximum term of copyright in the United Kingdom is
currently life plus 70 years. Canadian federal and provincial
documents are also protected by copyright, with the 50-year rule
applying from the date of creation.
Some online creators now place their work in the public domain
on creation. Using public domain material means that negotiating
rights is not necessary—material can be used as-is and immediately,
an attractive combination in online courses, where production time
is minimized (no printing, binding, collating, and shipping) and the
temptation is toward just-in-time creation. Note, however, that
materials in the public domain still require appropriate citation;
using them without acknowledgement constitutes plagiarism.
Scenarios: Online Course Production
Case A: Professor Rush is working on a course that she expects will
be entirely online. Her course start date is in two months, and she
has just decided to add some online readings. Best practice dictates
that she check the online journal databases for these readings first.
Most university libraries now register with many online journal
database providers. Copyright on articles within the databases has
already been licensed for the university user community. A link to
the proper reading can be embedded in the course, and when
students are ready for the reading, clicking the link will take them
there directly. Course creators can also link to a search term,
journal database search page, or library general search page. If
Professor Rush’s requested readings are not available through
online journal databases, it may take several months for clearances.
Professor Rush must then decide if she wants to wait to get
permission to reproduce these readings or choose other applicable
readings from those available in journal databases.
Case B: Professor Allbusiness has written a business administration
course centering on several business cases. This professor is
continually on the cutting edge of business practice and requires the
most recent cases. Two of the largest creators of business cases,
however, still do not allow certain of their materials (such as new
cases) to be converted to electronic files and delivered to students,
no matter what the format (e.g., password-protected site, CD-
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
ROM, in pdf format on their own Web site). In this situation, it is
simplest to get permission to reproduce these materials in print
format, and mail them to the student in a printed reading file.
Case C: Professor Tacitus has worked in distance education for 30
years, and has several established and comprehensive humanities
courses in print form, some with accompanying music cassette
tapes. Professor Tacitus is interested in new technologies and now
wants all of his material to be available online. In this case, much
of the third-party material may already be in the public domain,
and therefore can be used in the alternate format of online publication. Other materials, for which permissions have been obtained
for print use, will require new permissions for electronic use.
Clearing the rights for the music requires more research. Some
tunes will be in the public domain, but their performances and the
production of the songs will not be. In this case, performers’ and
producers’ rights must be considered. It may take up to a year to
secure permissions to reproduce all of this material for a Web site
that may be technically ready in only days.
The Athabasca University Copyright Office uses a collection of
form letters to initiate and maintain contact with copyright holders.
An initial contact letter is shown in Figure 9-3. Prior to making any
contact, searches are made to identify a copyright or permissions
administrator to whom the letter should be addressed. Often, email will be the easiest primary method of contact. A sample e-mail
response to a standard faxed request is shown in Figure 9-4.
Traditional Knowledge
Although not directly related to issues of copyright for online
materials in Canada or systems for negotiating copyright permissions, traditional knowledge is another issue that online course
developers must be aware of. Before using stories, ideas, images, or
sounds from an Indigenous group, consideration must be given to
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 9-3.
Sample initial
contact letter.
Our File # XXXX XXX RF/X
October XX, 20XX
Journal Title
Copyright and Permissions
Fax: XXX-XXX-XXXX
Dear Xxxx Xxxx:
RE: Author’s Surname, First Name or Initial. “Article title” as
found in: Journal Title at www.xxxxxxxxx.xxx. Date of posting.
Location: Copyright Holder, page range.
On the understanding that you own copyright, this letter is to
request permission to reproduce the above material. We have
designed a course titled Course Number: Course Title, and
would like to use this material in our course package. This
course package will be in electronic format, stored on a server
owned and maintained by Athabasca University. This server is
key and password protected, accessible only to registered
students. We are requesting non-exclusive world rights.
Athabasca University is a public, government-supported, nonprofit distance education institution. Enrolled students may
choose from two basic delivery modes: individualized study
(print-based or online-enhanced) or grouped study (classroom
or e-Class). Each delivery mode implements different learning
methods, including online and online-enhanced courses,
classroom instruction, e-Class, tele- and video-conferencing,
telecourses, home labs, and computer mediated instruction.
We look forward to your faxed reply. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Lori-Ann Claerhout
Copyright Officer
Permission granted for reproduction as
described above:
Credit Statement:______________________
Name_________________ Position_______
______________________ ______________
traditional forms of intellectual property transmission and credit.
In practice, Canadian Indigenous Elders’ knowledge has been held
by the community. Who owns these rights within the community is
not always clear.
Athabasca University’s Centre for World Indigenous Knowledge
and Research (CWIKR) works within a larger community of world
Indigenous leaders. CWIKR consults with four decision-making
groups. Three of them are CWIKR’s consensus-based Nehiyiwak
Caucus, an Internal Advisory Committee, and an External Advisory
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
Figure 9-4.
Sample e-mail
Source: Adapted and reproduced with permission from copyright holder.
Hello XXXXX,
Thank you, I have received your fax requesting permission to
use the electronic copy of XXXXX, for the above course which
begins in September. A PDF copy of the case is now posted for
you on our private case pick-up site. To access this file please
go to our site at:
Enter your email address as above and the password
You have access to the file until August 7th.
Your authorization to use the case will be sent to you by fax. An
invoice for the PDF master and the permission will follow by
regular mail 60 days from the start date of the course. Please let
me know before then if the number of copies used changes.
Please be sure to contact me if you have any questions.
Kind Regards,
Xxxxx Xxxxx,
Account Representative,
Xxxxxxxxxxx Publishing, Xxxxxxxxx
Committees, which primarily make planning decisions and identify
key issues for the program. The fourth group is an Elder’s
Committee, which provides guidance on all issues, and sits on all
other committees. These committees consider issues of appropriation, knowledge ownership, and usage; and must be consulted
before traditional knowledges are used.10
Conclusion
Everyone who can access a computer is a potential creator and user
of copyright-protected material. The establishment of new
technologies demands that new creators learn about copyright laws
and best practices for use of materials presented electronically. To
maintain the balance between creators’ and users’ rights, the governments of Canada and other countries must adapt their copyright
laws. Until laws find a way both to protect creators’ rights and to
allow easy use of electronic materials, the potentials of new technologies in online education will not be realized.
References
Athabasca University. . Intellectual indebtedness and
plagiarism. Master of Arts—Integrated Studies 656. Datascapes:
Information aesthetics and network culture course guide.
Athabasca, AB: Author.
Bloom, J. . Right and wrong: The copy-right
infringement. National Review Online. Retrieved October 9,
2003, from 
Contreras, J., Breuer, C., & Penfold, L. . The
tangled web of global deep-linking rules. Retrieved November
15, 2003, from the Hale and Dorr LLP Web site: 
.haledorr.com/publications/pubsdetail.asp?ID=133761032002
Delio, M. . Deep link foes get another win.
Wired.com. Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
.com/news/politics/0,1283,53697,00.html
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
10 Athabasca University’s
Centre for World Indigenous Knowledge and
Research provides more
information online.
Retrieved November 16,
2003 from 
.athabascau.ca/indigenous
Delio, M. . Deep links return to surface.
Wired.com.
 
Geist, M. . Net copyright reform: It’s deep in
policy agenda. [Electronic version]. The Globe and Mail.
Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
/servlet/ArticleNews/printarticle/gam/20021017/TWGEIS
Industry Canada. . Supporting culture and
innovation: Report on the provisions and operation of the
Copyright Act. Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
.ic.gc.ca/epic/internet/incrp-prda.nsf/vwGeneratedInterE/
h_rp01106e.html
Ivey School of Business. (N.d.). Quick search. Retrieved October 9,
2003, from 
Kelly v. Arriba, No.00-55521, D.C. No. CV-99-00560-GLT. . Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
.uscourts.gov/ca9/newopinions.nsf/C38AD9E9A70DB1518825
6B5700813AD7/$file/0055521.pdf?openelement
Murray, C. . “Deep-linking” flap could deep-six
direct links to relevant content for students. eSchool News.
Retrieved July 4, 2002, from 
news/showStory.cfm?ArticleID=3789
Pearson Education Canada. . Copyright permission.
Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
highered/permission.html
Prentice Hall. . Permissions. Retrieved October 9, 2003,
from 
Public Works and Government Services Canada. (N.d.). Application
for copyright clearance on Government of Canada works.
Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
application-e.pdf
Simonson, M., Smaldino, S., Albright, M., & Zvacek, S. .
Teaching and learning at a distance: Foundations of distance
education (2d ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Thomson Learning. . Permissions form. Retrieved January
27, 2004, from 
/action/begin
Copyright Issues in Online Courses: A Moment in Time
University of Alberta. . Why students plagiarize. Retrieved
October 9, 2003, from 
plagiarism/why/index.cfm
World Intellectual Property Organization. . Home page.
Retrieved October 9, 2003, from 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 0
VALUE ADDED—THE EDITOR IN DESIGN AND
DEVELOPMENT OF ONLINE COURSES
Jan Thiessen & Vince Ambrock
Athabasca University
Introduction
The editor has traditionally played a key role in the design and
development of instructional and educational materials. As both
the Web and the technology and processes for delivering
instructional materials on it have evolved, so too has the editor’s
role in course design and delivery. The typical “Web editor” has a
broad and changing range of responsibilities, from editing and
verifying course content to evaluating the efficacy of online
instructional tools, from unsnarling copyright issues to testing and
applying new multimedia applications. One aspect of the editor’s
role, however, has remained unchanged in the course development
process—the editor adds value to the course development value
chain by improving course material quality, enhancing students’
learning experiences, and ensuring that course quality standards
are set and maintained for the delivering institution.
Our model for defining and studying the online editor’s role in
the course development process is the School of Business at
Athabasca University. The School of Business has taken a
leadership role in delivering distance education courses online (e-
Class® mode), as well as in providing online enhancements to
existing print-based courses, and converting these courses to online
formats (online individualized study mode). The multimedia
instructional design editor (MIDE) is a key member of the School’s
online course design, development, and production team. The job
title, MIDE (and the particular configuration of skills and duties
associated with it), is unique to the School of Business, combining,
as it suggests, the tasks of integrating multimedia instructional
components into online course materials, applying instructional
design principles, and editing course materials. However, although
the MIDE is unique to the School of Business, many of the duties
and responsibilities of the job are typical of other online course
development projects.
The School of Business developed the job of MIDE to achieve a
number of course development objectives. First, to ensure that
standards of product and pedagogical quality are achieved (an
institutional objective), the MIDE is responsible for editing course
materials before they are delivered to students. Second, many
School of Business print-based courses make use of online
enhancements or are adapted for online delivery, so the MIDE is
charged with increasing the use of multimedia components and
online interactivity tools, while ensuring that they accomplish
meaningful instructional purposes. Finally, the MIDE has been
given responsibility for applying instructional design principles and
strategies to online courses and course enhancements. Although
most School of Business courses were instructionally designed
when written for print-based delivery, converting them for online
delivery raises further instructional design issues.
The MIDE’s role adds value to the delivery of online courses to
School of Business students in three ways: first, by linking other
participants in the value chain, and so increasing the effectiveness
and efficiency of the entire process; second, by increasing the ability
of value chain participants to produce effective online learning
experiences; and third, by providing a measure of quality control to
ensure that online courses are consistent, technologically
innovative, and pedagogically sound.
Distance Education and the
Online Instructional Environment
School of Business courses are delivered at a distance. Course
materials for distance education, whether online or print, “take a
learner-centred approach, rather than the traditional contentcentred approach of textbooks” . According to
Swales, this learner-centered feature enables students “to become
involved and motivated by the materials and to take ownership of
the skills and knowledge that they acquire” (p. 1). That distance
education course materials must motivate, engage, direct, and
support students means that the course editor makes an important
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
contribution. The hybrid role of the MIDE is particularly well
suited to enhancing distance delivery, especially when courses are
delivered online.
In the case of online delivery, the learning environment becomes
a particular and important consideration. Kuboni notes that the
term learning environment has emerged “as one of the key
metaphors associated with teaching and learning through the new
telecommunications and computer-networked technologies”
 . As a context in which learning takes place, the online
learning environment has several features; for example, it
encourages a reduction in the emphasis on the didactic role of the
teacher, while emphasizing collaboration; it enables the development of process skills and knowledge building, rather than
information and knowledge acquisition; and it supports collaborative group activities .
If the online instructional and learning environment presents
challenges and opportunities not found in conventional face-to-face
or traditional distance delivery, so too do the multimedia tools used
within it.
Nunes and Gaible contend that multimedia is “the most
effective and egalitarian of computer-based resources available”
(p. 95). Multimedia, and the online learning environment that
delivers and supports it, provide for “artful interaction between
learners and content” (p. 95). As with conventional distance
delivery practice, it is possible to offer “learning in different
locations . . . for students working at different rates and levels, [as
well as] repetition when repetition is warranted” (p. 95). Nunes and
Gaible state that multi-media is especially well suited to “dynamic
fields” and that “Web-based multimedia contentware is itself
dynamic” (p. 95). That multimedia and the online environment are
dynamic seems an obvious conclusion when we imagine the myriad
ways learners can interact with content in text, visual, audio,
animated, and other forms, through graphic and other interfaces.
This conclusion is reinforced by the online environment’s
possibilities for learner interaction with teachers and other learners,
at any time, and from any place.
As defined in The Concise Oxford Dictionary, the word
dynamic means the opposite of static; it is the reverse of “stationary; not acting or changing; passive” .
As dynamic entities, multimedia and the online environment offer
Value Added—The Editor in Design and Development of Online Courses
opportunities for various kinds of interaction and active learning,
and for “the chance to work with current and even cutting-edge
knowledge” . Rather than confine
the design, development, and delivery of learning content to
technical and production experts, it may be possible to “engage all
stakeholders in the education system . . . in the development of
multimedia learning resources” (p. 95).
However, the dynamic nature of the online environment also
presents unique challenges for course developers and editors. Web
content, links, and interactive elements are ever changing, and
require constant vigilance to maintain their currency. Moreover,
taking full advantage of the many multimedia and graphic enhancements available in this dynamic environment comes at a price. A
simple-looking but effectively designed multimedia tool often
requires many resources and a significant amount of time to
produce and test, and increases the workload and knowledge level
required of instructional, technical, and production staff to
implement and maintain.
The online environment has the potential for fast and easy interaction among diverse and distributed users, a fact that raises a
number of issues about how this interaction is accomplished, when
it is appropriate, and how it is managed. Similarly, although a
myriad of learning experiences and opportunities are available
through the online environment, questions of how much diversity
to offer, what instructional purposes each tool serves, and how to
manage the tools selected also become important. In the School of
Business, the MIDE addresses these issues from a learner’s
(student’s) perspective in both the multimedia and instructional
design components of their role. However, course content experts
and the technical, production, and other learning support staff also
have needs that must be met as this interaction with learners takes
place. The MIDE must consider these needs when determining the
effectiveness of online learning and interactive tools and technology.
These varied demands present great challenges for the MIDE,
who must apply precise editorial and instructional design standards
across the various course components. Increasing the number of
people engaged in the development process, and the number of
times learning content is subject to revision or change, makes it
difficult to achieve and maintain control over these standards.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Furthermore, the MIDE requires an ever-growing range of skills, as
well as flexibility in defining the scope of their duties, in order to
check and evaluate the diverse components that make up an online
course, and faces a constant challenge in balancing the learning
needs of students against technological and course production
constraints and requirements.
Course Development in an Online
Environment—the Role of the MIDE
Multimedia
In their capacity as editors, School of Business MIDEs develop an
intimate knowledge of the content of each course. They are one of
the final links in the content chain, and review all online course
components when they are ready to be integrated into the Webbased delivery template. The MIDEs occupy a unique position in
the design and development process, far enough along that they see
a course in its entirety and can clearly identify good locations for
using particular multimedia and interactive components, but still
early enough that there is time to develop and integrate those
components and explore new ideas for enhancing educational
materials.
As a means of making course production more efficient, and in
keeping with a general trend toward collecting and reusing effective
multimedia tools, the MIDEs play an important role in identifying
online components and tools that have widespread applicability
and can be used in several courses. The School of Business is still
exploring ways to store these components and simplify their use
across an array of course materials, and the trend at Athabasca
University, and in online learning in general, toward storing and
reusing multimedia applications, learning objects, and databases
presents many choices and opportunities for research. The MIDE is
a vital link in this research, working as a liaison between School of
Business academics and production teams and other departments
throughout the university that are developing data and learning
object storage strategies (e.g., the Library, the Educational Media
Development department).
Value Added—The Editor in Design and Development of Online Courses
Instructional Design
All new or significantly revised online courses are submitted to
School of Business instructional staff for a preliminary assessment
of their design, content, and learning objectives. At this point, the
MIDE performs a cursory instructional design (ID) assessment on
the proposed course. At this stage, too, a dedicated School of
Business instructional designer also reviews the proposal and offers
ideas for improving the course’s instructional efficacy to the course
author. However, as courses and their constituent elements often
undergo a significant transformation between proposal and
delivery, the bulk of the ID evaluation performed by the MIDE is
necessarily done after the course has been written or revised, when
it is submitted for editing and production. Although this strategy
can shorten the amount of time available for evaluating and testing
new ideas for ID and multimedia tools in a course, it is, overall, a
good use of limited resources. New courses are reviewed by the
School of Business instructional designer, but existing courses
(often high enrolment courses) that are being revised or converted
for online delivery might or might not have had the benefit of ID at
some point in their development (the School has only one
instructional designer, and many new courses that require ID). In
many cases, the content of a course has been revised regularly, but
issues related to its instructional efficacy have not been
systematically addressed in the revisions. This is where the ID role
of the MIDE, and its late application in the production process, is
especially useful in assessing and dealing with instructional quality
issues without returning a course to the beginning stages of
development.
As part of their instructional design role, MIDEs also check and
evaluate course design and layout for instructional efficacy,
providing input to authors and production staff. The MIDE ensures
that all resources are relevant, linked, and coordinated. It is essential that course components intended to present and deliver
information are clearly differentiated from learning activities which
are designed for application or practice. The purpose of the
learning activities must be clearly presented, and it must be obvious
to learners what action the learning activities require, as well as
how and where to obtain feedback. The MIDE also determines if
the learning resources work, if they work as they are intended to,
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and if the instructions for their use are clear. This function is
particularly crucial with multimedia components.
While working with existing courses, and in the instructional
design role, the MIDE reviews course components at a number of
levels . At a course level, the MIDE determines if the
course components support and conform to course objectives. At
the unit level, it is essential that unit objectives support, build
toward, and align with the larger course objectives. Each learning
objective in each unit or lesson is assessed to ensure that it is clear,
unambiguous, measurable, and related to the content in the lesson
or unit. The MIDE determines whether or not the lesson and review
activities, as well as technical elements, such as multimedia components and interactivity tools, contribute to the ability of learners
to meet the learning objectives of the course, and to see for themselves that they have done so. In online courses, as with traditional
distance delivery, this “seeing” must take place in the absence of
same-time and face-to-face interaction with a teacher.
The MIDE’s primary role in course development is as an editor. In
the online course development and production process, the MIDE
is situated at the same point as editors in more traditional course
development models. The MIDE reviews all course materials and
components, revising, and in consultation with course authors,
clarifying content, and ensuring that the text is grammatically
correct, concise, and online-ready. As do all editors, the MIDE
ensures that the tone of the course materials is appropriate for the
audience, and for the purpose of helping learning to happen, and
that coauthored materials communicate either a consistent voice or
a clearly defined set of individual voices, as desired by the authors
and suitable for the content. Editors ensure that course materials
are not biased and do not contain plagiarism, and that all necessary
copyright clearances have been obtained. Finally, Web-ready
content is copy edited to ensure that all i’s are dotted and t’s
crossed, and that the rules of grammar and punctuation have been
correctly and consistently applied.
As editors, more so than in their other roles, MIDEs serve as
proxies for the learners who will work through all components of
Value Added—The Editor in Design and Development of Online Courses
the online course. The MIDE ensures that information about
assignments, including instructions to students, assignment
questions, guidelines for assignment marking, and examination
guidelines, is correct, consistent, and readily available to students.
Well-edited course materials anticipate and address learner
concerns and needs for information, and so prevent work at the
“back-end” of the course delivery process (instructor and technical
support assistance calls), and build student confidence in and
satisfaction with School of Business online course materials.
Adding Value—The MIDE in the Design
and Development Process
The MIDE, then, contributes to many aspects and levels of course
design and development, and at each level affects the online
learning value chain. The effects of this contribution, however, are
difficult to measure empirically. The MIDE works in the design and
development component of the online learning value chain,
between upstream logistics (described in earlier chapters as infrastructure for online learning, technology choice, and attributes of
various media) and downstream logistics (to be discussed in
subsequent chapters, and including learner supports such as
tutoring, call centers, and electronic library and other digital
resources). Their interactions with the other participants in the
value chain help to highlight the contribution that MIDEs make to
the online delivery process (for a full discussion of the concept of
“value chain,” see the Chapter 3 of this volume).
In each role—instructional design, multimedia development,
and editing—the MIDE is concerned with facilitating communication between the author and the learner, and between the
author and the technical staff who create the multimedia tools and
instructional technology used in course delivery. The MIDE
explores new resources and opens lines of communication between
the many participants in the design and development value chain,
and looks for solutions to instructional issues that will satisfy
technical staff, academic experts, students, and upstream and
downstream support resources. The MIDE searches for and evaluates ways to enhance the overall instructional efficacy of each
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
course, and thus works constantly to bring the various elements of
the online delivery value chain together as efficiently and effectively
as possible.
But just as the MIDE brings together elements and participants in
the value chain, they also add value to the course development
process by enhancing the ability of other participants to produce
effective online learning experiences. Rowntree refers to this
role in course development as the transformer, “a skilled communicator who can liaise with any subject specialists whose writing
is obscure, winkling out their key ideas and re-expressing them in
ways learners will be able to understand” (p. 21). The MIDE helps
authors to refine and distil the material they want learners to grasp,
and looks for the best tools and techniques for presenting this
material concisely and effectively. MIDEs review and evaluate each
element in the content and design of a course, so they have an
opportunity to share their expertise and knowledge with the course
development team and to facilitate communication and knowledge
sharing among authors, production and support staff, and technical
personnel. This knowledge sharing benefits everyone in the process,
and enhances the ability of all value chain participants to make an
effective contribution to course development.
The MIDE’s most important contribution to the course design
and development value chain is quality control. The quality control
function has become more critical as courses have come to contain
multimedia components and to move into the online learning
environment. McGovern points out that “trillions of words
are published on millions of websites [and] much of this publishing
is of appalling quality.” On the surface, online publishing, which
has eliminated the highly technical tasks of typesetting, printing,
and distribution, appears deceptively simple. In particular, revising
online material seems to be quick, simple, and straightforward.
And in many ways, it is. Open the source document, use a simple
text editor, save the changes to the server, and every course can
contain what Nunes and Gaible refer to as “cutting-edge
knowledge” (p. 95). If consistent presentation and appearance were
the only issues to address, this capacity for multiple participants to
revise courses “on the fly” would be a serious enough concern for
the MIDE. But “technology is founded on the promise of
automation [and] you simply can’t automate the creation of quality
Value Added—The Editor in Design and Development of Online Courses
content” . Putting poor content into the online
learning environment can have especially serious consequences,
both for students and for the delivering institution.
As do editors in any course development project, MIDEs ensure
that all course materials are complete and functional, and that they
meet instructional, aesthetic, and editorial standards as established
by Athabasca University and other educational and publishing
institutions. With the course learning goals in mind, the MIDE
critically evaluates course materials from the learner’s perspective,
and considers the learner’s needs and likely responses to the
information presented in the course. The MIDE ensures that all the
pieces of a course work toward the same goal, and that the pieces
fit together in a unified whole that provides effective instruction for
students. By ensuring that the course materials delivered to students
are of consistently high quality, the MIDE contributes to students’
confidence in School of Business courses, removes material-based
obstacles to their learning, and enhances Athabasca University’s
reputation as a credible, learning-centered distance education
institution.
References
Kuboni, O. . Designing learning environments to facilitate
reflection in professional practice: Some initial thoughts. Paper
presented at TEL-isphere ’99, The Caribbean and technologyenhanced learning [conference], St. Michael, Barbados,
November 24-27, 1999. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from http://
www.col.org/tel99/acrobat/kuboni.pdf
McGovern, G. . Words make your website a
success. New Thinking. Retrieved July 22, 2003, from http://
www.gerrymcgovern.com/nt/2002/nt_2002_10_14_words.htm
Nunes, C. A. A., & Gaible, E. . Development of multimedia
materials. In W. D. Haddad & A. Draxler (Eds.), Technologies
for education: Potentials, parameters, and prospects (pp. 95-
117). Paris and Washington, DC: UNESCO and Academy for
Educational Development.
Rowntree, D. . Teaching through self-instruction: How to
develop open learning materials. London: Kogan Page.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Swales, C. . Knowledge series: Editing distance education
materials. Vancouver, BC: Commonwealth of Learning.
Thompson, D. (Ed.). . The concise Oxford dictionary (9th
ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Value Added—The Editor in Design and Development of Online Courses
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and Student
Volume 1–Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 1
TEACHING IN AN ONLINE LEARNING
Terry Anderson
Athabasca University
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the role of the teacher or tutor in an online
learning context. It uses the theoretical model developed by
Garrison, Anderson, and Archer that views the creation of
an effective online educational community as involving three critical
components: cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching
presence. This model was developed and verified through content
analysis and by other qualitative and quantitative measures in recent
research work at the University of Alberta (for papers resulting from
this work see Anderson, Garrison, Archer & Rourke, N.d.)
( 
Learning and teaching in an online environment are, in many
ways, much like teaching and learning in any other formal
educational context: learners’ needs are assessed; content is negotiated or prescribed; learning activities are orchestrated; and
learning is assessed. However, the pervasive effect of the online
medium creates a unique environment for teaching and learning.
The most compelling feature of this context is the capacity for
shifting the time and place of the educational interaction. Next
comes the ability to support content encapsulated in many formats,
including multimedia, video, and text, which gives access to
learning content that exploits all media attributes. Third, the
capacity of the Net to access huge repositories of content on every
conceivable subject—including content created by the teacher and
fellow students—creates learning and study resources previously
available only in the largest research libraries, but now accessible in
every home and workplace. Finally, the capacity to support human
and machine interaction in a variety of formats (text, speech, video,
etc.) in both asynchronous and synchronous modalities creates a
communications-rich learning context.
To provide a mental schema for thinking about learning and
teaching in this context, Garrison, Anderson, and Archer 
developed a conceptual model of online learning that they referred to
as a “community of learning” model. This model (see Figure 11-1)
postulates that deep and meaningful learning results when there are
sufficient levels of three component “presences.” The first is a
sufficient degree of cognitive presence, such that serious learning can
take place in an environment that supports the development and
growth of critical thinking skills. Cognitive presence is grounded in
and defined by study of a particular content; thus, it works within the
epistemological, cultural, and social expression of the content in an
approach that supports the development of critical thinking skills
 . The second, social presence, relates
to the establishment of a supportive environment such that students
feel the necessary degree of comfort and safety to express their ideas
in a collaborative context. The absence of social presence leads to an
inability to express disagreements, share viewpoints, explore
differences, and accept support and confirmation from peers and
teacher. Finally, in formal education, as opposed to infor-mal
learning opportunities, teaching presence is critical for a variety of
reasons discussed in this chapter.
In a work on teaching presence, Anderson, Rourke, Archer, and
Garrison delineated three critical roles that a teacher
performs in the process of creating an effective teaching presence.
The first of these roles is the design and organization of the learning
experience that takes place both before the establishment of the
learning community and during its operation. Second, teaching
involves devising and implementing activities to encourage discourse
between and among students, between the teacher and the student,
and between individual students and groups of students and content
resources . Third, the teaching role goes beyond
that of moderating the learning experiences when the teacher adds
subject matter expertise through a variety of forms of direct instruction. The creation of teaching presence is not always the sole task of
the formal teacher. In many contexts, especially when teaching at
senior university level, teaching presence is delegated to or assumed
by students as they contribute their own skills and knowledge to the
developing learning community.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
In addition to these tasks, in formal education, the institution
and its teacher employees are usually fulfilling a critical
credentialing role that involves the assessment and certification of
student learning. This chapter focuses on these component parts of
teaching presence, defining and illustrating techniques to enhance
this presence, and providing suggestions for effective teacher
practice in an online learning context.
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
Educational
experience
Supporting
Teaching presence
(structure/process)
Figure 11-1.
Community of inquiry.
Designing and Organizing the Online Learning Context
The design and construction of the course content, learning activities, and assessment framework constitute the first opportunity for
teachers to develop their “teacher presence.” The role the teacher
plays in creating and maintaining the course contents varies from
that of a tutor working with materials and an instructional design
created by others, to that of “lone ranger,” in which the teacher
creates all of the content. Regardless of the formal role of the
teacher, online learning creates an opportunity for flexibility and
revision of content in situ that was not provided by older forms of
mediated teaching and learning. The vast educational and content
resources of the Net, and its capacity to support many different
forms of interaction, allow for negotiation of content and activity,
and a corresponding increase in autonomy and control . Teachers are no longer confined to the construction
of monolithic packages that are not easily modified in response to
student need. Rather, the design and organization of activities
within the learning community can proceed while the course is in
progress. Of course, such flexibility is not without cost, as customization of any product is more expensive than mass production of a
standardized product. Thus, the effective online learning teacher
makes provision for negotiation of activities, or even content, to
satisfy unique learning needs. However, within this flexibility, the
need to stimulate, guide, and support learning remains. These tasks
include the design of a series of learning activities that encourage
independent study and community building, that deeply explore
content knowledge, that provide frequent and diverse forms of
formative assessment, and that respond to common and unique
student needs and aspirations (see Chapter 2, this volume).
The design of e-learning courses is covered in greater detail in
earlier chapters of this book, but this design process provides
opportunities for teachers to instil their own teaching presence by
establishing a personalized tone within the course content. This is
done by allowing students to see the personal excitement and
appeal that inspires the teacher’s interest in the subject. Borge
Holmberg first wrote about a style of expression, referred
to as “guided didactic interaction,” that presents content in a
conversational (as opposed to academic) style. This writing style
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
helps the learner identify, in a personalized way, with the teacher.
Techniques such as illustration of content issues with personal
reflections, anecdotes, and discussions of the teacher’s own
struggles and successes as they have gained mastery of the content
have been found to be inspirational and motivating to students.
Activities in this category of teaching presence include building
curriculum materials. The cost of creating high quality, interactive
learning resources has led to renewed interest in reusing content
encapsulated and formally described through metadata as
“learning objects” . These objects are then made
accessible in repositories such as Multimedia Educational Resource
for Learning and Online Teaching ( or the
Campus Alberta Repository of Educational Objects ( 
.careo.org). Creating or repurposing materials, such as lecture
notes, to provide online teacher commentaries, mini-lectures,
personal insights, and other customized views of course content, is
another common activity that we assign to the category of teaching
presence. We anticipate that work on educational standards for
describing, storing, and sequencing of educational content, and for
formally modeling the way in which learning activities are
designed, will significantly change the design role of many teachers
from one of content creation, to one of customization, application
and contextualization of learning sequences . Finally,
this design category of teaching presence also includes the processes
through which the instructor negotiates time lines for group
activities and student project work, a critical coordinating and
motivating function of formal online course design and development, and a primary means of setting and maintaining teaching
Getting the Mix Right
The modern Web supports a number of media, each of which can
be incorporated into the design of an online learning course.
However, getting the mix right between opportunities for synchronous and asynchronous interaction, and group and independent
study activities remains a challenge . There are two competing models of online
learning, each of which has strong adherents and a growing body of
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
research and theoretical rationales for its effective application. The
first, the community of learning model, uses real-time synchronous
or asynchronous communication technologies to create virtual
classrooms that are often modeled, both pedagogically and
structurally, on the campus classroom. This model evolved from
telephone-based audio (and later video) conferencing. Its evolution
to the Net has allowed for delivery directly to the learner’s office and
home, thereby bypassing expensive remote learning centres that
were a feature of older virtual classroom models. More recently,
popular Web-based computer conferencing systems allow for
asynchronous collaboration among and between student and
teachers. The synchronous virtual classroom model has advantages,
in that it is a familiar educational model with a great deal of similarity to teaching and learning in campus-based classrooms. It
provides increased access by spanning geographic distance; however,
it constrains participants in terms of a single time that they must be
present. This problem is compounded when a class spans many time
zones. The asynchronous version of the virtual classroom overcomes the temporal limitations, but can result in a shortage of
coordination and reduce opportunities for students to feel “in sync”
with the class . Designing effective online courses will
increasingly involve judicious selection of combinations of media
and format that balance the differential capacities of media to
support the creation of social and cognitive presence, with the
educational need for variety, the special communications
characteristics demanded of particular content, and the cost, access,
and training requirements of the media.
The second model of online learning involves independent
learners who work by themselves and at their own pace through
the course of instruction. This model maximizes flexibility, but it
challenges the institution’s capacity to facilitate group social or
collaborative learning activities. The “independent study model” is
almost always selected in online learning models that allow for
continuous enrolment or “just-in-time” access to educational
content. It is very challenging to create collaborative learning or
social activities when students are at very different places in the
curriculum.
Fortunately, it is possible to combine synchronous, asynchronous, and independent study activities in a single course. In my
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
own discussions with online students over the years, I have noticed
a deep division between those who yearn for the immediacy of realtime communication, and those who are adamant that they have
chosen online learning alternatives to avoid the time constraints
imposed by synchronous or paced learning activities. Thus, many
institutions, including Athabasca University, are developing both
paced and unpaced models of delivery to accommodate student
learning preferences and needs. Within a single class, it is possible
to offer optional synchronous activities, and I usually build a real
time Net-based audio graphic session into the beginning section of
my classes. This session allows me to get to know the students from
both a personal and professional viewpoint, explore their aspirations for the course, outline my own interests in the subject, discuss
assessment activities, and provide an opportunity for students to
ask any pressing questions. Synchronous activities are also useful
for guest interviews, for special activities such as debates and
presentations, and of course, for holding the end of class social
gathering—parties held in asynchronous time never seem to work!
These activities can be “canned” and streamed for viewing by
students in independent study mode.
Even if one’s course design or the available technology precludes
synchronous interaction, there are still opportunities to inject more
than text-based lectures and discussions into the course. Online
learning provides an opportunity for the teacher to build in video
or audio presentations of themselves to enhance their presence to
distributed learners. I have created two five-minute video productions that I link to my courses. The first provides an introduction to myself, focusing on my professional growth within the
discipline that I teach. The second discusses my own research
agenda, and not only helps establish my academic credentials, but
also, I hope, conveys my excitement for the research process within
my discipline.
Thus, the challenge for teachers designing and organizing the
online learning context is to create a mix of learning activities that
are appropriate to student needs, teacher skills and style, and
institutional technical capacity. Doing so within the ever-present
financial constraints of formal education systems is a challenge that
will direct online learning design and implementation for the
foreseeable future.
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
Facilitating Discourse
The second component of teacher presence is the critical task of
facilitating discourse. We use the term discourse rather than
discussion, as it conveys the meaning of relating to the “the process
or power of reasoning” ,
rather than the more social connotation of conversation. Discourse
not only facilitates the creation of the community of inquiry, but
also is the means by which learners develop their own thought
processes, through the necessity of articulating them to others.
Discourse also helps students uncover misconceptions in their own
thinking, or disagreements with the teacher or other students. Such
conflict provides opportunity for exposure of cognitive dissonance
that, from a Piagetian perspective, is critical to intellectual growth.
In fulfillment of this component of teaching presence, the teacher
regularly reads and responds to student contributions and concerns, constantly searching for ways to support understanding in
the individual student and the development of the learning community as a whole.
The first task of the e-learning teacher is to develop a sense of
trust and safety within the electronic community. In the absence of
this trust, learners will feel uncomfortable and constrained in
posting their thoughts and comments. We usually facilitate this
trust formation by having students post a series of introductory
comments about themselves. It is useful to request specific information, and to model an answer to the response request yourself.
For example the e-teacher may request that students articulate their
reasons for enrolling in the course or their interest in the subject
matter. I have seen this technique very successfully extended at the
beginning of regular online synchronous sessions by asking each
student to respond spontaneously to a content-related “question of
the week” that sets the tone for growth of both social and cognitive
Many online courses rely extensively on a model of discourse
wherein the teacher posts question or discussion items relevant to
readings or other forms of content dissemination. I have found that
over-reliance on this form of discourse soon becomes boring, and
allows much of the learning to be focused on responding to teacherinitiated items, rather than challenging students to formulate their
own questions and comments about course content. We have seen
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
much greater levels of participation, motivation, and student
satisfaction when such discussion groups are led by student
moderators . However, it cannot be
assumed that students have the necessary skills to undertake
successful moderation of class discussion, so role modeling by the
teacher for the initial discussions is usually helpful.
Assessment in Online Learning
No element of course design concerns the student in a formal
educational context more than that related to assessment. Effective
teaching presence demands explicit and detailed discussion of the
criteria on which student learning will be assessed. A teacher who
cultivates a presence of flexibility, concern, and empathy will reflect
these characteristics in the style and format of assessment. In an
earlier work , my colleague Randy
Garrison and I discussed assessment in online learning in greater
detail. Here I summarize the main features of assessment, and
provide two examples of frameworks for the challenging task of
assessing contribution to the online learning community.
We know, from research on assessment, that timely, detailed
feedback provided as near in time as possible to the performance of
the assessed behavior is most effective in providing motivation and
in shaping behavior and mental constructs. For this reason,
machine evaluations, such as those provided in online multiplechoice test questions or in simulations, can be very effective
learning devices . However, most models of online
learning also stress the capacity for direct communication and
feedback from teacher to the student . This
feedback is provided as an integral part of the discourse facilitation
function of the online teacher.
A commonly used technique in formal online education is to
require students to post comments as a component of the student
assessment. This practice has been hotly debated on online learning
discussion lists. In their discussion of college students studying
online, Jiang and Ting report that students’ perceived
learning was significantly correlated to the percentage of grade
weight assigned to participation, and their resulting participation in
discussion. However, for some, the practice of marking for
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
participation seems only to recall the onerous practice of
attendance marking that rewards the quantity and not the quality
of participation . Others counter that in the
absence of incentive for participation, a community will not be
created. Palloff and Pratt argue that, given the emphasis on
the process of learning in a social context that defines much
constructivist-based learning design, participation in the process
must be evaluated and appropriately rewarded. Most online
students are practical adults with much competition for their time;
thus they are unlikely to participate in activities that are
marginalized or viewed as supplemental to the course goals and
assessment schema. Many courses I have reviewed have assessed
participation in online activities as a component of the final mark,
usually with a weighting of between 10% and 25%.
Student assessment of any kind requires that the teacher be
explicit, fair, consistent, and as objective as possible. The following
examples illustrate how two experienced online learning teachers
assess participation, and thereby enhance their own teaching
Assessment Frameworks
Susan Levine has developed a very clear set of instructions
that describes her expectations for student contributions to
asynchronous online learning courses that she has used in
graduate-level education courses. She posts the following message
to her students.
1. The instructor will start each discussion by posting one or
more questions at the beginning of each week (Sunday or
Monday). The discussion will continue until the following
Sunday night, at which time the discussion board will close
for that week.
2. Please focus on the questions posted. But—do bring in
related thoughts and material, other readings, or questions
that occur to you from the ongoing discussion.
3. You are expected to post at least two substantive messages
for each discussion question. Your postings should reflect an
understanding of the course material.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
4. Your postings should advance the group’s negotiation of
ideas and meanings about the material; that is, your
contributions should go beyond a “ditto.” Some ways you
can further the discussion include:
• expressing opinions or observations. These should be offered
in depth and supported by more than personal opinion.
• making a connection between the current discussion and
previous discussions, a personal experience, or concepts
from the readings,
• commenting on or asking for clarification of another
student’s statement,
• synthesizing other students’ responses, or
• posing a substantive question aimed at furthering the group’s
understanding. 
Notice how these instructions guide students on both the
quantity (“two substantive postings” per discussion question) and
the quality of contributions expected. Levine then goes onto to
describe qualitative aspects of a substantive posting. Notice also the
“teaching presence” that emerges from this posting of requirements. Levine reveals her teaching presence as structured and
explicit, yet appreciative of qualitative outcomes associated with
deep learning and critical thinking.
Nada Dabbagh , from George Mason University, offers a
slightly more prescriptive set of recommendations for posting.
• Postings should be evenly distributed during the discussion
period (not concentrated all on one day or at the beginning
and/or end of the period).
• Postings should be a minimum of one short paragraph and a
maximum of two paragraphs.
• Avoid postings that are limited to “I agree” or “great idea,”
etc. If you agree (or disagree) with a posting then say why
you agree by supporting your statement with concepts from
the readings or by bringing in a related example or
experience.
• Address the questions as much as possible (don’t let the
discussion stray).
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
• Try to use quotes from the articles that support your postings.
Include page numbers when you do that.
• Build on others’ responses to create threads.
• Bring in related prior knowledge (work experience, prior
coursework, readings, etc.).
• Use proper etiquette (proper language, typing, etc.).
Table 11.1 shows Dabbagh’s sample framework for assessing
messages on a weekly basis. Note that one of the protocols is the
use of proper etiquette, including language, typing, and, I assume,
spelling. The imposition of a requirement to adhere to particular
protocols or standards is a hotly contested question among elearning teachers. Some suggest that new forms of expression,
grammar, and even spelling are arising in this medium, and that the
lack of common tools (such as spell checkers) that plague many
conferencing systems should allow for a much more relaxed form
of expression. Others argue that requiring high standard of written
communication helps students learn to communicate effectively in
the online learning academic context. Given my own problems with
spelling and the growing number of online learning students whose
first language is not the language of instruction, I tend to be much
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Timely discussion
contributions
Responsiveness to
discussion and
demonstration of
knowledge and
understanding
gained from
assigned reading
Adherence to
online protocols
5-6 postings
well distributed
throughout
very clear that
readings were
understood
and incorporated well into
all online
4-6 postings
distributed
throughout
readings were
understood and
incorporated
into responses
1 online protocol
not adhered to
3-6 postings
distributed
postings have
questionable
relationship to
reading material
2-3 online
protocols not
adhered to
distributed
throughout
not evident
that readings
were understood
and/or not
incorporated
into discussion
4 or more online
protocols not
adhered to
Table 11-1.
Evaluation criteria
for facilitating an
online/class discussion
 .
more tolerant of language informalities in postings than I do when
marking formal academic papers for term assignments.
Notice how Dabbagh requires more frequent posting than
Levine, and further stipulates that the messages should be spread
through the week. The second set of criteria (responsiveness and
demonstration of understanding) illustrates the way the online
discussion is used to motivate students to complete the weekly
readings. Finally, the adherence to a list of online protocol categories links grading explicitly to quantitatively measurable student
behaviors.
Both of the above instruction and marking schemes provide
extremely valuable guidance to learners and make clear and explicit
the requirements of the teacher. But what are the costs of such
evaluation? Assuming 20-30 students in an online learning class,
the weekly assessment proscribed by Dabbagh could be a very time
consuming activity. The amount of time required for assessment
depends, in part, on the tools available to the online teacher. A
good online learning system facilitates the display of the weekly
postings by each student. An exemplary system would incorporate
a number of active teacher agents that would
• scan the postings for spelling and grammatical errors.
• total the number of words.
• allow the display of preceding or subsequent postings and
the location of the posting in its thread to help assess
“responsiveness.”
• graph the posting dates to allow quick visual identification of
the timeliness of each contribution.
• present a grade book for easy entry of weekly scores.
• when appropriate, provide assistance for the teacher to create
and automatically mark a variety of multiple choice, matching,
and fill-in-the-blank type questions for student self assessment.
• automatically alert students when a grade has been posted or
Finally, it should be noted that creating a teaching presence is a
challenging and rewarding task, but cannot be a life-consuming
one. Research on assessment in distance education has shown that
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
rapid feedback is important for both understanding and motivation
to complete courses . However, the instantaneous
nature of online learning can lead to an unrealistic expectation by
learners that teachers will provide instant feedback and assessment
on submitted assignments. The virtual teacher has to lead a real
life, so setting and adhering to appropriate timelines helps students
hold realistic expectations and relieves the teacher of the unrealistic
expectation of providing instantaneous, 24-hour-a-day feedback.
In addition, online learning teachers must become ruthless time
managers, guarding against the tendency to check online activity
constantly, and to do everything to support the learners that can be
done, rather than everything that can be done within the
constraints of a busy professional and personal life.
Some online teachers, especially those teaching at graduate levels,
may be uncomfortable with the prescriptive nature of the guidelines
presented above. These teachers are often more comfortable with
subjective assessments of student contributions to the online
community and demonstration of their individual learning. This
type of assessment presents challenges to both students and teachers
as a result of the subjective nature of the assessment and the time
required to review all contributions made during a course in order
to assign a grade. For these reasons, a number of authors have
written about ways in which the student’s own postings can be used
as the basis for student assessment .
Typically, these self-reflective assessments require students at the end
of the course to illustrate both their contributions and evidence of
learning by composing a “reflection piece,” in which they quote
from their own posting to the course. They should be given guidance
to help them extract quotations that illustrate their contributions.
Obviously students who have not participated will not be able to
provide any transcript references from their own postings, and thus,
will generally receive lower evaluation scores on this project.
Alternatively, a vicariously participating student (i.e., a lurker) may
still be able to show learning by selective extraction of relevant
postings from other students.
In summary, giving directions for and modeling effective online
discourse is a critical component of creating effective teaching
presence. Assigning a portion of the assessment for the class to
participation is a common practice in online learning courses. If
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
participation is to be a formal and assessed requirement of the
course, then developing and implementing an explicit assessment
framework are essential, but potentially time-consuming, teacher
tasks. Some online learning teachers make this assessment into a
more reflective task by assigning students the task of using their
posting in the class conference as evidence of their understanding
of content concepts and intellectual growth during the class. This
type of assessed learning activity forces students to make quality
contributions, and then to reflect on them. This strategy moves the
locus of responsibility from the teacher to the student, a solution
that can save teacher time while contributing to student
understanding and metacognition.
Provision of Direct Instruction
In this final category, teachers provide intellectual and scholarly
leadership, and share their subject matter knowledge with students.
The online teacher must be able to set and communicate the
intellectual climate of the course, and model the qualities of a
scholar, including sensitivity, integrity, and commitment to the
unrelenting pursuit of truth. The students and the teacher often
have expectations that the teacher will communicate content
knowledge. Ideally, this knowledge is enhanced by the teacher’s
personal interest, excitement, and in-depth understanding of the
content and its application in the context of formal study. The
cognitive apprenticeship model espoused by Collins, Brown, and
Newman , Rogoff’s model of apprenticeship in
thinking, and Vygotsky’s scaffolding analogies illustrate a
helping role for teachers in providing instructional support to
students from their position of greater content knowledge.
Although many authors recommend a “guide on the side”
approach to teaching in e-learning, this type of laissez faire
approach diminishes a fundamental component of teaching and
learning in formal education. A key feature of social cognition and
constructivist learning models is the participation of an adult, or
expert, or more skilled peer who “scaffolds” a novice’s learning.
This role of the teacher involves direct instruction that makes use
of the subject matter and pedagogical expertise of the teacher. Some
theorists have argued that online teaching is unlike classroom-
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
based teaching, in that “the teacher must adopt the role of
facilitator not content provider” . This arbitrary distinction between facilitator and content
provider is troublesome. Garrison , in a lively exchange,
focused on differentiating so-called teacher-centered and studentcentered instruction, makes the point that “the self-directed
assumption of andragogy suggests a high degree of independence
that is often inappropriate from a support perspective and which
also ignores issues of what is worthwhile or what qualifies as an
educational experience" (p. 124).
Gilly Salmon describes the role and functions of an “emoderator.” In this model, the teacher’s role in online conferencing
is that of facilitator of learning. Her description suggests that the emoderator does not require extensive subject matter expertise; she
writes “they need a qualification at least at the same level and in the
same topic as the course for which they are moderating” (p. 41).
Such minimal subject level competency seems to be less than that
expected by learners and peers in higher education settings.
Anderson et al. write
we believe that there are many fields of knowledge, as well
as attitudes and skills, that are best learned in forms of higher
education that require the active participation of a subject
matter expert in the critical discourse. This subject matter
expert is expected to provide direct instruction by interjecting
comments, referring students to information resources, and
organizing activities that allow the students to construct the
content in their own minds and personal contexts.
Often, students hold misconceptions that impair their capacity
to build more correct conceptions and mental schemata. The design
of effective learning activities leads to opportunities for students
themselves to uncover these misconceptions, but the teacher’s
comments and questions as direct instruction are also invaluable.
Although teaching presence is most commonly set in synchronous or asynchronous activities of the virtual classroom, it can also
be set through fixed formats such as access to “frequently asked
questions” databases or audio-, video-, or text-based presentations.
Direct instruction can also be provided through an instructor’s
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
annotations of the scholarly work of others, including reviews of
articles, textbooks, or Web sites.
Finally, the teacher may be asked to provide direct instruction
on technical questions about access to Net-based resources,
manipulation of the networking software, operation of other tools
or resources, and other technical concerns related to effective use of
subject related resources.
The Process of Building Teaching Presence
Salmon has developed a model for e-moderators that
demarcates the progression of tasks that the online teacher moves
through in the process of effectively moderating an online course.
The process begins with providing students with access and
motivation. In this stage, any technical or social issues that inhibit
participation are addressed, and students are encouraged to share
information about themselves to create a virtual presence, as
described above. In the second stage, Salmon suggests that the emoderator continues to develop online socialization by “building
bridges between cultural, social and learning environments” (p. 26).
In the third stage, referred as “information exchange,” Salmon
suggests that the teaching task moves to facilitating learning tasks,
moderating content-based discussions, and bringing to light student
misconceptions and misunderstandings. In the fourth stage, that of
“knowledge construction,” students focus on creating knowledge
artifacts and projects that collaboratively and individually illustrate
their understanding of course content and approaches. In the final
“development” stage, learners become responsible for their own
learning and that of their group by creating final projects, working
on summative assignments, and demonstrating achievement of
learning outcomes.
Salmon’s model provides a useful guide and planning tool for
online learning teachers, however it should not be considered
prescriptive. For example, students may be entering the online class
with a great deal of technical and social experience of the online
learning environment. In such cases, technical and social issues may
have been resolved some time ago. Alternatively, a heterogeneous
group may have some very sophisticated and experienced students,
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
and some novices new to the online learning environment. Busy
adult students may be anxious to avoid what they see as
unproductive “ice breakers” associated with Stages 1 and 2, and to
proceed to more content rich and potentially more meaningful
learning activities associated with later stages. Thus, Salmon’s
model must be customized to the unique needs of each online
learning community.
Qualities of the e-Teacher
This chapter concludes with a discussion of the three sets of
qualities that define an excellent e-teacher. First and primarily, an
excellent e-teacher is an excellent teacher. They like dealing with
learners; they have sufficient knowledge of their subject domain;
they can convey enthusiasm both for the subject and for their task
as a learning motivator; and they are equipped with a pedagogical
(or androgogical) understanding of the learning process, and have
a set of learning activities at their disposal by which to orchestrate,
motivate, and assess effective learning.
Beyond these generic teaching skills is a second set of technical
skills. One does not have to be a technical expert to be an effective
online teacher. However, one must have sufficient technical skill to
navigate and contribute effectively within the online learning
context, access to necessary hardware, and sufficient internet
efficacy to function within the inevitable
technical challenges of these new environments. Internet efficacy is
a personal sense of competence and comfort in the environment,
such that the need for basic troubleshooting skills does not send the
teacher into terror-filled incapacity.
Finally, during this early period of creation and adoption of this
new learning context, an effective online learning teacher must
have the type of resilience, innovativeness, and perseverance typical
of all pioneers in unfamiliar terrain.
Conclusion
This chapter has outlined the three major components of teacher
presence, and provided suggestions and guidelines for maximizing
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
the effectiveness of the teaching function in online learning. I have
not provided a lengthy list of do’s and don’ts for online teaching in
a cookbook fashion; rather, I have attempted to provide a broad
theoretical model focusing on the three main tasks of the online
The context of online learning is still very much in a fluid and
changing state. The Web itself and the technologies that underlie it
are evolving rapidly to create a second Web—the “Semantic Web”
 . The development of teacher and student
agents, the structuring of content into learning objects , and the formal expression of learning interactions , are creating a new educational Semantic Web that will
provide new capabilities and challenges for online teachers and
learners. As yet, we are at early stages in the technological and
pedagogical development of online learning. But the fundamental
characteristics of teaching and learning and the three critical
components of teaching presence—design and organization,
facilitating discourse, and direct instruction—will continue to be
critical components of teaching effectiveness in both online
learning and classroom instruction.
References
American Heritage Dictionary (4th ed.). . Boston: Houghton
Anderson, T. . Getting the mix right: An updated and
theoretical rationale for interaction. ITFORUM, Paper #63.
Retrieved October 13, 2003, from 
/paper63/paper63.htm
Anderson, T., Garrison, R., Archer, W., & Rourke, L. (N.d.).
Critical thinking in a text based environment: Computer
conferencing in higher education. Retrieved October 21, 2003,
from the University of Alberta Academic Technologies for
Learning Web site: 
Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Archer, W., & Garrison, R. .
Assessing teaching presence in computer conferencing transcripts. Journal of the Asynchronous Learning Network, 5(2)
Retrieved October 13, 2003, from 
/publications/jaln/v5n2/v5n2_anderson.asp
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
Berners-Lee, T. . Weaving the Web: The original design and
ultimate destiny of the World Wide Web by its inventor. San
Francisco: Harper.
Burge, E. J. . Learning in computer conferenced contexts:
The learners’ perspective. Journal of Distance Education, 9(1),
Campbell, K. . Power, voice and democratization: Feminist
pedagogy and assessment in CMC. Educational Technology and
Society, 5(3) Retrieved Oct 13, 2003, from 
/periodical/vol_3_2002/campbell.html
CAREO (Campus Alberta Repository of Educational Objects).
 . Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. . Cognitive
apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and
mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and
instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dabbagh, N. . Online-protocols. Retrieved October 13,
2003, from 
Daniel, J., & Marquis, C. . Interaction and independence:
Getting the mix right. In D. Sewart, D. Keegan, & B. Holmberg
(Eds.), Distance education: International perspectives (pp. 339-
359). London: Routledge.
Davie, L. . Facilitation techniques for the online tutor. In
R. Mason & A. Kaye (Eds.), Mindweave: Communication, computers, and distance education (pp. 74-85). Oxford: Pergamon
Eastin, M., & LaRose, R. . Internet self-efficacy and the
psychology of the digital divide. Journal of Computer Mediated
Communications, 6(1), Retrieved October 13, 2003, from http:
//www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol6/issue1/eastin.html
Garrison, D. R. . Critical thinking in adult education: A
conceptual model for developing critical thinking in adult
learners. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 10(4),
Garrison, D. R. . Andragogy, learner-centeredness, and the
educational transaction at a distance. Journal of Distance
Education, 3(2), 123-127.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Garrison, D. R., & Anderson, T. . E-Learning in the 21st
century. London: Routledge.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. . Critical thinking
in text-based environment: Computer conferencing in higher
education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2), 87-105.
Garrison, D. R., & Baynton, M. . Beyond independence in
distance education: The concept of control. American Journal of
Distance Education, 1(3), 3-15.
Holmberg, B. . Theory and practice of distance education.
London: Routledge.
Jiang, M., & Ting, E. . A study of factors influencing
students’ perceived learning in a Web-based course environment.
International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 6(4),
Koper, R. . Modeling units of study from a pedgagogical
perspective: The pedagogical meta-model behind EML. Heerlen,
Netherlands: Open University of the Netherlands. Retrieved
October 13, 2003, from 
Laurillard, D. . Rethinking university teaching: A
framework for the effective use of educational technology.
London: Routledge.
Levine, S., . Replacement myth. Retrieved October 13, 2003,
from 
forum&D=0&P=12778
Mason, R., & Romiszowski, A. J. . Computer-mediated
communication. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), The handbook of research
for educational communications and technology (pp. 438-456).
New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
McPeck, J. . Teaching critical thinking. New York:
Routledge.
MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and
Online Teaching). (N.d.). Retrieved October 12, 2003, from
 
Palloff, R., & Pratt, K. . Building learning communities in
cyberspace. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Teaching in an Online Learning Context
Paulsen, M. . Moderating educational computer conferences. In Z. Berge & M. Collins (Eds.), Computer mediated
communication and the online classroom (pp. 81-90). Cresskill,
NJ: Hampton Press.
Prensky, M. . Digital game-based learning. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Rekkedal T. . The written assignments in correspondence
education. Effects of reducing turn-around time. Distance
Education, 4, 231-250.
Rogoff, B. . Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. . Using peer teams to lead online
discussions. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1.
Retrieved October 13, 2003, from 
/2002/1/rourke-anderson-02-1.pdf
Salmon, G. . E-Moderating: The key to teaching and learning
online. London: Kogan Page.
Vygotsky, L. S. . Mind in society, the development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Wiley, D. . Connecting learning objects to instructional design
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy. In
D. A. Wiley (Ed.), The instructional use of learning objects:
Online version. Retrieved October 13, 2003, from http://
reusability.org/read/chapters/wiley.doc
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 2
CALL CENTERS IN DISTANCE
Andrew Woudstra, Colleen Huber, & Kerri Michalczuk
Athabasca University
Introduction
In the past decade, call centers and contact centers have evolved to
become the front line for customer interaction in many types of
organizations. As such, they have a critical importance in the
implementation of organizational strategy . Call centers have application in many industries offering customer service, as they can provide customers a single access point to diverse services. Many organizations use call centers
to solicit clients or customers for new sales or donations and contributions. They can also be used to accomplish surveys of customer
satisfaction or public opinion. Call centers can be divided into
groups: those that focus on outgoing calling; those that focus on
incoming calls, such as customer information and help areas; and
those that are established to accomplish multiple tasks.
In education, call centers can be useful to the educational
institution in many ways, ranging from simple provision of information to prospective students, to fundraising, collection of survey
data, and even provision of instructional services . In distance education in particular, the call
center concept can be an effective communication tool, enabling
the institution to provide and improve service to students in many
areas, including instruction .
At Athabasca University, call centers are used in a number of
contexts, and show a good deal of potential for expansion and
consolidation, to take advantage of economies of scale in
technology. After a brief introduction to the place of call centers in
business theory and practice, this chapter uses Athabasca
University’s practice and potential as an example in its exploration
of call centers and distance education.
Call Centers in Organizations
Call centers have particular significance in three areas: in customer
service and retention, in direct marketing, and as sources of
management information and customer feedback (Friedman,
• Customer service and retention: In business operations, call
centers have become the primary contact point with customers,
and serve as the means by which the organization creates a longterm relationship with individual customers and maintains
customer satisfaction. Customer satisfaction will generally lead
to retention and to word-of-mouth recommendations. In
distance education, call centers can help create the same type of
relationship. In the context of a university’s service standards for
processing applications, marking assignments, or answering
calls and messages, call center staff are the consistent point of
contact with the student, and become their advocate.
• Direct marketing opportunities: The support provided by a call
center is increasingly seen as a service that customers expect to
find integrated with product offerings, and to be available by
phone and on the Internet. This contact with the customer (who,
in the case of online or distance education, is a student) may
result in opportunities to help the student choose additional
products (programs or courses) and services (e.g., advising,
counseling, tutorial).
• Source of management information and student or customer
feedback: A call center with good software accumulates a great
deal of information about customers or students. This information is collected by analyzing call documentation data, or by
directly presenting questions to the customer or student. Distance education institutions should make the collection and
analysis of information a major call center goal.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Organizational Strategy and Call Centers
Strategy and strategic decision-making have long been areas of
active academic and practitioner inquiry. Chandler studied
the development of American corporations in the early twentieth
century, and postulated that corporate structure was designed to
implement strategy; in other words, that structure followed
strategy. Many other scholars followed with theories of their own.
Mintzberg and Lampel identify ten “schools” of theory
about strategy, and note that recent work has begun to cut across
these schools or historical perspectives. Much recent work
 studies strategy as a dynamic that emerges from
the competitive environment, evaluates that environment in an
ongoing manner, and flexibly adjusts the corporate course when
necessary. Organizations compete on the edge, adjusting their
deployment of employees and other resources as necessary strategic
changes are made .
Over the past 20 to 25 years, experience has shown that information technology is an increasingly important potential contributor to an organization’s productivity, and that organizations
experience maximum value when information technology investments are strategically driven. Davenport and Short , who
studied the relationship between information technology and
business process redesign, postulated an enabling link between, on
the one hand, the development of strategic vision and process
objectives, and on the other, successful, IT-driven process redesign.
Call centers provide an example of the application of these
concepts. Call center design has been enabled by the use of telecommunications technology and its ongoing integration with information technology. Call center concepts are becoming integral to
the redesign of business processes (particularly informational
processes as distinguished from those focused on physical objects),
and where call center implementations are strategically driven and
aligned, their value to the organization is the greater.
It is important that objectives established for a call center support and further the organization’s strategic direction. For example,
a call center focused on routing telephone calls to the appropriate
staff member or department has a relatively narrow task; it will be
Call Centers in Distance Education
suited to an organization that needs to be able to give short, concise
answers to a high call volume. An inbound telemarketing call
center focused on sales will allow longer calls, focusing on
minimizing waiting times and maximizing sales impact. However,
if the organization as a whole were strategically focused on the
creation of customer loyalty, the call center would be a primary
means to achieve that goal, and both of the examples above would
fall short in contributing to this corporate strategy .
Many call center managers are looking for ways to build costeffective, competitive operations using industry benchmark
information.
We’ve become obsessed in this industry with mass comparison.
We survey and benchmark and publish averages, quartiles and
percentages. These numbers get proclaimed as “industry
standards” that your call center should aspire to match.
 .
However, as these authors go on to note, surveys reveal that
“customers are, overall, not happy with service.” Given the
diversity of mission and function of call centers, it is likely that
what fits one will not fit all. It is much better to examine what the
organization is trying to achieve, and to build processes and
systems that help achieve these goals in effective and efficient ways.
Call centers can very well be a strategic asset for organizations,
as they can be used to strengthen customer relationships, and can
enable the organization to learn more about customers, so as to
serve them better. Adria and Chowdhury make a strong case
for using call centers to improve an organization’s ability to serve
its customers. They argue for empowerment of call center managers
and employees to enhance customer service, and they note that the
main responsibility for workers in a call center operation is to
maintain and enhance the reputation of the organization. That is,
the organization’s carefully developed customer service culture is at
risk during each customer interaction.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Critical Success Factors for Call Centers
Distance education shares the trends affecting many firms in
financial service, telecommunication, and technology industries. A
dominant trend is the increasing distance from the customer (or
student). Phone companies, utility providers, and banks once operated many small outlets, scattered throughout cities and present in
every small community; now, however, there are a few large
facilities (and increasingly, online services) backed up by call
centers. For call centers to be successful and productive in any field,
including distance education, a number of critical success factors
must be in place. Successful call center implementations require the
development of effective processes and policy, the implementation
of appropriate technology, and effective human resource
management processes .
Processes and Policy
Once a call center business strategy has been developed, and the
processes required to carry out the designated objectives have been
adopted, it is crucial that those processes be evaluated. A key part
of this evaluation involves looking at the types of contacts the call
center is receiving, how contacts are routed, and how contact
processes are managed. The call center should also establish polices
and standardized operational procedures. Most importantly,
quality monitoring and reporting processes must be in place, so
that the call center can continue to meet established objectives.
Call centers are particularly effective, and had their genesis, in
organizations that received large volumes of calls from customers
who were experiencing uncertain results as they attempted to find
the individual or department that could deal with their issue. Staff
in such organizations were also frustrated, and not utilized effectively, as they forwarded calls or tried to help in areas outside their
experience. The direction of calls to one area allows call center
agents to handle queries in volume. Only calls requiring additional
expertise not available in the call center are referred on to other
areas of the organization. Call centers become a collection point for
organizational information as databases are created to allow agents
to handle a wide range of queries. Thus, over time, the expertise
Call Centers in Distance Education
and information available to a call center is expanded, so that it can
handle more of the calls coming to it without resorting to referrals
and call backs.
A call center concept also can be used to allocate and distribute
workload in the organization. Without such a center, highly paid
professionals are often used to handle tasks that underutilize their
expertise. A call center with good call routing processes can
distribute calls to the individuals or automated agents most
qualified to handle them.
Ideally, all relevant information about a customer and their issues
is documented and available to all agents within a call center. In
addition, with collaborative systems, more than one agent can simultaneously work out a particularly thorny issue with a customer,
with each staff member contributing their particular expertise.
Organizations that are customer-focused use call centers most
successfully . However, many firms seeking
to become more customer-oriented purchase and install elaborate
customer relationship management (CRM) software suites that
track and record service transactions. If this installation occurs
without significant planning, because managers are dazzled by the
promises of the technology, the implementation is often a failure.
Rigby, Reichheld, and Dawson emphasize that CRM
installations work if the organization starts with a customer strategy, then realigns its structure and processes to fit the strategy, and
finally selects the technology that is appropriate for the chosen
strategy and processes. Whether implementing CRM technology,
call center technology, or both, the organization must first ensure
that its strategy is appropriately customer-focused, and that the
technology being considered fits with that strategy .
CRM products have helped call centers organize some of their
customer contact processes, and have also helped increase
efficiencies and quality of service. According to John Kiska ,
a new approach must be added to follow up on CRM processes.
Customer experience management, or CEM, is emerging as a
means to retain valued customers. It is widely know that retention
of current customers is cost effective and highly profitable for an
organization . This can also be true for a distance
education organization that benefits from program or long-term
students. A CEM process begins by identifying key measures for
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
customer satisfaction and retention. The statistics it gathers can
help organizations make sound decisions when it comes to call
center operations and policies . Holt holds
opinions similar to Kiska’s, indicating that customer loyalty and
satisfaction are linked very closely to the success of the
organization and call center.
If call center operators used customer contact to understand
attitudes to the company, to assess brand perceptions, to
research responses to marketing activity, and to begin to unlock
the secrets of long-term loyalty and advocacy, the value of that
call center operation would increase immeasurably. It will
enable other parts of the organisation to assess the relevant
issues and take the necessary action. (p. 11)
Technologies
Information technology is increasingly important to a wide range of
firms, and is the enabling platform for call centers, the Internet, and
other innovations. Earlier in this chapter, we noted work by
Davenport and Short on the relationship between
information technology and business process redesign. Hitt et al.
 investigated adoption of technology in the financial industry.
They note that research on IT investment has found that it is a
substantial contributor to productivity and productivity growth.
In the last ten years, various call center technologies have
become available to the market, including voice-over-Internet
protocol (VoIP), customer relationship integration tools, and Internet and Web communication tools and products. In their study of
call centers in the financial services industry, Evanson et al. 
note the requirement for call centers to ensure that their technology
is effective or appropriate for the call center’s strategy. Krol 
indicates that while excesses in the adoption of technology were
common in the recent technology-bubble firms, organizations are
now returning to basics. That is to say, call centers are more
interested in products that provide mission-critical services.
Customer loyalty and service objectives should drive call center
technology investments.
Call Centers in Distance Education
Technology is transforming the traditional call center, allowing
staff to be in contact with customers in a number of different ways,
including, but not limited to, e-mail, chat, Web browsing, and voice
mail. Finding the right technology is not an easy task, but the first
steps must be to determine the organization’s needs, and to link
customers with the information and services they require quickly.
Knowledge databases, CRM or customer tracking, CEM or customer follow-up and retention, and handling of multiple contact
media must be integrated into a system that is easily accessible to
front-line staff, or to customers directly. Automated systems can
match customer and call center staff, based on the customer’s
profile and the staff member’s knowledge focus. The banking
industry is experimenting with such “intelligent routing” to direct
calls from the bank’s best customers to particular representatives
 .
The first generation of call centers focused on answering
telephone calls from customers (students). As the Internet has
become more widely used, call centers have made use of this technology as well. Internet technology allows feedback to customers
or students to occur through either of these two channels, and the
more flexible Internet media provide a variety of tools, including
Web chat, asynchronous conferencing, video conferencing, and
Web call backs.
Recently, call centers have also begun to make use of Web sites
to provide their customers with more information. There has been
a push to providing customers with “Frequently Asked Questions”
(FAQ) pages, where customers can look up answers to their own
questions. Intelligent question and answer systems can look up
answers for clients, and provide them automatically . Athabasca University has developed such a tool, called Ask
AU (see 
When considering any of the Web-based tools for use with a call
center, it is important to consider their positive and negative
aspects, and how they will affect call center operations. Since the
Internet gives customers or students the power to seek out answers
on their own, organizations have a challenge to develop integrated
systems that allow delivery of services that are better and that
operate faster than those that customers can find for themselves. In
addition, people tend to like services that are “multi-channel”; they
may use the Web site, but will also want direct contact with
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
representatives. The channels should be viewed as complementary,
not competitive.
The Internet is capable of providing vast amounts of
information for call center staff as well as for current and potential
customers or students. However, developing user interfaces that
make this information quickly available in a format that satisfies
the diverse needs of users is an ongoing challenge. A major impact
of the new Internet-based technologies is that the service bar is
being raised. If routine issues are handled on the Web through
automatic agents, the call center must handle more sophisticated
Human Resources
Bartlett and Ghoshal make the case that human, not
financial, capital must now be the starting point and foundation for
successful strategy. Financial capital and also technology are
increasingly being commodified, and each is found in abundant
supply. As a result, the skills, knowledge, and ability to innovate of
an organization’s staff will increasingly be the distinguishing
factors for successful strategy implementation and value creation.
Customer service studies show that when something goes right,
customers give credit to the individual employee dealing with the
problem; when something goes wrong, customers usually blame the
organization itself. This fact makes it crucial for any organization
to have the right number of people, with the right skills, at the right
place and the right time, ready to answer customer demands . In North America, personnel costs form 60% to 70% of
costs in call centers.
Clearly, therefore, recruitment and hiring of front line and call
center managers, training and coaching of staff, and ongoing
performance management are very important to a call center’s
success. Call center staff are the front-line human element for the
customer. They need to feel that they are a vital part of the
organization in order to promote the reputation of the organization. Selection of staff with customer service skills, such as excellent communication skills, writing skills, and a positive attitude, is
very important. It is also important to recruit personnel with
appropriate experience and educational background, to ensure that
Call Centers in Distance Education
they are capable of providing quality services to customers or
Training and ongoing coaching is also extremely important, as
call center environments, technologies, processes, etc., tend to
change rapidly. It is important that staff is involved in the changes,
buy into the new processes, and have the information they need to
be able to carry them out.
Assessment and performance checks are extremely important.
What are the employee satisfaction levels? What are your
customers saying about the service they are receiving? Retention of
staff is as important as retention of customers, so that loyalty to the
service is maintained. Rigby et al. note that the prime driver
of customer loyalty is the loyalty of the organization’s employees.
Creating a positive and healthy environment for employees will
improve the service they provide to customers. Evanson et al.
 found that institutions with customer service representatives
recruited from within the organization experience lower turnover.
Also, organizations that have fewer empowered employees have
higher turnover. They also noted that institutions with higher
employee empowerment tend to have higher overall customer
focus, and that institutions with greater customer focus have higher
average spending on labour.
Adria and Chowdhury argue that call centers can and
should allow employees to upgrade their skills, make more and
better decisions, and participate in team-based organizational
culture. Skills training leads to higher employee satisfaction and
higher productivity. Frontline staff should be corporate ambassadors for the organization. They also argue that organizations
should pursue decentralization and team building: frontline
employees are more productive if they are allowed to make
decisions and provide input into the operation of the call center;
and customer service is more effective if employees feel they are
part of the common effort to achieve excellence.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Call Centers in Marketing and Promotion
Early uses of call centers included marketing and promotion, as
well as the provision of technical assistance. There are two primary
operating modes for these functions. The first is to field calls from
current customers wishing to place more orders or discuss
products, and from new customers directed to the call center
number by advertising and promotional materials. This is the
function that increasingly involves the Internet. The second operating mode for a call center is the outgoing cold call. A possible
customer is identified by region, income, or other factor, and is
called at home with an offer the organization’s product, a
solicitation of a donation, etc. A carefully prepared script is provided for the call center staff to use in their contacts. This is a very
popular function for a call center for charities and long-distance
phone companies. Call centers are also used to carry out surveys
 .
In education, the primary use of call center technology in
marketing and promotion is to field incoming calls from students
who have learned of the educational institution through advertising,
word-of-mouth referral, Internet search, or other means . Many institutions accept volumes of queries,
from prospective students and their parents, in which they provide
information about their programs, both educational and extracurricular. Often, large numbers of attendants are only needed
during peak recruiting seasons. In distance education, where
students are not on campus, there is additional pressure to fill the
information needs of current students on a day-to-day basis, by
answering questions about course availability, helping a student get
information about their performance, and so on. Finally, the student
advising function, in which an advisor works with a prospective or
current student to work through program planning issues, is also an
ideal candidate for application of the technologies and organizational format found in call centers. The question of cold calling to
solicit customers or students is more questionable, but should
perhaps not be dismissed out of hand. The structure of such calls
and the criteria for initiation would require careful consideration.
However, it is interesting to note that Evanson et al. found
that employee turnover in call centers was lower when large calling
campaigns were outsourced.
Call Centers in Distance Education
Call Centers for Provision of Technical Assistance
Many colleges and universities support multiple software and
hardware platforms. With increasing offerings in online distance
education, students will not only be calling with questions related
to course content; they will also require technical assistance. Good
service to students requires a single contact point for both technical
and content related questions.
Helpdesk Meets Call Center
The helpdesk first emerged to help customers and staff of
organizations deal with technical problems associated with
computer use. Noel Bruton, a well known IT consultant in Great
Britain, notes that the IT helpdesk took on its current form in the
mid-1980s. The call center concept used today came later, in the
nineties, to deal with issues and queries that are not related to
technology . According to Bruton, a key difference
between a helpdesk and a call center lies in how the two functions
deal with knowledge management. He contends that helpdesks,
while they do impart prepared or premanufactured information,
also require diagnostic skills from their staff
It is the experience of the authors that call center services to
students engaged in e-learning require that call center staff have
diagnostic skills that enable them to work with students to determine the nature of and solutions to their course content queries
(tutoring), and to work through program issues (advising). To
deliver a one-stop shop for students engaged in e-learning, it is
important that the diagnostic skills offered by a helpdesk are
combined with the directive and prepared services of a typical call
In a consolidated call center/helpdesk, the use of a knowledge base
is important for both functions; however, with diagnostic situations,
the bigger problem is usually trying to deduce the actual problem.
The knowledge base built up for many course-related, programrelated, and technical questions can be very straight-forward and can
comprise simple questions and answers. The knowledge base for
diagnostic questions must also include a step-by-step guide for asking
questions to determine the nature of the problem, followed by steps
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
for solving the problem. Learning to deduce the actual problem is a
unique skill set and takes time to learn.
The staff of an online learning call center must incorporate skills
from both call center and helpdesk environments, and have some
specialists available to deal with particularly complex issues. Good
skills within an environment such as this usually include strong
communication skills, student (or customer) service experience,
and an ability to adapt to new situations.
The call center manager can help staff answer all types of
questions by ensuring that all staff are aware of any new technology being used. Demonstrations on how the technology works,
and time to practise and become familiar with the application are
important for the staff. A good set of “Frequently Asked Questions,” complete with step-by-step solutions, should be made
available to call center staff. And, as with course content queries,
there should also be a technical expert available for more complex
Brandt notes that only 14% of all helpdesk calls are new
problems that require serious attention. The remaining 86% could
all be resolved automatically, without human intervention, via
Web-based features. It has also been shown that if end-users are
equipped with better documentation or automated self-help Webbased facilities, calls to the call center or helpdesk can be greatly
reduced . Lawlor
 points to surveys showing that organizations that reduced
the number of helpdesk/call center calls by creating self-help
options had a higher level of user satisfaction.
Doherty points out that help desks are typically
organized in layers or tiers. Tiers can start at Web-based self-help
which Lawlor designates as tier 0, and move up in hierarchy
to the front line facilitator, tier 1; through the desktop analyst,
tier 2; to the network specialist, tier 3. A consolidated call
center/helpdesk in education will likewise be layered in tiers. Where
possible, Web-based self-help (tier 0) should be developed,
providing extensive FAQ files, bulletin boards, and conference and
chat areas. Call center staff that are the first contact with students
are tier 1, technical experts to whom questions are referred are
tier 2, and the academics serve as tier 3.
Call Centers in Distance Education
Call Center Consolidation
Call center consolidation makes a great deal of sense for a number
of reasons, including the rapid progression in technological
advances enabling better access to organizational information for
call center agents and customers. When there are similarities in the
tasks performed and overlap in the services provided by currently
separate call centers, there is an immediate potential for economies
of scale. An agent in a large group can handle more calls at a given
service level than they can in a small group. Mitchell points
out that efficiencies can be achieved up to a center size of
approximately 50 agents. After this point, incremental gains are
minimal if they occur at all. While many call centers contain many
more than 50 agents, the maximum optimal size for their subunits
or teams is 50. Other motivators for call center consolidation
include reduced equipment costs, simplified implementation of new
technologies, better control over service quality, and reduced
management staff requirements.
In the past, call centers segmented calls on the basis of skills.
Consolidation can also occur within a call center by rationalizing
the segmentation of some agent groups. For example, in a bank,
commercial loans required different skills than personal loans. In
other settings, technical help requires different skills than service,
which requires different skill than sales. According to Mitchell
 knowledge management, process management, just-in-time
training, and CRM all contribute to the tearing down of skills
barriers to service. Mitchell notes that
today’s segmentation strategies no longer look to agent skills as
the basis for routing calls, but instead focus on client value to
determine what services to provide through what media. Low
value customers get routed to self-service technologies. High
value customers get high-touch service. No matter who or what
the customer ends up interacting with, the agent, human or
computer, has all of the services, corporate knowledge and
process flows needed to handle the customer requests.
In an educational environment, the concept of “low value” and
“high value” customers has no place; however, the concept of
segmentation is potentially useful. Such segmentation would be
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
based on student characteristics (program versus non-program,
graduate versus undergraduate, area of study, etc.), as well as type
of query. Many queries may be routed to self-service areas, while
others are routed to specialized agents. Data collected within the
call center will inform the segmentation. Improving data will allow
each agent to handle more diverse and more difficult calls, and as
more knowledge becomes incorporated into knowledge systems,
training becomes more an exercise in teaching agents the “how
to’s” of developing customer relationships rather than focusing on
each product or service offered.
Call Centers at Athabasca University
Athabasca University serves more than 24,000 students annually.
Courses are offered primarily through independent study, in which
students have the flexibility of time and place to set their own
schedules, and so, in effect, to pursue part-time studies and a fulltime career. The University strives to remove the barriers of time,
space, past educational experience, and to some degree, level of
income. Athabasca University’s mission and mode of operation
make effective methods of communicating with students and
prospective students very important. Using the call center model to
build student satisfaction is an attractive alternative for Athabasca
University.
Over the past 10 years, Athabasca University has developed
three unique call centers, described below.
• The Information Center, the call center operating as a first point
of contact, was established in 1995. Information Center staff
field all incoming calls not directed to a private line or to one of
the other call centers, and determine the purpose of the call.
Information Center attendants are well informed about the
University’s services, programs, and courses, and have access to
a wide range of information. Many calls to the Information
Center are redirected to student advisors, to the Office of the
Registrar, to the Computer Services Help Desk, to the School of
Business Call Center, or to course assistants. Prior to 1995,
incoming calls came to a single telephone number in the Office
of the Registrar, and many calls were lost. In addition, students
expressed frustration with their experience in finding the right
Call Centers in Distance Education
person in the institution to deal with their particular problem.
Since 1995, many of these problems have been resolved, and the
volume of calls, and students, has increased exponentially. In the
past five years, the volume of e-mail queries has also risen
rapidly, and an automated information system called “Ask AU”
has been added to enable students to obtain answers to
questions without intervention of a staff member.
• The Computing Services Help Desk, established in 1994,
provides technical assistance primarily to help University staff
obtain information and support for University computing
resources; that is, it helps staff resolve problems with their
Athabasca University equipment and supported software. The
Help Desk does provide assistance to students in computing
science and psychology courses, but students are generally
referred to the academic units for courseware support.
• The School of Business Call Center was created in 1994 as a
pilot project to investigate the feasibility of alternative tutoring
methods. It has grown to include almost all School of Business
undergraduate courses, which account for approximately
11,000 registrations or 30% of the University’s undergraduate
course registrations. The Call Center is the central focus of
student support in the undergraduate School of Business, and is
integrated with its online course delivery platform, which will be
described in detail below.
Potential Developments in
Athabasca University Call Centers
The Information Center has operated as an inbound call center and
has not been used to make outward calls, except to return
messages. It has been very effective in provision of information and
facilitates the recruitment process in this respect. In the future,
there is no reason why the Information Center could not expand its
role to also make outgoing calls to students graduating from high
schools and college diploma programs to inform them of
opportunities at Athabasca University, should the University decide
to pursue this recruitment strategy. It would, of course, be
necessary to balance the drive for efficient outgoing call practice
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
with the need for customer focus. When call center staff have
underused time, they might be able to make outgoing calls, but they
should focus on customer-retention calls .
There is potential for consolidation of the three call center
groups into a single organizational structure: together, they have
less than 50 staff, and they do have some service overlaps. In
addition organizational efficiencies are available. Even without
consolidation of functions that involve direct student contact,
significant improvement in the quality of functions can be obtained
by centralizing operations such as center design, staff planning,
network design and management, ongoing standards reporting, IT
liaison, contact automation, quality assurance, and training.
Consolidation can also simplify disaster recovery issues.
The three call centers have enough overlap to make the
economies of scale attractive. Achievement of such economies
would logically involve the widening of call center service to include
all University academic units. Many of the calls handled by the
Information Center deal with academic administration, and so
mirror calls handled by the call center. The call center concept could
also be extended to include functions served by the course assistants,
who also answer student queries, relay mark and assignment
information, and so on. As more of these functions, and those
handled by staff from the Office of the Registrar, are placed online,
the group of services eligible for call center service expands.
Call Centers in Distance Education and Distributed Learning
Can a call center be used as a vehicle for academic coaching and
advising? In distance and online education, there is an automatic
separation of the instructor and the student through the elimination
of the classroom. The historical practice in distance education has
been to prepare detailed and thorough learning packages to guide
the students in their study, and to provide tutorial support by mail
and telephone. The traditional tutor at Athabasca University is the
focal point for student/institution contact, with the tutor answering
many administrative queries and relaying marks, as well as directly
helping in an instructional role.
In the early 1990s, the business faculty at Athabasca University
developed a call center model as a one-window approach for its
Call Centers in Distance Education
instructional tutoring . The key to its
success to date has been the development of a groupware call back
conference, in which call center staff (called “undergraduate
student advisors”) post student subject matter queries they cannot
answer, and requests by students to speak to the course academic.
In this way, academics field only substantive, course-related
questions or problematic administrative issues. This system can
ensure that someone who can answer their questions and discuss
the subject matter in depth quickly responds to students. The
model also allows the separation of the tutoring and marking roles
that are combined in the traditional tutor model at Athabasca
University, and which, we contend, form a bottleneck in the effectiveness and efficiency of the instructional function, by preventing
the use of economies of scale in marking and in the handling of
administrative queries. In the traditional Athabasca University
tutorial model, a tutor is responsible for all contacts for an assigned
group of 28 to 40 students, and marks all assignments for this
group. Tutors are generally available in three-hour blocks once per
week. In the call center model, students in a given course are not
broken into groups; administrative questions are answered by the
undergraduate student advisors, who form tier one of the model;
an academic expert role exists purely for answering students’
academic content queries; and a specialist marker role has been
created to handle marking duties.
Under the School of Business call center model, students in any
course are able to call a toll-free central telephone number five
afternoons and six evenings per week. The call center now provides
about 60 hours of access to telephone and e-mail assistance each
week to students, and can deal with 80% of the calls directed to it
 referring to call back only the 20% of
calls to which the course academic should respond. Course
academics over a broad range of courses are freed from 80% of the
calls they (or their tutors) would otherwise receive, and the
student’s queries are answered quickly, as received, rather than
once per week during an academic’s telephone contact hours.
It is anticipated that improvement of technology will allow the
routing of calls directly to particular agents or academic area
experts. The knowledge available to and level of expertise expected
of selected staff will increase constantly, to allow direct answers to
more of the 20% of queries now referred to academic experts. Call
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
center staff will handle more challenging calls about academic
content, as well as providing help with student program advising.
Prior to the implementation of call center model, payments to
telephone tutors were one of the School of Business’s largest
expenses. Each academic advisor now handles calls from about
three times as many students per week as an average telephone
tutor previously did. As a result, student support costs have been
reduced by approximately $100,000 annually in School of Business
undergraduate independent study courses. The cost savings enabled
the development of the call back conference. In addition, an online
course development and delivery system incorporating the call
center was developed for most School of Business undergraduate
courses. The technology used was Lotus Notes®, a groupware
software suite. Online course materials are continually being
developed and improved, so that students can access course help
through their course Web sites, as well as interact with call center
staff and academics via the Web, using chat or discussion boards.
The call back conference database allows undergraduate student
advisors and academics to track and resolve student queries online,
a necessity once student support was spread among academic and
support staff. The tracking in the call back conference only
accounted for approximately 20% of student contacts that could
not directly be answered by the undergraduate student advisors
 . However, beginning in the 2002-2003
academic year, a comprehensive Notes-based student tracking
system has tracked all queries to the call center, including those
handled by the call back conference, whether by e-mail or
telephone. The system is Web-enabled and allows academics and
other University staff to access the database from virtually
anywhere, using a standard Web browser. The database is also able
to produce reports and statistics on student contacts, for use,
among other things, in improving courseware.
Each year, Athabasca University surveys a group of students
about their satisfaction with the services they receive from the
academic departments . These surveys point to areas in which the Call Center can be improved, or
areas where it should continue doing those good things that are
working well. The surveys show that the differences between direct
tutor-to-student interaction and call-center-to-student interaction
are very small, and the accessibility of the call center is an accepted
Call Centers in Distance Education
and valued service to Athabasca University students. Reports such
as these, and tracking information received from call center
databanks, inform decisions about how services will be distributed
to students. Problems quickly come to light in the call center
environment, whereas long delays often occurred in the previous
student-to-tutor model.
A factor requiring improvement in the School of Business call
center model is the involvement of the full time academics as a
group in the delivery of instruction and service to students. While
the opportunity exists for their involvement, many have chosen to
concentrate on their research activities, and to “buy out” their
academic tutoring responsibility. Students ask for contact with the
course academic, and then find their contact is delayed or does not
occur as they had supposed. Inclusion of student contact
requirements in negotiated annual workloads would easily solve
this problem.
Conclusion
As Athabasca University takes the shape of a decentralized, network environment, as envisioned by the Strategic University Plan,
the call center organizational format becomes more and more
natural. There is considerable scope to expand the concept of call
center service to the two thirds of undergraduate students not in the
School of Business. Some of these students obtain some service
from the Information Center; others, who have had experience
with the School of Business call center, try to use it to obtain service
when they study in other areas of the University. Furthermore,
many of the services provided by the Office of the Registrar and by
the University student advisors are candidates for consolidation
into call center formats.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
References
Adria, M., & Chowdhury, S. D. . Making room for
the call center. Information Systems Management, 71-80.
Adria, M., & Woudstra, A. . Who’s on the line? Managing
student interactions in distance education using a one-window
approach. Open Learning, 16(3), 249-261.
Annand, D., Huber, C., & Michalczuk, K. . The use of
Lotus Notes as a comprehensive learning, evaluation and
production system. Paper presented at the Computers and
Advanced Technology (CATE) conference, Cancun, Mexico.
Athabasca University . Report on student satisfaction with
academic services: Undergraduate, domestic, individualized
study. Athabasca, AB: Author.
Bartlett, C. A., & Ghoshal, S. . Building competitive
advantage through people. Sloan Management Review, 43(2),
Brandt, D. S. . Automating your IT help desk. Computers in
Libraries, 22(3), 52.
Bruton, N. . Helpdesks and call centers—a comparison.
Retrieved October 23, 2003, from 
Chandler, A. D., Jr. . Strategy and structure: Chapters in the
history of the American industrial enterprise. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cleveland, B., & Hopton, T. . Industry standards
cannot replace sound decisions. Call Center Magazine.
Retrieved October 23, 2003, from 
magazine.com/article/CCM20021005S0002
Coen, D. . Building a powerful telephone sales presentation.
Direct Marketing, 64(7), 52-53.
Davenport, T. H., & Short, J. E. . The new industrial
engineering: Information technology and business policy
redesign. Sloan Management Review, 31(4), 11-27.
Doherty, S. . Helpdesk salvation. Network Computing,
12(7), 42-48.
Eisenhardt, K. M. . Strategy as strategic decision making.
Sloan Management Review, 40(3), 65-72.
Call Centers in Distance Education
Evanson, A., Harker, P. T., & Frei, F. X. . Effective call center
management: Evidence from financial services. Retrieved
October 23, 2003, from 
workingpapers/papers2/9899/99-110.pdf
Friedman, T. . Call center management: Balancing
the numbers. Industrial Management, 43(l), 6.
Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. . Competing for the future.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Hitch, L. P., & MacBrayne, P. . A model for effectively
supporting e-learning. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from
 
Hitt, L. M., Frei, F. X., & Harker, P, T. . How financial firms
decide on technology. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from
 
Holt, B. . Calling out for the human touch.
Customer Loyalty Today, 8(1), 11.
Hunter, P. . Hands-on helpdesks. Computer
Weekly, 60.
Kim, W. C., & Mauborgne, R. . Strategy, value innovation,
and the knowledge economy. Sloan Management Review, 40(3),
Kiska, J. . Customer experience management.
CMA Management, 76(7), 28-30.
Knowledge@Wharton. . Web based call centers transform
customer service. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from
 
Krol, C. . Firms stick to basics with call center
tools. B to B Chicago, 87(10), 22.
Lawlor, T. . The people factor. Computer
Weekly.com. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from 
.computerweekly.com/articles/article.asp?liArticleID=26184&li
ArticleTypeID=20&liCategoryID=2&liChannelID=30&liFlavo
urID=1&sSearch=&nPage=1
Markides, C. C. . A dynamic view of strategy. Sloan
Management Review, 40(3), 55-63.
Mintzberg, H., & Lampel, J. . Reflecting on the strategy
process. Sloan Management Review, 40(3), 21-30.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Mitchell, I. Call center consolidation—does it
still make sense? Business Communication Review, 24-28.
Pascale, R. T. . Surfing the edge of chaos. Sloan Management
Review, 40(3), 83-94.
Reichheld, F. F. . The loyalty effect. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press.
Rigby, D. K., Reichheld, F., & Dawson, C. .
Winning customer loyalty is the key to a winning CRM strategy.
Ivey Business Journal. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from http://
www.iveybusinessjournal.com/article.asp?intArticle_ID=409
Call Centers in Distance Education
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 3
SUPPORTING ASYNCHRONOUS
DISCUSSIONS AMONG ONLINE LEARNERS
Joram Ngwenya, David Annand, & Eric Wang
Athabasca University
Introduction
Many universities now offer Internet-based education. Most
research studies have determined that the Web is an effective
teaching medium, with student learning outcomes at least
equivalent to those of classroom-based students .
Web-based courses generally reflect many features of the
traditional academy: they generally have specified start and end
dates and limited entry points, and they consist of cohorts of
students who proceed through each course at about the same pace.
This cohort model lends itself to a group-based, online learning
experience. Commercial online learning management systems
(LMSs), usually assume an underlying cohort-based learning
model, and attempt to replicate many desirable features and activities derived from classroom-based learning contexts. This strategy,
in turn, enables increased interaction and knowledge construction
among learners. Not surprisingly, most research about online education is informed by these cohort-based learning experiences .
However, there is also a long tradition of open education that
addresses the needs of learners who for one reason or another do
not fit the classic mould of higher education. In large open and
distance education institutions, such as many of the “mega universities” described by Daniel , or in smaller variants, like Athabasca University in Canada, the primary objective of the learning
model is to provide a greater degree of flexibility for students. In
the more flexible of these institutions, learners may enrol in courses
throughout the year (continuous enrolment) and proceed through
these courses at their own pace. Assignments and examinations can
often be completed at any time and in any order. The relatively
unpaced nature of this “individualized” model appeals to learners
who have significant other responsibilities, such as full-time jobs
and families, or who, for some reason, require flexible alternatives
to acquire course credits to transfer into other external programs.
These two, somewhat divergent views of higher education
appear to have resulted in differing conceptions of the relative
importance of mediated, two-way communication in the distance
education process, as discussed in the following section.
The Interaction Debate
Holmberg conceptualized distance learning as essentially an
individual act of internalization. Thus, he saw instructional design
that supported learner autonomy and independence as important
for learners at a distance. He asserted that distance education
institutions needed to provide open access and unpaced courses,
and should not require group learning activities (pp. 64-65).
Keegan characterized effective distance education
processes as “reintegrating” the teaching and learning acts; that is,
replicating as many of the attributes of face-to-face communication
as possible, yet maintaining learner autonomy. Interpersonal
communication at a distance did not need to be limited to more
direct forms of instructor-student interaction, such as telephone
conversations or teleconferencing, but could also be recreated
through appropriate design and use of printed instructional materials. In this instance, reintegration occurred when printed learning
materials were easily understood, anticipated potential learner
problems, provided carefully constructed course objectives and
content, and contained ample practice questions and related feedback. Like Holmberg , Keegan considered the more
important characteristics of adult distance education to be learner
independence and personal responsibility for educational outcomes
and processes.
However, not all writers agree that learner autonomy and
independence continued to be the chief hallmarks of adult learning
after the advent of various forms of online communication.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Garrison expressed the need for a balanced approach
between teacher-centered relationships found in face-to-face
education, and to a lesser extent, traditional distance education,
and the tendency to stress learner-centered relationships in the
emerging electronic learning environment. The ability of instructors and learners to communicate openly and collaboratively, and
to determine the appropriate, delicate balance between the needs,
values, and perspectives of both parties were particularly strong
and promising features of the advent of interactive electronic
communication technologies (pp. 125-126).
Garrison argued that dialogue and debate were essential
for learning, because these forms of two-way communication
allowed learners to negotiate and structure personally meaningful
knowledge. Teaching necessarily transmitted societal knowledge,
but a rounded learning experience needed to foster critical analysis
processes in order to bring personal perspectives to bear and create
new understanding for both the teacher and student (pp. 7, 19).
Holmberg took exception to these assertions. He argued
that the vast majority of distance education continued to be based
on a correspondence model, characterized by student independence, separation in space and time, and the use of printed material
as the primary means of instruction. This model could be supported with various means of two-way communication, depending
in part on financial considerations, and in part on instructor and
student preferences. Mediated communication had always been a
primary characteristic of distance education, he maintained, but
merely supplemented the traditional correspondence-based model
of distance education. As a result, the nature of distance education
may have evolved, but it had not been revolutionized with the
introduction of online communication technologies.
Garrison and Shale responded that Holmberg’s
conception of distance education was deficient, because it relied on
enabling technologies to define the phenomenon. Correspondence
study, they argued, had arisen as a result of technological innovations—the mail and telephone systems. These systems were being
replaced by newer, more effective, mediated two-way electronic
communication systems. A more integrative, technologically
independent view of distance education, one that focused on the
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
essential educational feature of learning, was needed. Garrison and
Shale defined this feature to be sustained, two-way communication
between instructor and learner.
Various writers, including Jonassen, Davidson, Collins,
Campbell, and Banaan-Haag , developed this conception of
online learning even further. To them, sustained two-way
asynchronous communication not only enables greater instructorlearner communication, but most importantly, enables the social
construction of knowledge among learners at a distance. This
constructive effect occurs when online learning environments
require, among others, “negotiation of meaning and reflection on
what has been learned” (p. 21).
This relatively distinct divide between theorists appears to be
essentially unresolved at present. One view (represented by both
Holmberg and Keegan) conceptualizes the process of distance
education as involving primarily flexible, unpaced learning that
facilitates learner independence and autonomy. Others (such as
Garrison) conceive the distance education process as now being
transformed into one of sustained two-way communication, where
significant, frequent interaction between instructor and learner and
among learners is the essential, enabling learning feature. It is
noteworthy that, in practice, this dichotomy appears to manifest
itself in the degree of pacing incorporated into course and program
structures. This factor is discussed further in the next section.
Technology and Types of Interactions
in Online Learning Environments
The means of interaction among two or more people depends on
their relative locations in time and space, as illustrated in Table 13-1.
Using this schema, and by definition, distance learning can only
take place in quadrants 2 and 4. It is in these areas that teaching
and learning activities occur in different places, requiring some
form of technological mediation. Technologies that facilitate
synchronous online learning (e.g., desktop video conferencing,
chat, and audioconferencing) fall into quadrant 2 (different place,
same time). Asynchronous technologies (e.g., computer conferencing, e-mail) fall into quadrant 4 (different place, different time).
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Table 13-1.
Types of interaction in
learning environments.
Table 13-2.
Types of interactions
in online learning
environments.
However, this representation does not take into account the
relatively paced or unpaced nature of online courses. “Place” is
extraneous to the analysis if only forms of communication that
must be used among physically dispersed individuals are
considered. As a result, this variable can be replaced with “Pace,”
to gives us the more descriptive schema of online learning shown in
Table 13-2.
For instance, synchronous forms of technology-mediated
communication, such as desktop video conferencing, generally
occur in quadrant 1 (same pace, same time). Asynchronous forms
of communication, such as computer conferencing, occur in
quadrant 3 (same pace, different time).
In both paced and unpaced online learning environments,
various types of interpersonal, mediated communications are possible: student to student, student to class, instructor to class, and
student to instructor. However, Table 13-3 illustrates that, in
practice, there are relatively few forms of electronic technology that
are both supportable by the learning institution and suitable for the
unpaced online learning environment.
Tables 13-2 and 13-3 illustrate that technologies exist to
facilitate all forms of synchronous and asynchronous interaction in
paced, online learning environments—the type of interaction
envisioned by Garrison and Jonassen et al. .
However, facilitating interaction among learners in an unpaced
online setting is still problematic, despite rapid advances in technology and online learning management systems, because most
online learning systems have evolved from classroom-based
educational models and group-based support systems. Although
online technologies can be adapted to facilitate some forms of
interaction—for instance e-mail to allow learner-learner communication—organizational and systems problems engendered by
the rolling nature of student registrations may make these practices
difficult to implement.
Presumably, other means, such as the use of carefully structured
instructional material (whether online or printed) must be used at
present to provide meaningful unpaced learning experiences to
students at a distance. These strategies are very similar to those
promoted by Holmberg and Keegan . The
failure to distinguish among relative degrees of pacing in distance
education courses or programs, and the organizational and learning
system differences that result, may account for varying conceptualization of the appropriate means to achieve “interaction” in the
distance education literature.
As a result of this analysis, it also seems clear that unpaced
online learning must address some important practical challenges.
The balance of this chapter describes the development of an online
learning system prototype designed to facilitate learner-instructor
interaction, and a limited form of learner-learner interaction, in an
unpaced online environment. The system appears to provide
learners with maximal amounts of flexibility, yet to rectify an
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
to student
telephone/pager/
voice mail
online chat
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
to instructor
Instructor
online chat
telephone/pager/
voice mail
teleconference
videoconference
class e-mail
discussion board
conferencing
teleconference
desktop audio/
video conferencing
class e-mail
discussion boards
conferencing
telephone/pager/
voice mail
course Web site
class e-mail2
1. Such technologies are not available, unless students are apprised by the
institution of the means to contact other students; for example, given e-mail
addresses and telephone numbers. In practice, this is difficult.
2. It is difficult in practice to determine the e-mail addresses of all active
students in unpaced online learning environments.
Enabling online technology
Interaction
Table 13-3.
Technologies that
facilitate interactions
in online learning
environments.
important practical gap in unpaced online learning: the means to
communicate effectively with peers and instructors, and thereby
facilitate group-based learning. However, many of the features of
this system can also be applied to paced online learning
environments, thereby addressing some needs of learners and
instructors that are common across all online learning models.
The ASKS System
Collaboration among students in an unpaced online learning
environment is difficult because, by definition, they do not belong
to a cohort, and their courses are designed to be self-paced. As a
result, even two students who begin a course on the same day can
quickly be at different points within it. Interactions among learners
cannot be easily facilitated, monitored, or evaluated. Furthermore,
increased interaction in unpaced online environments can
significantly increase costs to the institution .
The ASKS (asynchronous knowledge sharing) prototype is
designed to overcome these difficulties. It uses discussion boards
with capabilities characteristic of most group decision support
systems .
Learners and instructors access the system directly via the Web. The
main student screen is divided into three areas, as shown in
Figure 13-1: knowledge sharing topics in the left-hand pane, the
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 13-1.
Student main screen.
main menu in the top part of the right-hand pane, and the topic
headings just below the main menu.
Each knowledge sharing topic has four parts: a closed or open
file folder icon just to the left of the topic, the topic itself, the
number of entries created by a student for the related topic (shown
in parentheses), and a trash can icon showing the number of entries
that have been deleted. Each knowledge sharing topic is described
briefly, in a phrase similar to the subject line in an e-mail message.
When the file folder icon for an applicable topic is opened, the
individual student’s entries related to the topic are displayed in the
right-hand pane. In this case, six entries have been made by the
student related to the topic, “System Advantages.” Each response
to the knowledge sharing topic is accompanied by the date an entry
was entered or last modified, the size (in kilobytes) of the response,
a short description of the entry, and a link to a more detailed
explanation.
Topic submissions can be created by clicking the “Compose”
button. This action brings up the editing screen shown in
Figure 13-2.
This screen has the look and feel of most e-mail systems. A
subject line provides a brief description of the response. The
“Explanation” area is similar to the main body of an e-mail.
Students may compose their detailed responses to the given topic
here, if they wish. If no explanation is entered, the system default
reports “No explanation, point self-explanatory.”
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Figure 13-2.
Topic editing screen.
A student cannot view others’ responses to a knowledge topic
until they have made and submitted their own. When entries are
submitted, they are accessible to the instructor for reviewing, and
unavailable to the originating student for further editing. Other
students cannot view these submissions until the instructor has
reviewed them.
The last item in the right-hand pane of the student main screen
(Figure 13-1) is the “Instructor’s Comments” section. If the instructor has evaluated an entry, a “new mail” icon and the date of the
evaluation appear in this section of the originating student’s screen.
Entries that have been rejected by the instructor appear with a red
“X” icon. Other possible instructor comments are “Not sent to
instructor yet,” for entries that have not yet been submitted for
evaluation, and “Awaiting evaluation,” for entries that have been
submitted but not reviewed by the instructor.
Clicking the date in the “Instructor’s Comments” column opens
the screen shown in Figure 13-3.
This screen provides each student with the instructor’s feedback
on their submissions in a private workspace. If the instructor is not
satisfied with the overall quality of submissions from a particular
student, they can provide hints to the student. The “Hints” button
is hidden until the instructor has commented on all entries made by
the student. Clicking on this button brings up an instructor
feedback screen like that shown in Figure 13-4.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 13-3.
Instructor’s comments
on an individual entry.
The instructor’s overall comments are shown in red. The
summary of student Mary Swift’s responses is shown in the lefthand column. In addition, a list of points not mentioned by the
student, but submitted by others in the virtual cohort, is shown on
the right-hand side of the screen. The instructor can choose the
amount of other students’ contributions disclosed to a participant.
The student then submits additional responses until the instructor
is satisfied. At this point, some or all of the student’s responses can
be viewed by others in the virtual cohort, and commented upon by
peers if desired or required by the instructor. Viewing may be
restricted by the instructor to new points not yet raised by the other
students, to provide a more succinct knowledge base. As well, the
cohort size can be restricted by submission date; for example, all
contributions made in January in one course. This strategy creates
online cohorts that are not based on a rigid schedule of submission
deadlines, as in a paced environment, but rather are based on
students’ similar place in a course within a particular period of
time. As a result, cohorts can be formed spontaneously and without
instructor mediation.
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Figure 13-4.
Instructor hints.
The ASKS Instructor Environment
The main screen for instructors, Figure 13-5, shows the student
submissions awaiting evaluation.
In this case, there are three related to the knowledge sharing
topic, “System Advantages”: one from Mary Swift, and two from
John Doe. Clicking Mary Swift’s name opens the evaluation screen
shown in Figure 13-6.
The ASKS system streamlines the instructor evaluation process
through several means. The upper left-hand part of the screen
shows the student’s submission to be evaluated. The upper righthand part shows a summary of points already contributed by the
cohort, as selected by the instructor in previous evaluations. The
bottom left-hand part of the screen (“Evaluation”) enables the
instructor to judge a particular response in terms of those of other
cohort members (“Class Matching”), clarity of presentation
(“Articulation”), and the importance of the point to the knowledge
sharing topic (“Relevance”).
With respect to Class Matching, one of three possible evaluations
is selected. The entry may be judged to be similar to a current class
entry, to be a new entry for the cohort, or to be unacceptable in its
current form. Selecting any one of the three options fills the feedback
box in the bottom right-hand part of the screen with a randomly
selected preset comment, suitable to the evaluation type selected. As
a result, instructors do not have to type in comments for every entry
they evaluate. However, the comments can be easily modified if the
instructor feels that more descriptive feedback is needed.
After all the entries on a knowledge sharing topic are evaluated
for a particular student, another comment screen automatically
appears. This screen enables the instructor to enter an overall
assessment of the student’s entries, and also gives the student
permission to view other students’ contributions. The default
setting enables access to all the entries. The instructor can choose
to keep some entries hidden, as an encouragement to the student to
come up with the missing points. Comments to the student can also
be modified to assist this process. These comments are then posted,
and become available to the student for viewing either in the
“Instructor’s Comments” section of the student screen, if the
student’s overall contribution is satisfactory (see Figure 13-1), or as
“Hints” if it is not (see Figure 13-4).
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 13-5.
Instructor main screen.
Figure 13-6.
Submission evaluation
A student’s overall class participation mark for a given
knowledge sharing topic is automatically calculated by ASKS, and
is based on four criteria: attendance, participation, articulation,
and relevance. Relative weights are pre-assigned to each of these
categories by the instructor. As an example, let us assume that the
weights assigned by the instructor to the four grading criteria are as
shown in Table 13-4.
The computation of individual student grades for a hypothetical
class is illustrated below. The example assumes a class of three
students and 10 critical thinking topics, with the class generating
five unique responses for each topic. In reality, the class size,
number of topics, and unique responses generated for each topic
will vary. The assumed number of responses raised by each student
for each topic are shown in Table 13-5. A black box indicates that
a student did not contribute to a particular topic.
An attendance mark is awarded for each topic that a student
addresses. In this example, Student 1 received 100% (10/10) for
attendance because all topics were addressed. Students 2 and 3
received 90% (9/10) and 80% (8/10) attendance scores,
respectively. These scores are then weighted according to the
attendance factor assigned in Table 13-4 to form part of the
student’s overall mark. The formula is given below.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Attendance =
= Total topics attempted by student
= Total discussion topics for the course
= Weight for attendance criterion
Table 13-4.
Criteria weighting.
Criterion Weight
Attendance
Participation
Articulation
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Table 13-5.
Assumed student
contributions to class
responses.
Table 13-6.
Individual students’
articulation scores.
Number of responses
Class response
Grand total
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Table 13-6.
(continued)
Class response
Grand total
Class response
Grand total
Individual participation marks are awarded based on the
number of responses raised by each student compared to those
raised by the whole class. In the example above, Students 1, 2, and
3 raised 36, 40, and 40 responses, respectively. The class as a whole
raised 50 unique responses. As a result, Student 1 received 36/50 or
72% for participation. Students 2 and 3 each received 80%
(40/50). Each of these marks is then weighted according to the
participation factor assigned in Table 13-4. The formula is shown
Articulation is a criterion for evaluating how well a student
response has been written. Articulation marks for each student
response submitted are awarded on a scale of 1 to 5 by the
instructor at the time of submission. The articulation scores for the
three example students for each of the ten topics are shown in
Table 13-6. Black boxes indicate responses that a particular student
did not raise.
To obtain the denominator used to calculate the articulation
score for an individual student, the system multiplies the number of
responses raised by the student by the highest possible score on the
articulation scale. In this example, the highest possible score is 5.
Therefore, the best articulation score for the 36 responses raised by
Student 1 (see Table 13-5) would be 180 (36 x 5). To obtain the
numerator, each student response is multiplied by the articulation
value assigned to the response by the instructor. The final
articulation mark is expressed as a percentage of the numerator
and denominator. The articulation score for Student 1 would be
140/180 or 78%. Similarly, the best articulation score for the 40
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Contributions =
= Total count of class or equivalent facts entered by student for all topics
= Total count of class facts for all topics
= Weight for contributions criterion
responses that Student 2 raised would be 200 (40 x 5). The
articulation score for Student 2 would be 144/200 or 72%. For
Student 3, the calculation would be 110/200 = 55%. Each of these
marks is then weighted according to the articulation factor assigned
in Table 13-4. The mathematical formula is given below.
Relevance, or perceived substance of each submission from a
particular student, is determined by the instructor on a scale of 1 to
7 at the time the response is reviewed (see Figure 13-7). At that
time, it becomes a new class response. All other students who
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Articulation =
= Total topics attempted by student
= Total count of class or equivalent facts entered by student for topic i
= Articulation score awarded to student for topic i fact j
= Total count of class or equivalent facts entered by student for all topics
= Highest score on the articulation scale
= Weight for articulation criterion
Table 13-7.
Relevance scores
assigned to each
class response.
Class response
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Table 13-8.
Individual students’
relevance scores.
Class response
Total score
Class response
Total score
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Table 13-8.
(continued)
Table 13-9.
Summary of individual
students’ marks.
Class response
Total score
Attendance
Participation
Articulation
Overall grade
Attendance
Participation
Articulation
Overall grade
Attendance
Participation
Articulation
Overall grade
subsequently mention this response are assigned the same relevance
score. Table 13-7 shows the assumed relevance scores for the 50
class responses that the three students raised.
For each class response that a student mentions, the relevance
score is tabulated and compared to the class total for that topic.
The overall relevance score for a student is the average of the
student’s score for all the topics attempted. For example, assume
that the relevance scores shown in Table 13-8 were assigned for
each student in the class.
Student 1 would get an overall relevance score of 223/310 or
72%. Student 2 would receive a score of 89% (249/280). Student
3 would receive a score of 100%. (Note that this student
mentioned all the class responses in the topics attempted and was
awarded the maximum mark for relevance, even though not all
topics were addressed.) This mark is then weighted according to
the relevance factor assigned in Table 13-4. Mathematically, this
value is expressed as
A summary of the class participation marks for all three
students is shown in Table 13-9.
This information is automatically prepared in report form for
each student. Each report also contains an automatically composed
summary of individual student performance. This summary is
tailored according to where a student is located on two, 2 x 2
matrices. The instructor can set the parameters of this summary to
dichotomize student performance as acceptable or unacceptable.
ASKS then generates student-specific comments based location
within these matrices.
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Relevance =
= Total topics attempted by student
= Total count of class or class equivalent facts entered by student for topic i
= Relevance score awarded to student for topic i fact j
= Total count of class facts entered for topic i
= Maximum relevance score awarded to student for topic i fact j
= Weight for relevance criterion
The first, or efficiency, matrix locates a student in one of four
quadrants according to attendance and participation marks, as
shown in Table 13-10.
The second, or effectiveness, matrix locates a student in one of
four quadrants according to articulation and participation marks,
as shown in Table 13-11.
Feedback is generated for each student in the form of a fiveparagraph summary report. The first paragraph provides an overall
comment on each student’s contributions. The second paragraph
provides a summary comment related to efficiency, and the third
paragraph provides detailed suggestions or encouragement to
improve articulation and relevance of the contributions. The fourth
paragraph summarizes student effectiveness, and the fifth
paragraph provides detailed suggestions for improvement in the
areas of articulation and relevance. A copy of this feedback is also
forwarded to the instructor.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
participation
attendance
participate in all
or most of the topics,
but make few
contributions in total
participate in all
or most of the topics,
and make many
contributions in total
participate in a few
of the topics,
and make few
contributions in total
participate in a few
of the topics,
but make many
contributions in total
Significant
participation
attendance
Table 13-10.
Efficiency matrix.
For example, recall the marks for Student 1 (Table 13-9).
Assume the instructor programs ASKS to deem marks above 75%
in a given category to be acceptable, and those at 75% or lower to
be unacceptable. Based on this cutoff, Student 1 would fall into
Quadrant 1 in the efficiency matrix (attendance = 100% =
acceptable; participation = 72% = unacceptable), and would also
be categorized in Quadrant 1 in the effectiveness matrix
(articulation = 78% = acceptable; relevance = 72% = unacceptable). Detailed feedback would be provided as shown in
Appendix 13A.
As currently implemented, the ASKS system is something of a
hybrid between traditional group decision support systems and an
automated system of “adaptive guidance” proposed by Bell and
Kozlowski . They proposed this technique as a means of
enhancing learners’ self-regulation processes and to improve the
efficiency of the learning process. Among other features, intelligent
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
articulation
present less-relevant
responses well
present relevant
responses well
present less-relevant
responses poorly
present relevant
responses poorly
Significant
articulation
Table 13-11.
Effectiveness matrix.
agents were proposed to monitor and assess learner progress, and
provide tailored feedback. ASKS uses instructors as intelligent
agents, but allows them to provide this adaptive guidance more
efficiently. It provides automatic instructor access to prior group
knowledge, streamlines an instructor’s ability to assess student
contributions, and provides tailored, automated responses to
students as a result of this assessment process. In the near to
medium term, this strategy may suffice to create a greater sense of
instructor immediacy in the learning process, a factor found to
increase student satisfaction in online courses .
ASKS also provides a permanent and growing course knowledge
base for students to access. Figure 13-7 illustrates such a
knowledge base.
In the student evaluation example above, three students
participated in one online class. Obviously, the number of students
in each class can be expanded. However, the ASKS system also
allows the group knowledge accumulated in a number of classes to
be easily assembled into one large course knowledge database,
made accessible to students as deemed appropriate by the
instructor. In this way, an expanding and instructor-vetted database
is made available to inform the learning processes of future
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 13-7.
ASKS course
knowledge database
structure.
Course knowledge database
(January starts)
(February starts)
(Month x starts)
Future Plans
The ASKS system is currently being evolved within the School of
Business at Athabasca University from a prototype system
developed in Microsoft Access and Cold Fusion to a productionbased system adapted to delivery via Lotus Notes and Domino.
More groupware characteristics are planned. At present, students
are not able to communicate easily with each other without
instructor intermediation. Planned enhancements include the
ability of unpaced students to be assigned arbitrarily to groups with
other students at a similar point in a course. Students could then
communicate within these groups before submitting group-based
assignments. As currently enabled in ASKS, these group contributions could then be evaluated by the instructor and posted for
other groups to review and critique.
The system needs to be evaluated to determine, for instance, to
what degree it facilitates student-to-student, student-to-instructor,
student-to-class, and instructor-to-class interactions; whether
students and instructors consider it easy to use; whether it is
perceived as fair by students in terms of evaluating individual
contributions to online discussion groups; and whether it is cost
effective. Davis showed that many of these factors are major
determinants of the acceptance of new technology, and proposed
an evaluation model. This model will likely be used as the basis for
follow-up research with both instructors and students.
Conclusion
The ASKS system allows students in both paced and unpaced online
learning environments to participate in grouped assessment
activities. It also permits instructors to assess individual
contributions quickly, and provides tailored, automated feedback
to students, thereby increasing the immediacy of feedback and
reducing instructor workload.
The ASKS system was initially designed as a means for students
in unpaced online learning environments to participate in group
discussion and knowledge-building exercises by creating online
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
virtual cohorts. Although an unpaced online learning environment
provides an important degree of flexibility for students, very few
existing technologies are suitable for promoting interactions among
learners in this model. By incorporating features such as adaptive
guidance, instructor immediacy, and collaborative learning into
both paced (cohort-based) and unpaced (individualized) online
learning environments, ASKS may signal the establishment of online
technologies that will reconcile differing perceptions about the role
of interaction evident in the distance learning literature to date.
ASKS addresses some of the problems associated with group
participation in any online environment. First, the system enables
the instructor to build a repository of model responses that can
easily be incorporated into tailored feedback for students. Second,
the system allows the instructor to evaluate each contribution
efficiently. Meaningful feedback can be constructed for each
student from an existing database. Individual student contributions
can be evaluated quickly, and the instructor does not need to recall
either the frequency or quality of prior contributions from a
particular student. This factor reduces the subjective element
common to the evaluation of online discussions.
From the student’s point of view, private workspaces allow
individual students to create a permanent record of their ideas on a
topic. The ASKS system also removes the advantage for students
who make early submissions to online discussions. ASKS solves this
problem by evaluating each students’ submissions in a private
workspace.
However, group knowledge building is facilitated when students
are then given access to other cohort members’ submissions.
Students can view the cohort’s common pool of submissions, build
on this knowledge to create new ideas, and submit these for
evaluation and further knowledge sharing. ASKS can also expand
on this concept by allowing student access to course knowledge
databases that can be vetted by the instructor, and created and
expanded easily. Overall, the system promises to increase the
amount and quality of interaction in both paced and unpaced
online learning environments, and probably in a more cost-effective
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
References
Annand, D. . The problem of computer conferencing for
distance-based universities. Open Learning, 14(3): 47-52.
Arbaugh, J. B. . How instructor immediacy behaviors affect
student satisfaction and learning in Web-based courses. Business
Communication Quarterly, 64(4), 42-54.
Bell, B., & Kozlowski, S. . Adaptive guidance: Enhancing
self-regulation, knowledge, and performance in technologybased training. Personal Psychology, 55, 267-306.
Burke, J. A. . Collaborative accounting problem solving via
group support systems in a face-to-face versus distance learning
environment.
Information
Technology,
Performance Journal, 19(2), 1-19.
Daniel, J. . The mega-university: The academy for the new
millenium. In The new learning environment—a global
perspective. Proceedings of the 18th ICDE World Conference
(p. 22). University Park, PA: International Council for Distance
Education.
Davis, F. . Perceived usefulness, perceived ease-of-use, and
user acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly,
13(3), 319-338.
Garrison, D. R. . Andragogy, learner-centredness and the
educational transaction at a distance. Journal of Distance
Education, 3(2), 123-127.
Garrison, D. R. . Understanding distance education: A
framework for the future. New York: Routledge.
Gerhing, G. . A degree program offered entirely online: Does
it work? In D. Foster & D. Jolly (Eds.), Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Telecommunication in Education,
(pp. 104-106), November 10-13, 1994, Albuquerque, New
Golberg, M. . CALOS: First results from an experiment in
computer-aided learning for operating systems. Proceedings of
the ACM's 28th SIGSCE Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education (pp. 48-52), San Jose, California.
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Holmberg, B. . Guided didactic conversation in distance
education. In D. Sewart, D. Keegan, & B. Holmberg (Eds.),
Distance education: International perspectives. London: Croom
Holmberg, B. . A paradigm shift in distance education?
Mythology in the making. International Council for Distance
Education Bulletin, 22, 51-55.
Jonassen, D., Davidson, M., Collins, M., Campbell, J., & Banaan-
Haag, B. . Constructivism and computer mediated
communication in distance education. American Journal of
Distance Education, 9(2), 7-26.
Keegan, D. . The foundations of distance education (2d ed).
London: Routledge.
McCollum, K. . A professor divides his class in two to test
value of online instruction. Chronicle of Higher Education,
43(24), A23.
McEwen, B. . Web-based and online learning. Business
Communication Quarterly, 64(2), 98-103.
Nunamaker, J., Jr., Dennis, A., Valacich, J., Vogel, D., & George, J.
 . Electronic meeting systems to support group work.
Communications of the ACM, 34, 40-61.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. . Using peer teams to lead online
discussions. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1.
Retrieved October 13, 2003, from 
/2002/1/rourke-anderson-02-1-t.html
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Appendix 13A: Model Student Feedback
Dear (Name).
Your final mark for the discussion part of Course XYZ is 76%,
calculated as follows:
Attendance
Participation
Articulation
Overall grade
I hope that your learning experience has been an enjoyable one.
Overall, you have addressed all the topics in the course and have
presented your thoughts well.
However, though you touched on all the required topics, the
overall number of your contributions was fairly limited. This
adversely affected your grade.
In the future, you should consider addressing other aspects of
each topic. For instance, one strategy would be to argue one
particular point of view for a given topic, then counterbalance this
with a somewhat opposing viewpoint.
Also, although you presented your points well, many of the
themes of your responses were not directly relevant to the topic, or
did not sufficiently identify some key concepts.
In the future, you should more carefully consider the given topic
before responding. As well, you might spend more time reviewing
pertinent information in the course material beforehand.
Instructor X
Supporting Asynchronous Discussions among Online Learners
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 4
LIBRARY SUPPORT FOR ONLINE
LEARNERS: E-RESOURCES, E-SERVICES AND
THE HUMAN FACTORS
Kay Johnson, Houda Trabelsi, & Tony Tin
Athabasca University
Introduction
The growth in online learning or e-learning, in which education is
delivered and supported through computer networks such as the
Internet, has posed new challenges for library services. E-learners
and traditional learners now have access to a universe of digital
information through the information superhighway. New information and communications technologies, as well as new educational models, require librarians to re-evaluate the way they
develop, manage and deliver resources and services.
Historically, librarians have sought to provide services to
distance learners that are equivalent to those available to on-campus
learners , and this aspiration is grounded in
the philosophical frameworks of the Canadian Library Association’s
Guidelines for Library Support of Distance and Distributed
Learning in Canada ( 
and the Association of College and Research Libraries’ Guidelines
for Distance Learning Library Services ( 
Content/NavigationMenu/ACRL/Standards_and_Guidelines/Guidel
ines_for_Distance_Learning_Library_Services.htm).
Both the Canadian and the American Guidelines recognize that
distance learners frequently do not have direct access to the full range
of library services and materials, and that in this situation, the goal
of equity makes it necessary that librarians services that are more
“personalized” than might be expected on campus. The library
literature provides a rich record of service models and best practices,
and there has been an explosion in publication as librarians consider
ways to support learners in a networked environment .
What do e-learners need from librarians? Suggestions advocating change in librarians’ roles in support of distance learning in
the information age appear throughout the literature: librarians
“must assert themselves as key players in the learning process
thereby changing their roles from information providers to
educators” ; they have become
providers of technical support ; and they have been
transformed from “information gatekeepers” to “information
gateways” . Lippincott advocates
librarian involvement in learning communities: “The librarian can
shift the focus from explaining library resources to meeting the
ongoing information needs of the students in the broad information environment” (p. 192).
In responding to the need to provide ongoing online library
support, librarians have worked at translating what they do in a
traditional library into virtual or digital environments, while
customizing their services and resources for e-learners. Traditionally,
libraries offer circulation services, interlibrary loans, course
reserves, an information desk, a reference desk, and library instruction. To serve learners connected to their institutional library
primarily through a computer network, librarians are providing
remote access to, and electronic delivery of, library resources, and
are using communication technologies to deliver electronic reference
services and instructional support.
When we speak of providing support to e-learners, we are
referring to a wider community of learners than the term “student”
suggests. An academic library’s learners may include students,
faculty, staff, researchers, and so on. The library is seen as a source
of training and guidance to a community of learners who are
concerned with navigating the complexities of locating and using
digital resources and services. Moreover, the move toward an
online environment has resulted in a shift from the systematic oneto-one information flow of the past to a new model in which the
users and the providers of information are able to relate in a manyto-many, dynamic relationship. For example, in the traditional
model, a librarian provides a bridge between learners and information providers by selecting and cataloguing resources and by
providing assistance with these resources. In the new model, the
library serves as a facilitator by offering ongoing support enabling
learners to interact and exchange knowledge with others, to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
communicate directly with the publishers and vendors of information resources, and to participate in a collaborative endeavor to
make available rich collections of online scholarly information
resources.
This chapter examines how libraries are responding to the
challenges of delivering core services to e-learners. We look at
library practices and technologies being applied in the construction
of virtual libraries. We also consider challenges and opportunities
virtual libraries bring to the support of e-learners, as well as the
importance of providing support within a collaborative environment, which stresses human factors, such as communication and
interaction.
Defining the Virtual Library
Gapen defines the virtual library as
the concept of remote access to the contents and services of
libraries and other information resources, combining an on-site
collection of current and heavily used materials in both print
and electronic form, with an electronic network which provides
access to, and delivery from, external worldwide library and
commercial information and knowledge sources. (p. 1)
Additional terms for the virtual library include the “digital
library,” the “electronic library,” and the “library without walls.”
Many libraries are hybrids, providing virtual access to electronic
resources and services, while maintaining and supporting use of a
physical collection housed in a library building.
With the tremendous growth of the Internet, e-learners have
access to an overwhelming range of information sources available
at the click of a mouse: library resources; government information;
news sites; advertising; even whole Web sites devoted to Elvis
sightings, crop circles, and JFK conspiracy theories. Librarians have
traditionally selected and organized resources with great care. In
building virtual libraries, librarians have the opportunity to provide
e-learners with direction and to rescue them from information
overload. A virtual library can link e-learners to library catalogues,
licensed journal databases, electronic book collections, selected
Library Support for Online Learners
Internet resources, electronic course reserves, and tutorials, and to
forums for communication and interaction with librarians. The
virtual library permits e-learners to access library and networked
resources and services anytime and anywhere that an Internet
connection and computing equipment are available.
The Landscape of Library Resources
Technology offers opportunities to be innovative, as the following
discussion of electronic resources and services demonstrates, but it
is important to bear in mind that not all e-learners are equal when
it comes to access to computing equipment; the availability, speed,
and stability of Internet connections; or the information skills that
are needed to make optimum use of virtual libraries.
Access to print-based library materials continues to be
important, because not all of the information resources that elearners need are available in electronic format: many of our most
valuable research materials are still print-based. The Digital
Library Federation and the Council on Library and Information
Resources commissioned a survey of the use of print and electronic
scholarly information resources at institutions of higher education
across the United States. The survey found that, although almost
half of undergraduates report using electronic resources all or most
of the time for their coursework, this was the case for only 35.2%
of graduate students. Only 34.7% of faculty indicated that they use
electronic resources all or most of the time for their research, and
just 22.7% said this of their teaching .
Although there has been a shift away from purchasing print
materials to be housed in a physical building and toward providing
access to licensed digital resources made available over a computer
network, librarians continue to work to resolve issues pertaining to
distance delivery of resources that are unavailable in digital format.
Online catalogues and indexing and abstracting systems provide elearners with convenient access to bibliographic information about
valuable scholarly documents. When those documents are not
available in full-text form online, a demand is generated for
delivery from a library’s print collection or from the collections of
other libraries through interlibrary loans. Typical solutions for
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
delivery of non-digital formats include the use of mail and courier
services, the establishment of collections at designated sites, and the
negotiation of agreements with other libraries through consortia.
Given that a growing number of learners are accessing library
collections online, librarians are working to develop an integrated
approach to providing access to electronic resources that facilitates
retrieval and reduces confusion. A library Web site can function as
an information gateway, an entry point to a range of online
resources, with key components being the library catalogue and
journal databases. Most online catalogues permit the integration of
electronic books and electronic journals, enabling learners to locate
items from digital and physical collections with one search. User
services—such as the ability to check due dates, renew materials,
and request materials online—are also provided. Gateways may
also organize collections and incorporate directories like that
provided by Athabasca University’s Journal Databases: List Databases by Subject page ( 
Librarians have become increasingly creative in enhancing their
Web sites. Because not all e-learners have physical access to
reference tools—the quick fact-finding tools that are the staple of
library collections—libraries can perform a valuable service by
providing pointers to online versions. Athabasca University
Library’s Digital Reference Centre ( 
/drc), for example, offers a digital version of an academic library’s
reference collection, including almanacs and directories, atlases and
maps, data and statistics, and dictionaries and encyclopedias.
Librarians select quality Internet resources to help e-learners
navigate the Web. For example, the British Open University
Library’s ROUTES database contains quality-assessed, courserelated Internet resources “selected by course teams and the
Library’s Information Specialists” ( 
As libraries work to enhance their presence on the Web, a
growing number are investigating the potential of electronic course
reserves (e-reserves). The traditional course reserves desk of an
academic library, with its limited copies, short loan periods, and
high late fines, can be a considerable source of frustration for
students. In the e-reserves model, the library makes available,
through the World Wide Web, items that faculty have selected and
“placed on reserve” for students in a particular course. San Diego
Library Support for Online Learners
State University (SDSU) pioneered e-reserves in the early 1990s
( ). SDSU uses Docutek’s ERes, a system that
provides access to course readings, chat rooms, and bulletin
Many other libraries have initiated their own projects.
Electronic delivery of course reserve material has become a hot
topic in the library literature . The
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) maintains the Electronic
Reserves Listserv, and an archive of the discussion can be accessed
on the Web ( 
Most e-reserves operate on a password-protected model: one
must be affiliated with the institution, or even registered in the
course, to view course reserves. A typical e-reserve solution is to
employ an electronic course reserve module that permits full
integration with the library’s online catalogue. Content in ereserves databases varies. Scanning and mounting readings in
portable document format (PDF) is time-consuming and requires
copyright clearance. Other options for content include incorporating institution-produced materials (e.g., lecture notes and
video or audio clips), using licensed digital resources through direct
linking to items by means of a persistent URL, and including
selected resources freely available through the World Wide Web.
Librarians can take a creative, pro-active approach to e-reserves.
Athabasca University Library has developed a platform for ereserves that operates on a somewhat different model than do other
e-reserves systems. The Digital Reading Room ( 
.athabascau.ca/drr) offers a digital solution for course readings and
supplementary materials. An in-house storage and retrieval system
was developed for the DRR using open source software. The model
operates along the principle of open access to collection creation
tools, thus permitting course content creators, educational media
developers, and librarians to develop a multidisciplinary
knowledge database.
Each course in the Digital Reading Room has a Digital Reading
File (DRF). The licensed contents, such as journal database articles,
require authentication through the Library’s proxy server,
permitting only the Athabasca University community of users to
access them; non-licensed resources, such as Web sites, are freely
available to the public. A search engine permits e-learners to search
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
across the DRFs, providing a multidisciplinary aspect to course
reserves that is not typically encountered. By encouraging the
inclusion of resources in a variety of formats, including text,
graphics, video, audio, simulations, and games, the DRR supports
a wide range of learning objectives and styles. The DRR
accommodates the inclusion of non-digital resources by providing
e-learners with a means to request them from the Library. The DRR
is being developed using metatags that conform to the IEEE LOM
standards and use the CanCore implementation guidelines to insure
consistency and search capability across database collections such
as MERLOT ( 
Managing the remote access and authentication issues involved
in making digital resources available has become a significant area
of support to users of the electronic library .
Librarians may be called upon to respond to questions concerning
log-in and password information, browser configuration, software
installation, and a range of troubleshooting needs. Access problems
are hugely frustrating for e-learners, and must be resolved quickly.
Ensuring that front-line library staff are adequately trained,
providing clear instructions on the library’s Web site, and
coordinating support activities with computing services personnel
can contribute to effective technical support. E-learners also benefit
from having a variety of means of contacting the library, including
e-mail, Web forms, and a toll-free telephone number.
Library Services: Challenges and Opportunities
E-learners require more than access to e-resources. Traditionally, a
reference librarian acts as an additional type of resource, one who
can be counted upon to provide expertise in making sense of library
systems and research tools, and to offer a helping hand along that
often slippery path known as the research process. Virtual library
users face additional challenges in mining relevant information out
of a computer system that “obstinately” returns zero hits in
response to a query that does not match the character strings in its
database files.
Library Support for Online Learners
The most common means of providing electronic reference
services to remote users has been e-mail, the advantages and
disadvantages of which have been well documented in the literature
 . The around-the-clock and around-the-world
accessibility of e-mail allows users to connect with librarians
beyond the walls of library buildings and outside the usual hours
of operation. E-mail provides a written record of requests and
responses, permits the electronic transmission of search results, and
allows librarians time to reflect on requests. One of the most
serious concerns about e-mail reference services is their impact on
the traditional face-to-face reference interview, particularly the
absence of the verbal and non-verbal cues that typically assist a
librarian in effectively responding to a question.
Hulshof identifies three issues related to the use of
electronic communication in serving virtual patrons (e-learners):
immediacy, intricacy, and interaction. Because it is so easy for a
learner to send a request electronically and have it arrive at the
library instantly, there is a perception that the librarian’s response
will be as immediate. The learner may become frustrated, not
realizing that the process of locating information and developing a
response takes the librarian just as long when the request is made
electronically as when it is made in person or in any other way. The
more intricate or complex the request, the longer it will take for the
librarian to clarify it and respond appropriately: a series of e-mail
messages may be required, which will further reduce the immediacy
of the e-mail request. Immediacy and intricacy relate to the lack of
interaction: the opportunity to discuss and clarify inquiries that
occurs in person or over the telephone is not so easily accommodated by e-mail.
There are ways to deal with some of these issues. A welldesigned reference Web form, such as that provided on the Ask AU
Library: Ask about a Research Topic Web page ( 
.athabascau.ca/contacts/refinquiry.htm), which encourages elearners to include full identifying and course information, to
describe clearly their research problem and search terminology, and
to state the parameters of the assignment, can clarify requests for
librarians and reduce the need to e-mail back and forth . Automated replies, which are sent out by the e-mail
program in response to the receipt of a message, can be used to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
reassure e-learners that their messages are being received, and can
let them know what to expect in terms of service.
E-mail reference service can be enhanced and supplemented with
additional technologies that raise the level of interaction with realtime or live communication. Chat technology allows e-learners and
librarians to send text messages back and forth instantly, using a
form of communication that is familiar to most Internet users.
There have been a number of library experiments with Web contact
center software, which is modeled on the private sector’s online
solution to providing customer support. Web contact center
software provides a higher level of interaction than does basic chat
software, allowing for queuing and routing of messages, as well as
enabling librarians to “push” Web pages to users . Providing e-learners
with a toll-free telephone number remains an effective and
convenient reference services strategy, particularly for intricate
inquiries. The telephone reference interview works best when both
librarian and e-learner are working in front of computers
connected to the Internet.
Instruction
E-learners are frequently silent and invisible as they search and
explore a library’s online resources, and they do not have the same
access that on-campus learners have to formal library instruction
sessions. With the array of digital resources available to them, the
multiplicity of interfaces and search tools, and the need for
evaluation and critical thinking when using the Internet for research,
“information literacy” skills are a must-have for e-learners. Information literacy refers to competencies with information sources in a
variety of formats. According to the Association of College and
Research Libraries ,
an information literate individual is able to
• Determine the extent of information needed
• Access the needed information effectively and efficiently
• Evaluate information and its sources critically
• Incorporate selected information into one’s knowledge base
• Use information effectively to accomplish a specific purpose
Library Support for Online Learners
• Understand the economic, legal, and social issues
surrounding the use of information, and access and use
information ethically and legally
Supporting the integration of information literacy skills training
into the core curriculum has become an important issue for
libraries . As an extension of their traditional role of
providing library instruction sessions and developing instructional
materials, librarians are designing online tutorials and courses that
promote information literacy and encourage active learning.
Particularly fine examples are the University of Texas System
Digital Library’s TILT—Texas Information Literacy Tutorial (http:
//tilt.lib.utsystem.edu); and Utah Academic Library Consortium’s
Internet Navigator ( a
multi-institutional online course developed by a team of librarians
and Web developers. The British Open University Library has
developed SAFARI ( a freely available interactive tutorial, as well as an information literacy course
called MOSAIC (Making Sense of Information in the Connected
Age) .
Many libraries provide instruction to e-learners by making
information available on their Web pages, including frequently
asked questions, library glossaries, research guides, and “how-to”
pages. Athabasca University Library’s Digital Reference Centre
integrates resources with contextual instruction and provides links
to instructional resources, including a detailed guide to Internet
searching that encourages e-learners to think critically about
Internet resources ( and
library research guides such as the AU Library Guide to
Researching Topics in Women’s Studies ( 
.ca/help/wmst/intro_wmst.htm).
Online tutorials usually operate on a model in which the elearner interacts in isolation with a computer. Their effectiveness
can be enhanced by the addition of more interactive forms of
instruction. The librarians at the Florida Distance Learning
Reference and Referral Center, for example, have experimented
with chat software to simulate a virtual classroom and open up
“live” group instruction to e-learners .
Librarians can also work with faculty to develop a library thread in
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
a course discussion area, or to open a discussion forum on the
library Web pages.
The Successful Virtual Library:
Partnership and Collaboration
In reviewing definitions of the virtual library, Sloan 
identifies an emphasis on the technological and informational
building blocks, and a neglect of human components, such as the
service tradition and human interaction. The continuing changes in
technology have been truly astonishing, and the scope for building
new information services and new ways of representing content
seem unlimited. However, it is very important to remember that
investment in human capital is also a strategic investment,
especially when introducing new technologies, procedures, and
processes. Although technology is the key infrastructure of the
virtual library—a tool used to support library goals—human
factors are the most important determinants of the success of the
virtual library.
The digital library serves mainly as a facilitator in organizing
and providing knowledge and resources to its users. Sharing
knowledge and information among library staff, researchers,
faculty, students, and other departments within the institution
encourages them to work together, develop their skills, and form
strong and trusting relationships.
A focus on collaboration between the library and the faculty
promotes a responsive approach to course design and supports
teaching and learning objectives, particularly when this
collaboration incorporates student contributions and feedback. All
parties must have a common vision in which each one participates
actively by contributing their skills and perspectives to the building
of a genuine partnership. This new approach considers the library
as an active partner of the learning community, helping learners to
become “information literates” by integrating information literacy
skills into the curriculum. For example, the library can help
learners to evaluate critically the authority and authenticity of the
resources they find, and to enhance their critical thinking skills.
The library can also offer support to learners, and can mentor their
Library Support for Online Learners
work by offering one-to-one communication and interaction, and
by achieving a deeper level of understanding of what learners need.
From a research perspective, a number of models can be
involved in creating an environment that is responsive to the
scholarly information needs of a diverse group of e-learners.
Librarians locate, select and describe quality Internet resources,
and provide access to journal databases and electronic book
collections, providing e-learners with full-text content from a wide
range of online resources and publications, including peer-reviewed
journals. Within this framework, the library works with faculty,
researchers, scholarly societies, and publishers in developing and
managing a collection of enriched online scholarly resources. Such
a partnership enables researchers to interact with others, exchange
experiences, and publish their works online. The library role is thus
transformed from simply being a provider of library resources, into
meeting the ongoing support needs of the parties involved. The
library also serves to foster research skills by encouraging students
and other learners to search, investigate, discover, and take
advantage of these valuable online resources.
Management support is as much a key to success in developing
the virtual library as in any other project. Athabasca University’s
strategic plan incorporates a distinct section related to library
strategies and projects, and explains how these strategies are
aligned with the overall mission of the University. A virtual library
should have a high profile leader, a key person who can work to
obtain the support of the institution’s management and promote a
climate of change.
In addition, the leader must work with different groups within
the institution to ensure that the project responds to their specific
needs and goals. For example, when Athabasca University Library
initiated the Digital Reading Room project as an enhanced
electronic course reserves system, the Library entered into
partnership with the Educational Media Development unit to
ensure a best practices approach to Web- and visual-design aspects.
Consultation with faculty has been an ongoing element of the
project, with faculty selecting content and acting as consultants in
evaluating the design and functionality of the DRR in relation to
their course development and delivery needs.
All staff involved in providing library support to e-learners must
be included in the partnership. Technological changes have been
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
the dominant force reshaping library services. Instilling a culture of
sharing, motivation, equity, and active partnering encourages
library staff to respond positively to the changing roles,
responsibilities, and skills that the integration and use of
technology requires. A well-designed, ongoing training program
enables library staff to upgrade their skills to their new
assignments, and helps them to understand and control fear of
External partnerships, collaborative efforts, and consortia form
another important bridge to the effective support of e-learners.
Within Canada, university libraries extend in-person borrowing
privileges to students, faculty, and staff from across the country
through the Canadian University Reciprocal Borrowing Agreement
 
( There are also initiatives
to share virtual reference desks, such as the National Library of
Canada’s Virtual Reference Canada ( which allow learners to benefit from the range of information
resources and staff expertise available at a variety of participating
institutions. Consortial approaches to database subscriptions
enable libraries to expand the scope of the electronic resources they
are able to offer their learners in a time of shrinking budgets and
escalating journal costs. The Canadian National Site Licensing
Project ( negotiates licensing agreements that
permit participating universities across Canada to access a suite of
research databases in the science, engineering, health and
environmental disciplines.
Conclusion
In summary, library services are an essential component of a quality
online learning system. As access to Internet-based courses grows,
an increasing number of e-learners are dispersed around the globe,
often in parts of the world where physical access to the collections
of large academic and research libraries is impossible. These
learners are largely dependent on the quality and academic
usefulness of services that the library can offer electronically. The
strength of virtual libraries and digital collections depends on the
relationships libraries develop and maintain with the creators,
Library Support for Online Learners
publishers, and aggregators of e-resources, as well as with those
who use, learn from, and evaluate these resources. Providing
ongoing technical, reference, and instructional support to elearners requires that libraries redefine their values and services,
collaborate with their users, and approach their tasks creatively.
References
Algenio, E. R. . The virtual reserve room: Extending library
services off-campus. In P. B. Mahoney (Ed.), The Tenth Off-
Campus Library Services Conference Proceedings (pp. 11-18).
Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan University.
Association of College and Research Libraries. . Guidelines
for distance learning library services. Retrieved October 12,
 
/ACRL/Standards_and_Guidelines/Guidelines_for_Distance_Lea
rning_Library_Services.htm
Association of College and Research Libraries. . Information
literacy competency standards for higher education. Retrieved
October 16, 2003, from 
Menu/ACRL/Standards_and_Guidelines/Information_Literacy_
Competency_Standards_for_Higher_Education.htm
Association of Research Libraries. (N.d.). ARL-ERESERVE Forum.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
/arl-ereserve
Athabasca University Library. . Digital Reference Centre.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Athabasca University Library. . Ask AU Library: Ask about
a research topic. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
.athabascau.ca/contacts/refinquiry.htm
Athabasca University Library. . Journal databases: List databases by subject. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from http://
library.athabascau.ca/journals/subject.htm
Athabasca University Library. . AU Library Guide to
Researching Topics in Women’s Studies. Retrieved October 16,
2003, from 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Athabasca University Library. . Digital Reading Room.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Athabasca University Library. . Internet searching. Retrieved
October 12, 2003, from 
Butler, B. . Electronic course reserves and digital libraries:
Progenitor and prognosis. Journal of Academic Librarianship,
22(2), 124-127. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from Academic
Search Premier database.
Calvert, H. M. . Document delivery options for distance
education students and electronic reserve service at Ball State
University Libraries. In P. S. Thomas (Ed.), The Ninth Off-
Campus Library Services Conference Proceedings (pp. 73-82).
Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan University.
Canadian Library Association. . Guidelines for library
support of distance and distributed learning in Canada.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
/distance.htm
Canadian National Site Licensing Project. . Home page.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Cooper, R., & Dempsey, P. R. . Remote library users—needs
and expectations. Library Trends, 47(1), 42-64. Retrieved
October 12, 2003, from Academic Search Premier database.
Council of Prairie and Pacific University Libraries, Council of
Atlantic University Libraries, Ontario Council of University
Libraries, & Conférence des recteurs et des principaux des
universités du Québec. . Canadian university reciprocal
borrowing agreement. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from
 
Friedlander, A. . Dimensions and use of the scholarly
information environment. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from
 
Gapen, D. K. . The virtual library: Knowledge, society and
the librarian. In L. M. Saunders (Ed.), The virtual library:
Visions and realities (pp. 1-14). Westport, CT: Meckler.
Haricombe, L. J. Introduction. Library Trends, 47(1), 1-5.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from Academic Search Premier
Library Support for Online Learners
Hulshof, R. . Providing services to virtual patrons.
Information Outlook, 3(1), 20-23. Retrieved October 12, 2003,
from Business Index ASAP database.
Kimmel, S., & Heise, J. . Being there: Tools for
online synchronous reference. Online, 31-39.
Lippincott J. K. . Developing collaborative relationships:
Librarians, students, and faculty creating learning communities.
College & Research Libraries News, 63(3), 190-192.
Lowe, S., & Rumery, J. . Service to distance learners:
Planning for e-reserves and copyright. In P. S. Thomas (Ed.), The
Ninth Off-Campus Library Services Conference Proceedings
(pp. 213-220). Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan
University.
McGlamery, S., & Coffman, S. . Moving reference to the
Web. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 39(4), 380-386.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from Expanded Academic ASAP
MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and
Online Teaching). (N.d.). Retrieved October 12, 2003, from
 
National Library of Canada. (N.d.). Virtual Reference Canada.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Needham, G., Parker, J., & Baker, K. . Skills for lifelong
learning at a distance: Information literacy at the Open
University. The New Review of Libraries and Lifelong
Learning, 2, 67-77.
Open University Library. . ROUTES (Resources for Open
University Teachers and Students). Retrieved October 12, 2003,
from 
Open University Library. . SAFARI—skills in accessing,
finding, and reviewing information. Retrieved October 12,
2003, from 
San Diego State University. . ERes, Electronic Reserve
System. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Slade, A. . International trends and issues in library services
for distance learning: Present and future [Keynote Address]. In
P. Brophy, S. Fisher & Z. Clarke (Eds.), Libraries without walls
3: The delivery of library services to distant users. London,
Library Association Publishing.
Slade, A., & Kascus, M. . An international comparison of
library services for distance learning. In P. S. Thomas & M.
Jones (Eds.), The Eighth Off-Campus Library Services
Conference Proceedings (pp. 259-297). Mount Pleasant, MI:
Central Michigan University.
Sloan, B. . Service perspectives for the digital library remote
reference services. Library Trends, 47(1), 117-144. Retrieved
October 12, 2003, from Academic Search Premier database.
Soete, G. . Electronic Reserves. Transforming Libraries (1).
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
/eres/index.html
University of Texas System Digital Library . TILT—
Texas information literacy tutorial. Retrieved October 12, 2003,
from 
Utah Academic Library Consortium. . Internet navigator.
Retrieved October 12, 2003, from 
/navigator
Viggiano, R., & Ault, M. . Online library instruction for
online students. Information Technology and Libraries, 20(3),
135-138. Retrieved October 12, 2003, from ABI/INFORM database.
Wilson, P. . The ins and outs of providing electronic reserves
for distance learning classes. In P. B. Mahoney (Ed.), The Tenth
Off-Campus Library Services Conference Proceedings (pp. 413-
422). Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan University.
Library Support for Online Learners
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 5
SUPPORTING THE ONLINE LEARNER
Judith A. Hughes
Athabasca University
Introduction
The ability and potential of online learning to enhance access to
education, particularly higher education, is largely determined by
the potential learner’s circumstances, which in many ways define
the learning environment. Not surprisingly, online learning’s
evolutionary predecessor, distance learning, has been applied to
two situations in which access to education is problematic.
The first occurs when a very large population has access to a
limited number of “seats” in conventional educational institutions.
This situation gives rise to what Daniel refers to as “megauniversities”—distance teaching universities with 100,000 students
or more. Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), with
an estimated 500,000 students, is one example, and the Open
University of Hong Kong (OUHK), with over 400,000 students, is
The second situation is one of sparse population—one in which
the community of learners is spread over a wide geographical area.
The fledgling University of the Arctic is an example of a response
to this situation. In both of these cases, the learner’s physical
environment presented a need that online learning could address.
A third situation is emerging. Learners who wish to use
technology to structure their learning environment are seeking out
the means by which they can do so. In a sense, their preferred
learning environment presents the access issue that online learning
can address.
In all three situations, the challenge is to provide access to higher
learning, determining what the learner brings to the environment,
and what they need in terms of support. These factors can vary—
after all, the first two situations are artifacts of geography, whereas
the third has more to do with personal learning preference. That is
why designing learner supports requires an understanding of the
learners’ circumstances.
This chapter discusses the importance of setting up a supportive
learning environment for online learners, and provides some
practical advice. Underlying this advice is a philosophy that
encourages an environment that aims to develop the learner’s
independence, while ensuring that supports are readily available
when needed. Student supports that are flexible, clear, and
continuously available are described, and best practices outlined.
Knowing the Learner
It is a good idea to remind ourselves that the learning enterprise is
not about us as educators: the focus should be placed on the
learning, not the teaching. Similarly, in providing learner supports,
we should focus on what the learner needs, not on what we want
to or are able to supply, but it is surprising how easily this emphasis
can be lost in our wish to help. We identify real needs best if we
know our learners. Therefore, we must ask questions about the
learner’s readiness for online learning, access to and familiarity
with the technology required, proficiency in the language of
instruction, individual learning style, and educational goals, as well
as about how aspects of the individual’s culture can affect learning.
These are some of the things that we need to understand about the
learners; they are also things that the learners need to know about
themselves in order to benefit from the learning experience.
Once the institution has this information, it must determine
what supports are most critical for learners, and must establish
priorities to ensure that resources, which are always limited, are
directed to the most useful supports. In doing so, the institution
must keep in mind that some learners will require more support
than others, and that any learner may need more help at one point
in their educational career than at others. So the institution must
find a balance between “just-in-case resources” and “just-in-time
resources” that recognizes that an online learner is often an adult
with responsibilities other than their educational goals. Flexible,
continuously available, easily accessible learner support systems are
required, but such systems must be genuinely useful. Learners have
been clear that they need to see the value added by a resource, or
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
they will not use it; they have also let us know that supports should
be available but not intrusive.
Learner Readiness for Online Learning
The learner brings a set of skills, experiences, and expectations to
the learning environment. This section outlines the resources
necessary, first, to assist potential online learners to make informed
decisions about their readiness for this form of learning experience,
and then, to provide advice for making specific program decisions.
To encourage independence in the learner, the focus should be on
self-assessment, although counseling backup should be available
when needed. The list below presents a series of questions that
learners who are thinking about post-secondary study online
should ask themselves, and identifies the kinds of assessment tools
that are available to answer them.
• Am I ready for university (or college)?—This type of online
resource provides the opportunity for the prospective learner to
determine their readiness from academic, financial, family
support, and time perspectives. Such a self-assessment, which is
Web-based and easily completed by the student, serves to
highlight areas that might need special attention. It guides the
learner through a series of questions in which they examine their
own expectations and readiness. Once the assessment is
complete, follow-up e-mail counseling complements the process.
For an example of such a self-assessment tool, see the Online
Resources section of Athabasca University’s Services for
Students Web site: 
• Am I ready for studies in the English language (or other
language of instruction)?—This type of online resource assists
the learner to decide if their command of the language is
sufficient to allow for success, and places the learner in specific
language course levels. The learner may be directed to online
remedial resources, and should always have the option of
contacting an advisor. For an example of such a resource see
 
Supporting the Online Learner
• Am I ready for online learning?—This type of online resource
assists potential learners to determine if they have the necessary
hardware and networking capabilities, and should help them to
explore whether this learning environment is comfortable. Short
sample experiences should be available to assist with the
process. For an example of such a resource, see Deakin
University’s Learning Toolkit at 
• What is my preferred learning style?—As does any form of
learning, online learning makes demands on the learner. The
institution can make many resources available in a variety of
formats, to suit different learning styles and preferences.
However, a learner may not have identified the format they find
most useful, and it can be helpful if the institution assists the
learner to examine their own learning style. Interactive tools are
available on the Web to help the learner to do so; however, these
tools vary in quality, and the institution can assist by providing
an annotated evaluation of these resources.
• Am I ready for university-level mathematics?—Proficiency in
mathematics, as well as in language of instruction, has proven to
be a significant success factor, particularly for adult learners
returning to the educational environment after some time away.
However, mathematics can also be a significant stressor.
Assisting the prospective learner to identify their strengths and
weaknesses in mathematics, and making remediation available,
can reduce this stress. An online self-assessment can be designed
to help the learner to determine their readiness for particular
mathematics courses, to recommend a mathematics course
appropriate to the learner’s level, and to identify remediation
resources. For an example of such a tool, see 
.athabascau.ca/main/studserv.htm
• Do I have the skills to be successful in my chosen program?—
This type of online resource outlines what skills are needed for
particular areas of study. The resource should be programspecific and should refer the student to online tutorials if needed.
For a Web site that assists the learner to make program choices,
see the Open University (UK) student pages at 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Matching Educational Programs to Career Interests
Often, potential learners will seek out online learning opportunities
to create or enhance career goals. As educators, we may want to
view the educational experience outside the context of career
development, but as stated previously, the learning experience is
not about us. The fact is that learners bring that context to their
educational decisions, and we need to understand that they do so.
Online resources designed to assist learners to determine their own
interests and skills, and then provide a career map aligned with
educational programs, is a reasonable expectation. After all, most
of these learners will experience several career changes—some of
them quite significant—throughout their working lives. The United
Kingdom’s Open University focuses on the learner’s need to
contemplate the future in making educational choices (see http://
www.open.ac.uk). “Mapping Your Future” on the Athabasca
University Services to Students Web site ( 
.ca/main/studserv.htm) provides the learner with a means of
exploring career clusters and the credentials required to pursue
them. After an initial exploration, the learner may wish to
communicate online with a counselor to refine their career goals.
Once this is achieved, electronic “program plans” are designed by
an advisor, taking the career goals as well as prior learning into
account. It is important to have the learner explore first, and then
have counselors provide assistance as needed.
Supporting the Learner
Well-designed course materials and strong academic and tutorial
support are necessary in all educational enterprises, and the special
considerations in the case of online learning are the subject of a
separate chapter. This chapter deals with non-academic supports
for the learner.
Having assisted the potential learner to make an informed
decision to pursue online learning, we have enhanced their chances
for success, but quite different support is now required. Once
again, the balance between being available and being intrusive is
important. Learners require support in different areas, and as
providers, we must anticipate the array of needs, and then work
Supporting the Online Learner
with individual learners to clarify what is needed at a given time.
Learners need to know exactly what they can expect in support,
how to interact with the institution, what is expected of them, and
how to determine when they need assistance.
Expectations
Learners need to know both what is expected of them, and what
services they can expect to receive from the institution. Online
learning may be a new experience for the learner, and it is important
that service standards be clear and easily available: How long
should it take to receive confirmation of my registration? How
much time does it take to receive my examination grade? How
quickly should I expect a response to e-mail? Who should I contact
for library assistance? These standards should be published for all
students to see, and can serve as benchmarks for service units within
the institution.
Information and Administrative Support
Daniel points out that a key component of supported open
learning is “effective administration and logistics.” Institutions
engaged in distance and online education know that smooth
administrative processes can be as much a factor in learner success
as the design of learning resources. The learners themselves report
that flexibility of access and smooth administrative support are
important to the learning environment. One would expect that
learners who have chosen an online learning environment prefer to
perform administrative functions (such as registration) online as
well, and this is proving to be the case. Institutions that provide
online learning report that students express a preference for having
the control that online administrative processes afford.
Providing online administrative access is not without challenges,
and improved technology, carefully designed Web pages and
helpdesk support are crucial. Constant monitoring and updating of
procedures is required, to find smoother interactions and to tease
out administrative frustrations. Designing Web pages and then
forgetting them is simply not acceptable. The following list outlines
a process for the continuous improvement required:
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• design the administrative Web page;
• test the technology and revise as necessary;
• observe the learners using the Web page and ask for feedback,
then revise;
• monitor the use of the Web page regularly;
• look for enhancements and improvements, and incorporate
• always have helpdesk attendants available to troubleshoot.
At the institutional level, regular learner satisfaction surveys can
ensure that administrative interactions are not barriers to learning.
Portals designed to individualize and personalize interactions
enhance the learner’s experience. Portal software is growing in
popularity as more institutions become involved in online learning.
Technological Support
As noted above, the learner must know what technology is needed
for the online environment, before they decide to register. A person
engaged in online learning requires technological support that is
clear and readily available. Drawing the line between technological
support on the one hand and academic support on the other is
often a challenge, and these types of support must be coordinated
carefully. There are three common support formats: an information
center provides institutional and program information; computing
helpdesks troubleshoot technological issues; and call centers are
frequently used to support a particular program area. All three
must work together to support the whole learning process.
Successful information centers, helpdesks, and call centers have
the following characteristics:
• reliable networks;
• asynchronous access “24/7”;
• synchronous access at clearly identified times;
• quick response, with acknowledgment and follow-up;
• follow-through to resolution of the issue;
Supporting the Online Learner
• simple, clear instructions;
• access by attendants to all critical databases and expertise; and
• the ability to identify problems with policies, procedures, or
systems, and to suggest change.
Study Skills Assistance
The online learner may be returning to learning after some time
away, may be new to post-secondary study itself, or may not have
experienced online learning before. Assisting the learner to identify
particular needs in the area of study skills can reduce stress and
enhance the experience. For example, it is critical to understand
that “life happens” and the learning experience may be just one of
the demands that the learner faces. This is particularly true for
adult learners. Some resources that may help online learners who
was facing challenges to their study skills include
• Web pages designed to assist in the development of time
management and study schedules;
• resources to help students learn to balance educational pursuits
with other life demands;
• tools for facilitating “study buddy” connections for peer
assistance;
• online strategies and exercises to reduce “exam anxiety”;
• resources to assist in reading for comprehension;
• assistance in annotating online resources such as e-books;
• resources to assist in writing papers;
• clarification of rules for citation and avoiding plagiarism;
• assistance in searching library resources on line; and
• assistance in making critical analyses of information from online
resources.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Online Educational Counseling
Well-prepared Web resources can be provided online, but
asynchronous counseling assistance is required as well, particularly
for learners who are experiencing difficulty. The online
environment is one in which learners can “fall through the cracks”
if assistance is not readily available. From time to time a learner
may need someone to assist in keeping a positive outlook and determining if an intervention is needed. Learners need to know that
help is there if they need it. The institution should provide this
resource and all institutional staff should be trained to identify
when a learner might benefit from a session with a counselor. It is
important to remember, however, that while referrals can be made,
the decision to pursue them belongs to the learner.
The work of the counselor in an online learning environment
has three aspects. The first is to work with Web designers to
develop online resources to help learners to identify and address
barriers to reaching their educational goals. The second is to
interact with the learners when an intervention is required. The
third is to work with other institutional staff to ensure that
processes and procedures enhance learning.
Educational and career counseling are well suited to the online
environment, but personal counseling is less so. Personal
counseling should be limited to immediate crisis resolution and
referral. Counseling units need information about community
resources to which they can refer clients.
Ongoing Program Advising
Distance and online learners are often adults and they frequently
spread their learning over a number of years. They report that they
need program planning that will help them achieve educational
goals in an expeditious manner. Moreover, learners often transfer
between institutions and jurisdictions, increasingly so in a global
learning environment.
Learners need to plan their coursework based on particular
programs, while remaining aware of course transferability. The role
of advisors is to assist learners to understand program requirements, match courses they may be transferring into a program, and
Supporting the Online Learner
then plan the remainder of their program accordingly. Since the
adult learner may change career and educational goals at any time
during the process of completing a program, advisors need to be
readily available and to have access to all program and transfer
information. Software products are available to allow advisor and
learner to navigate this process. Academics, counselors, and others
within the institution need to know when to refer learners to an
The Digital Library
In the early years of distance education, providing library support
to learners was a challenge. Courses were developed in print
format, and comprehensive course packages were sent to each
learner. The library typically developed a collection that was made
available, by mail or fax, to the learner on request. Distance
educators worried that learners were not gaining the library search
experience that would enhance their studies and their research
skills. Online sources of information have transformed libraries in
distance education: where in the past libraries focused on holdings,
they can now focus on access; where they used to be information
repositories, they can now be gateways to information.
This transformation has allowed the library experience to be
more profound for the learner and more integrated within the
learning process. From a learner support perspective, a welldesigned online library
• is easily found among other institutional Web pages;
• provides an up-front tutorial for the new learner;
• is integrated with the institution’s online courses;
• provides tools to assist with online searches; and
• provides access to personal assistance, if needed.
The transformation of libraries in distance education has posed
some interesting fiscal issues for institutions. In the past,
acquisitions budgets provided for purchasing holdings that became
part of the collection, part of the assets of the institution. Annual
funding was provided for collection development and updating.
Even subscriptions to periodicals, an annual expense, resulted in a
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
“holding.” Subscriptions to online resources are another matter
entirely. As libraries move toward becoming gateways rather than
repositories, a new way of viewing funding is needed.
Access for Students with Disabilities
Online learning can enhance access for people with disabilities.
New assistive technologies can allow access to learning
opportunities previously denied to this population. Increasingly, the
legal requirements to provide accommodations that allow access
are being defined by the courts, and institutions are required to
ensure that necessary accommodations are provided, without
compromising academic rigor. In an online environment, the
following services are expected:
• administrative accommodation with respect to timed
assignments and examinations;
• alternative formats for learning materials;
• advocacy within the institution;
• advice about assistive technologies;
• advice about funding sources;
• referral for specific needs; and
• “reasonable accommodation” as outlined in law.
Student Rights and Access to Ombuds Services
Online learners have as much need of clearly articulated rights as
do learners in traditional educational settings. An advocacy process
designed for online learners is one in which the learner is made
aware of student rights and responsibilities. An institution can
fulfill its basic legal responsibility by making a student code of
conduct available on the Web and in print on request. However, a
prudent institution will go well beyond this demonstration of due
diligence. Web sites that clearly outline intellectual honesty
expectations should be readily available on the Web and should be
referred to frequently. Reminders just prior to assignment
Supporting the Online Learner
preparation reduce the chance that the learner will fail to provide
proper scholarly acknowledgment.
Traditions regarding what constitutes intellectual property and
what is generally accepted common knowledge are not universal
concepts, nor are they always understood. Cultural views about
ownership of knowledge vary, and if the rules that are to apply
within the institution are to be understood, then the institution
must ensure that they are properly explained. For example,
although many educators do not accept the idea, the reality is that
students do not always understand the concept of plagiarism, much
less how to avoid it. To address this problem, the University of
Puget Sound has designed an excellent Web page that provides
learners with exercises to enhance their understanding of the
concept of plagiarism and to assist them in avoiding it (see http://
library.ups.edu/research/guides/plagrsm.htm).
All efforts to provide smooth interactions between the learner
and the institution notwithstanding, there will be situations in
which the learner becomes ensnared and does not know where to
turn. A highly visible ombuds office should be available. Moreover,
from the institutional perspective, the ombuds office can assist in
identifying policy and procedure problems that require attention
within the institution.
The Online Learner’s Role in Governance
Online learners have valuable contributions to make to an educational institution. Institutions that specialize in distance and online
learning can provide opportunities for students to participate in
institutional governance. Student government is possible in such an
institution as well, but administration must make special arrangements to facilitate the process.
In many ways, the student union has the same issues in keeping
in touch with its constituency as does the institution itself. Both are
vying for the attention of a learner who may be juggling learning
with other life demands. It is in the institution’s best interests to
have a healthy student union and to work with that union to meet
the needs of the learners. Some means by which to achieve these
goals include
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• making networks available to the student union;
• providing one main institutional contact with whom student
union representatives can interact;
• assisting in collecting student union fees;
• making information available, within the confidentiality
guidelines;
• having student representatives on all decision-making bodies;
• having decision-making bodies meet through electronic means
(video-conference, online conference, etc.) to maximize
participation;
• keeping the student representatives and the student union
apprised of significant events, initiatives, etc. (e.g., strategic
planning, budgeting, tuition fee increases);
• engaging in shared initiatives with the student union (include
them in convocation, copublish newsletters, etc.);
• seeking advice from the student union on important issues; and
• demonstrating appreciation for the work of the student union.
Learner Satisfaction Monitoring
and Environmental Scanning
Regular monitoring of the learners’ satisfaction levels and scanning
of the student services environment assist the institution to make
continuous improvements. Year-over-year comparisons are possible
if the survey instruments are carefully designed. In this way, trends
and areas in need of attention will become apparent.
Focus groups are being successfully conducted online by
institutions that are at a distance from their constituents. Such
groups can be used, for example, to test out the efficacy of a new
course, program, or service.
Supporting the Online Learner
A Case Study: University of the
Arctic—Stretching the Limits
University of the Arctic is a virtual university in the real sense of the
word . It is a consortium of
universities and colleges from the northern countries known as the
“Arctic Eight” (Canada, Finland, Greenland, Iceland, Norway,
Russia, Sweden, and the United States). It was formed because
there was a sense that these northern countries represented a
community that transcended national boundaries by virtue of their
“circumpolarity.” There was also a sense that the northerly parts of
these nations shared cultural, environmental, and learning issues
with one another that the more southerly parts did not necessarily
experience. The founding principles were based on notions of
development “in the north, by the north, for the north.” This
university would develop an issues-based curriculum culminating
in a Bachelor of Circumpolar Studies.
At the time of writing, five courses have been developed. The
first, Introduction to the Circumpolar World, has been pilot tested
in classroom format in one location, and as a Web-based offering
involving learners from institutions from four of the Arctic Eight
countries. The Web-based offering stretched the limits of online
learning, and serves as an example of the potential of online
learning to acknowledge a community of learning based, not
simply on geography, but on shared realities.
Some Early Decisions
Language of instruction was one of the first decisions taken. It was
decided to develop the courses in English and translate them at a
later date. Subject matter experts from Russia, Greenland, Finland,
Canada, Norway, and the United States wrote the curriculum in
English, and the material was edited into fourteen modules.
Another early decision was that the online delivery would take
place within a portal environment that would foster a community of
learning. WebCT was used for delivery, largely because this platform
was well recognized throughout the circumpolar world. The portal
was designed to provide a supportive learning environment, and at
the same time, an uncomplicated technical environment. The realities
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
of the variability of technical resources across the Arctic became
apparent, and the motto became “as inclusive as we must be, striving
to become as innovative as we can be.” It was important that no
group be excluded from the project.
Reliability of networks was seen to be important, as was the
need for a “Plan B.” The course was housed on the server of the
institution that was thought to have the most reliable server
arrangement. In addition, learners were provided with print
materials should any technological mishaps occur.
The pilot of the introductory course began in mid-February
2002, and lasted for fourteen weeks. Learners from Russia,
Greenland, Finland, and Canada all worked with their local
university or college. There was a site coordinator at each location,
and the instructor was located in Canada.
The Community of Learning
Largely because of the instructor’s skill, but also because the
learners shared so many issues, a community of learning soon
developed. Asynchronous discussions formed the basis for
exchange, with informal study groups (often conducted in the local
language) arranged by on-site coordinators. Because of the time
zone issues, chat rooms were not initially designed into the portal,
but the students asked that this utility be added. This was done,
and a few hardy souls spent the wee hours of the morning
communicating with colleagues across the North Pole. Learners
shared resources via the Web, and each institution was expected to
provide library and other student support resources.
Lessons Learned
The decision to keep the technology simple was a wise one. The
simple portal and WebCT worked quite well, but a more
comprehensive orientation to WebCT and online learning will be
designed for the next offering. The best approach to the orientation
is to have a training session with the site coordinators first, and
have them, in turn, conduct an orientation with the learners. This
strategy allows first-language assistance with the technology.
Because of the variation in institutional resources, subsequent
Supporting the Online Learner
online offerings will include computing helpdesk access, which will
be provided by the institution that is most experienced in online
delivery of services.
Although it was expected that the up-front preparation by the
curriculum developers, Web designers, and the instructor would be
substantial, the workload for the instructor was excessive. This was
partly because the volume of the learner postings was larger than
expected. In addition, more of the learner activities could have been
built into the course materials themselves.
A surprising outcome was the extent to which learners for whom
English was not the first language felt quite comfortable participating. The concern that the sessions would be dominated by
learners for whom English was a first language, was not borne out.
The participating institutions had ensured that the learners had a
sufficient command of the English language before registering them.
Attempts to incorporate traditional knowledge into the course
materials were a challenge because of the large number of
Aboriginal groups around the circumpolar world. In the end, this
issue was best addressed by having students share information with
colleagues. The result was somewhat serendipitous, but this
strategy may be preferable to something more structured.
Attempts to ensure that all of the students had broad access to
online library resources across all institutions were not successful,
largely because of the language issue. It may be that in cases where
such geographically and linguistically diverse groups are brought
together, the provision of learner support in areas such as library,
counseling, and so forth are best left to the “home” institution.
This suggestion assumes that learners will inevitably be tied to an
institutional setting. More investigation is required as these kinds
of initiatives develop.
Conclusion
As the learning environment becomes a global community of
learning, the cognitive sciences are merging with computing and
telecommunications technologies to form what distance educators
refer to as “knowledge media” (the term is attributed to Marc
Eisenstadt of the Knowledge Media Institute, 
.ac.uk/home-f.cfm). The Organisation of Economic Cooperation
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and Development (OECD) recognizes that these trends can provide
more equitable access to higher education, and hence more social
equity, as campus-bound and distance-education paradigms merge
and complement each other.
There is an ongoing discussion about new terminology that
should replace “distance education,” but at the same time be more
inclusive than “online education.” Terms such as “distributed
learning,” “technology mediated learning,” and “telematics” are
often used in North America. Elsewhere, other terms are being
used, such as “resource based learning” and “flexible learning”
 . This discussion exemplifies the role
that technology can play in placing the focus on making resources
available for the individual learner.
Whatever we call it, however, online learning only enhances a
focus on the learner as an individual within a community of
learning if individual differences are acknowledged and addressed
in the design of learner support services.
References
Athabasca University. . Services to Students. Retrieved
August 5, 2003, from 
Daniel, J. S. . Mega-universities and the knowledge media:
Technology strategies for higher education. London: Kogan Page.
Daniel, J. S. . At the end of now—global trends and their
regional impacts. In V. Reddy & S. Manjulika (Eds.), The world
of open and distance learning (pp. 451-461). New Delhi: Viva
Deakin University. . Deakin learning toolkit 2003. Retrieved
August 5, 2003, from 
Knowledge Media Institute. (N.d.). Home page. Retrieved August
5, 2003, from 
Moran, L., & Myringer, B. Flexible learning and university
change. In H. Keith (Ed.), Higher education through open and
distance learning (pp. 57-71). London: Routledge.
Supporting the Online Learner
Open University (UK). . Home page. Retrieved August 5,
2003, from 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
 . Adult learning in a new technological era. Paris: OECD
Publications.
University of Puget Sound, Collins Memorial Library. .
Academic honesty: Recognizing plagiarism. Retrieved August 5,
2003, from 
University of the Arctic. . Arctic learning environment.
Rovaniemi, Finland: University of the Arctic Coordination
Office, University of Lapland.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
C H A P T E R 1 6
THE QUALITY DILEMMA IN ONLINE
Nancy K. Parker
Athabasca University
Introduction
With the proliferation of online learning providers and the challenges presented by the distance education sector to state regulators
and accrediting bodies, it is not surprising that “buyer beware” is
the watchword for students, institutions, and public agencies alike.
In the current environment, it is incumbent on organizations to
demonstrate the quality of their services in ways that are intelligible
to potential students and their employers, faculty and staff,
regulators, and government agencies. The admirable attempts to
define quality standards and best practices for online education
have done little to assuage the skepticism of representatives in the
academy, who are more accustomed to face-to-face delivery
directed to bounded communities. Fully addressing the roots of
such skepticism is beyond the scope of this paper; however, its
presence informs much of the technical discussion around quality
assurance frameworks in higher education in general, and in online
delivery in particular.
Purveyors of online learning programs maybe inclined to
attribute a lack of broad acceptance among their colleagues to the
paradigm shift that higher education has been undergoing in the
past 15 years. In many cases, however, it must be admitted that
potential of electronic delivery modes has not been fully realized in
the execution of online courses. Some have suggested that these
shortcomings are the result of trying to replicate the classroom
environment, instead of maximizing the new configurations of
knowing and community formation possible in an interactive
online environment . Moreover,
finding appropriate comparators for the efficacy of any particular
mode of delivery is difficult when the broader questions of quality
assurance in higher education are far from settled. An examination
of definitional issues points to a long-standing conflict in values
between business modeling and public services. It is important to
acknowledge these tensions fully before turning to the more
technical, but admittedly value laden, exercise of reviewing the
standards proposed by different quality assurance agencies.
After a discussion of the contexts of quality assurance activities
in higher education in general, and of the competing paradigms
highlighted by online learning, this chapter examines quality
standards that have been proposed for the delivery of online
instruction in four jurisdictions. The full range of state licensing,
voluntary accreditation, and market driven seals of approval
reveals tensions between externally driven compliance and
internally driven improvements. Although the regulatory
frameworks for quality assurance vary dramatically in Australia,
the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, there is still
enough common ground to establish some general characteristics
for a scholarly approach to online teaching and learning. At a basic
level, the characteristics of quality educational delivery
demonstrated in these frameworks include 1) providing clear
statements of educational goals; 2) sustaining the institutional
commitment to support learners; and 3) engaging in a collaborative
process of discovery, which contributes to 4) improving the
teaching and learning environment.
Another area of commonality is the fact that, while self-review
can be a key component for any of the frameworks, to a large
degree they are being driven by external demands. One area of
contention, the degree to which quality assurance activities can or
should be targeted to outcomes as opposed to internal processes, is
addressed in a separate section. On a wider level, each of the
projects seeking to establish quality standards for online education
appears to aim toward inculcating a set of values that prizes
management by measurement. Recognizing that the terms
“quality” and “online education” are so burdened with assumptions as to create their own problematic is a necessary prelude to
what follows.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Definitional Issues
The greatest challenge for trying to define quality in any product or
service is that quality remains a relative experience, realized in large
part through an individual’s level of expectation. Since quality
necessarily rests in the eye of the beholder, at first glance, systems
developed around the concept must necessarily be exercises in
systematic subjectivity. In higher education, quality is a construct
relative to the unique perspectives and interpretations of different
stakeholder groups (students, alumni, faculty, administrators,
parents, oversight boards, employers, state legislatures, local
governing bodies, accrediting associations, transfer institutions,
and the general public). 
It follows, therefore, that the effectiveness of any quality
improvement activities will be as much a function of the ability to
foster agreement around common goals as of any substantive input
or process adjustments attempted by an institution. Fostering
agreement, however, is much more difficult when the term
“quality” is burdened with the legacy of failed management fads.
In many circles, the term “quality” is understood as shorthand
for Total Quality Management (TQM), or its close cousin,
Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI). Some may believe that
these fads peaked and retreated in the last century; however, recent
modeling , and examples of the
pursuit, by individual institutions, of the Malcolm Baldridge
Awards or ISO9000 recognition in distance
education suggest that TQM
still has a foothold in higher education, in spite of the problems
posed by the fact that its language carries a corporate flavor . The International Standards Organization
makes the central principle of the pursuit of quality clear—to
establish processes that will maximize service to customers. The
pressure to apply management techniques to higher education came
from a perceived crisis in confidence with post-secondary systems,
and from the growth of state-sponsored accountability systems.
For supporters it “has long been understood in organizations
that when you want to improve something, you first must measure
it” . But measurement systems are
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
about much more than the technical specifications of various
indicators—they are about control. The first iteration of TQM/CGI
provoked a debate about its social as well as technical implications,
and demonstrated the “disconnect between the philosophy of the
management process and the purposes of the institution[s] for
which it was being proposed” . The
engineering (or re-engineering) of systems designed to guarantee
that manufacturing processes would meet technical specification
might seem to imply a uniformity that may not be possible, or even
desirable, in the dynamic and heterogeneous environment of higher
education.
The annual race past the post in national press or government
scorings, while clearly suspect, still draws a surprising amount of
attention from audiences within the academy and government. This
is a bitter pill for academics, who are accustomed to casting their
institution’s function as being nothing less than to maintain the
foundations of the civil state. From that perspective, the vision of
customer satisfaction is a pale substitute for contributions to
knowledge and community formation. It also suggests an
ideological congruence with the reduction of “citizens” to
“taxpayers,” and as the focus moves to “value added” activities,
the terrain of the debate is being narrowed to shorter and shorter
transactional terms. To many within the academy, the “learner as
consumer/information as commodity” world presupposed by the
business model of higher education remains antithetical to
independent scholarship in pursuit of the advancement of
knowledge.
If these observations hold true, then it is fair to ask why one
would engage in a discussion of quality in relation to any form of
education. Why not just stand on the self-evident virtues of the
“sacred spaces” of the classroom, library, and laboratory? The
answer to that question resides in how contested meanings can be
both signals of power relations and tools of resistance.
Traditionally, universities achieved quality in intellectual endeavors
through the professionalism of academics, the principles of
scholarship, and the rigors of peer review; and they gained standing
in society by communicating those standards to political and social
elites. More recently, massification, diversity, and cuts to funding,
along with a wider political movement to demonstrate efficiency
and responsiveness, have spawned different conceptions of
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
accountability . The attempt to lift the
meaning of quality education to something beyond short-term
fiscal efficiencies and taxpayer benefits is a matter of trying to
regain some of the ground lost in previous decades. It is also an
encounter with what has been represented as a paradigm shift in
higher education that has been highlighted by the advent of online
education.
It must also be admitted at the outset that, with the shift to
wireless technologies, “online” education may well appear to be an
outmoded shorthand for computer or Web-enabled activities. The
term has appeal, however, since it carries the sense of a linked
community of learners. It still resonates of bounded communities
with the possibilities of transformative experiences, rather than the
sporadic or strictly utilitarian viewing of information on screens.
This feature distinguishes online teaching and learning systems
from Web-based publishing. It also presumes a qualitative
difference from the convergence of distance and face-to-face
delivery techniques being experienced on many campuses. With the
proliferation of easily accessed Web tools, mounting a course’s
syllabus on its own home page, directing students to relevant
electronic journals or Web-sites, and accepting assignment
submissions by e-mail are no longer enough to allow one to lay
claim to providing a distinct online teaching and learning
environment. Textbook publishers are adapting, providing an
increasing range of electronically delivered content systems and
customized companion Web sites to supplant traditional student
guides. When these resources are coupled with course management
systems, the online environment begins to take shape. Until
students and instructors engage, however, it is still just a shell.
It has been suggested that online learning is best conceptualized
as “an environment that integrates collaboration, communication,
and engaging content with specific group and independent learning
activities and tasks” . More
particularly, the ability of students to engage in “asynchronous
interactive learning activities” has been described as the “signature
characteristic of this technology” .
The importance of the flexibility inherent in asynchronous
activities challenges the assumption that emulating the classroom
constitutes best practice in online teaching and learning
environments. However, the degree to which technology has
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
driven, or simply enabled, the paradigm shift in higher education,
is debatable. Whether their adherents have overstated the changes
that have taken place as a result of Web-enabled learning
technologies is another question worthy of consideration.
Paradigm Shift
Although there had been many examples of applications of
computer technology in classrooms for at least a decade before
1995, Michael Dolence and Donald Norris have been credited with
issuing a “wake up call” for higher education administrators. In
Transforming Higher Education, they purported to offer ways for
colleges and universities to survive the transition from the
Industrial Age to the Age of Information. Even though their vision
for the future has not be realized on a wide scale, it is clear that
many of the conceptual juxtapositions they offered have gained
currency in higher education. These juxtapositions include a shift
from episodic access, to clusters of instructional resources, to
integrated perpetual learning, with a separation of teaching and
certification of mastery, and a reconceptualized role for faculty—
from deliverers of content to mentors and facilitators of learning.
The most pervasive of these changes is the shift from a “provider
focus” to a “learner focus,” with its attendent mass customization
through individualized learning systems.
More recent elaborations on this theme have indicated that the
capabilities of the Internet have overturned “the traditional roles of
the college or university as the leading (1) research source and
knowledge creator, (2) archivist and gateway to knowledge, (3)
disseminator of advanced knowledge, and (4) referee and evaluator
of truth” . If the production and dissemination
of knowledge are no longer the restricted purview of higher
education, the roles of postsecondary institutions in the worldwide
network are increasingly vulnerable. The need to be more open and
to promote capacities to analyze, interrelate and communicate
about facts gleaned from network-based knowledge will become
essential for students and faculty alike.
The traditional quality measures associated with accreditation
or state administered quality assurance frameworks do not match
this new climate of teaching and learning. One of the most
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
common measures, and a unit of analysis for costing, is “seattime,” which does not translate to an online environment. Yet
Lawrence N. Gold, higher-education director for the American
Federation of Teachers, claims that the amount of time a student
spends in class is still an important measure of quality . Even when adapted to an online environment,
other common measures rely on inputs (averages of entering
students, number of students, qualifications of instructors, systems
development) or outputs (numbers completing courses; satisfaction
ratings by students and alumni; revenue generated from tuition,
intellectual property, or commercial partnerships), but lack in
measures to address the fundamental integrity of the online
learning environment.
A recent article by Wallace Pond summarized some of the old
and new paradigms for accreditation and quality assurance as
follows. According to Pond the old paradigm measures could be
characterized by the following words and phrases: teacherinstitution centred, centralized, hegemonistic, “one-size-fits-all,”
closed, “us versus them,” quantitative, prescriptive, time as
constant with learning as variable, teacher credentials, consolidated
experience, regional/national, static, single delivery mode, process,
infrastructure. In contrast, the new paradigm measures can be seen
as learner centred, local, deferential, tailored, open, collaborative,
qualitative, flexible, learning as constant/time as variable, teacher
skills, aggregated experience, international/global, dynamic,
distributed delivery model, outcomes, services .
The degree to which these measures might apply is discussed the
next section, but they do not address some of the other questions
generated by the entry into online course delivery.
The first questions must relate to the degree to which online
learning environments have delivered or can deliver on their
promises. The greater access afford through Web-based delivery
systems has been one of the key advantages cited by observers of
the technological transformation in higher education. Whether
depicted as an advantage in developing greater economies of scale
for delivery systems or in ameliorating social inequalities, broader
access has been lauded as a key feature of the new paradigm.
However, electronic learning systems are not always as billed. From
the perspective of Thomas Booth, president of the Canadian
Association of University Teachers (CAUT), the access argument
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
carries very little weight, because people who have less education
to begin with are less likely to have access to the tools and services
they would need to study online. He also suggests that “Students
traditionally excluded from post-secondary education are the most
dependent on face-to-face interaction and least able to deal with
the frustration and isolation of Web-based distance education”
 . Another caution rests in the comparative completion rates between online and classroom delivery. If
intended economic and social transformations are to be realized,
access must be examined at more than just the point of entry.
The promise that economies of scale will make education more
affordable is perhaps even less persuasive to most academics. That
“proprietary institutions are likely to enter the market by
contracting with the best professors to provide video-based courses
with exclusive rights to their distribution and use” was a vision of
higher education in the 1990s . It is painfully
obvious that the proponents of such models have missed the
significance of interactive technologies. Providing more efficient
delivery of “lectures by famous faculty” would recreate in
cyberspace the “world of the passive listener and single speaker
that has marked much of what passes for higher education”
 . Making the doubtful system of mass
lectures more efficient does not appear to be much of an
advancement over the correspondence school’s traditional coursein-a-box. Another tension emanates from the fact that the bulk of
what is delivered in the online environment consists of discrete
training modules directed to particular job skills or competencies.
While there seems to be slippage between what is being articulated
in the realm of learning outcomes (the skills we expect graduates to
demonstrate) and expectations around the values associated with
the liberal arts, it is fair to say that higher education aims should
be broader than the goals of the corporate training sector.
Critics such as David Noble have presented almost apocalyptic
views on the incursion of educational technologies into the
classroom . The Web’s “dark side” has been depicted
as the “rapidly growing trend of university corporatism” and the
exploitation of knowledge workers . Challenges
from the for-profit sector, the influence of corporate training
agendas, and “the ‘rush to serve’ different clienteles” have been
described as jeopardizing the position of the post-secondary sector
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
as the “source of objective analysis of the society in which it exists”
 . Acting as the conscience of civil society speaks
to a much broader purpose than meeting the immediate training
needs of corporations. If this ideal is taken seriously, then one
should expect that faculty would lead the debate from a perspective
broader than their own protectionist instincts.
An alternative vision of democratic ideals in the digital age
would have education enabling “people to learn about, with, and
beyond technology” to open the “doors of economic, educational,
and personal empowerment” . The
reconceptualization of higher education should be done by (not to)
the academy. Establishing the terms through which online
education should be assessed should not be left to the marketplace
or to self-perpetuating bureaucracies. Taking back some of the
momentum will be a challenge, however, since attempts to establish
standards and best practices are well under way.
Standards from Four Jurisdictions
The formulation of quality assurance systems for online education,
while most frequently regulated at a regional or national level, has
in recent years been driven by international developments. The
global reach of the Internet and the lack of ways to regulate
transnational commercial activities allow fraudulent operators to
spring up. One response has been the promotion of consumer
education by sites such as AboutEducation ( 
.com/education); another possibility is free-lance course reviews
from former students, similar to the book reviews found on the
sites of online booksellers such as Amazon.com .
Not surprisingly, the appetite for allowing the marketplace to
determine the outcomes in a wide-open, for-profit model is not
large. Simply stated, it does not seem either ethical or efficient to
leave students to bear the full risks for the product testing of online
education ventures. Alternative responses have involved trying to
develop quality assurance and accreditation systems, or regionally
harmonized systems, such as those proposed under the Bologna
Declaration .
Responses from national and local quality assurance interests have
varied. Some of the differences rest in the degree to which state-
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
sponsored quality auditing procedures have become entrenched in
the past decade; others reflect the suspicions or traditions
associated with distance education in general.
Australia has a national instrument, in the form of its
Qualifications Framework, for protecting the quality of its
educational and training programs. Even the use of the term
“university” is restricted by State or Territorial legislation, and
universities must demonstrate that they have appropriate quality
assurance procedures in place. Within this framework,
“universities are expected to engage in a pro-active, rigorous and
ongoing process of planning and self-assessment which will enable
them to ensure the quality outcomes expected by their students and
the wider community” . The Australian government policy
framework has been presented as a marketing tool to address the
advantages that global competitors enjoy by having “centralized,
separate, and highly visible” bodies responsible for quality
assurance . The rationale for the development of
the national system was explicitly framed in terms of competitive
challenges, domestic and international, and of policies that have
encouraged the universities to “align themselves more closely with
industry needs” . Under the revised regime,
creditable quality assurance systems providing evidence of the
quality of service and skills of graduates were explicitly intended to
make the universities more attractive to business investors. The
systems include national qualification schemes that communicate
expected standards for each level of post-secondary achievement.
Quality assurance for online offerings by Australian universities
are within the self-accrediting models that include peer assessment
processes. Registered training organizations (RTOs) have also been
affected by quality audits, and draft guidelines have been developed
for auditing online learning. The standards include statements on
organizational commitment, learner support systems, learning
designs, learning outcomes and assessments, and technology plans
 . Other features relate to
managing risks by arranging for the stability of Web sites, and to
cross-jurisdictional regulations. A key principle in this framework
is that online delivery standards are incorporated within
comprehensive criteria, and do not operate as stand-alone schemas.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
A general institutional standard can easily encompass online
learning; for example, having written policies and procedures to
ensure that educational offerings and assessment processes are
consistent with the scope of the institution. The full ramifications
of these elements for post-secondary institutions will depend on
how the audit processes and guidelines are implemented in
Australia over the next three years.
The examples of quality assurance frameworks from the United
Kingdom are all centered around open and distance learning, with
e-learning issues being acknowledged variables within a spectrum
of delivery mechanisms. Three different external approaches to
assessing the offerings by individual institutions include licensing
procedures under the auspices of a government agency, a voluntary
accreditation association, and a scheme for certification through
quality marks. Again, much of the drive to enhance quality
assurance schemes has been presented in the context of potential
regional and global competition. Each of these examples also
demonstrates ongoing tensions between external regulatory
approaches and internal aspirations for improvement.
It has been suggested that the Quality Assurance Framework in
the United Kingdom is not just comprehensive, it is “the most
complex anywhere in the world” . The Quality
Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA) was incorporated
in 1997, with the aim of reducing some of the reporting burdens
created by a combination of external assessments by funding
agencies, and quality assurance processes driven by peer review. Its
mission is to “promote public confidence that the quality of
provision and standards of awards in higher education are being
safeguarded and enhanced” . The QAA has developed
codes of practice for ten areas: postgraduate research programs;
collaborative provision; students with disabilities; external
examining; assessment of students; program approval, monitoring
and review; career education, information and guidance; placement
learning; recruitment; and admissions (QAA, N.d.a). Further
regulation has developed in the form of benchmark information for
different subject areas, linked to the national frameworks for
higher education qualifications. These are the explicit learning
outcomes meant to communicate to the public and to potential
employers the attainments to be expected from program graduates.
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
The main thrust of the QAA guidelines for distance learning is
integration between distance delivery and the general quality
standards for teaching and learning activities expressed in the other
codes of practice. While not addressing online education directly,
the six sections of the guidelines (system design, program design,
program delivery, student development and support, student
communication and representation, and student assessment),
include examples of questions that address electronic delivery
systems (QAA, N.d.b). The guidelines (paraphrased in Table 1 of
Appendix 16A), are notable in that, whereas the codes of practice
for higher education apply equally in distance education, the
guidelines are intended to deal with aspects of quality assurance
that are “likely to require attention in a particular way” when
study is undertaken at a distance (QAA, N.d.b). The elaborate state
licensing approach has been depicted as excessive and a sign of the
erosion of the autonomy of higher education. To some, these
measures have demonstrated the drive to “harness the universities
to perceived economic priorities” . In that light, it
is interesting that the criteria of the state licensing agency have
largely subsumed standards that had been developed for a peer
review model of accreditation.
The QAA distance learning guidelines reference the work of the
voluntary association in the United Kingdom’s distance education
sector, citing the Open and Distance Learning Quality Council
(ODL QC) standards. These accreditation standards, revised in
2000, are organized into the following discrete operational areas:
• course objectives and outcomes (providing clear statements of
what will be achieved on successful completion; having
objectives that are compatible with the method of delivery);
• course contents (providing sufficient content to enable the target
group of learners to meet the course objectives);
• publicity and recruitment (providing accurate materials and
direct communication to give potential learners the best basis for
deciding to take the course);
• admission procedures (communicating the terms of the course,
including its scope and the requirements needed to realize the
intended outcomes, and providing applicants with enough
information to assess their own needs and level of preparation);
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
• learning support (monitoring student progress, providing
appropriate supports, including supplementary material, and
facilitating peer group interactions);
• open learning centers (identifying groups of users and ensuring
that sufficient resources are available to serve them);
• learner welfare (maintaining accurate records, providing
appropriate guidance, demonstrating learner satisfaction and
appropriate completion rates);
• providers (having appropriate plans and resources to meet their
mission, adopting good business and employment practice,
adhering to relevant legal requirements, ensuring that staff have
appropriate qualifications, monitoring performance);
• joint provision (specifying respective rights and responsibilities,
including procedures to meet standards); and
• accreditation (having procedures for application, limitation, and
The operational recommendations around learning support
resonate with the models developed by the Open University, and
technical supports appear almost incidental in the entire scheme.
This model demonstrates an integrated understanding of the
practice of distance learning, in contrast with the market model for
applying quality marks, which draws on more generic business
process analyses.
The British Association for Open Learning (BAOL) is an
external marketing agency that applies self-assessment and external
review processes. Of all the frameworks summarized here, it is the
one most explicitly tied to TQM precepts. Using the Business
Excellence Model developed by the European Foundation for
Quality Management, BAOL has developed five “enabler” criteria
that cover how an organization is managed: leadership, people,
policy and strategy, partnerships and resources, and processes.
BAOL had also developed four “results” criteria: people, customer,
society, and key performance results. Together, these nine generic
aspects of an organization “contribute to and enable” the
achievement of quality . BAOL has developed quality
marks to cover materials development, advice and guidance,
learner support, and learning centers. It is claimed that earning
these quality marks provides a market advantage for e-learning
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
providers, especially as they face the prospects of competing
internationally. BAOL targets a broader range of education
providers than does the university sector, and so its criteria have
points in common with the suggestions for the registered training
organizations in Australia. The existence of BAOL is an explicit
acknowledgement that the market sector can be a powerful
external influence on attempts to inculcate internal quality
assurance values.
With such an array of quality assurance prospects, it is
noteworthy that, in their study of “borderless education,” the higher
education agencies in the United Kingdom have acknowledged that
public accountability arrangements and elements of the credentialing
or qualification schemes have been challenged by developments in
for-profit, virtual, and corporate providers in the domestic and
international higher education market. They have proposed that the
quality frameworks addressing these developments would include
currency and security of qualifications; audit of the system
for design and approval of curricula or appropriate learning
contracts; an internationally recognized system of educational
credit; licensing of staff; security of assessment; adequate and
accurate public information about learning opportunities;
approved guidance and complaints systems for learners;
transparent quality management processes for each agent in
the educational supply chain; access to learning resources
assured by the provider; and publication of guidance relevant to
different modes of provision. 
It has also been suggested that the thinking on quality assurance
will have to shift dramatically, from external “compliance-based
approaches” toward “comparative benchmarking” and mutual
recognition arrangements for international quality standards.
Attempts to integrate an array of international standards have been
made in other jurisdictions.
In Canada, the responsibility for education rests at the
provincial, not the national, level. Each province has its own
quality assurance framework or approach to determining whether
post-secondary programs are eligible for student funding or to
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
receive public money. The degree to which a province might
regulate or even provide subsidies to private or for-profit
educational institutions varies widely. It is fitting, then, that the
Canadian example of quality guidelines originates with a private
corporation sponsored by community and government-funded
agencies .
The Canadian Recommended e-Learning Guidelines bill
themselves as “consumer-oriented, consensus-based, comprehensive, futuristic, distinctively Canadian, adaptable, and flexible.”
The last feature admits that “not all guidelines will apply to all
circumstances” (p. 2). This qualification is only realistic, as the list
is exhaustive. The 138 items are organized into three distinct
sections: “Quality Outcomes from e-Learning Products and
Services” includes 15 items related to how students acquire content
skills, knowledge, and learning skills; “Quality Processes and
Practices” includes 20 items on the management of students, and
the delivery and management of learning, using appropriate
technologies; and “Quality Inputs and Resources” includes the
remaining 103 items, which range through intended learning
outcomes, curriculum content, teaching and learning materials,
product and service information, learning technologies, technical
design, personnel, learning resources, comprehensive courses
packages, routine evaluation, program plans and budgets, and
advertising, recruitment, and admissions information. A more
succinct adaptation issued under the same initiative was the
Consumer’s Guide to e-Learning, which structured 34 questions
into basic, discerning, and detailed levels. These questions have
been paraphrased in Table 2 of Appendix 16A, to allow for
comparison with the other frameworks, but the instructions to
consumers provided with the Consumer’s Guide are more telling.
Before you sign up of an e-learning course or program
ask yourself:
• What is my purpose for taking this course? Do I know what I
want or need to learn?
• Do I need a credit or certificate when I finish . . . or do I just
want to know more?
• How much can I afford to spend? How much time can I
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
• What hardware and software do I have, and is it enough?
• Where will I access the Internet, what will it cost, and how
convenient will it be?
• Are my computer and Internet skills good enough for the
course I have in mind? Will I need technical help?
 
Institutions intending to adapt their offerings to the online
teaching and learning environment would be well advised to
rephrase these questions along the following lines:
• What is our purpose for offering this course?
• Do we know what we expect students to learn?
• Do we have the technological infrastructure to support our
students? Is it up-to-date?
• How skilled are our course developers and instructors in the
online environment?
• What technical assistance do we have available?
Such questions are at the heart of the two models proposed in the
United States.
In an analysis of the impact of electronically delivered distance
education, undertaken for the American Council of Education,
Judith Eaton suggested that the emergence of electronically
delivered degrees, programs, courses, and services, has the potential
to undo the delicate balance between “accreditation to assure
quality in higher education, the self-regulation of higher education
institutions, and the availability of federal money to colleges and
universities” . Although higher education
institutions are subject to state funding and regulatory bodies, and
although the systems of accountability may vary from state to state,
the federal government relies on accredited status to signal that
institutions and programs are of sufficient quality to allow the
release of federal funds in the forms of student grants and loans,
research grants, and other federal program funds. Under traditional
approaches to accreditation, the focus was on the verification of
site-based resources contributing to a learning environment (e.g.,
the number of volumes in the library). To address some of the
concerns raised by electronic delivery, the eight regional accrediting
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
commissions in the United States developed the Statement of
Commitment for the Evaluation of Electronically Offered Degree
and Certificate Programs, which declares the resolve of the
commissions to sustain the following values:
• that education is best experienced within a community of
learning where competent professionals are actively and
cooperatively involved with creating, providing, and
improving the instructional program;
• that learning is dynamic and interactive, regardless of the
setting in which it occurs;
• that instructional programs leading to degrees having
integrity are organized around substantive and coherent
curricula which define expected learning outcomes;
• that institutions accept the obligation to address student
needs related to, and to provide the resources necessary for,
their academic success;
• that institutions are responsible for the education provided in
their name;
• that institutions undertake the assessment and improvement
of their quality, giving particular emphasis to student
• that institutions voluntarily subject themselves to peer
review. 
The regional commissions also committed themselves to a
common statement titled Best Practices for Electronically Offered
Degree and Certificate Programs, developed by the Western Cooperative for Educational Telecommunications (WCET). The
statement was organized into five discrete sections: 1) institutional
context and commitment; 2) curriculum and instruction; 3) faculty
support; 4) student support; 5) evaluation and assessment. Taken
together, the Statement of Commitment and the Best Practices
propose a consistent framework for developing quality standards.
How those standards might translate into benchmarks was the
subject of as study prepared by the Institute of Higher Education
Policy .
In Quality on the Line, Phipps and Merisotis surveyed the
literature to compile a list of 45 possible benchmarks. They then
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
determined whether those benchmarks were recognized at various
institutions delivering online courses, and examined the importance
of each benchmark to administrators, staff, faculty, and students at
those institutions. The result was a list of 24 benchmarks that
should be considered “essential to ensure the quality in Internetbased distance education” (p. 2). The elements (see Table 3 in
Appendix 16A) include institutional support, course development,
teaching and learning, course structure, student support, faculty
support, and evaluation and assessment benchmarks. The
similarities between these benchmarks and the proposals from the
accrediting agencies clearly demonstrate a common conceptualization of distance education in the United States. Where they
diverge is in the degree to which the actual curriculum elements are
prescribed, and in the relative weights given to institutional
structures. It is also apparent that both sets of standards are
designed more for traditional face-to-face institutions introducing
distance education programs than for distance education providers
updating their mode of delivery. The provider focus remains a
strong orientation under both U.S. schemes, and unlike the
accreditation standard for open and distance learning in the United
Kingdom, neither U.S. scheme speaks to the importance of
encouraging learners to take responsibility for their own learning.
Process versus Outcomes
One of the first principles in all of the quality assurance schemes
considered here is guaranteeing consistency in the product’s results.
In the view of TQM advocates “many quality management
initiatives, especially in service industries, die because we fail in
measurement of the outcomes” . The
dangers of presenting higher education outcomes as strictly
utilitarian competencies are familiar features in the debate about
quality assurance activities. However, even if outcomes could be
framed in wider terms, there is also a hazard of sliding into what
has been aptly described as a variation on the “naming fallacy”;
that is, assuming that “explicitness about standards” somehow
provides assurance that the standards have been or can be achieved
 .
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Major efforts have been directed to identifying “quality in
undergraduate education,” but according to Ernest Pascarella,
some of these efforts are “based on a naive understanding of just
how difficult it is to accomplish in a valid manner” . Most notably, he argues that institutional reputation
and resources, and student or alumni outcomes are “potentially
quite misleading,” and that results based on either of these
common approaches are more likely to be driven by inputs than by
effective educational practices (pp. 19-21). The solution to this
problem should rest in careful measures that address the integrity
of the teaching and learning processes within institutions. The
seemingly insatiable appetite for comparable measures, regardless
of their validity, is a dimension of the operating environments of
most post-secondary institutions. While it is clear that the rhetoric
of accountability and the bureaucratic systems it has spawned are
not likely to disappear, it may be possible to present a framework
for quality online teaching and learning that attends to more than
short-term transactional or monetary values.
Reshaping the Debate
Whether or not the demands of stakeholder groups (however illdefined), the threat of fraud, or the intensification of competition
from local or international providers are behind the current
impulses for elaborating quality assurance mechanisms, a dual
challenge is being presented to the providers of online teaching and
learning. The common thread across quality assurance schemes in
the four jurisdictions is the need to address the concerns from both
inside and outside the academy. Even if online and distance delivery
institutions have been made the scapegoats for a wide range of
changes, not the least of which being the erosion of the power of
institutions of higher education to regulate themselves, there may
still be an opportunity to address some of the concerns presented
by colleagues in more traditional institutions. It follows that an
overarching principle of any proposal to address quality assurance
in online teaching and learning environments must be to recognize
the integrity of higher education—no matter how it is delivered.
The rhetoric of both the Australian and British qualification
frameworks suggests just such an integrated approach, but the
The Quality Dilemma in Online Education
regulatory burdens they have spawned do little to reassure those
who value the independence of higher education.
In the process of taking back some of the momentum in the
debate, the academy must provide clear statements of educational
goals. Such goals need not be restricted to technical mastery in
specific subjects; the opportunity to pursue ideas beyond the needs
of corporate sponsors should not be ignored. The measure of the
effectiveness of the articulation of the educational goals should be
the ways a course, program, and institution’s goals align with one
another. The demonstration of a consistency of purpose should be
persuasive to internal and external stakeholders alike, but should
not presuppose that students are responsible for seeking their own
learning outcomes. This suggestion returns to the essential need for
quality to be constructed through consensus building among a
range of institutional stakeholders, who must, at the same time, not
promise, or be promised, more than can be delivered.
A second theme running through all of the frameworks
presented here is the need for sustained institutional commitment
to support distance learners. The precise nature of that support
would be determined by the nature of the programs and by what
students need in order to have a reasonable chance of attaining
their aspirations in a given program. All too often, online delivery
of courses and programs has been presented in an experimental
mode, without long-term, planned infrastructure development.
Whether it involves investing in technical systems, or in training for
support and instructional staff, the process of developing robust
online teaching and learning environments should not be attempted
as “one-offs.” Some observers have gone so far as to suggest that
digital technology may hamper rather than promote educational
change, because the focus of investment becomes the short lifecycle technologies, rather than the longer view needed for effective
education (Ehrmann, N.d.). An institutional commitment to
supporting learners will go a long way to satisfying other
stakeholders, without displacing the fundamental project of
scholarship. This can only be true, however, if students and
educators are engaging in a collaborative process of discovery; that
is, if academics are not simply dispensers or interpreters of content
for passive students.
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Learning technologies can promote powerful connections to
content, context, and community. Unfortunately, they can also
offer broad access to poorly designed and executed courseware.
There are deliberate choices to be made in how to accommodate a
generation of students who expect independent investigation,
collaboration, and peer contacts to be facilitated in an online
environment.
The threats to traditional delivery, and most especially the
disaggregation of tasks associated with teaching in higher
education, are providing new opportunities for exploring the
constructions of community and knowledge, teaching and learning.
In the generation of documentary evidence of interactions with
content and with others, the structure of the online environment
lends itself new kinds of exploration. Eventually, the goal of such
inquiries should be to point to ways to improve the teaching and
learning environment. Ultimately, the online programs should be
able to mobilize recent theory and research into how people learn,
and to enhance learning by “enabling the identified characteristics
of effective learning environments and ensuring that they are
present and accessible” From that
perspective, the pursuit of quality online teaching and learning
environments may become as much an exercise in scholarship as it
has been in market or state control.