ORIGINAL ARTICLE
QRS detection using K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm
(KNN) and evaluation on standard ECG databases
Indu Saini a,*, Dilbag Singh b, Arun Khosla a
a Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar,
Jalandhar 144 011, India
b Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar,
Jalandhar 144 011, India
Received 24 March 2012; revised 10 May 2012; accepted 30 May 2012
Available online 6 July 2012
QRS detection;
Classiﬁer;
Cross-validation;
The performance of computer aided ECG analysis depends on the precise and accurate
delineation of QRS-complexes. This paper presents an application of K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
algorithm as a classiﬁer for detection of QRS-complex in ECG. The proposed algorithm is evaluated on two manually annotated standard databases such as CSE and MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. In this work, a digital band-pass ﬁlter is used to reduce false detection caused by interference
present in ECG signal and further gradient of the signal is used as a feature for QRS-detection. In
addition the accuracy of KNN based classiﬁer is largely dependent on the value of K and type of
distance metric. The value of K = 3 and Euclidean distance metric has been proposed for the
KNN classiﬁer, using ﬁvefold cross-validation. The detection rates of 99.89% and 99.81% are
achieved for CSE and MIT-BIH databases respectively. The QRS detector obtained a sensitivity
Se = 99.86%
speciﬁcity
Sp = 99.86%
Se = 99.81%
Sp = 99.86% for MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. A comparison is also made between proposed
algorithm and other published work using CSE and MIT-BIH Arrhythmia databases. These results
clearly establishes KNN algorithm for reliable and accurate QRS-detection.
ª 2012 Cairo University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Introduction
The function of human body is frequently associated with signals of electrical, chemical, or acoustic origin. These signals
convey information which may not be immediately perceived
but which is hidden in the signal’s structure and reﬂect properties of their associated underlying biological systems. Extract-
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +91 9876950214; fax: +91 181
2690320/932.
E-mail address: (I. Saini).
Peer review under responsibility of Cario University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Journal of Advanced Research 4, 331–344
Cairo University
Journal of Advanced Research
2090-1232 ª 2012 Cairo University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
 
ing useful information from these biomedical signals has been
found very helpful in explaining and identifying various pathological conditions. The most important category of the
biomedical signal is the signals which are originated from the
heart’s electrical activity. The heart is the one of the most
important organs of the human body hence it is termed as a
vital organ. It responds to body’s needs by adjusting its rate
moment to moment, relative to respiration, physical activity,
the sleep cycle and other factors. Thus for determining the
heart’s ongoing functional variability there is a need of longterm measurements, computer driven calculations and detection of subtle cyclical patterns. This electrical activity of the
human heart, though it is quite low in amplitude (about
1 mV) can be detected on the body surface and recorded as
an electrocardiogram (ECG) signal. The ECG, i.e. voltage
measured as a function of time, arise because active tissues
within the heart generate electrical currents, which ﬂow most
intensively within the heart muscle itself, and with lesser intensity throughout the body. The ﬂow of current creates voltages
between the sites on the body surface where the electrodes are
placed. In this regard the ECG has been established as a fast
and reliable tool for deciphering the current status of the heart
and has been also widely used in prognosis and diagnosis of
various cardiovascular diseases and abnormalities such as
myocardial ischemia and infarction, ventricular hypertrophy,
and conduction problems. In general the normal ECG signal
consists of P, QRS and T waves and in particular the QRScomplex reﬂects the electrical activity within the heart during
the ventricular contraction, the time of its occurrence as well
as its shape provide much information about the current state
of the heart. The QRS interval is a measure of the total duration of ventricular tissue depolarization. The normal QRS
interval is 0.06–0.10 s in the adult. Due to its characteristic
shape it serves as the basis for the automated determination
of the heart rate, as an entry point for classiﬁcation schemes
of the cardiac disease diagnosis. Thus, QRS detection provides
the fundamental reference for almost all automated ECG analysis algorithms. The ECG signal is only of the order of 1 mV in
amplitude, thus it is most susceptible to interference from biological and environmental sources such as motion artifacts,
skin potentials, muscle noise, power-line interference, and
radio frequency interference. These types of interferences are
always accompanying the ECG acquisition and recording.
That is why removal or suppression of the noise is required
to be performed before QRS detection. A wide diversity of
algorithms have been reported in the literature, based on
mathematical transformation and pattern recognition
 , artiﬁcial neural networks , statistical methods ,
for QRS detection. The heuristic methods were also
widely used in classifying the ECG signals. But the performance of these heuristic approaches is based on the ample
choice of the bandwidth of the band pass ﬁltering and the
duration of the moving window used for integration. However,
this choice is not, completely successful since large bandwidth
passes large amount of noise whereas narrow bandwidth
attenuates the QRS high frequency component. Similarly,
large moving window duration increases the false positive
QRS-complexes detected while small duration causes missed
QRS-complexes. This is mainly due to the time variant characteristic of the QRS-complex. Later on wavelet transform (WT)
was proposed to overcome the drawbacks of this ﬁxed ﬁltering
bandwidth and moving window duration . In order to
further improve the detection accuracy, new signal analysis
technique based on empirical mode decomposition has been
proposed for detection of QRS-complexes .
Friesen et al. have presented a comparison of nine QRS
detection algorithms based on: (i) amplitude and ﬁrst derivative, (ii) ﬁrst derivative only, (iii) ﬁrst and second derivative
and (iv) digital ﬁltering.
Kohler et al. proposed an extensive review of various
approaches of QRS detection based on: (i) signal derivatives
and digital ﬁlters, (ii) wavelet-based QRS detection, (iii) neural
network approaches, (iv) additional approaches like adaptive
ﬁlters, hidden Markov models, mathematical morphology,
matched ﬁlters, genetic algorithms, Hilbert transform-based
QRS detection, etc.
Previously, KNN method has been used in applications
such as data mining, statistical pattern recognition, image processing, recognition of handwriting, ECG disease classiﬁcation. This work is primarily motivated by the desire to
design an algorithm for precise and accurate delineation of
QRS-complexes which serves as a reference for the performance of automated ECG analysis. Thus, the aim of this work
is to explore the merits of KNN algorithm as an ECG delineator and to demonstrate its superior performance over other
published works for CSE database and MIT-BIH Arrhythmia
database (the golden standard for QRS detection).
The KNN method is an instance based learning method
that stores all available data points (examples) and classiﬁes
new data points based on similarity measure. The idea underlying the KNN method is to assign new unclassiﬁed examples
to the class to which the majority of its K nearest neighbors belongs. This algorithm proves to be very effective, in terms of
reducing the misclassiﬁcation error, when the number of samples in training dataset is large. Another advantage of the
KNN method over many other supervised learning methods
like support vector machine (SVM), decision tree, neural network, etc., is that it can easily deal with problems in which
the class size is three and higher .
In KNN, the each training data consists of a set of vectors
and every vector has its own positive or negative class label,
where K represents the number of neighbors. In all the classi-
ﬁcation techniques based on KNN, the classiﬁcation accuracy
largely depends on the value of K and the type of distance metrics used for computing nearest distance. Thus, in this work,
an attempt has also been made to ﬁnd out the optimal value
of K and distance metric using ﬁvefold cross-validation for
achieving the highest classiﬁcation accuracy. After evaluating
these best possible values of K and distance metric, a KNN
algorithm has been used for QRS detection.
Further, the accuracy of the KNN algorithm can be severely degraded by the presence of (i) noisy data, (ii) irrelevant
features, and (iii) non-consistency of feature scales with their
importance. Thus, for an efﬁcient KNN based classiﬁcation,
(i) digital ﬁltering has been used to reduce the noise, and (ii)
the gradient of the signal has been used as a feature for QRS
detection which serves to reduce the computational burden
on the KNN classiﬁer.
Overview of K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm
The KNN is one of prospective statistical classiﬁcation algorithms used for classifying objects based on closest training
I. Saini et al.
examples in the feature space. It is a lazy learning algorithm
where the KNN function is approximated locally and all computations are deferred until classiﬁcation. No actual model or
learning is performed during the training phase, although a
training dataset is required, it is used solely to populate a sample of the search space with instances whose class is known, for
this reason, this algorithm is also known as lazy learning algorithm. It means that the training data points are not used to do
any generalization and all the training data is needed during
the testing phase. When an instance whose class is unknown
is presented for evaluation, the algorithm computes its K closest neighbors, and the class is assigned by voting among those
neighbors. In KNN algorithm, training phase is very fast but
testing phase is costly in terms of both time and memory .
The KNN algorithm consists of two phases: Training phase
and Classiﬁcation phase. In training phase, the training examples are vectors (each with a class label) in a multidimensional
feature space. In this phase, the feature vectors and class labels
of training samples are stored. In the classiﬁcation phase, K is
a user-deﬁned constant, a query or test point (unlabelled vector) is classiﬁed by assigning a label, which is the most recurrent among the K training samples nearest to that query
point. In other words, the KNN method compares the query
point or an input feature vector with a library of reference vectors, and the query point is labeled with the nearest class of library feature vector. This way of categorizing query points
based on their distance to points in a training data set is a simple, yet an effective way of classifying new points.
Parameter K and distance metric
One of the advantages of the KNN method in classifying the
objects is that it requires only few parameters to tune: K and
the distance metric, for achieving sufﬁciently high classiﬁcation
accuracy. Thus, in KNN based implementations the best
choice of K and distance metric for computing the nearest distance is a critical task. Generally, larger values of K reduce the
effect of noise on the classiﬁcation, but make boundaries between classes less distinct. The special case where the class is
predicted to be the class of the closest training sample (i.e.
when K = 1) is called the nearest neighbor algorithm. In binary classiﬁcation problems, it is helpful to choose K to be an
odd number as it avoids tied votes. Thus, the value of K is de-
ﬁned in such a way that it produces the highest correct classi-
ﬁcation rate . In this work the different values of K which
have been tested are 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Further, the different distance metrics which are used in this work are Euclidean distance, City Block and Correlation. The brief explanation of
these distance metrics is as follows:
Distance metrics
Given an [mx · n] data matrix X, which is treated as
[mx(1 · n)] row vectors x1, x2, . . . , xmx, and [my · n] data matrix
[my(1 · n)]
y1, y2, . . . , ymy, the various distances between the vector xs
and yt are deﬁned as follows:
Euclidean distance metric (EU)
This is the most usual way of computing a distance between
two objects. It examines the root of square differences between
coordinates of a pair of objects and is deﬁned using the following equation :
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
j¼1ðxsj  ytjÞ2
City Block distance metric (CB)
It is based on Taxicab geometry, ﬁrst considered by Hermann
Minkowski in the 19th century, is a form of geometry in which
the usual metric of Euclidean geometry is replaced by a new
metric in which the distance between two points is the sum
of the absolute differences of their coordinates deﬁned using
the following equation:
jxsj  ytjj
The City Block distance metric is also known as Manhattan
distance, boxcar distance, absolute value distance. It represents
distance between points in a city road grid. While the Euclidean corresponds to the length of the shortest path between two
points (i.e. ‘‘as the crow ﬂies’’), the City Block distance refers
to the sum of distances along each dimension (i.e. ‘‘walking
round the block’’).
Correlation distance metric (CO)
It is one minus the sample correlation between points (treated
as sequences of values) and is deﬁned using the following
ðxs  xsÞðyt  ytÞ0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðxs  xsÞðxs  xsÞ0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðyt  ytÞðyt  ytÞ0
It is important to mention here that the performance of classiﬁers is usually dependent upon the value of K and distance
metric. In this work these values are evolved through crossvalidation, which involves the determination of classiﬁcation
accuracy for multiple partitions of the input samples used in
training. The cross-validation is mainly used in settings
where the goal is prediction, and one wants to estimate
how accurately a predictive model will perform in practice.
In general, one round of cross-validation involves partitioning a sample of data into complementary subsets, performing the analysis on one subset called the training set, and
validating the analysis on the other subset called the testing
set or validation set. Further, to reduce variability, multiple
rounds of cross-validation are performed using different partitions, and the validation results are averaged over the
In k-fold cross-validation, the original sample is randomly
partitioned into k subsamples. Of the k subsamples, a single
subsample is retained as the validation data for testing the
model, and the remaining (k  1) subsamples are used as training data. The cross-validation process is then repeated k-times
(the folds), with each of the k subsamples used exactly once as
KNN based QRS detection in ECG signal
the validation data. The k results from the folds then can be
averaged to produce a single estimation.
Methodology
In this section, we describe the proposed algorithm for the
detection of QRS-complex in CSE and MIT-BIH databases
using KNN classiﬁer. The algorithm schematic and the results
for 12-lead ECG CSE database are shown in Figs. 1 and 2
respectively. Although the algorithm is designed for use on
12-lead ECG data at a time using CSE database and on 2-lead
ECG data using MIT-BIH database, the results for one lead
are included here (in this case lead V6 of record no.
MO1_036 of CSE database) to demonstrate its effectiveness
in identiﬁcation of QRS-complex in ECG wave.
ECG databases
The databases used for the validation of the algorithm for
QRS detection are CSE and MIT-BIH Arrhythmia.
CSE is Common Standards for Quantitative Electrocardiography Database. There are three CSE reference data sets
 . The ﬁrst data set (CSE DS-1) consists of 3-lead ECGs,
been recorded
simultaneously
sequence. In the second data set (CSE DS-2), all the leads,
i.e. standard 12 leads plus 3 Frank leads are recorded simultaneously. A third CSE database (DS-3) has been developed for
the assessment of diagnostic ECG and evaluates the performance of computer measurement programs. This database
comprises multi-lead recordings of the standard ECG. All
the data have been sampled at 500 Hz. The multi-lead measurement database is composed of original and artiﬁcial
ECG recordings. This database has been split into two equal
sets, i.e. data set three and data set four. Each set consists of
ECG recordings of 125 patients. File name starts with the
character MA and MO. The record length for these cases is
in principle 10 s for each lead. These ECGs have been analyzed
by a group of ﬁve referee cardiologists and eleven computer
programmers. In this paper CSE DS-3 original 125 ﬁles has
been used for QRS detection.
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database was also considered for
validation of this proposed algorithm. This database consists
of 48 half-hour recordings for a total of 24 h of ECG data.
Each one has a duration of 30 min and include two leads –
the modiﬁed limb lead-II and one of the modiﬁed leads V1,
V2, V4 or V5 , sampled at 360 Hz with resolution of
5 lV/bit. Two cardiologists have annotated all beats. This
24 h MIT-BIH database contains more than 109,000 beats.
ECG signal pre-processing
A raw digital ECG signal of a record is acquired as shown in
Fig. 2a. This signal is often contaminated by disturbance such
as power-line interference; muscle noise and baseline wander.
In order to attenuate noise, the signal is bandpass ﬁltered.
QRS-complex
Classifier
Schematic representation of intermediate steps for KNN algorithm implementation.
Results obtained at each step of the algorithm for lead V6 of record MO1_036 of CSE database: (a) raw ECG, (b) ﬁltered ECG,
(c) gradient curve of the ECG signal and (d) QRS locations.
I. Saini et al.
Bandpass ﬁlter
The bandpass ﬁlter reduces the inﬂuence of muscle noise,
50 Hz interference, baseline wander, and T-wave interference.
The desirable passband to maximize the QRS energy is
approximately 5–15 Hz. For the databases used in this work,
a bandpass ﬁlter is used to achieve 3 dB passband from 5 to
12 Hz, and is composed of cascaded highpass and lowpass ﬁlters .
Lowpass ﬁlter
A lowpass ﬁlter is designed with a cut-off frequency of 11 Hz
and the gain of 36 with ﬁlter processing delay of six samples.
The transfer function of the second order lowpass ﬁlter is
HðzÞ ¼ ð1  z6Þ2
ð1  z1Þ2
The amplitude response is
jHðwTÞj ¼ sin2ð3xTÞ
sin2ðxT=2Þ
where T is the sampling period. The difference equation of the
yðnTÞ ¼ 2yðnT  TÞ  yðnT  2TÞ þ xðnTÞ  2xðnT
 6TÞ þ xðnT  12TÞ
Highpass ﬁlter
The design of the highpass ﬁlter is based on subtracting the
output of a ﬁrst-order lowpass ﬁlter from an allpass ﬁlter.
The low cut-off frequency of the ﬁlter is about 5 Hz, the gain
is 32 and the delay is 16 samples.
The transfer function for such a highpass ﬁlter is
HðzÞ ¼ ð1 þ 32z16 þ z32Þ
The amplitude response is
HðwTÞ ¼ ½256 þ sin2ð16xTÞ1=2
The difference equation is
yðnTÞ ¼ 32xðnT  16TÞ  ½yðnT  TÞ þ xðnTÞ  xðnT
The ﬁltered ECG signal after removal of power-line interference and baseline wander is shown in Fig. 2b.
QRS-complex detection algorithm using gradient as feature
Gradient calculation
The gradient is a vector, has both direction and units, that
points in the direction of the greatest rate of increase of the
scalar ﬁeld, and whose magnitude is the greatest rate of
change. The gradient of any function f, deﬁned using Eq.
(10) is the vector ﬁeld whose components are the partial
derivatives of f.
; . . . ; @f
In mathematics, gradient is widely used in measuring the degree of inclination, steepness or the rate of ascent or descent.
A higher gradient value indicates a steeper incline. Thus it is
clear that if the gradient of any signal under test is calculated,
then any part of the signal which is having a high slope will
have a higher value of gradient. The gradient of the curve as
shown in Fig. 3, at point A is the same as that of the tangent
at point A. Drawing tangents is a rather cumbersome method
of obtaining gradients. Hence, the solution is differentiation.
Differentiation allows to ﬁnd the rate of change. Here in case
of ECG signal, it allows to ﬁnd the rate of change of amplitude
of QRS-complex with respect to time samples. Thus, the QRScomplex as the most prominent wave component of ECG
wave, having high slope and amplitude as compared to the rest
of the wave components results in higher value of gradient
than non-QRS regions. Further, the gradient also assists in
the formation of decision boundaries and this in turn helps
in reducing the computational burden of a classiﬁer. Therefore
based upon this fact, in this part of the work an attempt has
been made to use the gradient as a feature vector for the detection of QRS-complexes .
The gradient at each point in the ECG signal, will show the
direction the signal rises most quickly and the magnitude of
the gradient will determine how fast the signal rises in that
direction. Moreover, the gradient is also being used to measure
how a signal changes in other directions, rather than just the
direction of greatest change, i.e. in the region of QRS-complex.
Thus in order to enhance the signal in the region of QRS-complex, the gradient of an ECG signal at each sampling instant is
calculated using Eq. (10). The gradient values so obtained are
then normalized as depicted in Fig. 2c .
Selection of K and distance metric
It is not known beforehand which value of K and the type of
distance metric are the best for this problem of component
wave detection. Thus, the objective of this part of the work
is to obtain best value of K and optimal distance metric, using
Curve y(x)
Gradient of a curve.
Averaged classiﬁcation accuracy using ﬁvefold crossvalidation for different values of K and distance metrics.
Distance metrics
Euclidean (EU)
City Block (CB)
Correlation (CO)
KNN based QRS detection in ECG signal
Results of evaluating the KNN algorithm using CSE database.
Actual peak
Detected peak
Detection rate (%)
I. Saini et al.
Table 2 (continued).
Actual peak
Detected peak
Detection rate (%)
KNN based QRS detection in ECG signal
cross-validation, so that the classiﬁer can accurately predict the
unknown data (testing data). In the present study ﬁvefold
cross-validation approach has been used to select the best K
value and type of distance metric. In this approach, the original sample/data is randomly partitioned into ﬁve subsamples,
of the ﬁve subsamples, a single subsample is retained as the
validation data for testing the classiﬁer, and the remaining subsamples are used as training data. The cross-validation
process is then repeated ﬁve times (the folds), with each of
the ﬁve subsamples used exactly once as the validation data.
The results from the ﬁvefolds are then averaged to produce a
single estimation. Thus, each instance of the whole training
set is predicted once so the cross-validation accuracy is the percentage of data which are correctly classiﬁed.
Using ﬁvefold cross-validation algorithm the results which
are obtained in terms of averaged classiﬁcation accuracy, for
ﬁve different values of K, i.e. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 using three different methods of computing the nearest distance, i.e. Euclidean
(EU), City-Block (CB), and Correlation (CO), are shown in
Table 1. After analyzing the results given in Table 1, it is found
that the averaged classiﬁcation accuracy obtained using EU
distance metric for K = 3 is highest, i.e. 99.76% in comparison
to CB (99.73%) and CO (99.74%) distance metrics for the
same value of K. Also the averaged classiﬁcation rate obtained
using EU method is higher than CB and CO methods for all
the values of K. Thus it has been established that in terms of
classiﬁcation accuracy obtained using ﬁvefold cross-validation,
the optimal value of K is 3 and type of distance metric is
Euclidean.
Training phase
After obtaining the optimal value of K and type of distance
metric, the KNN classiﬁer is now trained. The record no.
MA1_001 of CSE database and record no. 100 of MIT-BIH
database were used for training the classiﬁer.
The training phase for KNN consists of storing all known
instances and their class labels. Here, in this phase, a [m · n]
training matrix is formed, consisting of m training instances
of n features. The number of training instances (m) is equal
to the number of samples of selected portions of ECGs, i.e.
for CSE database the value of m = 5000 and for MIT-BIH
database m = 650,000. The value of n, which is the normalized
gradient value of each lead of the ECG at a training instance,
for a CSE 12-lead ECG database is taken as 12, whereas for
QRS detection in record MO1_008 of CSE database.
Comparison of proposed KNN algorithm with other QRS detection algorithms using CSE database.
QRS detector
Detection rate (%)
CSE database
KNN algorithm
Using proposed algorithm
SVM algorithm
Length and energy transformation
Time recursive prediction technique
K-means algorithm
Bottom up approach
Mathematical morphology
An integrated pattern recognition method
Predictive neural network based technique to detect QRS complexes
I. Saini et al.
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia 2-lead database is 2. If the training instance belongs to QRS region, the training label vector is set
to 1 and if it belongs to non-QRS region it is set to 1.
Classiﬁcation phase
A basic rule in classiﬁcation analysis is that the testing is not
made for data samples that are used for training or learning.
Instead, testing is made for samples that are kept out of training process. This was due to the reason that if testing is made
for samples used in training or learning, the accuracy will be
artiﬁcially biased upward.
Thus based upon this rule, after training the KNN, each record of the CSE and MIT-BIH databases is tested for the
detection of the QRS-complexes. Here, in case of CSE database, 10 s duration data has been used for testing while for
MIT-BIH database whole ﬁle of 30 min duration is used for
testing. After testing, a train of 1’s is obtained at the output
of KNN classiﬁer. Then this train of 1’s is picked and by using
Time (Data samples)
QRS detection in record MO1_124 of CSE database.
QRS detection in record MO1_109 of CSE database.
KNN based QRS detection in ECG signal
their duration, average pulse duration of 1’s is evaluated.
Those trains of 1’s, whose duration turns out to be more than
the average pulse duration are detected as QRS-complex and
the other are discarded. The locations of the QRS-complexes,
as detected by KNN, are shown by the curve Fig. 2d.
Results and discussion
QRS-complexes
considerable
promise for clarifying issues in clinical applications, the inaccurate detection and quantiﬁcation of these patterns may
obscure critical issues and may impede rather than foster
the development of computerized ECG analysis in clinical
settings. Thus by keeping this thing in consideration, the
evaluation of the performance of the proposed algorithm
for QRS-complex detection has been done using 125 original
12-leads ECG recording of dataset-3 of CSE multi-lead measurement library and 48 half-an-hour 2-leads recording of
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. Here, detection is said to
be true positive (TP) if the algorithm correctly detects the
QRS-complex, false negative (FN) if algorithm fails to identify QRS-complex, and false positive (FP) if the algorithm
Results of evaluating the KNN algorithm using MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database.
Actual peaks
Detected peaks
Det. rate (%)
48 patients
I. Saini et al.
detects non-QRS-complex as QRS-complex. Further, the
parameters which are used to evaluate the performance of
our proposed algorithm are: detection rate, sensitivity (Se)
and speciﬁcity (Sp). The detection rate, sensitivity and speciﬁcity have been calculated using the Eqs. (11)–(13) respectively .
Detection rate ¼ ðActual beats  failed beatsÞ
ðActual beatsÞ
Sensitivity; Se ¼
Specificity; Sp ¼
The quantitative values of the results of QRS detection using
proposed algorithm for all the records of CSE database, i.e.
from MO1_001 to MO1_125 are given in Table 2. After analyzing the results given in Table 2 it has been found that this
algorithm correctly detects the QRS-complexes in all the records except in record no. MO1_053, MO1_109, MO1_111
and MO1_124. In MO1_053 and MO1_109 it detects 01 FN
beat each and in MO1_111 and MO1_124 it detects 01 FP beat
each. Further, by using Eqs. (11)–(13), the detection rate of
99.89%, Se of 99.86% and Sp of 99.86% has been achieved.
In addition a comparative table showing the results of QRS
detection using our proposed algorithm and other published
 . The results clearly show that the proposed
99.89%. In terms of visual representation of the results, the results for record number MO1_008 of all the 12-leads of CSE
database is shown in Fig. 4. It has been seen that the proposed
classiﬁer detects all the QRS-complexes without any false positive and false negative detection. Further, the results of
QRS detection for record number MO1_109 of CSE database
is given in Fig. 5, demonstrates that the proposed KNN classiﬁer fails to detect one QRS-complex, due to its very low
amplitude in most of the leads, and it is termed as false negative (FN). However, all the QRS-complexes are accurately detected. Similarly the results for the detection of QRScomplexes of record number MO1_124 of CSE database
shown in Fig. 6, reveals that the algorithm detects one extra
non-QRS-complex, termed as false positive (FP).
Furthermore, in order to validate the results, same algorithm has been applied to MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database
for QRS detection. The results given in Table 4, summarizes
the performance of our proposed algorithm. It has been shown
that the detection rate of 99.81% is achieved with 151 false positive (FP) beats and 207 false negative (FN) beats. In addition,
the Se of 99.81% and Sp of 99.86% has been achieved using
this algorithm. In addition, the results of QRS detection for record number 201 of MIT-BIH database is given in Fig. 7,
which shows that the proposed KNN classiﬁer fails to detect
one QRS-complex, due to its very low amplitude, and it is
termed as false negative (FN). Fig. 8 shows the detection of
QRS-complex of record no. 207 of MIT-BIH database.
The detection performance of our proposed algorithm in
comparison to other published works tested on MIT-BIH
Arrhythmia database is also given in Table 5 . The percentage of sensitivity/rate of
accurate QRS detection given in Table 5 is not directly comparable, because, different number of beats has been used by
different researchers. In this work an entire available recordings of MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database have been considered
in comparison to the ﬁrst 5 min of records of MIT-BIH database, used as a learning period in some earlier published
works, and were not considered in the validation. Further,
precautions have also been taken in reporting the accurate
QRS detection in record no. 201 of MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database.
KNN based QRS detection in ECG signal
number of total beats on the account of false positive and false
negative beats.
Thus, as established using all the actual 125 records of CSE
database of 10 s duration and all 48 ECG recordings of MIT-
BIH Arrhythmia database of 30 min duration, the proposed
algorithm accurately detects all the QRS-complexes. Hence, it
is capable of detecting all kinds of morphologies of QRS-complexes, which has a direct bearing on the ECG interpretations.
QRS detection in record no. 207 of MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database.
Comparison of proposed KNN algorithm with other QRS detection algorithms using MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database.
QRS detector
MIT-BIH database
(109,966 beats)
KNN algorithm
MIT-BIH database
(109,809 beats)
A real-time QRS detection based upon digital analysis of
slope, amplitude and width
MIT-BIH database
(109,267 beats)
QRS detection using optimized decision rule process
MIT-BIH database
(Record 105)
NN based adaptive matched ﬁltering for QRS detection
MIT-BIH database
(104,181 beats)
Detection of ECG characteristic points using wavelet
MIT-BIH database
(2572 beats)
QRS detection based on optimized preﬁltering in
conjunction with matched ﬁlter and dual edge threshold
MIT-BIH database
(14,481 beats)
Use of wavelet transform for ECG characterization
MIT-BIH database
(103,763 beats)
WT based QRS detection
MIT-BIH database
(109,428 beats)
WT based QRS detection
MIT-BIH database
(110,050 beats)
QRS detection using combined adaptive threshold
MIT-BIH database
Empirical mode decomposition
MIT-BIH database
Multi wavelet packet decomposition
MIT-BIH database
Shannon energy envelope (SEE) estimator
I. Saini et al.
Conclusion
The present paper lays much emphasis on (i) the algorithmic
considerations of proposed algorithm, (ii) its methodological
aspects related to the classiﬁcation and (iii) its capabilities of
detecting QRS-complexes leading to the ability to precisely
discriminate between pathologies. This paper proposes a
new method for QRS detection using KNN classiﬁer. The results has been validated on two different standard annotated
ECG databases, (i) 125 original 12-leads ECG recording of
dataset-3 of CSE multi-lead measurement library and (ii) 48
half-an-hour
2-leads recording
of MIT-BIH Arrhythmia
database. The purpose of using these databases of different
sampling rates is to take into consideration the wide diversity
of morphologies of ECG signals. In this work gradient of an
ECG signal has been calculated and used for the generation
of a feature signal for the KNN classiﬁer. Further, for the
accurate detection of QRS-complexes, an optimal value of
K, i.e. 3 and type of distance metric for computing the nearest distance, i.e. Euclidean has been proposed using ﬁvefold
cross-validation for the KNN classiﬁer. The efﬁcacy of the
proposed value of K and type of distance metric has been
demonstrated by performing the comparative analysis between ﬁve different values of K, i.e. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 and three
types of distance metrics, i.e. Euclidian, City block and Correlation distance. Looking to the performance of the proposed algorithm, which gives the detection rate of 99.89%
on CSE DS-3 and 99.81% on MIT-BIH Arrhythmia databases, prove the efﬁcacy of KNN algorithm for the accurate
and reliable detection of QRS-complexes. Further, the training done on a dataset is equally applicable for other datasets
having same sample rate.
The results have also been compared with other contemporary published works and authenticated that this algorithm
outperforms the other existing algorithms (which includes
even the algorithms designed exclusively for real-time applications) for the detection of QRS-complexes. Thus, it is possible that this algorithm of QRS detection is capable of
enhancing speciﬁc rhythms in ECG signals, which are in turn
proves helpful in accurately detecting the QRS-complexes.
Hence, this method of detection of QRS-complexes leads to
a better visual and automated ECG analysis, which is not
only desirable in basic physiology studies, but also a prerequisite for a widespread utilization of QRS detection techniques in clinical studies like heart rate variability, where
simplicity and effectiveness of information are of primary
importance.