Beyond the intention to treat in comparative effectiveness
Miguel A. Hernán1,2 and Sonia Hernández-Díaz1
1Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
2Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Boston, MA USA
Background—The intention-to-treat (ITT) comparison is the primary, if not the only, analytic
approach of many randomized clinical trials (RCTs).
Purpose—To review the shortcomings of ITT analyses, and of “as treated” and “per protocol”
analyses as commonly implemented, with an emphasis on problems that are especially relevant for
comparative effectiveness research.
Methods and Results—In placebo-controlled RCTs, ITT analyses underestimate the treatment
effect, and are therefore non-conservative for both safety trials and non-inferiority trials. In RCTs
with an active comparator, ITT estimates can overestimate a treatment’s effect in the presence of
differential adherence. In either case, there is no guarantee that an ITT analysis estimates the
clinical effectiveness of treatment. Inverse probability (IP) weighting, g-estimation, and
instrumental variable (IV) estimation can reduce the bias introduced by non-adherence and loss to
follow-up in “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses.
Limitations—IP weighting and g-estimation require untestable assumptions and time-varying
data on confounders and adherence. IV estimation requires a dose-response model and timevarying data on adherence.
Conclusions—We recommend that all RCTs with substantial lack of adherence or loss to
follow-up are analyzed using different methods. These include an ITT analysis to estimate the
effect of assigned treatment, and “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses to estimate the effect of
treatment after appropriate adjustment via IP weighting or g-estimation.
randomized clinical trials; intention to treat analysis; as treated analysis; per protocol analysis;
effectiveness; safety
1. Introduction
Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) are widely viewed as a key tool for comparative
effectiveness research , and the intention-to-treat (ITT) comparison has long been
regarded as the preferred analytic approach for many RCTs .
Indeed the ITT, or “as randomized,” analysis has two crucial advantages over other common
alternatives—for example, an “as treated” analysis. First, in double-blind RCTs, an ITT
Correspondence: Miguel Hernán, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Phone:
+ 1617 432 0101, .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
 
Clin Trials. 2012 February ; 9(1): 48–55. doi:10.1177/1740774511420743.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
comparison provides a valid statistical test of the hypothesis of null effect of treatment. Second, in placebo-controlled trials, an ITT comparison is regarded as conservative
because it underestimates the treatment effect when participants do not fully adhere to their
assigned treatment.
Yet excessive reliance on the ITT approach is problematic, as has been argued by others
before us . In this paper we review the problems of ITT comparisons with an emphasis on
those are especially relevant for comparative effectiveness research. We also review the
shortcomings of “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses as commonly implemented in
RCTs, and recommend the routine use of analytic approaches that address some of those
shortcomings. Let us start by defining two types of causal effects that can be estimated in
2. The effect of assigned treatment versus the effect of treatment
Consider a double-blind clinical trial in which participants are randomly assigned to either
active treatment (Z=1) or placebo (Z=0) and are then followed for 5 years or until they die
(Y=1 if they die within 5 years, Y=0 otherwise). An ITT analysis would compare the 5-year
risk of death in those assigned to treatment with the 5-year risk of death in those assigned to
placebo. An ITT comparison unbiasedly estimates the average causal effect of treatment
assignment Z on the outcome Y. For brevity, we will refer to this as the effect of assigned
treatment.
Trial participants may not adhere to, or comply with, the assigned treatment Z. Some of
those assigned to placebo may decide to take treatment, and some of those assigned to active
treatment may decide not to take it. We use A to refer to the treatment actually received.
Thus, regardless of their assigned treatment Z, some subjects will take treatment (A=1) and
others will not take it (A=0). The use of ITT comparisons is sometimes criticized when not
all trial participants adhere to their assigned treatment Z, i.e., when Z is not equal to A for
every trial participant. For example, consider two RCTs: in the first trial, half of the
participants in the Z=1 group decide not to take treatment; in the second trial, all participants
assigned to Z=1 decide to take the treatment. An ITT comparison will correctly estimate the
effect of assigned treatment Z in both trials, but the effects will be different even if the two
trials are otherwise identical. The direction and magnitude of the effect of assigned
treatment depends on the adherence pattern.
Now suppose that, in each of the two trials with different adherence, we could estimate the
effect that would have been observed if all participants had fully adhered to their treatment
assignment. We will refer to such effect as the average causal effect of treatment A on the
outcome Y or, for brevity, the effect of treatment. The effect of treatment A appears to be an
attractive choice to summarize the findings of RCTs with substantial nonadherence because
it will be the same in two trials that differ only in their adherence pattern.
However, estimating the magnitude of the effect of treatment A without bias requires
assumptions grounded on expert knowledge (see Sections 4 and 5). No matter how
sophisticated the statistical analysis, the estimate of the effect of A will be biased if one
makes incorrect assumptions.
3. The effect of assigned treatment may be misleading
An ITT comparison is simple and therefore very attractive. It bypasses the need for
assumptions regarding adherence and dose-response by focusing on estimating the effect of
assigned treatment Z rather than the effect of treatment A. However, there is a price to pay
for this simplicity, as reviewed in this section.
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
We start by considering placebo-controlled double-blind RCTs. It is well known that if
treatment A has a null effect on the outcome, then both the effect of assigned treatment Z
and the effect of treatment A will be null. This is a key advantage of the ITT analysis: it
correctly estimates the effect of treatment A under the null, regardless of the adherence
pattern. It is also well known that if treatment A has a non-null effect (that is, either
increases or decreases the risk of the outcome) and some participants do not adhere to their
assigned treatment, then the effect of assigned treatment Z will be closer to the null that the
actual effect of treatment A . This bias towards the null is due to contamination of the
treatment groups: some subjects assigned to treatment (Z=1) may not take it (A=0) whereas
some subjects assigned to placebo (Z=0) may find a way to take treatment (A=1). As long as
the proportion of patients who end up taking treatment (A=1) is greater in the group
assigned to treatment (Z=1) than in the group assigned to placebo (Z=0), the effect of
assigned treatment Z will be in between the effect of treatment A and the null value.
The practical effect of this bias varies depending on the goal of the trial. Some placebocontrolled RCTs are designed to quantify a treatment’s beneficial effects—for example, a
trial to determine whether sildenafil reduces the risk of erectile dysfunction. An ITT analysis
of these trials is said to be “conservative” because the effect of assigned treatment Z is
biased towards the null. That is, if an ITT analysis finds a beneficial effect for treatment
assignment Z, then the true beneficial effect of treatment A must be even greater. The
makers of treatment A have a great incentive to design a high-quality study with high levels
of adherence. Otherwise a small beneficial effect of treatment might be missed by the ITT
Other trials are designed to quantify a treatment’s harmful effects—for example, a trial to
determine whether sildenafil increases the risk of cardiovascular disease. An ITT analysis of
these trials is anti-conservative precisely because the effect of assigned treatment Z is biased
towards the null. That is, if an ITT analysis fails to find a toxic effect, there is no guarantee
that treatment A is safe. A trial designed to quantify harm and whose protocol foresees only
an ITT analysis could be referred to as a “randomized cynical trial.”
Now let us consider double-blind RCTs that compare two active treatments. These trials are
often designed to show that a new treatment (A=1) is not inferior to a reference treatment
(A=0) in terms of either benefits or harms. An example of a non-inferiority trial would be
one that compares the reduction in blood glucose between a new inhaled insulin and regular
injectable insulin. The protocol of the trial would specify a non-inferiority margin, that is,
the maximum average difference in blood glucose that is considered equivalent (e.g., 10 mg/
dL). Using an ITT comparison, the new insulin (A=1) will be declared not inferior to
classical insulin (A=0) if the average reduction in blood glucose in the group assigned to the
new treatment (Z=1) is within 10 mg/dL of the average reduction in blood glucose in the
group assigned to the reference treatment (Z=0) plus/minus random variability. Such ITT
analysis may be misleading in the presence of imperfect adherence. To see this, consider the
following scenario.
Scenario 1. The new treatment A=1 is actually inferior to the reference treatment A=0, e.g.,
the average reduction in blood glucose is 10 mg/dL under treatment A=1 and 22 mg/dL
under treatment A=0. The type and magnitude of adherence is equal in the two groups, e.g.
30% of subjects in each group decided not to take insulin. As a result, the average reduction
is, say, 7 mg/dL in the group assigned to the new treatment (Z=1) and 15 mg/dL in the group
assigned to the reference treatment (Z=0). An ITT analysis, which is biased towards the null
in this scenario, may incorrectly suggest that the new treatment A=1 is not inferior to the
reference treatment A=0.
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Other double-blind RCTs with an active comparator are designed to show that a new
treatment (A=1) is superior to the reference treatment (A=0) in terms of either benefits or
harms. An example of a superiority trial would be one that compares the risk of heart disease
between two antiretroviral regimes. Using an ITT comparison, the new regimen (A=1) will
be declared superior to the reference regime (A=0) if the heart disease risk is lower in the
group assigned to the new regime (Z=1) than in the group assigned to the reference regime
(Z=0) plus/minus random variability. Again such ITT analysis may be misleading in the
presence of imperfect adherence. Consider the following scenario.
Scenario 2. The new treatment A=1 is actually equivalent to the reference treatment A=0,
e.g., the five-year risk of heart disease is 3% under either treatment A=1 or treatment A=0,
and the risk in the absence of either treatment is 1%. The type or magnitude of adherence
differs between the two groups, e.g., 50% of subjects assigned to the new regime and 10%
of those assigned to the reference regime decided not to take their treatment because of
minor side effects. As a result, the risk is, say, 2% in the group assigned to the new regime
(Z=1) and 2.8% in the group assigned to the reference regime (Z=0). An ITT analysis, which
is biased away from the null in this scenario, may incorrectly suggest that treatment A=1 is
superior to treatment A=0.
An ITT analysis of RCTs with an active comparator may result in effect estimates that are
biased towards (Scenario 1) or away from (Scenario 2) the null. In other words, the
magnitude of the effect of assigned treatment Z may be greater than or less than the effect of
treatment A. The direction of the bias depends on the proportion of subjects that do not
adhere to treatment in each group, and on the reasons for non-adherence.
Yet a common justification for ITT comparisons is the following: Adherence is not perfect
in clinical practice. Therefore clinicians may be more interested in consistently estimating
the effect of assigned treatment Z, which already incorporates the impact of nonadherence,
than the effect of treatment A in the absence of nonadherence. That is, the effect of assigned
treatment Z reflects a treatment’s clinical effectiveness and therefore should be privileged
over the effect of treatment A. In the next section we summarize the reasons why this is not
necessarily true.
4. The effect of assigned treatment is not the same as the effectiveness of
Effectiveness is usually defined as “how well a treatment works in everyday practice,” and
efficacy as “how well a treatment works under perfect adherence and highly controlled
conditions.” Thus the effect of assigned treatment Z in post-approval settings is often
equated with effectiveness, whereas the effect of treatment Z in pre-approval settings (which
is close to the effect of A when adherence is high) is often equated with efficacy. There is,
however, no guarantee that the effect of assigned treatment Z matches the treatment’s
effectiveness in routine medical practice. A discrepancy may arise for multiple reasons,
including differences in patient characteristics, monitoring, or blinding, as we now briefly
The eligibility criteria for participants in RCTs are shaped by methodologic and ethical
considerations. To maximize adherence to the protocol, many RCTs exclude individuals
with severe disease, comorbidities or polypharmacy. To minimize risks to vulnerable
populations, many RCTs exclude pregnant women, children, or institutionalized
populations. As a consequence, the characteristics of participants in an RCT may be, on
average, different from those of the individuals who will receive the treatment in clinical
practice. If the effect of the treatment under study varies by those characteristics then the effect of
assigned treatment Z in the trial will differ from the treatment’s effectiveness in clinical
Patients in RCTs are often more intensely monitored than patients in clinical practice. This
greater intensity of monitoring may lead to earlier detection of problems (i.e., toxicity,
inadequate dosing) in RCTs compared with clinical practice. Thus a treatment’s
effectiveness may be greater in RCTs because the earlier detection of problems results in
more timely therapeutic modifications, including modifications in treatment dosing,
switching to less toxic treatments, or addition of concomitant treatments.
Blinding is a useful approach to prevent bias from differential ascertainment of the outcome
 . There is, however, an inherent contradiction in conducting a double-blind study while
arguing that the goal of the study is estimating the effectiveness in routine medical practice.
In real life, both patients and doctors are aware of the assigned treatment. A true
effectiveness measure should incorporate the effects of assignment awareness (e.g.,
behavioral changes) that are eliminated in ITT comparisons of double-blind RCTs.
Some RCTs, commonly referred to as pragmatic trials , are specifically designed to
guide decisions in clinical practice. Compared with highly controlled trials, pragmatic trials
include less selected participants and are conducted under more realistic conditions, which
may result in lower adherence to the assigned treatment. It is often argued that an ITT
analysis of pragmatic trials is particularly appropriate to measure the treatment’s
effectiveness, and thus that pragmatic trials are the best design for comparative effectiveness
research. However, this argument raises at least two concerns.
First, the effect of assigned treatment Z is influenced by the adherence patterns observed in
the trial, regardless of whether the trial is a pragmatic one. Compared with clinical practice,
trial participants may have a greater adherence because they are closely monitored (see
above), or simply because they are the selected group who received informed consent and
accepted to participate. Patients outside the trial may have a greater adherence after they
learn, perhaps based on the trial findings, that treatment is beneficial. Therefore the effect of
assigned treatment estimated by an ITT analysis may under- or overestimate the
effectiveness of the treatment.
Second, the effect of assigned treatment Z is inadequate for patients who are interested in
initiating and fully adhering to a treatment A that has been shown to be efficacious in
previous RCTs. In order to make the best informed decision, these patients would like to
know the effect of treatment A rather than an effect of assigned treatment contaminated by
others patients’ nonadherence . For example, to decide whether to use certain
contraception method, a couple may want to know the failure rate if they use the method as
indicated, rather than the failure rate in a population that included a substantial proportion of
non-adherers. Therefore the effect of assigned treatment Z may be an insufficient summary
measure of the trial data, even if it actually measures the treatment’s effectiveness.
In summary, the effect of assigned treatment Z—estimated via an ITT comparison—may not
be a valid measure of the effectiveness of treatment A in clinical practice. And even if it
were, effectiveness is not always the most interesting effect measure. These considerations,
together with the inappropriateness of ITT comparisons for safety and non-inferiority trials,
make it necessary to expand the reporting of results from randomized clinical trials beyond
ITT analyses. The next section reviews other analytic approaches for data from RCTs.
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
5. Conventional “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses
Two common attempts to estimate the effect of treatment A are “as treated” and “per
protocol” comparisons. Neither is generally valid.
An “as treated” analysis classifies RCT participants according to the treatment that they took
(either A=1 or A=0) rather than according to the treatment that they were assigned to (either
Z=1 or Z=0). Then an “as treated” analysis compares the risk (or the mean) of the outcome
Y among those who took treatment (A=1) with that among those who did not take treatment
(A=0), regardless of their treatment assignment Z. That is, an “as treated” comparison
ignores that the data come from an RCT and rather treats them as coming from an
observational study. As a result, an “as treated” comparison will be confounded if the
reasons that moved participants to take treatment were associated with prognostic factors.
The causal diagram in Figure 1 represents the confounding as a noncausal association
between A and Y when there exist prognostic factors L that also affect the decision to take
treatment A (U is an unmeasured common cause of L and Y). Confounding arises in an “as
treated” analysis when not all prognostic factors L are appropriately measured and adjusted
A “per protocol” analysis—also referred to as an “on treatment” analysis— only includes
individuals who adhered to the clinical trial instructions as specified in the study protocol.
The subset of trial participants included in a “per protocol” analysis, referred to as the per
protocol population, includes only participants with A equal to Z: those who were assigned
to treatment (Z=1) and took it (A=1), and those who were not assigned to treatment (Z=0)
and did not take it (A=0). A “per protocol” analysis compares the risk (or the mean) of the
outcome Y among those who were assigned to treatment (Z=1) with that among those who
were not assigned to treatment (Z=0) in the per protocol population. This contrast will be
affected by selection bias if the reasons that moved participants to adhere to their
assigned treatment were associated with prognostic factors L (via A). The causal diagram in
Figure 2 includes S as an indicator of selection into the “per protocol” population. The
selection indicator S is fully determined by the values of Z and A, i.e., S=1 when A=Z, and
S=0 otherwise. The selection bias is a noncausal association between Z and Y that arises
when the analysis is restricted to the “per protocol” population (S=1) and not all prognostic
factors L are appropriately measured and adjusted for.
As an example of biased “as treated” and “per protocol” estimates of the effect of treatment
A, consider the following scenario.
Scenario 3. An RCT assigns men to either colonoscopy (Z=1) or no colonoscopy (Z=0).
Suppose that undergoing a colonoscopy (A=1) does not affect the 10-year risk of death from
colon cancer (Y) compared with not undergoing a colonoscopy (A=0), i.e.., the effect of
treatment A is null. Further suppose that, among men assigned to Z=1, those with family
history of colon cancer (L=1) are more likely to adhere to their assigned treatment and
undergo the colonoscopy (A=1).
Even though A has a null effect, an “as treated” analysis will find that men undergoing
colonoscopy (A=1) are more likely to die from colon cancer because they include a greater
proportion of men with a predisposition to colon cancer than the others (A=0). This is the
situation depicted in Figure 1. Similarly, a “per protocol” analysis will find a greater risk of
death from colon cancer in the group Z=1 than in the group Z=0 because the per protocol
restriction A=Z overloads the group assigned to colonoscopy with men with a family history
of colon cancer. This is the situation depicted in Figure 2.
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The confounding bias in the “as treated” analysis and the selection bias in the “per protocol”
analysis can go in either direction—for example, suppose that L represents healthy
childhood diet rather than family history of colon cancer. In general the direction of the bias
is hard to predict because it is possible that the proportions of people with a family history,
healthy diet, and any other prognostic factor will vary between the groups A=1 and A=0
conditional on Z.
In summary, “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses transform RCTs into observational
studies for all practical purposes. The estimates from these analyses can only be interpreted
as the effect of treatment A if the analysis is appropriately adjusted for the confounders L. If
the intended analysis of the RCT is “as treated” or “per protocol”, then the protocol of the
trial should describe the potential confounders and how they will be measured, just like the
protocol of an observational study would do.
6. More general “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses to estimate the
effect of treatment
So far we have made the simplifying assumption that adherence is all or nothing. But in
reality RCT participants may adhere to their assigned treatment intermittently, e.g., they
may take their assigned treatment for 2 months, discontinue it for the next 3 months, and
then resume it until the end of the study. Or subjects may take treatment constantly but at a
lower dose than assigned, e.g., by taking only one pill per day when they should take two.
That is, treatment A is generally a time-varying variable—each day you may take it or not
take it—rather than a time-fixed variable—you either always take it or never take it during
the follow-up.
An “as treated” analysis with a time-varying treatment A usually needs to include some sort
of dose-response model. A “per protocol” analysis with a time-varying treatment A includes
all RCT participants but censors them if/when they deviate from their assigned treatment.
The censoring usually occurs at a fixed time after nonadherence, say, 6 months. The per
protocol population in this variation refers to the adherent person-time rather than to the
adherent persons.
Because previous sections were only concerned with introducing some basic problems of
ITT, “as treated”, and “per protocol” analyses, it may have been acceptable to consider A as
a time-fixed variable. However, this simplification may be unrealistic and misleading in
practice. When treatment A is truly time-varying (i) the effect of treatment needs to be
redefined, and (ii) appropriate adjustment for the measured confounders L cannot generally
be achieved by using conventional methods such as stratification, regression, or matching.
The definition of the average causal effect of a time-fixed treatment involves the contrast
between two clinical regimes. For example, we defined the causal effect of a time-fixed
treatment as a contrast between the average outcome that would be observed if all
participants took treatment A=1 versus treatment A=0. The two regimes are taking treatment
A=1 and taking treatment A=0. The definition of the causal effect of a time-varying
treatment also involves a contrast between two clinical regimes. For example, we can define
the causal effect of a time-varying treatment as a contrast between the average outcome that
would be observed if all participants had continuous treatment with A=1 versus continuous
treatment with A=0 during the entire follow-up. We sometimes refer to this causal effect as
the effect of continuous treatment.
When the treatment is time-varying, so are the confounders. For example, the probability of
taking antiretroviral therapy increases in the presence of symptoms of HIV disease. Both
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
therapy and confounders evolve together during the follow-up. When the time-varying
confounders are affected by previous treatment—for example, antiretroviral therapy use
reduces the frequency of symptoms—conventional methods cannot appropriately adjust for
the measured confounders . Rather, inverse probability (IP) weighting or g-estimation
are generally needed for confounding adjustment in “as treated” and “per protocol” analyses
involving time-varying treatments .
Both IP weighting and g-estimation require that time-varying confounders and time-varying
treatments are measured during the entire follow-up. Thus, if planning to use these
adjustment methods, the protocol of the trial should describe the potential confounders and
how they will be measured. Unfortunately, like in any observational study, there is no
guarantee that all confounders will be identified and correctly measured, which may result in
biased estimates of the effect of continuous treatment in “as treated” and “per protocol”
analyses involving time-varying treatments.
An alternative adjustment method is instrumental variable (IV) estimation, a particular form
of g-estimation that does not require measurement of any confounders . In doubleblind RCTs, IV estimation eliminates confounding for the effect of continuous treatment A
by exploiting the fact that the initial treatment assignment Z was random. Thus if the timevarying treatment A is measured and a correctly specified structural model used, IV
estimation adjusts for confounding without measuring, or even knowing, the confounders.
A detailed description of IP weighting, g-estimation, and IV estimation is beyond the scope
of this paper. Toh and Hernán review these methods for RCTs . IP weighting and gestimation can also be used to estimate the effect of treatment regimes that may be more
clinically relevant than the effect of continuous treatment .
7. Discussion
An ITT analysis of RCTs is appealing for the same reason it may be appalling: simplicity.
As described above, ITT estimates may be inadequate for the assessment of comparative
effectiveness or safety. In the presence of nonadherence the ITT effect is a biased estimate
of a treatment’s effects such as the effect of continuous treatment. This bias can be corrected
in an appropriately adjusted “as treated” analysis via IP weighting, g-estimation, or IV
estimation. However, IP weighting and g-estimation require untestable assumptions similar
to those made for causal inference from observational data. IV estimation requires a doseresponse model and its validity is questionable for non-blinded RCTs.
The ITT approach is also problematic if a large proportion of participants drop out or are
otherwise lost to follow-up, or if the outcomes are incompletely ascertained among those
completing the study. In these studies, an ITT comparison cannot be conducted because the
value of the outcome is missing for some individuals. To circumvent this problem, the ITT
analysis is often replaced by a pseudo-ITT analysis that is restricted to subjects with
complete data or in which the last observation is carried forward. These pseudo-ITT
analyses may be affected by selection bias in either direction. Adjusting for this bias is
possible via IP weighting if information on the time-varying determinants of loss to followup is available, but again the validity of the adjustment relies on untestable assumptions
about the unmeasured variables .
RCTs with long follow-up periods, as expected in many comparative effectiveness research
settings, are especially susceptible to bias due to nonadherence and loss to follow-up. As
these problems accumulate over time, the RCT starts to resemble a prospective
observational study, and the ITT analysis yields an increasingly biased estimate of the effect
of continuous treatment. Consider, for example, a Women’s Health Initiative randomized
Hernán and Hernández-Díaz
Clin Trials. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
trial that assigned postmenopausal women to either estrogen plus progestin hormone therapy
or placebo . About 40% of women had stopped taking at least 80% of their assigned
treatment by the 6th year of follow-up. The ITT hazard ratio of breast cancer was 1.25 (95%
CI: 1.01, 1.54) for hormone therapy vs. placebo. The IP weighted hazard ratio of breast
cancer was 1.68 (1.24, 2.28) for 8 years of continuous hormone therapy vs. no hormone
therapy . These findings suggest that the effect of continuous treatment was more than
two-fold greater than the effect of assigned treatment. Of course, neither of these estimates
reflects the long-term effect of hormone therapy in clinical practice (e.g., the adherence to
hormone therapy was much higher in the trial than in the real world).
When analyzing data from RCTs, the question is not whether assumptions are made but
rather which assumptions are made. In an RCT with incomplete follow-up or outcome
ascertainment, a pseudo-ITT analysis assumes that the loss to follow-up occurs completely
at random whereas an IP weighted ITT analysis makes less strong assumptions (e.g., followup occurs at random conditional on the measured covariates). In an RCT with incomplete
adherence, an ITT analysis shifts the burden of assessing the actual magnitude of the effect
from the data analysts to the clinicians and other decision makers, who will need to make
assumptions about the potential bias introduced by lack of adherence. Supplementing the
ITT effects with “as treated”or “per protocol” effects can help decision makers , but
only if a reasonable attempt is made to appropriately adjust for confounding and selection
In summary, we recommend that all RCTs with substantial lack of adherence or loss to
follow-up be analyzed using different methods, including an ITT analysis to estimate the
effect of assigned treatment, and appropriately adjusted “per protocol” and “as treated”
analyses (i.e., via IP weighting or g-estimation) to estimate the effect of received treatment.
Each approach has relative advantages and disadvantages, and depends on a different
combination of assumptions . To implement this recommendation, RCT protocols
should include a more sophisticated statistical analysis plan, as well as plans to measure
adherence and other post-randomization variables. This added complexity is necessary to
take full advantage of the substantial societal resources that are invested in RCTs.
Acknowledgments
Funding: National Institutes of Health grant R01 HL080644-01
We thank Goodarz Danaei for his comments to an earlier version of this manuscript.