Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index
in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)
Interested in publishing with us?
Contact 
Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected.
For more information visit www.intechopen.com
Open access books available
Countries delivered to
Contributors from top 500 universities
International authors and editors
Our authors are among the
most cited scientists
We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of
Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists
Introduction to Machine Learning
Introduction to Machine Learning
Taiwo Oladipupo Ayodele
University of Portsmouth
United Kingdom
1. Introduction
In present times, giving a computer to carry out any task requires a set of specific
instructions or the implementation of an algorithm that defines the rules that need to be
followed. The present day computer system has no ability to learn from past experiences
and hence cannot readily improve on the basis of past mistakes. So, giving a computer or
instructing a computer controlled programme to perform a task requires one to define a
complete and correct algorithm for task and then programme the algorithm into the
computer. Such activities involve tedious and time consuming effort by specially trained
teacher or person. Jaime et al also explained that the present day
computer systems cannot truly learn to perform a task through examples or through
previous solved task and they cannot improve on the basis of past mistakes or acquire new
abilities by observing and imitating experts. Machine Learning research endeavours to open
the possibility of instruction the computer in such a new way and thereby promise to ease
the burden of hand writing programmes and growing problems of complex information
that get complicated in the computer.
When approaching a task-oriented acquisition task, one must be aware that the resultant
computer system must interact with human and therefore should closely match human
abilities. So, learning machine or programme on the other hand will have to interact with
computer users who make use of them and consequently the concept and skills they
acquire- if not necessarily their internal mechanism must be understandable to humans.
Also Alpaydin stated that with advances in computer technology, we
currently have the ability to store and process large amount of data, as well as access it from
physically distant locations over computer network. Most data acquisition devices are
digital now and record reliable data. For example, a supermarket chain that has hundreds of
stores all over the country selling thousands of goods to millions of customers. The point of
sale terminals record the details of each transaction: date, customer identification code,
goods bought and their amount, total money spent and so forth, This typically amounts to
gigabytes of data every day. This store data becomes useful only when it is analysed and
tuned into information that can be used or be predicted.
We do not know exactly which people are likely to buy a particular product or which author
to suggest to people who enjoy reading Hemingway. If we knew, we would not need any
analysis of the data; we would just go ahead and write down code. But because we do not,
we can only collect data and hope to extract the answers to these and similar question from
www.intechopen.com
New Advances in Machine Learning
data. We can construct a good and useful approximation. That approximation may not
explain everything, but may still be able to account for some part of data. We believe that
identifying the complete process may not be possible, we can still detect certain patterns or
regularities. This is the niche of machine learning. Such patterns may help us understand
the process, or we can use those patterns to make predictions: Assuming that the future, at
least the near future, will not be much different from the past when the sample data was
collected, the future predictions can be expected to be right.
Machine learning is not just a database problem, it is a part of artificial intelligence. To be
intelligent, a system that is in a changing environment should have the ability to learn. If the
system can learn and adapt to such changes, the system designer need not foresee and
provide solutions for all possible situations. Machine learning also help us find solutions to
may problems in vision, speech recognition and robotics. Lets take the example of
recognising of faces: This is a task we do effortlessly; we recognise family members and
friends by looking their faces or from their photographs, despite differences in pose,
lighting, hair, style and so forth. But we do consciously and are able to explain how we do it.
Because we are not able to explain our expertise, we cannot write the computer program. At
the same time, we know that a face image is not just a random collection of pixel: a face has
structure, it is symmetric. There are the eyes, the nose, the mouth, located in certain places
on the face. Each person’s face is a pattern that composed of a particular combination of
these. By analysing sample face images of person, a learning program captures the pattern
specific to that person and then recognises by checking for the pattern in a given image. This
is one example of pattern recognition.
Machine learning is programming computers to optimise a performance criterion using
example data or past experience. We have a model defined up to some parameters, and
learning is the execution of a computer program to optimise the parameter of the model
using the training data or past experience. The model may be predictive to make predictions
in the future, or descriptive to gain knowledge from data, or both. Machine learning uses the
theory of statistics in building mathematical models, because the core task is making
inference from sample. The role of learning is twofold: First, in training, we need efficient
algorithms to solve the optimised problem, as well as to store and process the massive
amount of data we generally have. Second, once a model is learned, its representation and
algorithmic solution for inference needs to be efficient as well. In certain applications, the
efficiency of the learning or inference algorithm, namely, its space and time complexity may
be as important as its predictive accuracy.
1.1 History of Machine Learning
Over the years, Jaime et al elaborated that research in machine
learning has been pursued with varying degrees of intensity, using different approaches and
placing emphasis on different, aspects and goals. Within the relatively short history of this
discipline, one may distinguish three major periods, each centred on a different concept:
neural modelling and decision-theoretic techniques
symbolic concept-oriented learning
knowledge-intensive approaches combining various learning strategies
www.intechopen.com
Introduction to Machine Learning
1.1.1 The Neural Modelling (Self Organised System)
The distinguishing feature of the first concept was the interest in building general purpose
learning systems that start with little or no initial structure or task-oriented knowledge. The
major thrust of research based on this approach involved constructing a variety of neural
model-based machines, with random or partially random initial structure. These systems
were generally referred to as neural networks or self-organizing systems. Learning in such
systems consisted of incremental changes in the probabilities that neuron-like elements
(typically threshold logic units) would transmit a signal. Due to the early computer
technology, most of the research under this neural network model was either theoretical or
involved the construction of special purpose experimental hardware systems, such as
perceptrons , , pandemonium
 , and . The groundwork for this paradigm was laid in the
forties by Rashevsky in the area of mathematical biophysics , and by
McCulloch , who discovered the applicability of symbolic logic to
modelling nervous system activities. Among the large number of research efforts in this
area, one may mention many works such as , , , . Related research involved the simulation of evolutionary processes,
that through random mutation and “natural” selection might create a system capable of
some intelligent, behaviour , .
Experience in the above areas spawned the new discipline of pattern recognition and led to
the development of a decision-theoretic approach to machine learning. In this approach,
learning is equated with the acquisition of linear, polynomial, or related discriminant
functions from a given set of training examples Example include, . One of the
best known successful learning systems utilizing such techniques (as well as some original
new ideas involving non-linear transformations) was Samuel’s checkers program, . Through repeated training, this program acquired master-level
performance somewhat, different, but closely related, techniques utilized methods of
statistical decision theory for learning pattern recognition rules.
1.1.2 The Symbolic Concept Acquisition Paradigm
A second major paradigm started to emerge in the early sixties stemming from the work of
psychologist and early AI researchers on models of human learning by Hunt .
The paradigm utilized logic or graph structure representations rather than numerical or
statistical methods Systems learned symbolic descriptions representing higher level
knowledge and made strong structural assumptions about the concepts to he acquired.
Examples of work in this paradigm include research on human concept acquisition and various applied pattern recognition systems. Some researchers constructed taskoriented specialized systems that, would acquire knowledge in the context of a practical
problem. Ryszard , learning system was an influential
development in this paradigm. In parallel with Winston’s work, different approaches to
learning structural concepts from examples emerged, including a family of logic-based
inductive learning programs.
www.intechopen.com
New Advances in Machine Learning
1.1.3 The Modern Knowledge-Intensive Paradigm
The third paradigm represented the most recent period of research starting in the midseventies. Researchers have broadened their interest beyond learning isolated concepts from
examples, and have begun investigating a wide spectrum of learning methods, most based
upon knowledge-rich systems specifically, this paradigm can be characterizing by several
new trends, including:
Knowledge-Intensive Approaches: Researchers are strongly emphasizing the use
of task-oriented knowledge and the constraints it provides in guiding the learning
process One lesson from the failures of earlier knowledge and poor learning
systems that is acquire and to acquire new knowledge a system must already
possess a great deal of initial knowledge
Exploration of alternative methods of learning: In addition to the earlier research
emphasis on learning from examples, researchers are now investigating a wider
variety of learning methods such as learning from instruction, , learning by analogy and discovery of concepts and classifications .
In contrast to previous efforts, a number of current systems are incorporating abilities to
generate and select tasks and also incorporate heuristics to control their focus of attention by
generating learning tasks, proposing experiments to gather training data, and choosing
concepts to acquire .
1.2. Importance of Machine Learning
These are benefits of machine learning and these are why research in machine learning is
now what could not be avoided or neglected. Using machine learning techniques make life
easier for computer users. These are the importance of machine learning. They are:
Some tasks cannot be defined well except by example; that is we might be able to
specify input and output pairs but not a concise relationship between inputs and
desired outputs. We would like machines to be able to adjust their internal
structure to produce correct outputs for a large number of sample inputs and thus
suitably constrain their input and output function to approximate the relationship
implicit in the examples.
It is possible that hidden among large piles of data are important relationships and
correlations. Machine learning methods can often be used to extract these
relationships (data mining).
Human designers often produce machines that do not work as well as desired in
the environments in which they are used. In fact, certain characteristics of the
working environment might not be completely known at design time. Machine
learning methods can be used for on the
job improvement of existing machine
www.intechopen.com
Introduction to Machine Learning
The amount of knowledge available about certain tasks might be too large for
explicit encoding by humans. Machines that learn this knowledge gradually might
be able to capture more of it than humans would want to write down.
Environments change over time. Machines that can adapt to a changing
environment would reduce the need for constant redesign. New knowledge about
tasks is constantly being discovered by humans. Vocabulary changes. There is a
constant stream of new events in the world. Continuing redesign of AI systems to
conform to new knowledge is impractical. But machine learning methods might be
able to track much of it.
1.3 Machine Learning Varieties
Research in machine learning is now converging from several sources and from artificial
intelligent field. These different traditions each bring different methods and different
vocabulary which are now being assimilated into a more united discipline. Here is a brief
listing of some of the separate disciplines that have contributed to machine learning
 .
Statistics: A long-standing problem in statistics is how best to use samples drawn
from unknown probability distributions to help decide from which distribution
some new sample is drawn. A related problem is how to estimate the value of an
unknown function at a new point given the values of this function at a set of
sample points. Statistical methods for dealing with these problems can be
considered instances of machine learning because the decision and estimation rules
depend on a corpus of samples drawn from the problem environment. We will
explore some of the statistical methods later in the book. Details about the
statistical theory underlying these methods can be found in Orlitsky .
Brian Models: Non linear elements with weighted inputs have been suggested as
simple models of biological neurons. Networks of these elements have been
studied by several researchers including . Brain modelers
are interested in how closely these networks approximate the learning phenomena
of living brain. We shall see that several important machine learning techniques are
based on networks of nonlinear elements often called neural networks. Work
inspired by this school is some times called connectionism, brain-style computation
or sub-symbolic processing.
Adaptive Control Theory: Control theorists study the problem of controlling a
process having unknown parameters which must be estimated during operation.
Often, the parameters change during operation and the control process must track
these changes. Some aspects of controlling a robot based on sensory inputs
represent instances of this sort of problem.
www.intechopen.com
New Advances in Machine Learning
Psychological Models: Psychologists have studied the performance of humans in
various learning tasks. An early example is the EPAM network for storing and
retrieving one member of a pair of words when given another .
Related work led to a number of early decision tree, and semantic
network, methods. More recent work of this sort has been
influenced by activities in artificial intelligence which we will be presenting. Some
of the work in reinforcement learning can be traced to efforts to model how reward
stimuli influence the learning of goal seeking behaviour in animals, . Reinforcement learning is an important theme in machine learning
Artificial Intelligence From the beginning, AI research has been concerned with
machine learning. Samuel developed a prominent early program that learned
parameters of a function for evaluating board positions in the game of checkers. AI
researchers have also explored the role of analogies in learning and how future
actions and decisions can be based on previous exemplary cases. Recent work has
been directed at discovering rules for expert systems using decision tree methods
and inductive logic programming Another theme has been saving and
generalizing the results of problem solving using explanation based learning,
 , .
Evolutionary Models
In nature, not only do individual animals learn to perform better, but species
evolve to be better fit in their individual niches. Since the distinction between
evolving and learning can be blurred in computer systems, techniques that model
certain aspects of biological evolution have been proposed as learning methods to
improve the performance of computer programs. Genetic algorithms and genetic
programming are the most prominent computational techniques for
evolution.
2. References
Allix, N. M. . Epistemology And Knowledge Management Concepts And
Practices. Journal of Knowledge Management Practice .
Alpaydin, E. . Introduction to Machine Learning. Massachusetts, USA: MIT Press.
Anderson, J. R. . Learning and Memory. Wiley, New York, USA.
Anil Mathur, G. P. . Socialization influences on preparation for later life. Journal of
Marketing Practice: Applied Marketing Science , 5 (6,7,8), 163 - 176.
Ashby, W. R. . Design of a Brain, The Origin of Adaptive Behaviour. John Wiley and Son.
Batista, G. &. . An Analysis of Four Missing Data Treatment Methods for Suppervised
Learning. Applied Artificial Intelligence , 17, 519-533.
Bishop, C. M. . Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Bishop, C. M. . Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics). New York, New York: Springer Science and Business Media.
Block H, D. . The Perceptron: A Model of Brian Functioning. 34 (1), 123-135.
www.intechopen.com
Introduction to Machine Learning
Carling, A. . Introducing Neural Networks . Wilmslow, UK: Sigma Press.
D. Michie, D. J. . Machine Learning, Neural and Statistical Classification. Prentice Hall Inc.
Fausett, L. (19994). Fundamentals of Neural Networks. New York: Prentice Hall.
Forsyth, R. S. . The strange story of the Perceptron. Artificial Intelligence Review , 4 (2),
Friedberg, R. M. . A learning machine: Part, 1. IBM Journal , 2-13.
Ghahramani, Z. . Unsupervised learning algorithms are designed to extract structure
from data. 178, pp. 1-8. IOS Press.
Gillies, D. . Artificial Intelligence and Scientific Method. OUP Oxford.
Haykin, S. (19994). Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. New York: Macmillan
Publishing.
Hodge, V. A. . A Survey of Outlier Detection Methodologies. Artificial Intelligence
Review , 22 (2), 85-126.
Holland, J. . Adaptive Algorithms for Discovering and Using General Patterns in
Growing Knowledge Bases Policy Analysis and Information Systems. 4 (3).
Hunt, E. B. . Experiment in Induction.
Ian H. Witten, E. F. . Data Mining Practical Machine Learning and Techniques (Second
edition ed.). Morgan Kaufmann.
Jaime G. Carbonell, R. S. . Machine Learning: A Historical and Methodological
Analysis. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence , 4 (3), 1-10.
Kohonen, T. . Self-Organizating Maps.
Luis Gonz, l. A. . Unified dual for bi-class SVM approaches. Pattern Recognition , 38
(10), 1772-1774.
McCulloch, W. S. . A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bull.
Math. Biophysics , 115-133.
Mitchell, T. M. . The Discipline of Machine Learning. Machine Learning Department
technical report CMU-ML-06-108, Carnegie Mellon University.
Mooney, R. J. . Learning Language in Logic. In L. N. Science, Learning for Semantic
Interpretation: Scaling Up without Dumbing Down (pp. 219-234). Springer Berlin /
Heidelberg.
Mostow, D. . Transforming declarative advice into effective procedures: a heuristic search
cxamplc In I?. S. Michalski,. Tioga Press.
Nilsson, N. J. . Principles of Artificial Intelligence (Symbolic Computation / Artificial
Intelligence). Springer.
Oltean, M. . Evolving Evolutionary Algorithms Using Linear Genetic Programming.
13 (3), 387 - 410 .
Orlitsky, A., Santhanam, N., Viswanathan, K., & Zhang, J. . Convergence of profile
based estimators. Proceedings of International Symposium on Information Theory.
Proceedings. International Symposium on, pp. 1843 - 1847. Adelaide, Australia: IEEE.
Patterson, D. (19996). Artificial Neural Networks. Singapore: Prentice Hall.
R. S. Michalski, T. J. . Learning from Observation: Conceptual Clustering. TIOGA
Publishing Co.
Rajesh P. N. Rao, B. A. . Probabilistic Models of the Brain. MIT Press.
Rashevsky, N. . Mathematical Biophysics:Physico-Mathematical Foundations of Biology.
Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Richard O. Duda, P. E. . Pattern Classification (2nd Edition ed.).
www.intechopen.com
New Advances in Machine Learning
Richard S. Sutton, A. G. . Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press.
Ripley, B. . Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge University Press.
Rosenblatt, F. . The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain . Psychological Review , 65 (6), 386-408.
Russell, S. J. . Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (2nd Edition ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall.
Ryszard S. Michalski, J. G. . Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach
(Volume I). Morgan Kaufmann .
Ryszard S. Michalski, J. G. . Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach.
Selfridge, O. G. . Pandemonium: a paradigm for learning. In The mechanisation of
thought processes. H.M.S.O., London. London.
Sleeman, D. H. . Inferring Student Models for Intelligent CAI. Machine Learning. Tioga
Tapas Kanungo, D. M. . A local search approximation algorithm for k-means
clustering. Proceedings of the eighteenth annual symposium on Computational geometry
(pp. 10-18). Barcelona, Spain : ACM Press.
Timothy Jason Shepard, P. J. . Decision Fusion Using a Multi-Linear Classifier . In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Multisource-Multisensor Information
Tom, M. . Machibe Learning. Machine Learning, Tom Mitchell, McGraw Hill, 1997:
McGraw Hill.
Trevor Hastie, R. T. . The Elements of Statistical Learning. New york, NY, USA: Springer
Science and Business Media.
Widrow, B. W. . Adaptive Inverse Control: A Signal Processing Approach. Wiley-IEEE
Y. Chali, S. R. . Complex Question Answering: Unsupervised Learning Approaches
and Experiments. Journal of Artificial Intelligent Research , 1-47.
Yu, L. L. . Efficient feature Selection via Analysis of Relevance and
Redundacy. JMLR , 1205-1224.
Zhang, S. Z. . Data Preparation for Data Mining. Applied Artificial Intelligence. 17,
375 - 381.
www.intechopen.com
New Advances in Machine Learning
Edited by Yagang Zhang
ISBN 978-953-307-034-6
Hard cover, 366 pages
Publisher InTech
Published online 01, February, 2010
 
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com
InTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821
The purpose of this book is to provide an up-to-date and systematical introduction to the principles and
algorithms of machine learning. The definition of learning is broad enough to include most tasks that we
commonly call “learning” tasks, as we use the word in daily life. It is also broad enough to encompass
computers that improve from experience in quite straightforward ways. The book will be of interest to industrial
engineers and scientists as well as academics who wish to pursue machine learning. The book is intended for
both graduate and postgraduate students in fields such as computer science, cybernetics, system sciences,
engineering, statistics, and social sciences, and as a reference for software professionals and practitioners.
The wide scope of the book provides a good introduction to many approaches of machine learning, and it is
also the source of useful bibliographical information.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Taiwo Oladipupo Ayodele . Introduction to Machine Learning, New Advances in Machine Learning,
Yagang Zhang (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-034-6, InTech, Available from:
 
© 2010 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike-3.0 License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction for
non-commercial purposes, provided the original is properly cited and
derivative works building on this content are distributed under the same