Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 643–648,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c⃝2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Parsing for Single-Relation Question Answering
Wen-tau Yih
Xiaodong He
Christopher Meek
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{scottyih,xiaohe,meek}@microsoft.com
We develop a semantic parsing framework
based on semantic similarity for open domain question answering (QA). We focus
on single-relation questions and decompose each question into an entity mention and a relation pattern. Using convolutional neural network models, we measure the similarity of entity mentions with
entities in the knowledge base (KB) and
the similarity of relation patterns and relations in the KB. We score relational
triples in the KB using these measures
and select the top scoring relational triple
to answer the question. When evaluated
on an open-domain QA task, our method
achieves higher precision across different
recall points compared to the previous approach, and can improve F1 by 7 points.
Introduction
Open-domain question answering (QA) is an important and yet challenging problem that remains
largely unsolved. In this paper, we focus on answering single-relation factual questions, which
are the most common type of question observed in
various community QA sites ,
as well as in search query logs.
We assumed
such questions are answerable by issuing a singlerelation query that consists of the relation and an
argument entity, against a knowledge base (KB).
Example questions of this type include: “Who is
the CEO of Tesla?” and “Who founded Paypal?”
While single-relation questions are easier to
handle than questions with more complex and
multiple relations, such as “When was the child of
the former Secretary of State in Obama’s administration born?”, single-relation questions are still
far from completely solved. Even in this restricted
domain there are a large number of paraphrases of
the same question. That is to say that the problem
of mapping from a question to a particular relation
and entity in the KB is non-trivial.
In this paper, we propose a semantic parsing
framework tailored to single-relation questions.
At the core of our approach is a novel semantic
similarity model using convolutional neural networks. Leveraging the question paraphrase data
mined from the WikiAnswers corpus by Fader et
al. , we train two semantic similarity models: one links a mention from the question to an
entity in the KB and the other maps a relation pattern to a relation. The answer to the question can
thus be derived by ﬁnding the relation–entity triple
r(e1, e2) in the KB and returning the entity not
mentioned in the question. By using a general semantic similarity model to match patterns and relations, as well as mentions and entities, our system outperforms the existing rule learning system,
PARALEX , with higher precision at all the recall points when answering the
questions in the same test set. The highest achievable F1 score of our system is 0.61, versus 0.54 of
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
We ﬁrst survey related work in Sec. 2, followed by
the problem deﬁnition and the high-level description of our approach in Sec. 3. Sec. 4 details our
semantic models and Sec. 5 shows the experimental results. Finally, Sec. 6 concludes the paper.
Related Work
Semantic parsing of questions, which maps natural language questions to database queries, is
a critical component for KB-supported QA. An
early example of this research is the semantic
parser for answering geography-related questions,
learned using inductive logic programming . Research in this line originally used small, domain-speciﬁc databases, such
as GeoQuery . Very recently, researchers have started
developing semantic parsers for large, generaldomain knowledge bases like Freebase and DBpedia .
Despite signiﬁcant
progress, the problem remains challenging. Most
methods have not yet been scaled to large KBs
that can support general open-domain QA. In contrast, Fader et al. proposed the PARALEX
system, which targets answering single-relation
questions using an automatically created knowledge base, ReVerb .
applying simple seed templates to the KB and
by leveraging community-authored paraphrases of
questions from WikiAnswers, they successfully
demonstrated a high-quality lexicon of patternmatching rules can be learned for this restricted
form of semantic parsing.
The other line of work related to our approach
is continuous representations for semantic similarity, which has a long history and is still an
active research topic.
In information retrieval,
TF-IDF vectors , latent
semantic analysis and
topic models take the bag-ofwords approach, which captures well the contextual information for documents, but is often too
coarse-grained to be effective for sentences.
a separate line of research, deep learning based
techniques have been proposed for semantic understanding . We adapt the work
of for measuring the semantic distance between a question
and relational triples in the KB as the core component of our semantic parsing approach.
Problem Deﬁnition & Approach
In this paper, we focus on using a knowledge
base to answer single-relation questions. A singlerelation question is deﬁned as a question composed of an entity mention and a binary relation description, where the answer to this question would be an entity that has the relation with
the given entity. An example of a single-relation
question is “When were DVD players invented?”
The entity is dvd-player and the relation is
be-invent-in.
The answer can thus be described as the following lambda expression:
λx. be-invent-in(dvd-player, x)
RP →when were X invented
M →dvd players
when were X invented
→be-invent-in
dvd players
→dvd-player
Figure 1: A potential semantic parse of the question “When were DVD players invented?”
A knowledge base in this work can be simply
viewed as a collection of binary relation instances
in the form of r(e1, e2), where r is the relation and
e1 and e2 are the ﬁrst and second entity arguments.
Single-relation questions are perhaps the easiest
form of questions that can directly be answered
by a knowledge base. If the mapping of the relation and entity in the question can be correctly
resolved, then the answer can be derived by a simple table lookup, assuming that the fact exists in
the KB. However, due to the large number of paraphrases of the same question, identifying the mapping accurately remains a difﬁcult problem.
Our approach in this work can be viewed as a
simple semantic parser tailored to single-relation
questions, powered by advanced semantic similarity models to handle the paraphrase issue. Given a
question, we ﬁrst separate it into two disjoint parts:
the entity mention and the relation pattern. The
entity mention is a subsequence of consecutive
words in the question, where the relation pattern
is the question where the mention is substituted
by a special symbol. The mapping between the
pattern and the relation in the KB, as well as the
mapping between the mention and the entity are
determined by corresponding semantic similarity
models. The high-level approach can be viewed
as a very simple context-free grammar, which is
shown in Figure 1.
The probability of the rule in (1) is 1 since
we assume the input is a single-relation question.
For the exact decomposition of the question (e.g., (2), (3)), we simply enumerate all combinations and assign equal probabilities to them.
The performance of this approach depends mainly
on whether the relation pattern and entity mention
can be resolved correctly (e.g., (4), (5)). To deter-
Word hashing layer: ft
Convolutional layer: ht
Max pooling layer: v
Semantic layer: y
<s> w1 w2 wT <s>
Word sequence: xt
Word hashing matrix: Wf
Convolution matrix: Wc
Max pooling operation
Semantic projection matrix: Ws
Figure 2: The CNNSM maps a variable-length
word sequence to a low-dimensional vector in a
latent semantic space. A word contextual window
size (i.e., the receptive ﬁeld) of three is used in the
illustration. Convolution over word sequence via
learned matrix Wc is performed implicitly via the
earlier word hashing layer’s mapping with a local
receptive ﬁeld. The max operation across the sequence is applied for each of 500 feature dimensions separately.
mine the probabilities of such mappings, we propose using a semantic similarity model based on
convolutional neural networks, which is the technical focus in this paper.
Convolutional Neural Network based
Semantic Model
Following , we develop a new convolutional neural
network (CNN) based semantic model (CNNSM)
for semantic parsing. The CNNSM ﬁrst uses a
convolutional layer to project each word within a
context window to a local contextual feature vector, so that semantically similar word-n-grams are
projected to vectors that are close to each other
in the contextual feature space. Further, since the
overall meaning of a sentence is often determined
by a few key words in the sentence, CNNSM uses
a max pooling layer to extract the most salient local features to form a ﬁxed-length global feature
vector. The global feature vector can be then fed
to feed-forward neural network layers to extract
non-linear semantic features. The architecture of
the CNNSM is illustrated in Figure 2. In what follows, we describe each layer of the CNNSM in
detail, using the annotation illustrated in Figure 2.
In our model, we leverage the word hashing technique proposed in 
where we ﬁrst represent a word by a lettertrigram count vector.
For example, given a
word (e.g., cat), after adding word boundary symbols (e.g., #cat#), the word is segmented into a sequence of letter-n-grams (e.g., letter-trigrams: #c-a, c-a-t, a-t-#). Then, the word is represented
as a count vector of letter-trigrams.
For example, the letter-trigram representation of “cat” is:
In Figure 2, the word hashing matrix Wf denotes the transformation from a word to its lettertrigram count vector, which requires no learning.
Word hashing not only makes the learning more
scalable by controlling the size of the vocabulary,
but also can effectively handle the OOV issues,
sometimes due to spelling mistakes.
letter-trigram based word representation, we represent a word-n-gram by concatenating the lettertrigram vectors of each word, e.g., for the t-th
word-n-gram at the word-n-gram layer, we have:
t−d, · · · , fT
t , · · · , fT
T , t = 1, · · · , T
where ft is the letter-trigram representation of the
t-th word, and n = 2d + 1 is the size of the contextual window.
The convolution operation can
be viewed as sliding window based feature extraction. It captures the word-n-gram contextual features. Consider the t-th word-n-gram, the convolution matrix projects its letter-trigram representation vector lt to a contextual feature vector ht. As
shown in Figure 2, ht is computed by
ht = tanh(Wc · lt), t = 1, · · · , T
where Wc is the feature transformation matrix, as
known as the convolution matrix, which are shared
among all word n-grams. The output of the convolutional layer is a sequence of local contextual
feature vectors, one for each word (within a contextual window). Since many words do not have
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the semantics of the sentence, we want to retain in the global feature vector
only the salient features from a few key words. For
this purpose, we use a max operation, also known
as max pooling, to force the network to retain only
the most useful local features produced by the convolutional layers. Referring to the max-pooling
layer of Figure 2, we have
t=1,··· ,T{ft(i)}, i = 1, · · · , K
where v(i) is the i-th element of the max pooling layer v, ht(i) is the i-th element of the t-th
local feature vector ht. K is the dimensionality
of the max pooling layer, which is the same as
the dimensionality of the local contextual feature
vectors {ht}. One more non-linear transformation
layer is further applied on top of the global feature
vector v to extract the high-level semantic representation, denoted by y. As shown in Figure 2, we
have y = tanh(Ws · v), where v is the global feature vector after max pooling, Ws is the semantic
projection matrix, and y is the vector representation of the input query (or document) in latent semantic space. Given a pattern and a relation, we
compute their relevance score by measuring the
cosine similarity between their semantic vectors.
The semantic relevance score between a pattern Q
and a relation R is deﬁned as the cosine score of
their semantic vectors yQ and yR.
We train two CNN semantic models from sets of
pattern–relation and mention–entity pairs, respectively. Following , for every
pattern, the corresponding relation is treated as a
positive example and 100 randomly selected other
relations are used as negative examples. The setting for the mention–entity model is similar.
The posterior probability of the positive relation
given the pattern is computed based on the cosine
scores using softmax:
exp(γ · cos(yR+, yQ))
R′ exp(γ · cos(yR′, yQ))
where γ is a scaling factor set to 5. Model training is done by maximizing the log-posteriori using stochastic gradient descent. More detail can
be found in .
Experiments
In order to provide a fair comparison to previous work, we experimented with our approach
using the PARALAX dataset ,
which consists of paraphrases of questions mined
from WikiAnswers and answer triples from Re-
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the
dataset, describe the system training and evaluation processes and, ﬁnally, present our experimental results.
Data & Model Training
The PARALEX training data consists of approximately 1.8 million pairs of questions and
single-relation database queries, such as “When
invented?”,
be-invent-in(dvd-player,?). For evaluation, the authors further sampled 698 questions
that belong to 37 clusters and hand labeled the answer triples returned by their systems.
To train our two CNN semantic models, we
derived two parallel corpora based on the PAR-
ALEX training data. For relation patterns, we ﬁrst
scanned the original training corpus to see if there
was an exact surface form match of the entity (e.g.,
dvd-player would map to “DVD player” in the
question). If an exact match was found, then the
pattern would be derived by replacing the mention
in the question with the special symbol. The corresponding relation of this pattern was thus the relation used in the original database query, along with
the variable argument position (i.e., 1 or 2, indicating whether the answer entity was the ﬁrst or second argument of the relation). In the end, we derived about 1.2 million pairs of patterns and relations. We then applied these patterns to all the 1.8
million training questions, which helped discover
160 thousand new mentions that did not have the
exact surface form matches to the entities.
When training the CNNSM for the pattern–
relation similarity measure, we randomly split the
1.2 million pairs of patterns and relations into two
sets: the training set of 1.19 million pairs, and
the validation set of 12 thousand pairs for hyperparameter tuning.
Data were tokenized by replacing hyphens with blank spaces.
In the experiment, we used a context window (i.e., the receptive ﬁeld) of three words in the convolutional
neural networks. There were 15 thousand unique
letter-trigrams observed in the training set (used
for word hashing).
Five hundred neurons were
used in the convolutional layer, the max-pooling
layer and the ﬁnal semantic layer, respectively.
We used a learning rate of 0.002 and the training converged after 150 iterations. A similar setting was used for the CNNSM for the mention–
entity model, which was trained on 160 thousand
mention-entity pairs.
We used the same test questions in the PARALEX
dataset to evaluate whether our system could ﬁnd
Table 1: Performance of two variations of our systems, compared with the PARALEX system.
the answers from the ReVerb database. Because
our systems might ﬁnd triples that were not returned by the PARALEX systems, we labeled these
new question–triple pairs ourselves.
Given a question, the system ﬁrst enumerated
all possible decompositions of the mentions and
patterns, as described earlier. We then computed
the similarity scores between the pattern and all
relations in the KB and retained 150 top-scoring
relation candidates. For each selected relation, the
system then checked all triples in the KB that had
this relation and computed the similarity score between the mention and corresponding argument
entity. The product of the probabilities of these
two models, which are derived from the cosine
similarity scores using softmax as described in
Sec. 4, was used as the ﬁnal score of the triple for
ranking the answers. The top answer triple was
used to compute the precision and recall of the system when reporting the system performance. By
limiting the systems to output only answer triples
with scores higher than a predeﬁned threshold, we
could control the trade-off between recall and precision and thus plot the precision–recall curve.
Table 1 shows the performance in F1, precision, recall and mean average precision of our systems and PARALEX. We provide two variations
here. CNNSMpm is the full system and consists
of two semantic similarity models for pattern–
relation and mention–entity.
The other model,
CNNSMp, only measures the similarity between
the patterns and relations, and maps a mention to
an entity when they have the same surface form.
Since the trade-off between precision and recall can be adjusted by varying the threshold, it
is more informative to compare systems on the
precision–recall curves, which are shown in Figure 3.
As we can observe from the ﬁgure, the
precision of our CNNSMpm system is consistently
higher than PARALEX across all recall regions.
The CNNSMm system also performs similarly to
CNNSMpm in the high precision regime, but is inferior when recall is higher. This is understandable
Figure 3: The precision–recall curves of the two
variations of our systems and PARALEX.
since the system does not match mentions with
entities of different surface forms (e.g., “Robert
Hooke” to “Hooke”). Notice that the highest F1
values of them are 0.61 and 0.56, compared to
0.54 of PARALEX. Tuning the thresholds using a
validation set would be needed if there is a metric
(e.g., F1) that speciﬁcally needs to be optimized.
Conclusions
In this work, we propose a semantic parsing
framework for single-relation questions.
Compared to the existing work, our key insight is to
match relation patterns and entity mentions using
a semantic similarity function rather than lexical
rules. Our similarity model is trained using convolutional neural networks with letter-trigrams vectors. This design helps the model go beyond bagof-words representations and handles the OOV issue. Our method achieves higher precision on the
QA task than the previous work, PARALEX, consistently at different recall points.
Despite the strong empirical performance, our
system has room for improvement.
For instance, due to the variety of entity mentions in
the real world, the parallel corpus derived from
the WikiAnswers data and ReVerb KB may not
contain enough data to train a robust entity linking model.
Replacing this component with a
dedicated entity linking system could improve
the performance and also reduce the number of
pattern/mention candidates when processing each
question. In the future, we would like to extend
our method to other more structured KBs, such as
Freebase, and to explore approaches to extend our
system to handle multi-relation questions.