Procedure for systematically tuning up crosstalk in the cross resonance gate
Sarah Sheldon, Easwar Magesan, Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
 
We present improvements in both theoretical understanding and experimental implementation
of the cross resonance (CR) gate that have led to shorter two-qubit gate times and interleaved
randomized benchmarking ﬁdelities exceeding 99%.
The CR gate is an all-microwave two-qubit
gate oﬀers that does not require tunability and is therefore well suited to quantum computing
architectures based on 2D superconducting qubits.
The performance of the gate has previously
been hindered by long gate times and ﬁdelities averaging 94-96%. We have developed a calibration
procedure that accurately measures the full CR Hamiltonian. The resulting measurements agree
with theoretical analysis of the gate and also elucidate the error terms that have previously limited
the gate ﬁdelity. The increase in ﬁdelity that we have achieved was accomplished by introducing
a second microwave drive tone on the target qubit to cancel unwanted components of the CR
Hamiltonian.
The cross resonance (CR) gate is an entangling gate
for superconducting qubits that uses only microwave
control and has been the standard for multiqubit experiments in superconducting architectures using ﬁxed-frequency transmon qubits .
Superconducting qubits arranged with shared quantum buses 
allow qubit networks to be designed with any desired connectivity. This ﬂexiblity of design also translates into a
ﬂexibility of control and many choices in entangling gate
implementations. The CR gate is one choice of two-qubit
gate that uses only microwave control, as opposed to using magnetic ﬂux drives to tune two qubits into a speciﬁc resonance condition to entangle, as in the controlled-
Phase gate , or to tune a coupler directly . The
CR gate requires a small static coupling of the qubit pair
that slightly hybridizes the combined system and one additional microwave drive. The relatively low overhead of
the CR scheme (the additional control line is combined
with a single-qubit drive at room temperature) makes it
an attractive gate for use in quantum computing architectures based on planar superconducting qubits. Additionally, the CR gate is well-suited to transmon qubits ,
which have become the superconducting of choice due
to promising long coherence and lifetimes , limited charge noise , and high single-qubit gate ﬁdelities . The microwave-only control allows the use of
ﬁxed-frequency transmons, further reducing the sources
of possible noise . Given all of these qualities, the
CR gate has been a useful tool for application in multiqubit experiments, including demonstrations of parity
measurements required for the surface code .
Despite the appeal of the CR gate, its implementation
has been hindered by slow gate times. The CR gate relies on an always-on qubit-qubit coupling, but large couplings can lead to crosstalk between qubits. This leads
to a trade-oﬀbetween fast, high-ﬁdelity two-qubit gates
and high-ﬁdelity simultaneous single-qubit gates. As a
result, typical CR gates between transmon devices have
resulted in gate times > 300 ∼400 ns, with measured ﬁdelities of 94-96% . Here we describe improvements
to the CR gate through a careful Hamiltonian analysis
and novel tune-up procedure that reduce the gate time
by a factor of two with corresponding ﬁdelities over 99%.
Our increased understanding of the CR Hamiltonian expands upon previous studies, which have primarily used
a simple qubit model . We show that such models
are incomplete and do not fully capture the dynamics of
the complete two transmon qubit system.
Randomized Benchmarking
Interleaved Benchmarking
Gatetime )nsE
Error Per Gate
Number of Cliffords
Population of |0>
FIG. 1. (Color online) (a) Schematic for the echoed cross resonance gate with active cancellation on the target qubit. The
π-pulse on the control is a 20 ns derivative removal via adiabatic gate (DRAG) pulse, and is buﬀered by two 10 ns delays.
The CR pulses are ﬂat-topped Gaussian pulses, with 3σ rise
time where σ = 5 ns. (b)The error per gate found by randomized benchmarking (blue circles) and interleaved randomized
benchmarking (red squares) as a function of gate time. The
benchmarking decay curves for highest ﬁdelity point are highlighted in the inset.
 
Control in |P>
Control in |w>
CR Amplitude gaDuDh
Interaction Strength gMHzh
CR Drive Power gMHzh
FIG. 2. (Color online) (a) CR Rabi oscillations on the target qubit projected onto x, y, and z for the control in |0⟩(blue)
and the control in |1⟩(red). The Bloch vector, R, for the target indicates gate times of maximal entanglement at points when
R = 0. (b) The CR Hamiltonian as a function of the two-qubit drive amplitude including IX (dashed black circles), IY (dashed
red squares), IZ (dashed blue triangles), ZX (solid black circles), ZY (solid red squares), and ZZ (solid blue triangles). The
magenta dot-dashed line and green dotted line correspond to the theory predictions for ZX and ZZ respectively as a function
of the CR drive power on the upper x-axis. The grey shaded region corresponds to the data from (a) and later in Fig. 3.
The experimental system tested in this paper consists
of two ﬁxed-frequency transmon qubits coupled by a bus
resonator.
The qubit frequencies are 4.914 GHz (target qubit) and 5.114 GHz (control qubit) with anharmonicities of -330 MHz for both, and the bus frequency
is 6.31 GHz. The coupling between the two qubits is estimated to be J/2π = 3.8 MHz for these parameters. The
single-qubit gate ﬁdelities measured with simultaneous
randomized benchmarking are 0.9991±0.0002 for the
target and 0.9992±0.0002 for control. We characterize
the two-qubit gate ﬁdelities in the system by using interleaved randomized benchmarking (RB) . For this
measurement we ﬁrst ﬁnd the average ﬁdelity per Clifford in the two-qubit system using standard randomized
benchmarking , and then repeat the measurement interleaving the CR gate between random Cliﬀords in the
sequence. The ﬁdelities are extracted from exponential
ﬁts to the average over 35 random sequences each with a
total length of 100 Cliﬀord gates. By applying the theoretical Hamiltonian understanding of the next few sections, we were able to benchmark results showing a CR
gate ﬁdelity, f = 0.991 ± 0.002 for a 160 ns gate. This
gate time includes 20 ns added by the single qubit echo,
which is buﬀered by two 10 ns delays. The CR pulses are
rounded square pulses with Gaussian rise times of 15 ns.
The critical experimental technique for the improvement of the CR gate is an active cancellation pulse on the
target qubit drive to eliminate unwanted interactions of
the CR drive Hamiltonian, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Without this cancellation tone the CR gate ﬁdelity for the
same gate time is f = 0.948 ± 0.018, demonstrating that
the additional drive eﬀectively cancels out the error terms
of the CR Hamiltonian.
We measure the two-qubit gate ﬁdelity as a function of
gate time, plotted in Fig. 1(b) with the RB curves for the
gate with the best measured ﬁdelity. These gate times
are the time for the total echoed CR gate including the
single-qubit echoing gates. While the ﬁdelities improve
as the gate time decreases from 400 ns to 160 ns, shorter
gates appear to saturate.
We suspect that leakage to
higher levels or drive-induced dephasing from the strong
two-qubit drive may be the source of this saturation.
The addition of the cancellation drive on the target
is the consequence of measurements and simulation of
the CR Hamiltonian indicating single-qubit errors that
are not fully refocused by the standard CR gate (e.g.
the echoed sequence in Fig. 1[a] without the cancellation
pulse on the target qubit).
We have developed an effective block-diagonal Hamiltonian model for the system
dynamics under a CR drive that reveals the important
contributions to the Hamiltonian on the qubit-qubit 4dimensional subspace. The method ﬁnds a unitary operator T that block-diagonalizes the full system Hamiltonian H, HBD := T †HT, under the constraint that T
minimizes the distance to the identity operation ∥T −I∥2
(hence T aﬀects the system as little as possible). The solution for T is given by
where X is the eigenvector matrix of H and is assumed
to be non-singular, and XBD is the block-diagonal matrix
In our implementation the diﬀerent blocks correspond
to the diﬀerent states of the control qubit and an oﬀresonant (higher energy) subspaces. The model predicts
ZX and IX components of similar magnitude, negligible
IZ and ZZ contributions, and a large ZI term arising
from a Stark shift of the control qubit from oﬀ-resonant
driving. The complete CR Hamiltonian has the structure
Motivated by this understanding of the CR Hamiltonian, we have developed a protocol for experimentally
measuring the CR Hamiltonian that allows us to determine the real error terms in the gate. This measurement
is accomplished by turning on a CR drive for some time
and measuring the Rabi oscillations on the target qubit.
We project the target qubit state onto x, y, and z following the Rabi drive and repeat for the control qubit in |0⟩
and |1⟩. Fig. 2(a) contains an example of a complete set
of such Hamiltonian tomography experiments. The last
parameter plotted, ∥⃗R∥, is the Bloch vector of the target
qubit deﬁned as,
(⟨X⟩0 + ⟨X⟩1)2 + (⟨Y ⟩0 + ⟨Y ⟩1)2 + (⟨Z⟩0 + ⟨Z⟩1)2
When this quantity goes to zero, the two-qubits are maximally entangled (unless the dynamics are completely
mixed, but because ∥⃗R∥oscillates between zero and one
we believe this is not the case). We use ∥⃗R∥to estimate
the gate length required to perform the entangling gate.
We ﬁt the Rabi oscillations corresponding to the control
in |0⟩and |1⟩separately with a Bloch equation model
˙⃗r(t) = eAt⃗r(0),
with the matrix A deﬁned as
Here ∆is the control drive detuning, and Ωx,y is the
Rabi drive amplitude in along {x, y}.
⃗r(t) is the vector composed of the measured expectation values as
a function of the length of the applied Rabi drive,
(⟨X(t)⟩, ⟨Y (t)⟩, ⟨Z(t)⟩). We ﬁnd two generators corresponding to the control qubit in either |0⟩or |1⟩, characterized by the vectors
⃗v{0,1} = (Ω{0,1}
, ∆{0,1}).
From these parameters we derive the CR drive Hamiltonian in terms of the six possible interactions: IX, IY ,
IZ, ZX, ZY , ZZ. For example, IX = (Ω0
x)/2. Note that this method of Hamiltonian tomography is applicable to any system with a
Hamiltonian with the same form as Eq. 2. In addition,
due to the symmetry of H, this method scales eﬃciently
Cancellation Pulse Amplitude 6a.u.7
Interaction Strength 6MHz7
Phase of CR Drive
Interaction Strength 6MHz7
(Color online) (a) CR Hamiltonian parameters as
a function of the drive phase: ZZ (solid blue triangle), ZY
(solid red square), ZX (solid black circle), IZ (dashed blue
triangle), IY (dashed red square), IX (dashed black circle).
(b) The same Hamiltonian parameters plotted versus the active cancellation pulse amplitude (x, as shown in the pulse
schematic in the inset). The CR amplitude for this data corresponds to that of the shaded region in Fig. 2(b)
for an n-qubit system since there are n(n −1)/2 diﬀerent pairs and each pair requires six Rabi measurements
described above.
We can measure the CR Hamiltonian as a function of
the two-qubit drive amplitude, as shown in Figure 2. It
is clear from this ﬁgure that components IZ and ZZ are
small and independent of the drive power.
was acquired with the CR drive phase set so that the
ZY contribution is small and the conditional component
of the Hamiltonian consists only of ZX. The measured
Hamiltonian parameters are consistent with the ZX and
ZZ predicted by the eﬀective Hamiltonian plotted in
Fig. 2(b).
There is an unexpected feature in the experiment as
there is also an IY term present when the CR phase is
set as above. We attribute this phase diﬀerence between
conditional and single-qubit terms to classical crosstalk.
Although such crosstalk has little eﬀect on simultaneous
RB since it is oﬀ-resonance, since the CR drive is applied
at the frequency of the target qubit this crosstalk has a
signiﬁcant impact on the two-qubit gate calibration. The
standard CR gate is performed using an echo to refocus
IX, ZZ, and ZI, depicted in Fig.
The echoed
scheme involves a π pulse on the control qubit and a
change of sign of the CR drive. If IY terms are present,
however, then the echo fails to completely refocus the
unwanted interactions. In this case the IY interaction
does not commute with ZX and all higher-order terms
of the commutator will be on during the two-qubit gate.
The gate calibration procedure is based on these
Hamiltonian measurements.
Ultimately the goal is to
tune up a ZX90, which is a generator of a controlled-
NOT (CNOT) with single-qubit Cliﬀord rotations. The
ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the Hamiltonian parameters as a function of the phase of the CR drive (see Fig. 3[a]). We use
Figure 3 to ﬁnd the CR phase, φ0 at which the ZX component is maximized and ZY is zero.
With the CR phase ﬁxed at φ0 the two-qubit drive
produces nonzero IX and IY components. We ﬁnd the
phase, φ1, at which the single-qubit component, IY , is
zero. The correct phase for the cancellation pulse is φ =
φ0 −φ1, at which phase the single-qubit drive on the
target matches tan−1 (IY/IX) for the two-qubit drive.
The second step is to set the cancellation pulse to the
correct amplitude for canceling cos(φ)IX + sin(φ)IY .
Again we measure the CR Hamiltonian,
sweeping the cancellation pulse amplitude as shown in
Fig. 3(b). If IX and IY are not zero at the same cancellation amplitude (x in the schematic shown in 3[b]),
then the cancellation phase is incorrect.
Control in |0>
Control in |1>
FIG. 4. (Color online) CR Rabi experiments as a function
of the CR pulsewidth after calibrating the active cancellation
amplitude and phase. From top to bottom are the expectation
values ⟨X⟩, ⟨Y ⟩,and ⟨Z⟩, and the Bloch vector of the target
The CR-Rabi oscillations on the target qubit with the
fully calibrated cancellation pulse (Fig.
4) are much
closer to the oscillations expected for a ZX drive. From
4 we see that the entangling gate is signiﬁcantly
faster than previous cross resonance gates; the R-vector
goes to zero at 100 ns for the particular CR amplitude
This is slightly slower than the entangling time
of 83 ns that is predicted by the ZX rate, which we attribute to the rise time of the pulse. The echoed gate
time of 160 ns is consistent with the R-vector measurement as it includes the additional single qubit gate and
the rise and fall of both halves of the CR echo. Additionally the oscillation of ∥⃗R∥are sinusoidal, unlike in
Fig. 2. If the cancellation were perfect, there would be
no oscillation of ⟨X⟩, and ⟨Y ⟩oscillations would have full
contrast. Plotting the same data on the Bloch sphere, as
Control in |1>
Control in |0>
Standard CR
With Active
Cancellation
Simulation
with ZZ, IX errors
(Color online) Plots of the target qubit state on
the Bloch sphere during evolution during the echoed cross
resonance gate.
Left column is the target state when the
control is in |0⟩, with the right side corresponds to the control
in |1⟩. Top row: echoed cross resonance gate with no active
cancellation. Middle: echoed cross resonance gate with active
cancellation on the target qubit. Bottom: simulations of the
echoed cross resonance with small IZ and IX errors on the
two-qubit drive.
in Fig. 5, we can see the trajectory of the target qubit
during the CR gate. The data in the top row of Fig. 5 is
the target trajectory when the two-qubit echoed gate is
applied with no active cancellation pulse. A perfect ZX
gate would result in a circle on the surface of the Bloch
sphere, but the echoed CR gate creates a more convoluted path on the Bloch sphere before an entangling gate
is achieved. When the cancellation pulse is added (middle row), the picture is qualitatively closer to the ideal
circle on the Bloch sphere, but still some error remains.
Comparing to a simulated echoed gate (bottom row), we
ﬁnd that the residual error is consistent with a ZZ on
the order of the ZZ error we measure in the calibration
sweeps and an order of magnitude smaller IX.
While the measured ﬁdelity is higher than previously
reported ﬁdelities for CR two-qubit gates, it is still not
yet limited by coherence. The limit placed on the ﬁdelity
by T1 (38±2 µs/41±2 µs for the control/target) and T2
(50±4 µs/61±6 µs) for the two-qubits is 0.996. There
is evidence from studies of single-qubit gates that driveactivated dephasing may be a limiting factor for the error
rates of gates at similar drive powers . Even so,
it appears from the CR Rabi data that coherent errors
have not been fully eliminated in the CR gate.
While it is clear that some coherent errors remain on
the cross resonance gate, the inclusion of an active cancellation tone has produced a dramatic improvement in
the two-qubit gate ﬁdelity.
The calibration procedure
that we have developed has provided insight into the full
CR Hamiltonian, and revealed that a single-qubit phase
shift due to crosstalk (either classical or quantum) is a
signiﬁcant source of error in the echoed CR gate. Future work will focus on shortening the gate times further
by tuning up a CR gate without an echo and developing
faster and more robust calibration procedures.
These improvements to the microwave-driven CR gate
are encouraging for a quantum computing architecture
built out of ﬁxed-frequency qubits. With greater knowledge of the CR Hamiltonian, we are conﬁdent that further improvements can be made to reduce the two-qubit
gate time and increase ﬁdelity.
We acknowledge contributions from Marcus Brink, Jim
Rozen, and Jack Rohrs.
This work was supported by
ARO under contract W911NF-14-1-0124.
 C. Rigetti and M. Devoret, Phys. Rev. B 81, 134507
 J. M. Chow, A. D. C´orcoles, J. M. Gambetta, C. Rigetti,
B. R. Johnson, J. A. Smolin, J. R. Rozen, G. A. Keefe,
M. B. Rothwell, M. B. Ketchen, and M. Steﬀen, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 080502 .
 J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, E. Magesan, D. W. Abraham, A. W. Cross, B. R. Johnson, N. A. Masluk, C. A.
Ryan, J. A. Smolin, S. J. Srinivasan,
and M. Steﬀen,
Nature Communications 5, 4015 .
 A. Corcoles, E. Magesan, S. J. Srinivasan, A. W. Cross,
M. Steﬀen, J. M. Gambetta,
and J. M. Chow, Nature
Communications 6 , 10.1038/ncomms7979.
 J. Majer, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, J. Koch, B. R.
Johnson, J. A. Schreier, L. Frunzio, D. I. Schuster, A. A.
Houck, A. Wallraﬀ, A. Blais, M. H. Devoret, S. M.
Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Nature 449, 443 .
D. Sank, E. Jeﬀrey, T. C. White, J. Mutus, A. G.
Fowler, B. Campbell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
A. Dunsworth, C. Neill, P. O/’Malley, P. Roushan,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, A. N. Korotkov, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Nature 508, 500 .
 L. DiCarlo, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, L. S. Bishop,
B. R. Johnson, D. I. Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Nature 460, 240
 A. O. Niskanen, K. Harrabi, F. Yoshihara, Y. Nakamura,
S. Lloyd, and J. S. Tsai, Science 316, 723 .
 R. C. Bialczak, M. Ansmann, M. Hofheinz, M. Lenander, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank,
H. Wang, M. Weides, J. Wenner, T. Yamamoto, A. N.
and J. M. Martinis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
060501 .
 Y. Chen, C. Neill, P. Roushan, N. Leung, M. Fang,
R. Barends, J. Kelly, B. Campbell, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
A. Dunsworth,
E. Jeﬀrey,
A. Megrant,
J. Y. Mutus, P. J. J. O’Malley, C. M. Quintana, D. Sank,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, M. R. Geller,
A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
220502 .
 D. C. McKay et al., (in preparation).
 J. Koch, T. M. Yu, J. Gambetta, A. A. Houck, D. I.
Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin,
and R. J. Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319 .
 A. A. Houck, J. A. Schreier, B. R. Johnson, J. M. Chow,
J. Koch, J. M. Gambetta, D. I. Schuster, L. Frunzio,
M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 080502 .
 R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, D. Sank, E. Jeffrey, Y. Chen, Y. Yin, B. Chiaro, J. Mutus, C. Neill,
P. O’Malley, P. Roushan, J. Wenner, T. C. White, A. N.
and J. M. Martinis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
080502 .
 J. A. Schreier, A. A. Houck, J. Koch, D. I. Schuster,
B. R. Johnson, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, J. Majer, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. B 77, 180502 .
 S. Sheldon, L. S. Bishop, E. Magesan, S. Filipp, J. M.
and J. M. Gambetta, Phys. Rev. A 93, 012301
 D. J. Van Harlingen, T. L. Robertson, B. L. T. Plourde,
P. A. Reichardt, T. A. Crane, and J. Clarke, Phys. Rev.
B 70, 064517 .
 A. D. C´orcoles, J. M. Gambetta, J. M. Chow, J. A.
Smolin, M. Ware, J. Strand, B. L. T. Plourde,
M. Steﬀen, Phys. Rev. A 87, 030301 .
 G. S. Paraoanu, Phys. Rev. B 74, 140504 .
 J. M. Gambetta, A. D. C´orcoles, S. T. Merkel, B. R.
Johnson, J. A. Smolin, J. M. Chow, C. A. Ryan,
C. Rigetti, S. Poletto, T. A. Ohki, M. B. Ketchen, and
M. Steﬀen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 240504 .
 E. Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, B. R. Johnson, C. A. Ryan,
J. M. Chow, S. T. Merkel, M. P. da Silva, G. A. Keefe,
M. B. Rothwell, T. A. Ohki, M. B. Ketchen, and M. Steffen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 080505 .
 J. P. Gaebler, A. M. Meier, T. R. Tan, R. Bowler, Y. Lin,
D. Hanneke, J. D. Jost, J. P. Home, E. Knill, D. Leibfried,
and D. J. Wineland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 260503 .
 E. Magesan, J. M. Gambetta,
and J. Emerson, Phys.
Rev. A 85, 042311 .
 H. Ball, W. D. Oliver, and M. J. Biercuk, ArXiv e-prints
 , arXiv:1602.04551 [quant-ph].